 

1

A Possible Biogenic Origin for Hydrogen Peroxide on Mars:  
The Viking Results Reinterpreted 
 
Joop M. Houtkooper1 and Dirk Schulze-Makuch2 
 
1Center for Psychobiology and Behavioral Medicine 
Justus-Liebig-University of Giessen, Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 10F,  
D-35394 Germany 
E-mail: joophoutkooper@gmail.com 
 
2School of Earth and Environmental Sciences 
Washington State University 
Pullman, WA 99164, USA 
Email: dirksm@wsu.edu 
 
 

 
The  adaptability  of  extremophiles  on  Earth  raises  the  question  of  what  strategies 
putative  life  might  have  used  to  adapt  to  the  present  conditions  on  Mars.  Here,  we 
hypothesize  that  organisms  might  utilize  a  water-hydrogen  peroxide  (H2O-H2O2) 
mixture  rather  than  water  as  an  intracellular  liquid.    This  adaptation  would  have  the 
particular advantages in the Martian environment of providing a low freezing point, a 
source  of  oxygen,  and  hygroscopicity.  The  findings  by  the  Viking  experiments  are 
reinterpreted  in  the  light  of  this  hypothesis.  Our  conclusion  is  that  the  hitherto 
mysterious  oxidant  in  the  Martian  soil,  which  evolves  oxygen  when  humidified,  might 
be H2O2 of biological origin. This interpretation has consequences for site selection for 
future missions to search for life on Mars. 
 
 
The Viking landers on Mars remain the only direct attempt to detect life on another 
world.  All  three  experiments  conducted  by  the  landers  observed  chemical  changes  that 
indicated  the  possible  presence  of  life,  although  the  expected  signals  were  not  as  large  as 
expected for a biological response and tapered off after a while, casting doubt on a biological 
explanation.    This  led  to  a  consensus  view  that  Viking  had  detected  reactive,  oxidizing 
surface chemistry, but not biochemical metabolic processes (1).   
We propose here a reinterpretation of the Viking results, based on the assumption that 
 
microorganisms on Mars produce hydrogen peroxide  to generate an H2O-H2O2 intracellular 
solvent  for  biochemical  processes  selected  by  and  adapted  to  the  unique  Martian 
environment. 
Current environmental conditions near the surface of Mars are not incompatible with 
 
life.    Various  survival  studies  exposing  terrestrial  microbes  to  simulated  near-surface 
conditions  on  Mars  have  revealed  remarkably  high  survival  rates  below  very  shallow  soil 
(2,3).  In regard to oxidant-tolerance, some soil bacteria survive and grow to stationary phase 
in 30,000 ppm H2O2 (4).  McDonald et al. (5) tested the stability of organic macromolecules 
subjected to oxidation stress by 30 % H2O2 in water at three diffferent temperatures relevant 
to  Martian  environmental  conditions. 
that  some  organic 
macromolecules  are  stable  against  oxidation  on  the  Martian  surface,  at  least  in  the  polar 

  Their  data  suggested 

 

2
regions, over the entire history of Mars. Mixtures of H2O2 and H2O would have remarkably 
useful properties for any organism in need to adapt to Martian environmental conditions.  
Mixtures  of  H2O2  and  H2O  freeze  at  temperatures  significantly  below  the  freezing 
 
point  of  water.  The  lower  eutectic  point  lies  at  -56.5oC  for  a  mixture  with  61.2  weight  % 
H2O2 (6).  Mixtures with a high H2O2 concentration tend to supercool, sometimes resulting in 
the  formation  of  glasses,  down  to  liquid-air  temperatures  (7).  Thus,  putative  Martian 
organisms  could  stay  completely  functional  at  temperatures  far  below  the  freezing  point  of 
water  and  even  survive  lower  temperatures  as  the  formation  of  ice  crystals  and  piercing  of 
cellular  membranes  would  be  prevented.    H2O2-H2O  mixtures  are  slightly  acidic,  the  60 
weight % mixture has a pH of 4.5.  H2O2-H2O mixtures tend to be hygroscopic because of the 
lower  water  vapor  partial  pressure  in  equilibrium  with  the  liquid,  as  compared  with  water, 
which  would  offer  the  opportunity  for  an  organism  to  scavenge  water  molecules  from  the 
Martian  atmosphere.  These  considerations  point  to  at  least  the  possibility  that  organisms 
might  use  H2O2,  not  only  in  storage  as  a  convenient  source  of  oxygen,  but  also  as  a  major 
component of their intracellular fluid.   
An intracellular H2O2-H2O mixture would not only provide a source of oxygen and be 
 
a  favorable  adaptation  to  cold  temperatures,  but  also  convey  hygroscopic  abilities  to  the 
putative  Martian  organisms.  At  little  metabolic  cost  they  would  be  able  to  scavenge  the 
atmosphere  for  the  little  water  vapor  present.  On  the  other  hand,  this  ability  would  mean  a 
vulnerability  for  exposure  to  liquid  water.    They  would  be  susceptible  to  death  by 
hyperhydration. This could occur when the organisms are exposed to liquid water or even to a 
relatively warm atmosphere saturated with water vapor. At death, the cellular contents would 
be  set  free.  This  could  be  in  the  form  of  organic  compounds,  but  O2  might  well  be  a 
component.  Furthermore,  it  is  likely  that  an  exothermic  reaction  between  the  H2O2  and  the 
organics would occur, and the organism would transform into CO2, O2,  and water vapor (and 
some nitrogen and minor constituents). 
 
through energy obtained from sunlight. A gross metabolism pathway could follow 
 
 
             
 
The equation would proceed to the right using sunlight as an energy source and to the left in 
darkness  or  when  work is  exerted.  However,  when  exchange  with  the  environment  is  to  be 
avoided, the sugars could be oxidized to formic acid  
 
 
 
However, this would quickly acidify the cell, like lactic acid does in terrestrial animals. In an 
alternative  reaction,  H2O2  could  serve  as  a  source  of  energy  by  simply  decomposing  into 
water and oxygen: 
 
                      2 H2O2 →  2 H2O + O2                                                                                                                            (3) 
 

           CH2O + H2O2  ↔  HCOOH + 2 H2O                                                              (2) 

The  H2O2  could  be  produced  biochemically  by  the  organisms  themselves, 

CO2 + 3 H2O ↔ CH2O + 2 H2O2                                                                                                 (1) 

 

 

 

 

 

3

Based on the freezing point of a H2O-H2O2 mixture, the organisms would be well-

 
adapted if their intracellular fluid contains a substantial concentration of H2O2.  This is if an 
adaptation  to  these  high  amounts  of  H2O2  in  the  intracellular  fluids  would  not  require  too 
high  of  a  cost  in  terms  of  energy  requirements  such  as  the  production  of  stabilizing 
compounds. Metabolic activity could theoretically occur at temperatures down to -56oC (217 
K), if an eutectic mixture is used.  Temperatures lower than the freezing point of the H2O2-
H2O eutectic could also be withstood because of likely supercooling of the liquid. An upper 
temperature limit depends on the stabilization mechanism, which must consume energy at a 
faster rate at high temperatures. As the cell contents are energy-rich, higher temperatures than 
usually occur on Mars may be withstood for brief periods of time. 
 
While the life detection experiments conducted by the Viking landers were generally 
interpreted as a failure to detect life based on the biochemistry of microorganisms on Earth, 
doubts and inconsistencies about those results remain.  Particularly,  

(1) While  no  organic  molecules  were  detected  by  gas  chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (GC-MS), the requisite sensitivity may not have been achieved at the 
time. 

(2) Chemical  explanations  for  the  Viking  lander  experiments  (particularly  the 
evolution  of  O2  upon  wetting)  require  a  strong  oxidizer  at  sufficiently  high 
concentration, which has still not been identified. 

(3) There is no satisfactory explanation for the 30 % rise in CO2, the near doubling of 
N2, or the surprising large rise of O2, from 4 nmol to about 520 nmol, in the Gas 
Exchange Experiment (8). 

(4) No  convincing  mechanism  had  been  proposed  for  the  small  but  significant 
synthesis of organic material in the Pyrolytic Release Experiment (Table 1). This 
amount could not come from the synthesis by UV radiation since an optical filter 
to  screen  out  the  UV  wavelengths  below  320  nanometers  was  included  in  the 
experiment. 

(5) The  production  of  gas  recorded  from  the  Labeled  Release  (LR)  nutrient  when  it 
was  placed  on  Martian  soil  at  both  lander  sites  was  significant.    Decreases  of 
released gas were observed at secondary injections. The reactant in the Mars soil 
was  completely  unreactive  at  the  sterilizing  temperature  of  160oC.  In  contrast, 
exposure to 18oC for two Martian days did not inhibit the reaction. 

 
The failure to detect organic molecules by the GC-MS during the Viking mission to 
 
Mars  was  surprising,  especially  because  some  2.4  x  108  g  of  reduced  carbon  falls  on  Mars 
each year via asteroids, comets, and other planetary material (9).  The common assumption is 
that all the organic material near the surface is oxidized by H2O2 and other strong oxidizing 
compounds.    Based  on  the  reactivity  of  the  surface  measured  by  the  Viking  Gas  Exchange 
experiment (GEx), the amount of H2O2 on the Martian surface was estimated to be between 1 
ppm (10) and 250 ppm (4).  Yet, photochemical processes generate H2O2 in the atmosphere at 
a much lower rate in the parts per billion range. Atmospheric H2O2 abundances vary between 
20 and 40 ppb by volume over the planet (11), which appears to be a maximum concentration 
occurring during favorable weather conditions (12).  Thus, there is a case to be made not only 
for the missing organics but also for the missing H2O2.   

 

 

4
The biological explanation of the lack of detected organics by GC-MS could be that 

 
the  oxidizing  inventory  of  the  H2O2-H2O  solvent  well  exceeded  the  reducing  power  of  the 
organic compounds of the organisms. Upon heating, therefore, the putative organisms might 
have  auto-oxidized  catastrophically,  leaving  the  gases  as  detected  by  the  GEx  experiment 
plus very little solid residue without or with only little organic content. The negative result of 
the GC-MS (13) is therefore not a very reliable estimate of an upper bound on the biomass in 
the  soil.    A  reasonable  alternative  explanation  of  the  missing  organics  using  a  purely 
chemical explanation was advanced by Benner et al. (14), who suggested that any organics on 
the surface of Mars would undergo a diagenesis to metastable compounds of carboxylic acids 
derivatives and would not be easily detected by GC-MS. Explanations to the five questions 
presented above in terms of the H2O2-H2O hypothesis and traditional chemical explanations 
are provided in Table 2.  
The  fact  that  O2  evolved  from  soil  samples  upon  humidification  deserves  particular 
 
scrutiny in order to evaluate if this is in accordance with a biological rather than a chemical 
origin.  The  release  of  O2  was  a  surprise  for  the  mission  scientists,  who  then  became 
convinced in a chemical origin as terrestrial life is not known for originating O2 upon wetting. 
Our interpretation, however, is that under a dry or slightly humid atmosphere the release of 
oxygen would be a consequence of a metabolic pathway of putative H2O2-H2O based Martian 
organisms  (Reaction  3),  while  under  wet  conditions  it  would  indicate  the  decomposition  of 
organisms by hyperhydration after being exposed to excess water.  A similar inference can be 
drawn  from  the  Pyrolytic  Release  (PR)  Experiment.    Wetting  all  but  inhibited  any  organic 
synthesis reaction in the Utopia 2 sample and the following Utopia 3 sample (Table 1), while 
organic synthesis reactions did occur under dry conditions (Chryse 1, and possibly to some 
minor degree also for Chryse 3 and 4, and Utopia 1).  The mission scientists had problems to 
explain this phenomenon. Horowitz et al. (15) called it “startling”, while Klein (16) felt that a 
explanation for this phenomenon “remains obscure”.    
 
Not  all  results  can  be  satisfyingly  explained  with  our  hypothesis.  For  example,  the 
differences in amplitude of the response of the PR experiment remain a puzzle. However, this 
might be understood by assuming that the Martian surface is not covered by a homogeneous 
population of organisms. And some chemical reactions certainly play a role in the response to 
the  Viking  lander  experiments.  In  view  of  the  H2O2-H2O  hypothesis  on  Martian  life,  the 
Viking  experiments  were  both  too  warm  and  too  wet.  Especially  the  combination  of  high 
temperatures  (relative  to  average  Martian  conditions)  and  saturation  with  water  vapor  is  an 
extremely  unmartian  condition  and  both  the  GEx  and  the  LR  experiment  employed  this 
condition.  The  interpretation  of  these  two  experiments  might  well  not  be  related  to 
heterotrophic metabolism (as the tests were designed for), but in terms of coping and failing 
to adverse conditions. The putative Martian organisms were overwhelmed by too much water 
vapor, a condition against which they had no defense, so that they failed because of too high 
of an osmotic pressure. 
If we assume H2O2-H2O based life as a working hypothesis, we conclude that adding 
 
water would only be of limited benefit to growth. At the test cell temperatures of about 10oC, 
organisms  might  survive  50%  humidity  for  some  time,  whereas  100%  humidity  at  that 
temperature seems to be fatal within a few days at most. The hygroscopicity of the H2O2-H2O 

 

5
mixture  and  the  probable  lack  of  a  mechanism  to  exclude  too  much  water  are  the  likely 
causes of the sensitivity for water, even as vapor.  The argument that Viking detected reactive 
chemistry rather than biology based on the fact that there is no known Earth organisms that 
can  be  shown  to  reproduce  all  Viking  results  is  wanting.  Likewise,  is  the  argument  that 
Viking  discovered  biology,  because  there  is  no  known  mineral  or  reactive  Earth-analog 
chemistry  that  produces  all  Viking  results.  Any  explanation  of  the  Viking  results  must  be 
intrinsically  linked  to  the  Martian  environment  with  its  differing  geochemistry  and  also 
organisms, if they exist.  
H2O2-H2O  solutions  are  mostly  known  as  desinfectants  and  sterilizing  agents  on 
 
Earth.  Thus,  the  compatibility  of  H2O2  with  biological  processes  might  seem  questionable. 
However, some microbial organisms produce hydrogen peroxide (e.g., certain Streptococcus 
and  Lactobacillus  sp.  (17,18),  while  other  microbes  utilize  H2O2  (e.g.,  Neisseria  sicca, 
Haemophilus  segnis,  H.  parainfluenzae,  Actinomyces  viscosus,  and  Staphylococcus 
epidermidis  (18).  The  microbe    Acetobacter  peroxidans  even  uses  H2O2  in  its  metabolism 
(overall  reaction  H2O2(aq)  +  H2(aq)  ↔  2H2O  (19)).    However,  the  high  reactivity  of  H2O2 
poses  a  problem  to  most  microorganisms,  which  control  it  by  the  use  of  stabilizing 
compounds.    Colloidal  silicate  and  pyrophosphate  often  are  used  in  commercial  products, 
compounds  such  as  phenacetin,  an  aromatic  amine  (N-ethoxy-acetanilide)  may  be  more 
applicable to organisms.  Most microbes that come into contact with H2O2 protect themselves 
with scavenging enzymes such as catalase, glutathione peroxidase, and peroxiredoxin.  H2O2 
is  commonly  used  as  defense  mechanisms  by  microbes,  antibodies  (20),  immune  cells,  and 
even  certain  insects.  The  Bombardier  beetle,  Brachinus  crepitans,  for  example,  has  in  its 
posterior a chitinous chamber in which a mix of fluids can be injected, one of which is a 25% 
solution of H2O2 (21). This is combined with hydroquinone and a catalyst to produce a steam 
explosion in the chamber, which can be directed at a pursuing predator.  The uses of H2O2 in 
biology  are  surprisingly  diverse.    Mammalian  cells  are  known  to  produce  H2O2  to  mediate 
diverse  physiological  responses  such  as  cell  proliferation,  differentiation,  and  migration 
(22,23) and biological redox reactions catalyzed by H2O2 typically involve  the oxidation of 
cysteine residues on proteins (24).  Thus, high concentrations of H2O2 can be produced and 
utilized  biochemically  even  in  terrestrial  organisms.  There  does  not  appear  to  exist  a  basic 
reason why H2O2 could not be used by biology. On Earth, utilizing H2O2 in the intracellular 
fluid  has  little  advantage  with  regard  to  temperature  and  availability  of  oxygen  and  water, 
thus the majority of Earth organisms never developed extensive adaptation mechanisms. On 
Mars, on the other hand, directional selection may have favored organisms which developed 
on an early warm and wet Mars to adapt to the progressive cooling and desiccation of Mars.  
The  utilization  of  H2O2  is  not  without  some  drawbacks.  H2O2  decomposes 
 
spontaneously, thus an organism needs some mechanism to stabilize the H2O2. The situation 
is even more demanding for photoautotrophic organisms exposed to sunlight, which on Mars 
includes  a  considerable  flux  of  UV  with  wavelengths  down  to  about  200  nm.  H2O2  will 
decompose under UV radiation and has to be protected by pigments in the cellular membrane 
or  by  an  active  stabilization  mechanism.  This  does  not  necessarily  require  chlorophyll,  but 
could  involve  bacteriorhodopsin  embedded  in  the  cell  membrane  such  as  in  halophilic 
organisms,  or  involve  some  inorganic  compound  such  as  cycloocta  sulfur  for  efficient  UV 

 

6
protection (25).  However, to date, no suitable UV protection compound has been identified 
to  exist  on  Mars,  perhaps  indicating  that  any  such  organisms,  if  they  exist,  would  have  to 
pursue  an  endolithic  lifestyle  comparable  to  the  microbes  in  the  Antarctic  Dry  Valleys 
(26,27).    Notably,  these  problems  are  of  lesser  magnitude  at  lower  temperatures  requiring 
fewer resources. 
 
In contrast to water-based organisms, the putative Martian autotrophs would need to 
avoid  liquid  water.  However,  in  the  generally  arid  environment,  it  is  beneficial  if  the  water 
vapor  partial  pressure  is  above  about  50  %  a  significant  fraction  of  time.  Also,  a  generally 
low ambient temperature is beneficial in view of the stabilization of the cellular contents. If 
organisms on Mars exist that use the proposed biochemistry, they would likely be active in 
colder areas on Mars with high water vapor  concentrations as would be  expected  along the 
polar  ice  fringes.    The  Martian  tropical  areas  may  be  warmer  and  drier  than  optimum,  thus 
were not the optimal location for a life detection experiment such as Viking.   
Our  hypothesis  of  Martian  organisms  that  would  utilize  a  H2O2-H2O  mixture  as 
 
intracellular  liquid  is  of  great  consequence  for  future  missions  searching  for  extant  life  on 
Mars.  Rather  than  exploring  in  the  equatorial  belt,  where  temperatures  might  allow  liquid 
water to exist for brief periods of time, life may well exist in temperate or sub-arctic regions, 
where  temperatures  are  colder  and  the  atmosphere  contains  more  water  vapor.    These 
concerns would also have to be addressed in future sample return missions to Mars. 
 
 
References 
 
1. H.P. Klein, Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 29, 625 (1999).  
2. C.S. Cockell, A.C. Schuerger, D. Billi, E.I. Friedmann, E.I., C. Panitz, Astrobiology 5, 127 

(2005). 

3. B. Diaz, D. Schulze-Makuch, Astrobiology 6, 332 (2006). 
4. R.L. Mancinelli, Adv. Space Res. 9, 191 (1989). 
5. G.D. McDonald, E. de Vanssay, J.R. Buckley, Icarus 132, 170 (1998). 
6. W.T. Foley,  P.A. Giguère, Can. J.  Chemistry 29, 123 (1951). 
7. P.A. Giguère, P. A., E.A. Secco, E. A. Can. J.  Chemistry 32, 550 (1954). 
8. V.I. Oyama, B.J. Berdahl,  J.  Geophys. Res. 82, 4669 (1977). 
9. G.J. Flynn, Earth Moon Planets 72, 469 (1996) 
10. A.P. Zent, C.P. McKay, Icarus 108, 146 (1994). 
11. Th. Encrenaz et al., Icarus 170, 424 (2004). 
12. S.K. Atreya, Z. Gu,  J. Geophys. Res. 99, 13133 (1994). 
13. K. Biemann et al., J. Geophys. Res. 82, 4641-4658 (1977).  
14. S.A. Benner, K.G. Devine, L.N. Matveeva, D.H. Powell, PNAS (USA) 97, 2425 (2000). 
15. N.H. Horowitz, G.L. Hobby, J.S. Hubbard, J.  Geophys. Res. 82, 4659 (1977). 
16. H.P. Klein,  Icarus 34, 666 (1978). 
17. D.A. Eschenbach et al., J. Clin. Microbiol. 27, 251 (1989). 
18. C.S. Ryan, I. Kleinberg, Arch. Oral. Biol. 40, 753 (1995).  
19. S.W. Tanenbaum, S. W. (1956) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 21, 335 (1956). 
20. P. Wentworth et al.,  Science 293, 1806 (2001). 
21. T. Eisner, For Love of Insects (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2003). 

7

22. M. Sudaresan, Science 270, 296 (1995) 
23. S.G. Rhee, Sci. STKE 2000, pe1 (2000). 
24. S.G. Rhee, Science 312, 1882 (2006).  
25. D. Schulze-Makuch, D.H. Grinspoon, O. Abbas, L.N. Irwin, M. Bullock, Astrobiology 4, 
11 (2004). 
26.  E.I.  Friedmann,  R.  Ocampo-Friedmann,  R.,  in    Current  Perspectives  in  Microbiology, 
M.J.  Klug  and  C.A.  Reddy,  Eds.  (American  Society  of  Microbiology,  Washington,  D.C., 
1984), pp.177-185. 
27.  P.T.  Doran,  R.A.  Wharton,  D.J.  Des  Marais,  C.P.  McKay,  C.  P.  J.  Geophys.  Res.  103, 
28481 (1998).  
28. N.H. Horowitz, G.L. Hobby, J.S. Hubbard, Science 194, 1321 (1976). 
29. V.I. Oyama, B.J. Berdahl, G.C. Carle, Nature 265, 110 (1977). 
30. G.V. Levin, P.A. Straat, J. Geophys. Res., 82, 4663 (1977) 

Table 1. Data from the Pyrolytic Release Experiment (28). The Conditions Column indicates 
whether  the  lamp  was  on  or  off,  whether  or  not  water  vapor  was  injected,  and  whether  the 
soil  sample  was  heat-sterilized  (control  is  175oC  for  3  hours).  The  radioactivity  of  Peak  2 
column represents organic matter synthesized from the labeled gases.    

Experiment  
Chryse 1 
Chryse 2 
Chryse 3 
Chryse 4 
Utopia 1 
Utopia 2 
Utopia 3 
 
 

Conditions 
Light, dry, active 
Light, dry, control 
Light,dry, active 
Light,dry, active 
Dark, dry, active 
Light, wet, active 
Dark, dry, active 

Peak 2 (count/min) 
96 +/- 1.15 
15 +/- 1.29 
27 +/- 0.98 
35 +/- 1.6 
23 +/- 1.7 
2.8 +/- 0.92 
7.5 +/- 2.5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

Table 2. Explanations for some remaining questions after Viking 

8

Question 
Lack  of  organic 
molecules 

Chemical Explanation 
The organics have been oxidized to 
nonvolatile salts of benzenecarboxylic 
acids, and perhaps oxalic and acetic acid 
(14). 

(14) 

H2O2-H2O hypothesis 
Upon death of the organisms, the organics 
spontaneously are oxidized by H2O2 with 
no  or  very  little  organic  residue.    Non-
biology  bound  organic  molecules  are 
oxidized 
and/or 
chemically 
consumed by organisms. 
The  H2O2  in  the  H2O2-H2O  mixture  is 
part  of  the  biochemistry  of  the  putative 
Martian  organisms.  It  would  provide 
sufficient  oxidizing  potential  to  explain 
the Viking results. 
The release of O2 (and possibly CO2 to a 
lesser degree) can be interpreted as the 
result of an energy-producing 
metabolism. Upon humidification it could 
point  also to the decomposition of dying 
Martian biota, as could the increase of N2.  
The decrease of N2 can be understood as 
biological fixation, a possibility also 
entertained by Oyama et al. (29). 
Some of the putative organisms were able 
to  metabolize  and  synthesize  organic 
compounds  before 
they  died  being 
overwhelmed by water.  

Limited  metabolism  (30)  before 
the 
organisms  died  due  to  hyperhydration, 
osmotic pressure, and/or heat shock. 

There is some yet unidentified mechanism 
producing H2O2 or other oxidants. The 
oxidant might be present in form of a 
compound that has no analog on Earth. 

Evolution of O2 on humidification was 
suggested to involve one or more reactive 
species such as ozonides, superoxides, and 
peroxides (8). CO2 production in the wet 
mode can be interpreted to be related to the 
oxidation of nutrient organic compounds 
(29) and N2 release can be interpreted to be 
related to an initial N2 desorption from soil 
by water vapor and subsequent resorption in 
liquid water (29).  
No consistent explanation has been 
provided, but attempts to explain the 
observations include instrument 
malfunction, incorporation of 14CO into 
carbon suboxide polymer preformed on the 
Martian surface, and reduction of 14CO by 
H2O2 in the surface material (15) 
Laboratory test on Earth using inorganic 
oxidants and clay minerals simulated many 
of the key findings (1).   

Lack of oxidant 

and 

Release 
Partial 
Resorption of O2, 
CO2,  and  N2  in 
the 
GEx 
experiment 

of 
Synthesis 
organic  material 
in PR experiment 

Responses  in  the 
Labeled  Release 
experiment 
 
 
 
 
 
 

