Passively mode-locked diode-pumped Nd:YVO4 oscillator 
operating at ultra-low repetition rate 

D. N. Papadopoulos, S. Forget, M. Delaigue, F. Druon, F. Balembois and P. Georges 

Laboratoire Charles Fabry de l’Institut d’Optique, UMR 8501 du CNRS 
Université Paris-Sud,  91403 Orsay, France 

 

 

We demonstrate the operation of an ultra low repetition rate, high peak power, picosecond 
diode  pumped  Nd:YVO4  passively  mode  locked  laser  oscillator.  Repetition  rates  even 
below  1  MHz  were  achieved  with  the  use  of  a  new  design  multiple-pass  cavity  and  a 
semiconductor saturable absorber. Long term stable operation at 1.2 MHz, pulse duration 
of  16.3  ps  and  average  output  power  of  470  mW  corresponding  to  24  KW  peak  power 
pulses  is  reported.  This  is,  to  our  knowledge,  the  lowest  repetition  rate  high  peak  power 
pulses ever generated directly from a picosecond laser resonator without cavity dumping. 

OCIS codes: 140;3580, 140.4050 

Many  applications  in  biology  such  as  fluorescence  lifetime  measurements  require  pulsed  laser 
sources emitting visible radiations. As the fluorescence lifetime of numerous molecules is in the 
hundreds  of  picoseconds  range,  short  pulses  around  some  tenths  of  picoseconds  are  ideally 
needed  from  reliable  laser  sources.  The  repetition  rate  of  the  laser  source  used  is  also  a  very 
important parameter in experiments using photon counting detection chains: high-repetition rates 
ensure a fast acquisition process of the fluorescence decay signal and allow to study of dynamic 
processes.  However,  if  the  repetition  rate  exceeds  several  MHZ,  some  problems  appear  in  the 
complex signal processing devices during the acquisition of the data. Consequently a repetition 
rate around 1 or 2 MHz seems to be a good requirement for this kind of applications. A classical 
approach to generate short visible pulses is to use an oscillator operating at a fixed wavelength in 
the  IR  (1064  nm)  and  to  use  non-linear  processes  to  reach  the  visible  range.  But  producing 
picosecond pulses in the IR at a repetition rate of 1 MHz is not straightforward: a first alternative 
is the development of a Q-switched microchip laser.1 However, in such systems pulse durations 
below  100  ps  with  high  enough  peak  power  cannot  be  directly  achieved  without  the  use  of 
amplification stages. The second alternative is the development of a mode-locked laser oscillator. 
However,  those  sources  operate  typically  at  several  tenths  of  MHz  if  the  cavity  size  doesn’t 
exceed some meters : for a mode-locked laser the repetition rate, f, of the pulses is fixed by the 
length of the cavity, L, according to the relation f=c/2L, where c is the speed of light. Therefore 
to  achieve  a  repetition  rate  down  to  1  MHz,  the  cavity  length  should  be  increased  up  to  150 
meters. To achieve such long cavities one has to introduce a multiple pass cavity (MPC). In this 
letter we report the operation of a passively mode locked diode pumped Nd:YVO4 oscillator at 
repetition  rate  even  below  1MHz,  emitting  pulses  of  16.3  ps  duration  with  470  mW  average 
power.  

 

1

The classical two concave mirrors Herriott-style MPC, already widely used in a number 
of  applications,  especially  as  a  delay  line  as  well  as  for  gas  cells,2  has  been  recently  used 
successfully for the decrease of the frequency of a Ti:Al2O3 mode locked laser down to 4 MHz.3 
In  such  a  MPC  however,  the  number  of  passes  through  the  cavity  is  strictly  defined  by  the 
distance  between  the  two  concave  mirrors,  while  the  beam  entrance  conditions  i.e.  the  initial 
distance r of the beam from the axis of the MPC and the angle θ, only affects the shape and the 
size of the spot pattern on the concave mirrors.2 

The configuration of the MPC used in our system is in fact the folded in two, with the 
help  of  two  plane  mirrors  (Fig.  1),  version  of  the  Herriott-style  MPC.  In  our  configuration  the 
distance of both concave mirrors (R=2 m) from the two plane mirrors is fixed at approximately 
the focal length of the concave mirrors, specifically at 105 cm. The beam is periodically focused 
and defocused after each reflection on the concave and the plane mirrors respectively. The over 
all ABCD matrix of the MPC in this case is of course no longer a unity transformation matrix.3 
Thus, the design of the cavity as a whole, already containing the MPC, is necessary. With the use 
of an ABCD matrix simulation program (simulating the MPC as a repeated series of 2 m concave 
mirrors separated by a distance of about 2 m) we saw that no significant change in the intracavity 
beam properties is observed when the number of passes through the MPC is arbitrarily increased, 
if  the  design  starts  with  a  small  cavity  (without  the  MPC)  providing  a  fairly  collimated  beam. 
The  main  advantage  of  this  MPC  configuration  is  the  almost  continually  controlled  number  of 
the passes through the MPC by simply changing the alignment of the plane and/or the concave 
mirrors. The remarkable freedom of the easy control on the beam path in the MPC, is the result 
of  the  use  of  the  two  plane  mirrors.  Each  reflection  on  them,  when  the  proper  alignment  is 
achieved, actually resets the beam into the MPC in such a way that forces it to stay in the MPC 
for an arbitrary large number of round trips. Possibly the use of three or even four instead of two 
plane mirrors could supply better and easier control on the number of reflections, complicating 
of course the final setup. Additionally, in our case it was of course not necessary to drill or cut 
the concave mirrors for the entrance and the exit of the beam.3  

In this system a 5mm long, 0.1% doped Nd:YVO4 crystal is pumped by a fiber coupled 
laser diode at 808 nm of 15 W maximum power. Passive mode locking is achieved with the use 
of a semiconductor saturable absorber mirror (SESAM)4,5 with 6.1% modulation depth. During 
the  alignment  of  the  MPC  inside  the  laser  cavity,  various  repeated  beam  spot  numbers  and 
patterns were observed resulting each time the operation of the system on a number of different 
frequencies. Specifically, stable operation in 20, 12, 5, 3, 2.3 and finally 1.2 MHz was achieved 
by simply adjusting the alignment of the MPC. For the case of 1.2 MHz an asymmetric repeated 
elliptical beam spot pattern on the two concave mirrors (Fig. 2) and the corresponding on the two 
planes  provided  a  cavity  length  of  around  121  m  after  56  round  trips  inside  the  MPC.  Stable, 
single mode operation at repetition rate as low as 1.2 MHz, pulse duration of 16.3 ps  duration 
with average power of 470 mW corresponding to 392 nJ pulse energy and 24 kW peak power is 
reported. The beam quality is close to the diffraction limit, with M2 slightly above 1.1. In figure 
3  is  shown  the  photograph  of  the  pulse  train  as  measured  with  the  help  of  a  fast  photodiode. 
Small peaks appearing just after the pulses correspond to relaxation peaks of the photodiode. In 
figure 4 are shown the autocorrelation trace of the pulses and the respective Gaussian fit curve. 
The FWHM of the Gaussian curve is 23 ps corresponding 16.3 ps pulse duration. The stability of 
the system for continuous operation during some weeks period was very satisfactory. 

The output power was seriously confined by diffraction losses at the edges of the MPC 
mirrors. Replacing the SESAM with a second output mirror of the same transmission as the first 

 

2

one and by comparison of the power of the two outputs, the overall losses in the MPC (including 
the diffraction losses) were measured to be  30%.  At higher frequencies i.e. when fewer passes 
through  the  MPC  and  simpler  beam  spot  patterns  on  the  mirrors  were  chosen,  higher  output 
powers  of  several  Watts  were  possible  (2.5  W  for  f  =  2,3  MHz).  On  the  other  side,  operation 
even below 1 MHz was also observed at 884 and 650 kHz. However in those frequencies severe 
multiple  pulsing  instabilities  did  not  allow  a  long  term  operation.  Nevertheless,  we  strongly 
believe that the reduction of the frequencies far below the 1 MHz is quite manageable with the 
use of this MPC configuration, if the design of the cavity is done from the beginning for such a 
purpose. 

In such low frequencies and high intracavity energies and peak powers, careful design is 
crucial to avoid malfunction of the SESAM. The value of the modulation depth of the SESAM 
ΔR, the tendency for Q-switching mode locking (QML) and multiple pulsing instabilities that the 
SESAM  introduces  and  of  course  its  damage  threshold  are  the  key  points  towards  the  correct 
design  of  the  cavity.  Generally  in  passively  mode  locked  solid  state  lasers  with  weak  gain 
saturation, such as an Nd:YVO4 laser, an initial fluctuation of the intracavity power into the cw 
regime will monotonically increase until steady state mode locking is reached if and only if:6 

 

(1) 
κPln(mi)>Tr/Tc 
where mi represents the number of the initially oscillating  modes, P could be approximated by 
the  steady  state  intracavity  power,  Tr  is  the  round-trip  time,  Tc  the  effective  correlation  time 
defined by the inverse 3 dB full width Δv3dB of the first beat note of the free-running laser and κ 
a characteristic of the nonlinear device (SESAM), that gives the change in round-trip power gain 
per  unit  intracavity  power.6  As  the  values  of  P,  mi  and  Tc  should  be  considered  as  fixed  for  a 
specific system, for very long cavities i.e. large Tr values, the previous condition becomes very 
demanding. Since the left hand factor of (1) approximates the effective modulation depth, ΔR,6 
of the SESAM, a choice of a sufficiently large value for ΔR is crucial. For Tr≈1 μs and typical 
values of the Δv3dB around 1-10 KHz6 a secure choice of ΔR is above 3%. Our systems employs 
a SESAM with ΔR=6.1%. On the other hand a SESAM introduces a Q-switching tendency that 
can  drive  the  laser  into  the  unwanted  regime  of  Q-switching  mode  locking  (QML).  To  obtain 
free  of  QML  instabilities  cw  mode  locking  the  intracavity  pulse  energy  Ep  should  satisfy  the 
condition:7 

 

Ep> (Fsat,LAeff,LFsat,AAeff,AΔR)1/2 
(2) 
where Fsat,L, Fsat,A are the saturation fluence of the gain medium and of the SESAM respectively 
and  Aeff,L, Aeff,A  the  effective  laser  mode  in  the  gain  medium  and  on  the  SESAM  respectively. 
Thus, for a choice of large ΔR and for the fixed values of Fsat,L and Fsat,A the design of the cavity 
should provide small enough values for the Aeff,L and Aeff,A and enough Ep, so that the condition 
(2)  is  satisfied  too.  However,  the  saturation  of  the  SESAM  i.e.  the  value  of  the  factor 
S=Ep/Fsat,AAeff,A, should be kept always below 20 to avoid multiple pulsing instabilities or even 
damage  of  the  SESAM8,9.  By  proper  choice  of  the  pumping  focusing  optics  and  of  the  cavity 
mirrors we were able in some extent to achieve the proper values for Aeff,L and Aeff,A so that all 
previous  conditions  were  simultaneously  met.  Thus,  for  the  case  of  1.2  MHz  system  i.e.  for 
P=470  mW  with  a  10%  OC  corresponding  to  Ep=3.5  μJ,  for  a  double  pass  (under  strong 
overlapping of the beams) through the Nd:YVO4 crystal i.e. Fsat,L=hv/4σL=30 mJ/cm2 and for a 
SESAM  with  ΔR=6.1%  and  Fsat,A=70  μJ/cm2  we  have  chosen  an  1:1  two  lens  focusing  of  the 
pump beam, providing a mode area in the crystal estimated around Aeff,L= 1.3 10-3 cm2   (pump 

 

3

fiber core diameter = 400 μm) and a 2 m focusing mirror on the SESAM providing an 770 μm 
mode  diameter  on  the  SESAM  corresponding  to  Aeff,A=4.7  10-3  cm2.  For  the  above  values 
condition (2) is well satisfied since 3.5>0.88 and the saturation of the SESAM is S=10. 

In conclusion, operation of an ultra low repetition rate, even below 1 MHz, mode locked 
Nd:YVO4 oscillator has been demonstrated with a simple and low cost design. Stable long term 
operation in 1.2 MHz, pulse duration of 16.3 ps, and 24 kW peak power was achieved. For the 
best of our knowledge this is the lowest repetition rate ever reported for a completely passively 
mode locked laser with no use of complicated and expensive techniques such as cavity dumping.  
In preliminary experiments on frequency doubling, conversion efficiency into 532 nm as high as 
50% was achieved with the use of 10 mm long periodically poled KTP crystal. These results are 
very  promising  for  the  further  use  of  this  source  for  the  generation  of  short  visible  pulses  for 
fluorescence lifetime measurements.  

 
This  research  was  partially  supported  by  the  research  program  POLA  from  the  Contrat 
Plan  Etat  Région  (2000-2006)  (French  State  and  Conseil  Général  de  l’Essonne).  D.  N. 
Papadopoulos worked for this project under a Marie Curie fellowship. His current affiliation is: 
Lasers and Applications Group, Physics Department, National Technical University  of  Athens, 
Heroon Polytechniou 9, 15780 Athens, Greece.  
The e-mail address of  Sébastien Forget is: sebastien.forget@iota.u-psud.fr. 

 
References 
 

(2003). 

1.  S.  Forget,  F.  Balembois,  G.  Lucas-Leclin  and  P.  Georges,  Opt.  Commun.  220,  187-192 

2.  A. Herriott, H. Kogelnik and R. Kompfner, Appl. Opt. 3, 523 (1964).  
3.  S. H. Cho, F. X. Kärtner, U. Morgner, E. P. Ippen, J. G. Fujimoto, J. E. Cunningham and W. 

4.  U.  Keller,  D.  A.  B.  Miller,  G.  D.  Boyd,  T.  H.  Chiu,  J.  F.  Ferguson  and  M.  T.  Asom,  Opt. 

H. Knox, Opt. Lett. 26, 560 (2001).  

Lett. 17, 505 (1992). 

5.  U.  Keller,  K.  J.  Weingarten,  F.  X.  Kärtner,  D.  Kopf,  B.  Braun,  I.  D.  Jung,  R.  Fluck,  C. 
Hönninger,  N.  Matuschek  and  J.  Aus  der  Au,  IEEE  J.  Sel.  Top.  Quantum  Electron.  2,  453 
(1996). 

6.  F. Krausz, M. E. Fermann, T. Brabec, P. F. Curley, M. Hofer, M. H. Ober, C. Spielmann, E. 

Winter and A. J. Schmidt, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 28, 2097 (1992). 

7.  C. Hönninger, R. Paschotta, F. Morier-Genoud, M. Moser and U. Keller, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 

8.  G. J. Spühler, T. Südmeyer, R. Paschotta, M. Moser, K. J. Weingarten and U. Keller, Appl. 

9.  F.  X.  Kärtner,  J.  Aus  der  Au  and  U.  Keller,  IEEE  J.  Sel.  Top.  Quantum  Electron.  4,  159 

16, 46 (1999). 

Phys. B 71, 19 (2000). 

(1998). 

 
 

 

 

 

4

 
References including the titles 
 

1.  S. Forget, F. Balembois, G. Lucas-Leclin and P. Georges, “Picosecond laser source at 1 
MHz with continuous tunability in the visible red band”, Opt. Commun. 220, 187 (2003). 
2.  D.  Herriott,  H.  Kogelnik  and  R.  Kompfner,  “Off  axis  paths  in  spherical  mirror 

interferometers” Appl. Opt. 3, 523 (1964).  

3.  S. H. Cho, F. X. Kärtner, U. Morgner, E. P. Ippen, J. G. Fujimoto, J. E. Cunningham and 
W.  H.  Knox,  “generation  of  90  nJ  pulses  with  4  MHz  repetition  rate  Kerr  lens  mode 
locked  Ti:Al2O3  laser  operating  with  net  positive  and  negative  intracavity  dispersion” 
Opt. Lett. 26, 560 (2001).  

4.  U.  Keller,  D.  A.  B.  Miller,  G.  D.  Boyd,  T.  H.  Chiu,  J.  F.  Ferguson  and  M.  T.  Asom, 
“Solid-state  low-loss  intracavity  saturable  absorber  for  Nd:YLF  lasers:  an  antiresonant 
semiconductor Fabry - Perot saturable absorber” Opt. Lett. 17, 505 (1992). 

5.  U. Keller, K. J. Weingarten, F. X. Kärtner, D. Kopf, B. Braun, I. D. Jung, R. Fluck, C. 
Hönninger, N. Matuschek and J. Aus der Au, “Semiconductor saturable absorber mirrors 
(SESAM’s) for femtosecond to nanosecond pulse generation in solid state lasers”, IEEE 
J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 2, 435 (1996). 

6.  F. Krausz, M. E. Fermann, T. Brabec, P. F. Curley, M. Hofer, M. H. Ober, C. Spielmann, 
E. Winter and A. J. Schmidt, “Femtosecond solid state lasers” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 
28, 2097 (1992). 

7.  C. Hönninger, R. Paschotta, F. Morier-Genoud, M. Moser and U. Keller, “Q -switching 
stability  limits  of  continuous-wave  passive  mode  locking”,  J.  Opt.  Soc.  Am.  B  16,  45 
(1999). 

8.  G.  J.  Spühler,  T.  Südmeyer,  R.  Paschotta,  M.  Moser,  K.  J.  Weingarten  and  U.  Keller, 
“Passively  mode-locked  high  power  Nd:YAG  lasers  with  multiple  laser  heads”  Appl. 
Phys. B 71, 19 (2000). 

9.  F. X. Kärtner, J. Aus der Au and U. Keller, “Mode locking with slow and fast saturable 
absorbers : what’s the difference ?”, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 4, 159 (1998). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

5

Figures 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

R=2 m 

Pump 

R=2 m 

Multiple Pass Cavity 

SESAM 

R=0.5 m 

Nd :YVO4 

R= 0.3 m 

OC, 10% 

Fig.  1.  Schematic  of  the  laser  cavity  with  the  four  low  losses  R>99.9  mirrors  (two 
folding plane mirrors and two concave with R=2m) multiple-pass cavity.  
 

Fig. 2. Photograph of the MPC concave mirrors with the beam spot pattern 
on them for the 1.2 MHz repetition rate mode locked Nd:YVO4 laser. 
 

6

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 3. Oscilloscope trace of a fast photodiode, showing the mode locked laser pulse train of 1.2 MHz of 810 ns separation. 

Fig. 4. Intensity autocorrelation trace showing a pulse duration of 16.3 ps assuming a Gaussian intensity profile. 
 

 

 

7

Figures captions 

R=2m) multiple-pass cavity.  

Nd:YVO4 laser. 

Fig. 1. Schematic of the laser cavity with the four low losses R>99.9 mirrors (two folding plane mirrors and two concave with 

Fig. 2. Photograph of the MPC concave mirrors with the beam spot pattern on them for the 1.2 MHz repetition rate mode locked 

Fig. 3. Oscilloscope trace of a fast photodiode, showing the mode locked laser pulse train of 1.2 MHz of 810 ns separation. 

Fig. 4. Intensity autocorrelation trace showing a pulse duration of 16.3 ps assuming a Gaussian intensity profile. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8

