Success and persistence  1

Success and Persistence in Science: The Influence of Classroom Climate

L. O. Dickie*1, H. Dedic2, S. Rosenfield2, E. Rosenfield3, R. A. Simon4

1 John Abbott College, Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue, Quebec, Canada. 2 Vanier College and 
Concordia University, St-Laurent, Quebec, Canada. 3 Champlain College, St-Lambert, 
Quebec, Canada. 4 McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

*Corresponding author; leslie.dickie@johnabbott.qc.ca

Acknowledgement:

This work was supported by the Quebec Government through the program, Fonds 

Québécois de la recherche sur la société et la culture (FQRSC). The authors wish to thank 

the faculty and students who took the time to participate in this study and the many 

helpful discussions with the members of the research team.

Success and persistence  2

To better understand how student and faculty perceptions of the learning climate 

in science/mathematics classes influence success and persistence, we followed a cohort of 
1425 academically able students who entered CEGEP in the fall of 2003. Students 
completed surveys in their first, second and fourth semesters. In the second semester 84 
faculty members completed a similar survey. Faculty conceptions of teaching were 
identified using a framework developed by Scardamalia and Bereiter (1989).  
No significant gender differences in achievement were found. Self-efficacy declined 
over students’ first semester as did affect towards science. Classes that students 
perceived as fostering their development had a positive impact on persistence and 
success while classes characterized as transmitting had a negative impact. Females 
were more likely than males to characterize a class as transmitting and to abandon 
science. Faculty members who had pedagogical training were more likely to create a 
fostering atmosphere in their classes.

Abstract

Résumé

Afin de mieux comprendre comment la perception des élèves et des enseignants 
du climat pédagogique dans les classes de sciences/mathématiques influence le succès et 
la persévérance, nous avons suivi 1 425 étudiants possédant un rendement académique 
supérieur ayant commencé le CEGEP à l’automne 2003. Les étudiants ont complété un 
questionnaire durant leur premier, second et quatrième semestres. Au second semestre, 84 
membres du personnel enseignant ont complété un questionnaire similaire. Les 
conceptions de l’enseignement des enseignants ont été identifiées à l’aide d’un cadre 
référentiel développé par Scardamalia et Bereiter (1989).

Selon les résultats obtenus, aucune différence importante liée au sexe des 

candidats n’a été notée dans la performance académique de ces derniers. L’efficacité 
personnelle des élèves a baissé au cours du premier semestre, de même que leur 
apréciation des sciences. Le succès et la persévérance scolaires seraient affectés 
positivement lorsque les élèves perçoivent un soutien dans leur environnement d’études, 
contrairement aux cours caractérisés par la simple transmission du savoir qui, eux, ont un 
impact négatif. Les filles ont plus tendance que les garçons à décrire le climat 
pédagogique comme étant caractérisé par la transmission du savoir et, par conséquent, à 
abandonner les sciences. Les professeurs ayant reçu une formation en éducation avaient 
quant à eux davantage tendance à créer des environnements de soutien dans leurs classes.

Success and Persistence in Science: The Influence of Classroom Climate

Success and persistence  3

Students, especially females, are abandoning science in university in disturbing 

numbers. Over the past twenty years the number of college bound students interested in 

science or engineering majors has dropped by 50% and moreover, as many as half of the 

students that do enter science programs transfer out (Pearson & Fechter, 1994). The 

current study found a steady attrition from high school to college to university (see Figure 

1; Rosenfield et al., 2005).

             

Figure 1. The leaky pipeline: Attrition from high school to university (asterisk indicates estimate)

This trend of fewer students graduating from the sciences is of concern because in 

a technological world, scientific literacy for all is essential if citizens are to make 

informed decisions on issues like global warming and the responsible use of the earth’s 

resources (Grayson, 2006). Further, as we move away from the Industrial Age to the 

Knowledge and Communication Age, the wealth of each country increasingly depends 

upon its ability to educate an increasing percentage of its population as “knowledge-

workers.” 

When students enter college classrooms their learning outcomes are influenced by 

contextual factors such as the course, the setting, their epistemological conceptions about 

learning and teaching, their prior knowledge of the subject and the perceived actions of 

Success and persistence  4

the teacher. Students look to faculty for guidance about what to learn and how to learn: 

some of the direction is overt, some must be inferred from the actions and words of the 

teacher, and some from the reactions of the teacher to stimuli such as student questions. 

In turn the teacher’s epistemological conceptions about learning and teaching and his/her 

beliefs about how students learn influence his/her actions (Haney, Lumpe, Czerniak & 

Egan, 2002). For example, whether the teacher views teaching as transmitting knowledge 

or as promoting conceptual change in students will affect the type and frequency of 

assessment tasks assigned, the degree of control the teacher maintains by either lecturing 

or enabling small-group work, and whether the teacher assumes responsibility for 

covering the material by providing handouts and library references or delegates part of 

this responsibility to the student by expecting them to be more active in finding their own 

resources (Kember & Kwan 2002; Vermut & Verloop, 1999). 

The use of inappropriate teaching methods by faculty is an important detriment to 

success and persistence in science (Seymour & Hewitt, 1997; Tobias, 1990): the problem 

does not start in college or university but has its roots in elementary school. Yager, 

Simmons and Pennik (1989) in a study of nine-year-old students, found that 75% of them 

felt positive about studying science, but that this percentage declined to 50% in 17-year-

olds. Similarly, Davis and Steiger (1996) reported that student interest in studying 

science, mathematics or engineering declines over the two years at CEGEP as a direct 

consequence of science instruction and this decline was reported amongst high, as well as 

low, achievers.

Seymour and Hewitt (1997) found that poor teaching was mentioned by more 

than 90% of switchers (p. 146), and that the atmosphere in science, mathematics and 

engineering classes was perceived as being cold compared with classes in the humanities. 

They further found that students equated good teaching with “openness, respect for 

students, encouragement of discussion, and the sense of discovering things together” 

(p.148). These qualities are consistent with the Fourteen Learner-Centered principles of 

student learning processes with which the American Psychological Association 

summarized research findings about good teaching and learning (American Psychological 

Association, 1997).

Despite this body of knowledge, Kardash and Wallace (2001) found that 

Success and persistence  5

undergraduate science majors in biology and physics: a) see their classes as placing them 

in the role of passive learners; b) perceive grades, rather than an explanation of science 

concepts, to be the primary form of feedback provided; c) are unsure whether laboratory 

experiences support inquiry and problem-solving, as opposed to simply stating the correct 

answer; and d) find that faculty are seldom interested in them as students, and are instead 

preoccupied with their discipline. They further reported that 74% of the students who do 

persist in science, mathematics or engineering complain about poor teaching. 

Seymour and Hewitt report that  “traditional science pedagogy is inherently 

disadvantageous to women,” (p. 235) and that females’ preference for more cooperative 

learning experiences do not serve them well in the competitive ethos of science classes 

and contribute to their lower persistence compared with their male peers. More recently 

Epstein (2006) has pointed out that many students are forced to “slog through” two or 

more years of large, formulaic and impersonal introductory classes before they are 

introduced to the hands-on work that make a career in science attractive to working 

scientists.

To better understand how student and faculty perceptions of learning 

environments interact with student characteristics to impact on student academic 

performance and persistence in science, this study sought to understand students’ 

perceptions of the learning climate in their classes. Further, teachers’ conceptions of 

teaching were examined because these conceptions will determine how teachers translate 

their intentions into actions in their classrooms.

Prior research has demonstrated the relationship between students’ conceptions of 

learning, their approach to learning tasks and learning outcomes (Kember & Kwan, 

2002). Similarly, conceptions of teaching influence the approach to teaching adopted by 

faculty and in turn impact on the approach students adopt and the quality of the learning 

outcomes (Kember, 1997; Marton & Säljö, 1984). Entwistle and Walker (2002) explored 

the ways in which an ordered set of teachers’ conceptions of teaching, from teacher-

centered to student-centered, was associated with student learning outcomes, and 

concluded that the intellectual development of students was enabled by a student-

centered approach to teaching rather than by a teacher-centered approach.

Success and persistence  6

In 1997 Kember undertook a reconceptualization of research on the conceptions 

of teaching held by faculty in post-secondary education. All of the studies examined 

found distinct conceptions of teaching that could be arranged in an ordered set of 

qualitatively different conceptions from teacher-centered/content-oriented to student-

centered/learning-oriented. After reviewing the studies he concluded that the outcomes 

could be synthesized into a two-tiered model, and that the teacher-centered/student-

centered axis was a useful orientation for the ordered set (Figure 2).

teacher-centred/

content-oriented





student-centred/

learning-oriented





conceptual 

change/

intellectual

development

imparting

information

transmitting

student-teacher 

structured

knowledge



interaction/

apprenticeship

 facilitating

understanding

Figure 2: A two level model for categorizing conceptions of teaching.

The shaded areas indicate a diffuse boundary implying an easy development from one conception to the 

other. (after Kember, 1997)

Kember placed the conceptions under two broad orientations: The first is teacher-

centered and focuses on the communication of specific content. The second is student-

centered and focuses on students and learning. Each orientation is divided into two 

subordinate conceptions while a fifth transitional conception, where student-teacher 

interaction is first recognized as necessary, serves as a bridge between the two 

orientations. Rather than having well-defined boundaries the five conceptions of teaching 

are better thought of as well-established positions along a continuum (Prosser, Trigwell 

& Taylor 1994). After reviewing a number of frameworks (Kember, 1997; Kane, 

Sandretto & Heath, 2002; Havita & Goodyear, 2002) it was decided that that of 

Scardamalia and Bereiter (1989) was the most promising for the project. Their 

framework is non-judgmental, an important consideration when describing the project to 

Success and persistence  7

faculty, it also describes classroom strategies and the mental gymnastics that faculty 

might use to overcome or avoid the deficits of each of the conceptions. Their four, “time-

honored,” (p. 37) conceptions are; teaching as cultural transmission; teaching as skills 

training; teaching as the fostering of natural development; and teaching as producing 

conceptual change. They consider the stages of their taxonomy to be hierarchical.

For each of these conceptions of learning the team developed a grid that described 

the actions of the teacher, descriptions of likely teaching activities, faculty expectations 

of student actions both inside and outside of the classroom and types of assessments used. 

As examples, for faculty who conceptualized teaching as transmission of knowledge or as 

fostering conceptual change, the characteristics are:

Teaching as transmission of knowledge: Human knowledge can accumulate and 

be transmitted from generation to generation. The teacher a) defines the curriculum by 

what they see as the standard knowledge of the subject; b) lectures and provides notes; c) 

maintains control; d) expects the students to be a passive recipient of knowledge and e) 

assessments focus on the correct answer.

Teaching as conceptual change: Learning is transformative rather than merely 

cumulative. The teacher a) identifies those areas where prior knowledge structures might 

contradict new knowledge structures; b) uses class time for short lectures, interactive 

activities and discussions that challenge students to resolve conflicts between prior and 

present conceptual knowledge; c) expects students to participate in discussions; d) 

prepares problem sets that challenge students’ prior conceptions; and e) uses assessments 

that require that students demonstrate both correct problem solving algorithms and verbal 

and/or written responses relating to prior conceptions.

Methodology

Participants

Student participants (N = 1425) represent a cohort of academically able students 

who graduated from High School (grade 11) in June 2003 and entered one of four public 

Anglophone CEGEPs (Collège d'enseignement général et professionnel, two-year 

colleges preceding a three-year university program) in the fall. Participants volunteered to 

Success and persistence  8

respond to at least one of three surveys administered during the four semesters of their 

college studies. The first survey was administered in class in the first weeks of students’ 

first semester (fall 2003). The second was administered in science classes in the first 

weeks of students’ second semester, while the third was administered in science classes 

in the students’ fourth semester (spring 2005) after they had either applied for admission 

to university in a specific field, or were thinking about their choice for future studies.

Faculty participants (N = 84; 39% female, 61% male) were pre-university science 

program faculty at the four CEGEPs participating in this study and made up 42% of the 

population of mathematics and science faculty at these colleges. The participants were 

members of four departments: biology (6%), chemistry (25%), mathematics (37%), and 

physics (32%). Approximately 42% of faculty held a doctorate, 51% held a masters 

degree, and 7% did not reveal their education. Faculty who had more than 15 years of 

teaching experience made up 61% of the sample.

Achievement and demographic data of students were obtained from academic 

Student Data

records.

The first survey

Each participant responded to one of four randomly distributed 100-item versions of a 

130-item survey. Consequently, the sample size for assessment of each of the variables 

varies and is less than the full 1425. All participants responded to items assessing Interest 

in Science careers (18 items), Motivation to Select Science Courses in High School (6 

items), Perceptions of learning environments in mathematics and science classes (22 

items) and Teacher evaluation (5 items). The latter two sets of items were a selection of 

high-factor-loading items from a scale developed by Kardash and Wallace (2001) that 

assessed students’ perceptions of the classroom environment. The second part of the 

questionnaire assessed Socio-economic Status (parental education and family income), 

Ethnic Background and Student Motivational Characteristics, Self-efficacy Beliefs (6 

items developed by Dedic, Rosenfield, Alalouf, & Klasa (2004)), and Affect. A nine-item 

Affect scale was used (Emmons, 1992). Participants were asked to rate each item, based 

on how they felt during the past week, using a Likert scale that ranged from 1 to 5, with 1 

representing very slightly and 5 representing extremely. The items were: joyful, unhappy, 

Success and persistence  9

worried/anxious, enjoyment/fun, depressed, pleased, happy, angry/hostile, and frustrated. 

These scales have excellent temporal reliability and internal consistency (Diener & 

Emmons, 1984).

The second survey

This survey assessed change in Interest in Science Careers (13 items) and 

Perceptions of Learning Environments in science and mathematics courses taken during 

the first semester in CEGEP (45 items).

 The third survey

This survey was administered after students had made their choice of university program 

and asked them for their choices and the reasons for making those choices. 

Faculty data

During the winter 2004 semester participants volunteered to answer an 80-item 

survey which included 30 items that assessed: a) faculty perceptions of the learning 

environment in their classes; b) their coping strategies; and, c) their course preparation 

practices. Thirty-seven items from the second student survey were rephrased to develop 

these thirty items. For example, the item “Teachers attempted to find out what students 

already know about a topic before presenting new or more advanced information in their 

classes.” from the student survey, became “I attempt to find out what students already 

know about a topic before presenting the topic,” in the teacher survey. Most but not all 

items were transformed. Some items had to be omitted from the faculty questionnaire 

because the faculty version would have clearly elicited skewed responses. Other items 

were potentially offensive to faculty, even though not to students. For example, although 

it was reasonable to ask students if they perceived that their instructor did not treat them 

with respect, asking faculty if they treat their students with respect was certain to be 

offensive.

Results

Student and Faculty Perceptions of Learning Environments

In the second survey students responded to 37 items describing learning 

environments in CEGEP. Exploratory factor analysis was carried out on the data from 

Success and persistence  10

one CEGEP and a three-factor model determined. Confirmatory factor analysis was 

carried out on data from the remaining three CEGEPs and confirmed the three-factor 

model. A similar analysis was used for the first student survey that asked about learning 

environments in high school and revealed a three-factor model. 

Exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis of the faculty data 

revealed a two-factor model: teaching as transmission and teaching as fostering student 

development. The data did not support the four-factor model implied in the Scardamalia 

and Bereiter (1989) model but rather the three conceptions, teaching as skills training, 

teaching as the fostering of natural development, and teaching as producing conceptual 

change coalesced into the single conception, fostering student development.

There were clear similarities between the student models for high school and 

CEGEP. In both cases, the first student factor describes a supportive environment where 

teachers make students feel confident and competent. Teachers stimulate students to think 

along with them while they are explaining concepts, and encourage students’ independent 

thinking. This factor was labeled Fostering.

The second student factor describes the classroom use of collaborative strategies, 

an environment where peer collaboration is encouraged or structured into lesson plans. 

Collaborative learning environments have been shown to be effective in enhancing both 

student motivation and learning (Lou, Abrami, Spence, Poulsen, et al., 1996; Springer, 

Stanne, & Donovan, 1999). This factor was labeled Collaborative.

Items that load on factor 3 in the student model, and on factor 2 in the faculty 

model, are very similar. They describe practices of faculty whose conception of teaching 

is Transmission of Knowledge. Unfortunately, all three surveys included too few such 

items, and some had to be removed from the analysis because they were highly skewed.

Ultimately four items loaded on these factors. Nonetheless these items are 

describing environments where the focus is on delivery of knowledge, not students’ 

learning. This factor was labeled Transmitting. Table 1 provides a side-by-side 

comparison of the items that contributed to these models.

Success and persistence  11

CEGEP teachers

I attempt to find out what my 
students already know before 
showing them a new method of 
solving a problem
I encourage students to develop their 
own methods for solving typical 
problems.

I try to help students connect to the 
curriculum material by finding 
topics that will be interesting to 
them.
In this course I focus on changing 
students’ understanding of many 
concepts that they thought they 
already understood.

I often use examples from other 
science disciplines in my class

I often show several ways of solving 
the same problem.

I encourage students to discuss ideas 
amongst themselves as a way to 
improve their understanding.

I encourage students to work with 
their peers to promote a sense of 
mutual support.

1
 
r
o
t
c
a
F

High School students
Teachers explained their ideas in a 
way that made sense.
Teachers tried to ensure that their 
students felt confident and 
competent ...
Teachers attempted to find out what 
students already know about a topic 
before presenting the topic

CEGEP students
The teacher explained ideas in a way 
that made sense to me.
The teacher tried to ensure that 
students felt confident and 
competent in the course.
The teacher attempted to find out 
what students already knew about a 
topic before presenting the topic.

Teachers encouraged me to think for 
myself.

The teacher encouraged me to think 
for myself.

Lectures stimulated me to think 
along with the teacher, and to 
understand new ideas.
Teachers emphasized the 
understanding of concepts more than 
the remembering of formulas.

Classes stimulated me to think along 
with the teacher, and to understand 
new ideas.
The teacher emphasized the 
understanding of concepts more than 
the remembering of formulas.

1
 
r
o
t
c
a
F

The teacher spent considerable time 
helping us to improve our skills and 
learn new ones.

The teacher made me feel that 
making mistakes is a normal part of 
learning.
When I made a mistake in solving a 
problem I still got a good grade as 
long as my method was correct.
The teacher often taught us several 
ways of solving the same problem.
The teacher asked students to work 
together as a regular part of classes.
The teacher encouraged students to 
discuss ideas amongst themselves as 
a way to improve understanding.

The teacher allowed class time for 
debates about interesting issues that 
we brought up
The teacher encouraged students to 
work with their peers to promote a 
sense of mutual support.

Teachers gave good examples and 
practical applications of 
mathematical and scientific 
concepts.
Teachers treated students with 
respect. 

Teachers related information 
presented in their classes to math or 
other science classes.

Teachers encouraged students to 
work together.
When teachers asked groups of 
students to discuss a topic, the 
discussion usually improved my 
understanding.
Teachers encouraged students to 
participate in classroom discussions.

Teachers promoted the idea of 
“discovering things together” with 
students in their classes.
Teachers gave a short lecture and 
then groups of students worked on 
problems or discussed topics.
I spent most of my time in class 
copying the teacher's notes.
Teachers lectured most of the time. 

Teachers assumed that students 
knew more about math and science 
than they really do.
Group work in my classes mostly 
involved repetition of problems 
where one "plugs-in" numbers into a 
formula.

2
 
r
o
t
c
a
F

3
 
r
o
t
c
a
F

I spent most of my time in class 
copying the teacher's notes.
The teacher lectured most of the 
time.
The teacher was mostly concerned 
with covering all the material that he 
planned to cover.
To succeed in this course I often had 
to memorize solutions.

Students should spend most of their 
time in class taking notes ...

In my class I am mostly concerned 
with covering all the material that I 
planned to cover.
I limit the number of questions I 
allow in a given class because of 
time needed to cover the material.

2
 
r
o
t
c
a
F

Table 1. Comparison of perceptions of the learning environments

Success and persistence  12

Students’ factor scores on Fostering and Collaborative correlated positively with 

students’ perception that the teacher was effective in making them learn while students’ 

factor scores on Transmitting correlated negatively with their perception of teachers’ 

effectiveness as shown in Table 2.

Table 2. Correlations between students’ perception of a class and student’s perception 

that the teaching was effective in making them learn

High School Students

College Students

Factor 1  Fostering

Factor 2  Collaborative

.589**

.307**

Factor 3  Transmitting

- .199**

.819**

.364**

- .359**

Note  ** significance at level p = .01

Persistence and Academic Performance

A student’s potential to succeed in science was measured by averaging their 

grades in high school science courses. Students whose score was 70% or greater had the 

ability to succeed in the science program (Dickie, 2000). There were N = 1425 students 

in this cohort (765 females, 660 males). There were no significant differences in the 

potential of females and males to succeed in science as measured by their high school 

science grades, (82.2% vs. 82.1%, respectively) nor were there differences in their 

performances in the first semester in CEGEP (83.6% vs. 82.2%). However at every stage 

of decision making about future careers in science, female students were more likely to 

abandon science (Figure 3).

Success and persistence  13

Figure 3. Persistence of male and female students who had an aptitude for science and mathematics.

There was a significant difference between the science potential of those who 

persisted in science at CEGEP and those who abandoned science after high school but 

this difference is small (83.6% vs. 82.2%, persist/abandon) and is unlikely to have 

practical impact. For those who persisted there was a small but non-significant difference 

in the average CEGEP grade over three semesters in favor of females (73.1% vs. 72.2%, 

N = 841, p = .059). Female students in this cohort of academically able students do 

perform better but can such a small difference in average grades have any practical 

meaning?

Persistence and Attitude, Self-efficacy and Perception of the Learning Climate

Grades alone do not provide explanations for why capable students abandon 

science, or why bright female students are more likely to forgo science careers than their 

male peers. Do their attitudes and beliefs provide clues? It was determined that there 

were statistically significant differences in females’ and males’ attitudes towards science, 

means 3.7 vs. 3.9, (F(1,1425) = 13.4, p < .001) on a scale from 1, “I hate sciences and 

mathematics” to 5, “I love sciences and mathematics”. This difference points to students’ 

beliefs about science as a possible contributor to their abandoning science.

To further explore this difference in feelings toward science, students’ positive 

feelings and the strength of their self-efficacy beliefs were assessed first as they entered 

CEGEP and again, after completion of the first semester. In the cohort of 1425 students, 

Success and persistence  14

data were available for 398 students. There was no significant difference between the 

feelings towards science of females and males at the beginning of CEGEP, when they 

were reporting on their experiences in high school, (means 3.6 vs. 3.6 respectively, 

F(1,398) = .8, p = .36). However, after one term at CEGEP, there was a significant 

difference, (means 2.9 vs. 3.2, F(1,398) = 15.1, p < .001) with males feeling more 

positive towards science, as shown in Figure 4.

3.5

2.5

4

3

2

Female
Male

Sec V

CEGEP 1

Figure 4.  Means of the frequency of positive feelings for female and male students.

(scale: 2 = “just a few times”; 3 = “often”; 4 = “quite often”)

Similarly, there were significant differences in self-efficacy beliefs between 

females and males, both at the beginning of CEGEP (when they were reporting on their 

experiences in high school) and after the first semester of CEGEP (HS: means 3.4, 3.7 for 

females and males respectively, F(1,398) = 42.6, p < .001; CEGEP: means 3.2, 3.5 for 

females and males respectively, F(1,398) = 19.9, p < .001). Both females and males 

become less confident in their abilities to tackle tasks after one term of studies in the 

science program. Males are more confident than females and the difference between 

female and male self-efficacy beliefs, initially seen in high school, is repeated, albeit at 

lower values, after the first term of CEGEP (Figure 5). The differences and changes in 

self-efficacy beliefs during the transition period are not sufficient to explain why female 

students are leaving science in greater numbers than their male peers.

Success and persistence  15

3.5

2.5

4

3

2

Female

Male

Sec V

CEGEP

Figure 5. Self-efficacy beliefs after Secondary V and after the first semester of CEGEP

The greater self-efficacy of males entering CEGEP compared to females might be 

an example of males systematically overestimating their own ability and of females 

underestimating their ability (Sax, 2005, p. 43). Pajares (2003) has suggested that males 

are more likely to express confidence in skills they may not possess and to express 

overconfidence in skills they do possess.

Students’ perceptions of learning environments were also examined. There 

were no significant gender differences in the perception of the learning environments 

that are student-friendly and nurture their learning (Fostering). However, it was found 

that female students perceive the learning environment as more teacher-centered 

(Transmitting) than their male peers both in high school, (mean 3.0, 2.8 females/males 

respectively, F(1.398) = 7.1, p = .008), and in CEGEP, (mean 3.4, 3.2, F(1.398) = 7.7, 

p = .006). Both genders perceived the learning environments in CEGEP as more 

Transmitting than in high school (Figure 6).

Success and persistence  16

3.5

2.5

4

3

2

Female

Male

Sec V

CEGEP

Figure 6. Perceptions of teacher-centred transmitting learning environment

It is important to note that the perception of a supportive environment 

(Fostering) positively correlated with students’ perception of teacher effectiveness. In 

addition, there was also a significant difference in academic performance between 

students who saw their classes as more-effective/less-effective in promoting learning 

(means 83.0, 81.3), F(1, 1302) = 16.7, p < .001).

Discussion

The most important finding of this study is that for the cohort of academically 

able students, ability (as measured by high school performance) and performance (as 

measured by CEGEP grades) cannot explain the difference in persistence of females and 

males. This inability of performance to predict persistence is in agreement with the 

findings of Fehrs and Czujko, (1992) who found that females who left physics performed 

on par with males who persisted, but is at odds with the findings of two large studies of 

gender differences in science, mathematics and engineering graduates that were reviewed 

by Seymour and Hewitt (1997); these two studies reported that similar performance lead 

to similar persistence (Strenta, Elliott, Adair, Matier et al., 1994; Ginorio, Brown, 

Henderson & Cook, 1993). 

Success and persistence  17

The persistence and success of students cannot be divorced from the context in 

which they are embedded. The four colleges are commuter colleges and the science 

program allows students only a limited choice of optional courses. Tinto (1997) has 

pointed out that in commuter colleges, students’ academic interactions with other 

students and with faculty take place in the classroom. Indeed the classroom might be the 

only context where this academic engagement takes place so it is crucial to success and 

persistence. In the science program there is a compulsory core of courses in Biology, 

Chemistry, Physics and Mathematics. Parker, Rennie, and Harding (1995) in a meta-

analysis, found that in every country for which data were available the participation 

levels of females in science beyond the compulsory courses was lower than that of males. 

This effect was particularly notable in Physics, less so in Chemistry and small for 

Biology. They also point out that when they are free to choose, “females and males 

participate quite differently, (in both quantitative and qualitative terms) in the study of 

science” (p. 188).

Seymour and Hewitt suggest that a clue to finding the cause of the poor 

persistence of females is that women in both graduate and undergraduate levels reported 

that feelings of psychological alienation were important factors in their abandoning 

science. In this study we found differences in the perception of the learning climate. In 

particular, females perceived classes as more teacher-centered (Transmitting) than did 

their male counterparts.

We suggest that this difference in the perception of the learning climate, 

combined with their lower feelings of self-efficacy are important contributors to the poor 

persistence of females. In making this hypothesis we are in agreement with the findings 

of Kubanek and Waller (1996) who followed a randomly selected sample of women 

students for four semesters from when they entered CEGEP until they graduated, 

abandoned science or continued their science studies. They too found that their 

quantitative data, from the Coopersmith Self-Esteem Inventory (1984), showed no 

relationship between either self-esteem and persistence, or self-esteem and performance 

(as measured by CEGEP grades). They did however find that a student’s perception of 

how their questions were received (both in-class and out-of-class) was crucial to their 

self-esteem and confidence. Female students’ perception that their questions were not 

Success and persistence  18

encouraged, and their perceptions of how they could or could not relate to their teachers, 

were associated with abandoning science.

This study found a connection between self-efficacy, students’ perception of the 

ability of the teacher to help them learn, and persistence. Female students who were in 

the “more effective in making be learn” group have higher self-efficacy than their female 

counterparts in the “less effective in making me learn” group and are more likely to 

persist. Male students in either group have higher self-efficacy than females. Perhaps the 

male students have developed an “immunity” to effects of the learning environment on 

self-efficacy, and hence persistence. This suggestion is supported by the report of Tobias 

(1990) who reviewed a study of 4,000 Ph.D. scientists and engineers in NASA (Dietz, 

Lund & Rosendhal, 1989), where it was found that “over 80% decided on a career in 

science or engineering before completing high school,” and that “the intrinsic interest of 

the subject matter” was more important than, “all other influences,” including their high 

school and college teachers, in their decision to study science or engineering (Tobias, 

1990, p. 10).

One key factor in classes that are perceived as Fostering is the involvement of 

students beyond silent listening and copying notes. When students perceived classes as 

supportive of their engagement, their academic performance was better. On the other 

hand, if the climate of a class is perceived as Transmitting, persistence is negatively 

affected: more so for women. While “Transmitting” and “Fostering” are convenient 

constructs for characterizing the learning climate created by the teacher the expectations 

of women and men can be teased out to more fully describe the desired faculty-student 

relationship. Men have described a “good” teacher as one who is “enthusiastic,” 

“interesting,” “entertaining,” and “can explain well,” while women characterize a “good” 

teacher as one who is “approachable,” “friendly,” “patient,” and “interested in how you 

respond” (Seymour and Hewitt, 1997, p. 305). While a Harvard study (Light, 1990, cited 

in Powell, 2005) found that men wanted an advisor who “knows the facts,” or one who 

“makes concrete and direct suggestions, which I’m then free to accept or reject.” In 

comparison women wanted an advisor who “will take the time to get to know me 

personally,” or who “is a good listener and can read between the lines if I am hesitant to 

express a concern.” Kubanek and Waller (1996) avoided comparing the perceptions of 

Success and persistence  19

men and women but did find that women students sought to establish a relationship with 

their teachers and used the teacher’s response to their questions as a barometer of whether 

a relationship had been established.

This study found that teachers who are perceived as more Fostering and less 

Transmitting by their students (and so enable better performance and persistence), are 

more likely to have a degree or diploma in Education, in agreement with the findings of 

Darling-Hammond et al. (2005) who found that teacher preparation did matter and 

resulted in higher performance of elementary students. The lack of training in pedagogy 

of most CEGEP faculty is unfortunate when, in response to an open-ended question

asking for obstacles to their teaching, 52% of teachers’ comments concerned students’ 

lack of academic preparation in study skills and strategies, poor written and oral 

communication skills, lack of deep approaches to learning, and poor student motivation

and interest. These student ‘knowledge of how to participate in higher education’ factors 

and motivation issues have a rich empirically based literature that point to avenues of 

intervention in mathematics and sciences by the regular classroom teacher (Arons, 1990; 

Ramsden, 1992; Redish, 2003; Sultan & Artz, 2003).

Conclusions and Recommendations

Science faculty (at high school, college and university) must be made aware of the 

relationship between students’ perceptions of the learning climate in their classes and 

persistence and success, and of the different perceptions of their actions by male and 

female students. Unless the teacher sets out to create a Fostering environment it is 

unlikely that students in that class will perceive it as such. In practical terms this means 

less lecturing and more interactive-engagement. Faculty must also be challenged as to 

why they are rigorous in their research but rely on intuition when they teach. A 

consequence of this lack of rigor is that, “unlike most physics problems, problems in 

education do not stay solved” (Hehn & Neuschatz 2006 p. 38).

“Fostering” classes involve more student-student interactions and less lecturing 

and quiet copying of notes. For several years this teacher-talking, student-listening model 

of instruction has been known to be less effective than active learning in improving 

students’ conceptual understanding of physics and other disciplines (Hake, 1998). There 

have been recent and notable articles in high status journals like Science and Nature

Success and persistence  20

pointing out the failures of much of traditional teaching, and the promise of active 

learning (Handelsman et al., 2004; Powell, 2003). Teaching with interactive strategies not 

only yields significantly increased understanding for both males and females, but also 

reduces the gender gap in conceptual understanding in physics (Lorenzo, Crouch, & 

Mazur, 2006) and benefits historically underserved minority and marginalized students 

(Kuh, Kinzie, Cruce, Shoup, & Gonyea, 2006).

The multi-year study of Tai, Liu, Maltese, & Fan, (2006) found that students who 

expressed an interest in a science career early in their schooling were more likely to 

persist and earn science, engineering or technology degrees. This suggests that 

encouraging students in science at an early age can play a significant role in their career 

choices. Unfortunately there is little science done in elementary schools in Quebec 

(Lenoir, Larose, & Geoffroy, 2000), so change must begin in elementary schools if a high 

level of interest in science on the part of students, both girls and boys, but especially 

girls, is to be maintained into high school, college and beyond. Intervention must begin 

by ensuring that teachers at elementary and high schools have experience with the 

methodology of science so that they can feel comfortable using it in their classrooms. 

Intervention need not be confined to the classroom however, as is shown by after-school 

programs that use, for example, community gardens and recycling projects to develop 

understanding of the methodology of science. Les Scientifines, an after-school program 

serving elementary school girls from a low-income community in Montreal, offers not 

only a safe place for a snack and homework but activities, for example, a project on 

rockets for a science fair, that develop girls’ scientific literacy and understanding of the 

scientific method (Rahm, Moore, & Martel-Reny, 2005). Further, such programs expose 

children from low-income, frequently immigrant, communities “to a variety of financially 

interesting career paths potentially new to them, that if pursued, could help them break 

out of the vicious cycle of poverty” (Chamberland, Théoret, Garon, & Roy, 1995).

Currently the majority of CEGEP science faculty are discipline experts, with little or no 

knowledge of education research. If student persistence and success in science in CEGEP 

are to be increased then we must take the time and energy to educate faculty about 

research on teaching and learning, and in particular about ways in which their teaching 

can become more effective. We must not allow them to be seduced by the tendency to 

Success and persistence  21

blame problems on other milieu (e.g., high school), and accept instead that changes in 

their own practices are required and can enable real empowerment of learners. This 

empowerment can extend beyond the (justifiably) immediate concern of faculty with 

increasing students’ understanding of their own particular discipline, to appreciating the 

important contribution they as faculty can make to advancing wider societal goals like 

reducing inequality, unemployment and poverty, and increasing economic well-being by 

advancing persistence, success and science literacy.

 References

American Psychological Association. (1997). Learner-centered psychological principles: 

A framework for school redesign and reform. Retrieved 18 September 2006, from 

http://www.cdl.org/resource-library/articles/learner_centered.php. 

Arons, A. B. (1990). A guide to introductory physics teaching. Toronto: John Wiley.

Chamberland, C., Théoret, M, Garon, R., & Roy, D. (1995). Les Scientifines en action. 

Conception, implantation et évaluation. Rapport de recherche, Université de 

Montréal, Faculté des arts et des sciences, école de service social.

Coopersmith, S. (1984). Self-esteem inventories. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 

Darling-Hammond, L., Holtzman, D. J., Gatlin, S. J., & Heilig, J. V. (2005). Does teacher 

preparation matter? Evidence about teacher certification, teach for America, and 

teacher effectiveness. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 13 (42) Retrieved 23 

October, 2005, from http://epaa.asu.edu/epaa/v13n42/v13n42.pdf

Davis, F., & Steiger, A. (1996). Gender and persistence in the sciences. Montreal: Vanier 

Psychologists.

College.

Dedic, H., Rosenfield, S., Alalouf, E., & Klasa, J. (2004). Calculus and computer-

supported collaborative learning. Montreal: Vanier College.

Dickie, L. O. (2000). Science and technology exploration program: Performance of step 

students and of science students. Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue: John Abbott College.

Diener, E. & Emmons, R. A. (1984). The independence of positive and negative affect. 

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 1105 1117.

Success and persistence  22

Dietz, T., Lund, L. & Rosendhal, J. D. (1989). On the Origins of Scientists and 

Engineers. Washington, D.C.: Space Policy Institute, George Washington 

Emmons, R. A. (1992). Abstract versus concrete goals: Personal striving level, physical 

illness, and psychological well-being. Journal of Personality and Social 

University.

Psychology, 62, 292-300.

Entwistle, N., & Walker, P. (2002). Strategic alertness and expanded awareness within 

sophisticated conceptions of teaching. In N. Havita & P. Goodyear (Eds.), 

Teacher thinking, beliefs and knowledge in higher education. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Epstein, D. (2006, July 26). So that's why they're leaving. Inside Higher Education. 

Retrieved July 26, 2006, from 

http://insidehighered.com/news/2006/07/26/scipipeline  

Fehrs, M., & Czujko, R. (1992). Women in physics: Reversing the exclusion. Physics 

Today, 45(August), 33-40.

Ginorio, A. B., Brown, M. D., Henderson, R. S., & Cook, N. (1993). Patterns of 

persistence and attrition among science and engineering majors at the university

of Washington, 1985-1991. New York: Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.

Grayson, D. J. (2006, February). Rethinking the content of physics courses. Physics 

Today, 59(2), 31-36.

Hake, R. R. (1998). Interactive-engagement vs traditional methods: A six-thousand-

student survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. American 

Journal of Physics, 66(1), 64-74.

Handelsman, J., Ebert-May, D., Beichner, R., Bruns, P., Chang, A., DeHaan, R., et al. 

(2004). Scientific teaching. Science, 304 (23), 521-522.

Haney, J. J., Lumpe, A. T., Czerniak, C. M., & Egan, V. (2002). From beliefs to actions: 

The beliefs and actions of teachers implementing change. Journal of Science 

Teacher Education, 13(3), 171-187. 

Havita, N., & Goodyear, P. (Eds.). (2002). Teacher thinking, beliefs and knowledge in 

higher education. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Hehn, J., & Neuschatz, M. (2006, February). Physics for all? A million and counting. 

Physics Today, 59(2), 37-43.

Success and persistence  23

Kane, R., Sandretto, S., & Heath, C. (2002). Telling half the story: A critical review of 

research on the teaching beliefs and practices of university academics. Review of 

Educational Research, 72(2), 177-228.

Kardash, C. M., & Wallace, M. L. (2001). The perceptions of science classes survey: 

What undergraduate science reform efforts really need to address. Journal of 

Educational Psychology, 93(1), 199-210.

Kember, D. (1997). A reconceptualisation of the research into university academics’ 

conceptions of teaching. Learning and Instruction, 7(3), 255-275.

Kember, D., & Kwan, K. P. (2002). Lecturers' approaches to teaching and their 

relationship to conceptions of good teaching. In N. Havita & P. Goodyear (Eds.), 

Teacher thinking, beliefs and knowledge in higher education (pp. 219-239). 

Kubanek, A.-M. W., & Waller, M. (1996). Confidence in science:Interpersonal and 

institutional influences (No. 1532-560). Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue: John Abbott 

Dordrecht: Kluwer.

College.

Kuh, G. D., Kinzie, J., Cruce, T., Shoup, R., & Gonyea, R. M. (2006). Connecting the 

dots:  Multi-faceted analyses of the relationships between student engagement 

results from the NSSE, and the institutional practices and conditions that foster 

student success (Final Report prepared for Lumina Foundation for Education 

Grant # 2518). Bloomington, IN: Center for Postsecondary Research, Indiana 

University Bloomington.

Lenoir, Y., Larose, F., & Geoffroy, Y. (2000). Interdisciplinary practices in primary 

education in quebec: Results from ten years of research. Issues in Integrative 

Light, R. (1990). The Harvard assessment seminars: Explorations with students and 

faculty about teaching, learning and student life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 

Studies, 18, 89-114.

University Press.

Lorenzo, M., Crouch, C. H., & Mazur, E. (2006). Reducing the gender gap in the physics 

classroom. American Journal of Physics, 74(2), 118-122.

Lou, Y., Abrami, P. C., Spence, J. C., Poulsen, C., Chambers, B., & d'Apollonia, S. 

(1996). Within-class grouping: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 

Success and persistence  24

Marton, F., & Säljö, R. (1984). Approaches to learning. In F. Marton, D. Hounsell & N. 

Entwistle (Eds.), The experience of learning (pp. 36-55). Edinburgh: Scottish 

66, 423-458.

Academic Press.

Pajares, F. (2003). Self-efficacy beliefs, motivation, and achievement in writing: A 

review of the literature. Reading and Writing Quarterly, 19(2), 139-158.

Parker, L. H., Rennie, L. J., & Harding, J. (1995). Gender Equity. In B. J. Fraser & H. J. 

Walberg (Eds.), Improving Science Education (pp. 186-210). Chicago: National 

Society For The Study of Education.

Pearson, W., Jr., Fechter, A., &. (Eds.). (1994). Who will do science? Educating the next 

generation. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Powell, K. (2003, 18 September). Science education: Spare me the lecture. Nature, 425,

Powell, R. M. (2005). Sundials in the shade: A study of women’s persistence in the first 

year of a computer science program in a selective university. Unpublished Ed. D, 

University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Prosser, M., Trigwell, K., & Taylor, P. (1994). A phenomenographic study of academics' 

conceptions of science learning and teaching. Learning and Instruction, 4, 217-

234-236.

231.

Rahm, J., Moore, J. C., & Martel-Reny, M-P. (2005). The role of afterschool and 

community science programs in the lives of urban youth. School Science and 

Mathematics, 105(6), 283-291.

Ramsden, P. (1992). Learning to teach in higher education. London: Routledge.

Redish, E. F. (2003). Teaching physics with the physics suites. New York: John Wiley.

Rosenfield, S., Dedic, H., Dickie, L. O., Rosenfield, E., Aulls, M., Koestner, R., et al. 

(2005, October). Étude des facteurs aptes à influencer la réussite et la rétention 

dans les programmes de sciences aux cegeps anglophones (FQRSC Action 

Concertée Grant 2003-PRS-89553.). Montréal: Vanier College.  Available on-line 

http://sun4.vaniercollege.qc.ca/fqrsc/reports/fr_22.pdf

Sax, L. (2005). Why gender matters. New York: Doubleday.

Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1989). Conceptions of teaching and approaches to core 

Success and persistence  25

problems. In M. Reynolds (Ed.), Knowledge base for beginning teachers (pp. 37-

46). Oxford: Pergamon.

Seymour, E., & Hewitt, N. M. (1997). Talking about leaving: Why undergraduates leave 

the sciences. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Springer, L., Stanne, M. E., & Donovan, S. S. (1999). Effects of small-group learning on 

undergraduates in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology: A meta-

analysis. Review of Educational Research, 69(1), 21-51.

Strenta, A. C., Elliott, R., Adair, R., Matier, M., & Scott, J. (1994). Choosing and leaving 

science in highly selective institutions. Research in Higher Education, 35(5), 513 

- 547.

Sultan, A., & Artzt, A. F. (2003). Mathematicians are from mars, math educators are 

from venus: The story of a successful collaboration. Notices of the American 

Mathematical Society, 52, 48-53.

Tai, R. H., Liu, C. Q., Maltese, A. V., & Fan, X. (2006, May 26). Planning early for 

careers in science. Science, 312(5777), 1143-1144.

 Tinto, V. (1997). Classrooms as communities: Exploring the educational character of 

student persistence. Journal of Higher Education, 68(6), 599-623.

Tobias, S. (1990). They’re not dumb, they’re different: Stalking the second tier. Tucson, 

AZ: The Research Corporation.

Tomsho, R. (2006, 19 January 2006). What's the right formula? Pressure from new tests 

leads educators to debate how best to teach science. Wall Street Journal, p. 9.

Vermunt, J. D., & Verloop, N. (1999). Congruence and friction between learning and 

teaching. Learning and Instruction, 9, 257-280.

Yager, R. E., Simmons, P., & Penick, J. E. (1989). Student perceptions of the usefulness 

of science. School Science and Mathematics, 89(4), 313-319.

