METHODS OF USING EXISTING AND CURRENTLY USED WIRE LINES
(POWER LINES, PHONE LINES, INTERNET LINES) FOR TOTALLY SECURE
CLASSICAL COMMUNICATION UTILIZING KIRCHOFF'S LAW AND
1
JOHNSON-LIKE NOISE

+Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3128, USA

+
LASZLO B. KISH

(Versions: October 2, 2006)

We  outline  some  general  solutions  to  use  already  existing  and  currently  used wire lines, such as
power lines, phone lines, internet lines, etc, for the unconditionally secure communication method
based on Kirchoff's Law and Johnson-like Noise (KLJN). Two different methods are shown. One is
based on filters used at single wires and the other one utilizes a common mode voltage superimposed
on a three-phase powerline.

Keywords:  Unconditionally  secure  data  communication;  secure  key  distribution;  network  key
distribution; via existing wire lines.

Introduction

1. 
Recently, a totally secure classical communication scheme was introduced [1,2] utilizing
two identical pairs of resistors and noise voltage generators, the physical properties of an
idealized  Kirchoff-loop  and  the  statistical  physical  properties  thermal  noise  (KLJN
communicator). The resistors (low bit = small resistor  RL , high bit = large resistor  RH )
and their thermal-noise-like voltage generators (thermal noise voltage enhanced by a pre-
agreed factor) are randomly chosen and connected at each clock period at the two sides of
the wire channel. A secure  bit  exchange takes place when the states at the two ends are
different, which is indicated by an intermediate level of the rms noise voltage on the line,
or  that  of  the rms current noise in the wire. The most attractive properties of the KLJN
cipher are related to its security [1, 3-7] and the robustness of classical information. In the
idealized  scheme  of  the  Kirchoff-loop-Johnson(-like)-noise  cipher,  the  passively
observing  eavesdropper  can  extract  zero  bit  of  information  and  the  actively
eavesdropping  observer  can  extract  at  most  one  bit  before  getting  discovered  [3-7].
Eavesdropper executing a man-in-the-middle attack can extract virtually zero bit before
getting  discovered  [3].  The  KLJN  system  has  recently  became  network-ready  [6].  This
new property [6] opens a large scale of practical applications because the KLJN cipher
can be installed as a computer card [6], similarly to Eternet cards.

Quantum  communication,  the  alternative  communication  line  secured  by  physical
laws,  needs  a  separate,  well  isolated  optical  cable  (so-called  "dark  optical  fiber")  to
function  because  of  the  fragility  of  quantum  information  based  on  single  photon
operations.  Similarly,  up  to  now,  it  has  been  a  common  assumption  that  the  KLJN
communication  also  needs  separate  wire  lines  to  operate  because  the  Kirchoff  loops  of
communicator  pars  must  stay  single  loops  as  given  in  the  original  description  in  the
KLJN scheme.

However, via a few examples we will show that existing and used wire lines, such as
power lines, phone wire lines and internet wire lines can also be used to build a KLJN
network by implementing proper filter units at each intersection within the line section of
concern.  We  avoid  discussing  any  details  of  the  filters  here;  we  suppose  they  are
idealized  filters  passing  only  the  allowed  bands  of  frequencies.  We  suppose  that  the

                                                  
1 A TAMU patent disclosure is submitted.

frequency ranges of the KLJN frequency band and that of the normal usage of the wire
are  established  and  they  do  not  overlap.  For  power  lines  that  means  that  for  large
distances the frequency range of the KLJN cipher must be below 60 Hz (or 50 Hz).

2.  The filter method for single lines
In Figure 1, an example is shown how to use KLJN frequency Band Excluder (BE) and
Band Pass (BP) filters to preserve a single Kirchhoff's loop characteristics in the KLJN
frequency band between two KLJN communicators with one intersection between them.
Both, the original non-KLJN load (power consumer, phone, or internet card represented
by  R N)  and  the  KLJN  communicators  will  work  using  their  own,  non-overlapping
frequency bands. BE excludes the KLJN frequency band and passes all other important
frequencies. BP passes the KLJN frequency band and excludes all other frequencies. BP
filters  must  be  used  in  any  case  at  the  communicator  outputs  to  avoid  transient  and
eavesdropping probing signals out of the KLJN band.

Line Filter Box

Line

BE

1

BP

3

Line

BE

BP

BE

BE

BP

2

RL

RH

RN

RH

RL

Communicator A

Communicator B

Figure 1.  Example for how to use KLJN frequency Band Excluder (BE) and Band Pass (BP) filters to preserve
a single Kirchhoff loop in the KLJN frequency band between two KLJN communicators with one intersection
between them. Thick (blue) lines: original line current; thin (red) line: KLJN current; double (green) lines: both
types of currents.

Figure 2 shows that, though the topology in Figure 1 may look complex, the circuitry in
the Line Filter Box in Figure 1 can be contained by a box with only three electrodes. if
there  are  more  then  one  consumers  along  the  line  between  the  communicators,  each  of
them must be fed via a separate Line Filter Box.

External
Line In

External
Line Out

1

3

Line Filter
Box

2

Local line (e.g.
to household
line input)

Figure  2. The line filter box (see Figure 1) should be installed at each intersection of the line to separate the
non-KLJN communicator loads from the KLJN frequency band.

3.  Common voltage method with 3-phase power lines
In the case of 3-phase power lines, we can make use of the fact that, in the idealized case,
when the load is symmetric on the phases, there is no current flowing from the common
point of the 3-phase transformers to the ground. Then the KLJN communicators can be
connected between the common points of the 3-phase transformers and the ground, see
Figure 3. This arrangement can help to reduce the problem of working with high voltages
because the common point of the transformers is at ground potential at the idealized case.

Power Station A

Power Station B

Communicator A
(KLJN)

Communicator B
(KLJN)

Figure 3. Communication via idealized 3-phase power lines with symmetric loads of the 3-phase transformers
at Power Stations A and B, respectively.

However, in the practice, there are non-idealities and asymmetries among the lines (load,
phase,  etc.)  therefore  filters  will  be  necessaries  to  avoid  problems.  Figure  4  shows  a
possible  solution  of  such  problems.  In  the  KLJN  frequency  range  the  filters  drive  the
current through the communicators and out of that frequency range the current goes into
the  ground.  Note,  if  there  is  an  intersection  of  cables  with  asymmetric  loads  between
Power  Stations  A  and  B  then  filters  must  be  used  similarly  to  Figure  1  and  then  the
problems with high voltages cannot be avoided. Therefore, the arrangements in Figures 3
and  4  are  most  advantageous  when  there  is  no  intersection  between  the  two  power
stations.

Summary

We have shown with some simple circuit demonstrations that the KLJN communicators
can  use  existing  and  currently  used  wires  for  communication.  We  presented  some
examples as demonstration. The filter method can be used also with phone and  internet
lines and getting the KLJN current around switchers and multiplexer units. The concrete
realization  and  further  developments  of  these  ideas  is  straightforward,  though  by  no
means it is trivial, and they reach out of the scope of the present paper.

Finally, we must answer the following questions. Is the communication still secure if the
eavesdropper  removes  a  filter  or  if  a  non-filtered  new  intersection  is  made  on  the  line?
The  answer  is  straightforward:  the  communication  becomes  non-secure  however  the
current-voltage alarm system [3], which is comparing the KLJN voltages and currents at
the  two  communicators,  will  go  on  and  the  communication  will  immediately  be
terminated for security reasons therefore the eavesdropper can at most extract a single bit
of information [3].

Power Station A

Power Station B

BP

BP

Communicator A
(KLJN)

BE

BE

Communicator B
(KLJN)

Figure 3. Communication via practical 3-phase power lines.

Acknowledgment

A discussion with Gabor Schmera is appreciated.

References
[1]  L.B.  Kish,  "Totally  secure  classical  communication  utilizing  Johnson  (-like)  noise  and
a t

law",  Physics  Letters  A 

1 7 8 - 1 8 2 ;  

( 2 0 0 6 )  

a l s o  

3 5 2  

Kirchoff's 
http://arxiv.org/physics/0509136.

[2]  Adrian Cho, "Simple noise may stymie spies without quantum weirdness", Science 309 (2005)

2148.

[3]  L.B. Kish, "Protection against the man-in-the-middle-attack for the Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson(-
like)-noise cipher and expansion by voltage-based security", Fluctuation  and  Noise  Letters 6
(2006) L57-L63; also at http://arxiv.org/physics/0512177.

[4]  L.B.  Kish,  "Response  to  Scheuer-Yariv:  "A  Classical  Key-Distribution  System  based  on
Johnson (like) noise - How Secure?", physics/0601022", http://arxiv.org/physics/0602013 .
[5]  L.B. Kish, "Response to Bollinger: "On the Impossibility of Keeping Out Eavesdroppers Using
Only  Classical  Physics"  and  to  Some  Other  Comments  at  Bruce  Schneier's  Blog  Site",
http://www.ece.tamu.edu/~noise/research_files/Response_Bollinger.pdf .

[6] L.B.  Kish  and  R.  Mingesz,  "Totally  secure  classical  networks  with  multipoint  telecloning
(teleportation) of classical bits through loops with Johnson-like noise", Fluctuation and Noise
Letters 6 (2006) C9-C21.

[7]  L.B. Kish, "How Secure, How to Design, and How to Run Practical Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson-

like-Noise Ciphers", in preparation.

