A non-invasive device to measure mechanical interaction between tongue, palate 
and teeth during speech production 

 

Christophe Jeannin1,5, Pascal Perrier1, Yohan Payan2, André Dittmar3, Brigitte Grosgogeat4,5  
1Institut de la Communication Parlée, INPG, Grenoble, France 
2 TIMC, Grenoble, France 
3 Laboratoire des microsystèmes et microcapteurs biomédicaux, INSA, Lyon, France 
4 Laboratoire d’Etude des Interfaces et des biofilms en Odontologie, Lyon, France 
5 Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service d’odontologie, Lyon, France 
Christophe.Jeannin@icp.inpg.fr, perrier@icp.inpg.fr 

Abstract 
This  paper  describes  an  original  experimental 
procedure to measure the mechanical interaction between 
the tongue and teeth and palate during speech production. 
It  consists  in  using  edentulous  people  as  subjects  and  to 
insert  pressure  sensors  in  the  structure  of  their  complete 
dental  prosthesis.  Hence,  there  is  no  perturbation  of  the 
vocal tract cavity due to the sensors themselves. Several 
duplicates  are  used  with  transducers  situated  at  different 
locations  of 
to 
palatography’s  results,  in  order  to  carefully  analyze  the 
production of specific sounds such as stop consonants.. It 
is  also  possible  to  measure  the  contact  pressure  at 
different locations on the palate for the same sound.  

the  complete  denture  according 

 
Index  Terms—speech 

production, 

tongue/palate 

interaction, complete denture, pressure transducer 

 

 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Speech  motor  control  has  been  often  compared  with 
the  control  of  other  skilled  human  movements  such  as 
pointing or grasping [1]. This approach was very helpful 
and  permitted  the  elaboration  of  important  hypotheses 
that  were  the  basis  of  major  speech  production  theories. 
However,  a  peculiarity  of  speech  movement  has  been 
often  overseen,  namely  the  fact  that  speech  articulators, 
and especially the tongue, are not moving in a free space. 
Indeed, the vocal tract is a very narrow space, and tongue 
is  most  of  the  time  in  mechanical  interaction  with 
external  structures,  such  as  the  palate  or/and  the  teeth. 
Hamlet  &  Stone  [2]  and  Fuchs  et  al.  [3]  have  found  a 
number of evidences supporting the hypothesis that these 
external  structures  would  be  integrated  in  speech  motor 
control strategies, and would, consequently, significantly 
contribute to the control of speech movement accuracy. 

Now, two questions can be raised: 
(1)  What 
is 

the  quantitative  nature  of 

the 
interaction  between 
tongue  and  external 
structures? In other words, are these structures 
only geometrical  limits of the space in which 
tongue  is  allowed  to  move,  or  are  they 
mechanical  objects  that  are  actually  used  to 
position and shape the tongue? 

(2)  What are the changes in speech motor control 
strategies  induced  by  dramatic  modifications 
of these external structures, as it is the case for 
instance for edentulous people? 

Quantitative measurements of the intensity of the force 
exerted by the tongue on the teeth provide an interesting 
basis  to  address  these  issues.  In  addition,  this  technique 
provides  interesting  information  about  the  order  of 
magnitude of the intensity of muscular forces involved in 
the  generation  of  tongue  movements  during  speech 
production.  

induce  slight  perturbations  of 

In  this  aim,  a  number  of  experimental  set-ups  have 
been  developed  in  the  past  to  measure  tongue  pressure 
against the palate in various experimental conditions [4]. 
The  limits  of  these  techniques,  beside  the  inherent 
complexity  of  their  calibration,  lie  in  the  fact  that  they 
actually 
the  speech 
production,  because  they  modify  the  geometry  of  the 
vocal tract. Honda et al. [5] have shown that speakers can 
compensate  quite  easily  and  quite  quickly  for  brutal 
changes  in  the  thickness  of  an  inflated  palate,  in  that 
sense that they could adapt tongue positions in reference 
to  the  variable  palatal  shapes.  However,  it  is  not  clear 
whether the intensity of the palate/tongue interaction was 
or not affected by these brutal changes.  

In  this  paper,  we  will  present  a  new  experimental 

procedure that aims  

(1) at  measuring the interaction between tongue, teeth 
and  palate  without  perturbing  the  production  of  speech, 
and  

(2)  at  studying  how  speech  motor  control  strategies 
evolve for edentulous people, from the moment where an 
artificial  denture  is  put  back  in  the  mouth.  Finally, 
preliminary results of a pilot study will be presented. 

 

II.  EXPERIMENTAL DEVICE AND METHODS 

 
The  basic  principle  and  the  originality  of  the  method 
presented  in  this  paper  is  to  use  edentulous  people  as 
subjects, and to insert pressure sensors in their complete 
dental prosthesis, in such a way that the geometry of the 
vocal tract remains exactly the same as when their normal 
dental prosthesis is in place.  
 
A.  Experimental device 
General description 

The complete  denture, in which the pressure sensor is 
included, is placed inside the mouth. A sheath goes from 
the  premolar  area  to  the  connector  placed  outside  the 
mouth, via the labial commissure. Then, a wire goes from 
the  connector  to  the  amplifier,  from  the  connector  to  a 
data sampling board and then to the computer. 

A  microphone  is  also  connected  to  an  amplifier  to 
record the acoustic speech signal simultaneously with the 
pressure  exerted  by  the  tongue  against  the  palate  and/or 
the  teeth.  This  amplifier  is  in  turn  linked  to  the  data 
sampling board. 
 
Description of the complete dental prosthesis 

The dental  prosthesis  is  made  of resin  and consists  of 
complete  artificial  denture  and  of  an  artificial  palate. 
Artificial  teeth  are  similar  in  shape  and  size  to  natural 
teeth. The artificial palate must be at least 3mm thick to 
avoid breakage.  Hence, both  the pressure  sensor  and  the 
wires  connecting  it  with  the  connector  outside  of  the 
mouth  can  be  easily  inserted  in  the  prosthesis,  without 
creating any additional change of the oral cavity (fig. 1). 

thanks 

For  each  edentulous  patient,  the  dental  prosthesis  that 
is  designed  for  obvious  medical  purposes  is  accurately 
to  a  specific  prosthesis  design 
duplicated 
technique. Several duplicates are thus realized, in order to 
have  different  possible  positions  for  the  pressure  sensor. 
Thus, the sensor can be inserted in the prostheses before 
the  experiment  with  the  patient,  and  no  time  is  wasted 
during the experiment itself, when the tongue palate/teeth 
interaction is measured at different locations. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wire inserted in the resin 

Sensor 

 

 

Figure 1: Complete dental prosthesis with a sensor 
inserted in a front incisor. The wire connecting the 
sensor to the external connector can be seen on the 
right hand side of the picture, at the level of the first 
premolar. It goes then to the sensor inside the 
structure of the palate. 

 
Pressure sensor description 

The  sensor  is  made  of  a  strain  gauge  sensor  which  is 
composed of thirteen layers (fig. 2). Each layer plays an 
important role in measuring capabilities of the transducer. 
The  intraoral  area  is  a  very  difficult  environment 

mainly because of three factors: 

•  Permanent moisture due to saliva 

 
 
 
 
 

•  Variable temperature 
•  Mechanical constrains 

Therefore,  the  sensor  must  be  electrically  insulated  and 
water  proof.  Moreover,  it  must  be  sturdy  in  order  to  go 
through several experiments. 

 

3
3
3

m
m
m

m
m
m

5 m m
5 m m
5 m m

Figure 2: The 13 layers of the pressure sensor 
 
The  middle  layer  is  made  of  a  steel  cantilever  beam 
which  is  10/100  mm  thick.  It  supports  on  each  side  an 
active  strain  gauge.  The  gauges  (Vishay,  ref  EA06 062 
AQ  350)  are  placed  in  a  half  Wheatstone  bridge 
configuration.. This strain gauge has been chosen because 
of its stability in temperature.  

Gauges  are  bonded  on  a  metallic  support  with  M-
Bond  200  adhesive  (Vishay  measurement  group).  Wires 
of  0,1mm  diameter  are  soldered  with  tin  on  the  gauge. 
The area of solder is 1mm2 small and there are 4 points, 2 
by side. 

The two next layers are made of protective coating. M-

3mm 

5mm

Coat  A  (Vishay  measurement 
group). 
 
In  any  case,  during 

the 
construction,  the  thickness  of  all 
the  liquid  components  such  as 
protective  coating  or  bonding 
must  be  very  small,  in  order  to 
mechanical 
preserve 
properties 
sensor. 
Consequently just one application 
of  each  component  by  layer  can 
be done. 

the 
of 

the 

Figure  3  shows  a  detailed 

picture of such a sensor. 

Figure 3: The pressure sensor connected to its wire.  
 

Associated instrumentation tools: 
 

Before sampling the signal goes through an amplifier 
(2100 series by Vishay Measurement) featuring a digital 
control  display  and  different  settings  possibilities  with 
2100  maximal  gain  range  and  a  bandwidth  of  5kHz  (at 
0,5dB,  and    15  kHz  at  -3  dB).  It  can  hold  up  to  two 
transducers. 

to 

that 

is  connected  directly 

To record the acoustic signal, a microphone is placed 
near  the  patient.  It  is  linked  with  an  amplifier  and  then 
with  the  data  sampling  board  (DT  9800  series  by  Data 
translation) 
the  host 
computer  via  an  USB  port.  This  board  can  accept  up  to 
16  analog  inputs  that  can  be  simultaneously  sampled  at 
different  rates  (from  50  Hz  to  20  000  Hz).  For  these 
experiments, 2 or 3 inputs are used: one for the acoustic 
signal and one or two for the tongue pressure. 
 
B.  Methods 
 
Pressure sensor calibration 
 

Since  the  transducers  are handmade,  some  differences 
can  exist  between  them.  Therefore,  they  have  to  be 
calibrated  individually  to  convert  electric  signals  into 
mechanical units such as strength or pressure. 

The  soft  body  characteristics  of  the  tongue  suggests 
that pressure should be more appropriate. Indeed, due to 
the  tongue  deformation  in  contact  with  a  solid  structure, 
the contact area is always large and can't be reduced to a 
specific point. However, the transformation of the sensor 
displacement  into  mechanical  pressure  is  not  obvious, 
because  of  the  visco-elastic  properties  of  the  tongue. 
Indeed,  in  case  of  contact  with  external  structures,  the 
shape of the tongue varies over time and this variation is 
strongly  dependent  of  the  visco-elastic  properties  of  the 
tongue. Hence, establishing a good approximation of the 
relation between the strain exerted on the sensor and the 
contact  pressure  is  not  a  simple  task.  In  this  aim,  we 
designed  and  tested  2  different  devices  to  calibrate  the 
sensors: 

-  The  first  device  uses  weights  to  convert  electrical 

signals into strength. 

This  is  the  fastest  and  easiest  way  to  calibrate  the 
transducer. Small lead beads hanging out of the middle 
of  the  edge  of  the  steel  cantilever  beam  were  used. 
Since  the  weight  of  the  lead  is  known,  the  electric 
signal can be converted into mechanical strength. This 
allows an evaluation of the intensity of the mechanical 
interaction,  as  well  as  a  comparison  of  them  under 
different experimental conditions. However, it is not a 
good  approach  to  quantitatively  asses  their  absolute 
values of the pressure at contact location. 

 

-  The  second  device  called  “dried  water  column” 

converts electric signals into pressure. 
The weight of a water column is applied on the whole 
surface  of  the  sensor.  A  latex  membrane  which  is  not 
tensed (to avoid signal due of it) is attached to the end of 
the column and is in contact with the sensor. The electric 
signal  is  compared  to  the  level  of  water.  This  is  a  nice 
way  to  account  for  the  soft  body  characteristics  of  the 
tongue,  and  to  give  an  idea  of  the  pressure  at  contact 
location. However, it does not model the true viscoelastic 
characteristics  of 
the 
conversion from sensor displacement to contact pressure 
does not strictly apply to the contact between tongue and 
teeth and palate. 

tongue.  Consequently, 

the 

In  both  cases,  the  calibration  of  the  sensors  has  to  be 
done very carefully and to be explained in order to know 
what kind of information can be extracted from the data. 

 

Palatography 
 

In  order  to  know  with  enough  accuracy  where  the 
sensors should be inserted to measure tongue-palate/teeth 
interaction  during  speech production,  the  exact  locations 
of  the  main  contact  regions  have  to  be  determined.  [6]. 
This  is  why,  during  a  preliminary  session,  palatographic 
recordings  are  carried  out,  with  the  prosthesis  in  the 
mouth  
 

Figure 4: Tongue contacts regions on the prosthesis 
obtained with palatography for /t/ (left) and /d/ 
(right), and for a female subject in a pilot experiment. 

 
With  complete  dental  prostheses,  electropalatagraphy 
(EPG) 
can  not  be  used  because  of  obvious 
incompatibility  reasons  between  the  prosthesis  and  the 
EPG device [7]. Therefore, pink powder (occlusion spray 
red  “okklufine  premium™”)  is  applied  on  the  teeth  and 
on  the  artificial  palate.  When  tongue  is  in  contact  with 
one  of  these  structures,  the  powder  is  removed  from  the 
area  of  contact.  Thus,  when  the  subject  is  asked  to 
pronounce  a  specific  phoneme  in  isolation,  the  edges  of 
the  contact  areas  can  be  determined  for  this  phoneme. 
These  edges  are  highlighted  with  a  black  pen  before 
removing the powder. This technique is not as accurate as 

EPG, but accurate enough to determined where to set the 
sensor  when  tongue  and  palate/teeth  interaction  is 
investigated for this phoneme. 

Figure 4 shows an example of the results thus obtained 
during the production of the alveolar stops /t/ and /d/, for 
a female subject in a pilot experiment. 

 

 

 

 

 

  Data acquisition 

As exemplified above, for each subject, each prosthesis 
is dedicated to the measurement of tongue – palate/teeth 
interactions in a vocal tract region that  is strongly related 
to  the  production  of  a  specific  phoneme.  Sounds  are 
repeated  several  times  by  the  subjects  both  in  isolation 
and within short carrier sentences such as, for the alveolar 
stop /t/, “toto a têté sa tétine”. 

For each sound, according to the palatography results, 

the transducers are placed in the specified area.  

III. RESULTS 

Figure 5 shows an example of results obtained for /d/ 
in  a  pilot  study  carried  out  with  an  80  years  old  female 
subject. The sensor was inserted in the most front contact 
area measured with palatography (see fig. 4, right panel). 
It  can  be  seen  that  the  acoustic  release  of  the  stops  is 
well-synchronized  with  the  abrupt  decrease  of  tongue 
pressure  in  the  palate.  The  vertical  axis  represents  the 
intensity  of  force  exerted  by  the  tongue  on  the  steel 
cantilever. 

6

4

2

0

2

1

0

-1

4
x 10

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

4

2

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

4

 

Figure 5: Acoustic speech signal (low panel) and 
tongue force in the alveolar region (upper panel) 
during two repetitions of [de] 

 
Obviously,  the  pressure  patterns  depict  a  noticeable 
variability.  The  origin  of  this  variability  has  to  be 
clarified, to know whether it is related to the experimental 
device  or  whether  it  reveals  the  intrinsic  intra-speaker 
variability  of  speech  production.  The  maximal  order  of 
magnitude  of  the  force  is  around  0.003N  which  is  in 
agreement  with  other  kind  of  data  published  in  the 
literature. 

IV. CONCLUSION 

An  original  device  for  the  measurement  of  the 
mechanical  interaction  between  tongue  and  teeth  and/or 
palate  was  presented.  It  adapted  to  a  specific  kind  of 
subjects, namely edentulous patients. Using the complete 
dental  prosthesis  to  insert  force  sensors,  the  device 
permits  the  measurement  of  contact  pressure  without 
the 
introducing  any  additional  perturbation 
prosthesis it self.  

than 

This  experimental  setup  will  permit  to  study  speech 
production  either  by  patients  who  have  been  wearing 
their  prosthesis  for  years  and  have  completed  the 
adaptation  process  to  it,  or by  patients  that  just  received 
the prosthesis, in order to study how they adapt to its new 
denture.. 
 

 
REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Flanagan  J.R.,  Ostry  D.J.  &  Feldman  A.G.  (1990). 
Control  of  human 
jaw  and  multi-joint  arm 
movements.  In  G.E.  Hammond  (Ed.),  Cerebral 
control  of  speech  and  limb  movements  (pp.  29-58). 
Amsterdam,  The  Netherlands:  Elsevier  Science 
Publishers B.V. (North-Holland). 

[2]  Hamlet,  S.L.  and  Stone,  M.  (1978).  Compensatory 
alveolar consonant production induced by wearing a 
dental prosthesis. Journal of Phonetics, 6, 227-248. 
[3]  Fuchs,  S.,  Perrier,  P.,  Geng,  C.  &  Mooshammer,  C. 
(2005).  What  role  does  the  palate  play  in  speech 
motor  control?  Insights  from  tongue  kinematics  for 
German  alveolar  obstruents.  In  J.  Harrington  &  M. 
Tabain  (eds).  Speech  Production:  Models,  Phonetic 
Processes,  and  Techniques.  Psychology  Press: 
Sydney, Australia (In Press) 

[4]  Wakumoto,  M.,  Masaki,  S.,  Honda,  K.  &  Ohue,  T. 
(1998).  A  pressure 
: 
Application  of  new  pressure  sensitive  sheet  for 
measuring 
pressure. 
Proceedings of the 5th Int. Conf. on Spoken Language 
Processing, Vol. 7, 3151 – 3154. 

sensitive  palatography 

tongue-palatal 

contact 

[5]  Honda,  M.,  Fujino,  A.  &  Kaburagi,  T.  (2002). 
Compensatory 
to 
unexpected perturbation of the palate shape. Journal 
of Phonétics, 30 (3), 281-302. 

articulations 

responses 

of 

[6]  Kelly  S.,  Mai  A.,  Manley  G.  and  McLean  C.  - 
Electropalatography  and  the  linguagraph  system. 
Medical engineering & physics, 2000; vol 22, issue 1: 
pp. 47-58 

[7]  Searl  JP.  -  Comparison  of  transducers  and  intraoral 
placement  options 
lingua-palatal 
contact  pressure  during  speech.  J  Speech  Lang  Hear 
Res. 2003 Dec;46(6):pp.1444-56. 

for  measuring 

