Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

MORPHOLOGICAL INSTABILITY AND CANCER INVASION:  
A ‘SPLASHING WATER DROP’ ANALOGY 

1 Caterina Guiot, 2 Pier Paolo Delsanto and 3,* Thomas S. Deisboeck 

 
 
1 Dip. Neuroscience and CNISM, Università di Torino, Italy.  
2  Dip. Fisica, Politecnico di Torino, Italy. 
3  Complex  Biosystems  Modeling  Laboratory,  Harvard-MIT  (HST)  Athinoula  A.  Martinos  Center 
for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. 
 
 
*Corresponding Author:  
 
Thomas S. Deisboeck, M.D.  
Complex Biosystems Modeling Laboratory  
Harvard-MIT (HST) Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging  
Massachusetts General Hospital-East, 2301  
Bldg. 149, 13th Street  
Charlestown, MA 02129 
Tel: 617-724-1845  
Fax: 617-726-5079  
Email: deisboec@helix.mgh.harvard.edu 
 
 
 

Abstract 

We present an analogy between two unrelated instabilities. One is caused by the impact of a drop of 

water  on  a  solid  surface  while  the  other  one  concerns  a  tumor  that  develops  invasive  cellular 

branches into the surrounding host tissue. In spite of the apparent abstractness of the idea, it yields a 

very  practical  result,  i.e.  an  index  that  predicts  tumor  invasion  based  on  a  few  measurable 

parameters.  We  discuss  its  application  in  the  context  of  experimental  data  and  suggest  potential 

clinical implications.  

Introduction 

Tissue invasion is one of the hallmarks of cancer (Hanahan & Weinberg, 2000). From the primary 

tumor  mass,  cells  are  able  to  move  out  and  infiltrate  adjacent  tissues  by  means  of  degrading 

enzymes  (e.g.,  Nakano  et  al.,  1995).  Depending  on  the  cancer  type,  they  may  form  distant 

settlements, i.e. metastases (e.g., Fidler, 2003). Tumor expansion therefore results from the complex 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1

Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

interplay of the developmental ability of the tumor itself and the characteristics of the host tissue in 

which its growth occurs (e.g., Postovit et al., 2006).  

 

Figure 1 

It  has  been  recently  proposed  (Cristini  et  al.,  2005)  that  cancer  invasion  can  be  described  as  a 

morphological instability that occurs during solid tumor growth and results in invasive ‘fingering’, 

i.e. branching patterns (see Figure 1). This instability may be driven by any physical or chemical 

condition  (oxygen,  glucose,  acid  and  drug  concentration  gradients),  provided  that  the  average 

cohesion  among  tumor  cells  decreases  and/or  their  adhesion  to  the  stroma  increases  (for  a  recent 

review on the molecular aspects, such as the cadherin-‘switch’, see Christofori, 2006). In fact, the 

model  of  Cristini  et  al.  (2005)  shows  that  reductions  in  the  surface  tension  at  the  tumor-tissue 

interface may generate and control tumor branching in the nearby tissues. Correspondingly, a recent 

paper  by  Anderson  (2005)  stresses  the  relevance  of  cell  adhesion  in  the  process  of  tumor 

invasiveness. 

Undoubtedly,  a  more  detailed  understanding  of  insight  into  the  mechanisms  that  drive  tumor 

invasion  is  critical  for  targeting  these  cancer  cell  populations  more  effectively,  and,  possibly, 

concepts derived from other scientific disciplines may contribute valuable insights. It is in this line 

of  thought  that  we  propose  an  analogy  with  the  case  of  a  liquid  drop,  which  impacts  on  a  solid 

surface and causes the formation of a fluid ‘crown’. Such an instability, termed Rayleigh or Yarin-

Weiss capillary instability, has been extensively studied in the field of fluid dynamics (Rozhkov et 

al,2004,  Rioboo et al., 2003, Yarin, 2006) (see Figure 2). 

Figure 2 

 

Both  phenomena  share  similar  features,  such  as  secondary  jets  (corresponding  to  the  invasive 

branching in the case of tumors), nucleation near the fluid rim (corresponding to the evidence for 

branching confluence) and dispersion of small drops at the fluid-air interface (with resemblance to 

proliferating  aggregates  that  have  been  reported  to  emerge  within  the  invasive  cell  population 

(Tamaki et al., 1997)).   

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

The Model 

Fluiddynamicists  describe  their  system  by  means  of  some  non-dimensional  numbers,  such  as  the 

Weber number We = ρ D V2 / σ , the Ohnesorge number Oh = µ / sqrt(ρ σ D), the Reynold number 

Re = ρ D V / µ  and the Capillary number Ca= µ V / σ , where ρ is the fluid density, D the drop 

diameter,  V  the  impact  velocity,  µ  the  fluid  viscosity  and  σ the  surface  tension.  For  instance, 

Vander Wal & coll (2006) showed that the splash/non-splash boundary for several different fluids is 

well  described  by  sqrt(Ca)  =  0.35.  Provided  an  estimate  for  both,  tumor  viscosity  and  surface 

tension is available it could be interesting to investigate whether similar non-dimensional quantities 

could discriminate between invasive and non invasive tumor behaviour. Moreover, also the number 

of  invasive  branches  may  be  predicted  on  the  basis  of  the  previous  adimensional  numbers 

(Bussmann et al., 2000). According to them the number of branches is given by: 

Nf = 2 π R / λ  
λ = 2 π (3 σ / ρ a )1/2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

(2) 

where  R  is  the  radius  of  the  drop  and  a  is    the  ‘deceleration’  at  the  impact.    In  the  case  of  a 

splashing drop, the impact velocity is the main measurable parameter related to the way in which 

kinetic energy is converted into surface energy, associated with the increased free-surface area and 

viscous  dissipation.  Splashing  is  in  some  sense  the  droplet’s  reaction  to  a  sudden  increase  in 

pressure.  The  relevant  quantity,  due  to  the  very  short  time  scale  involved  in  the  process,  is  the 

splashing impact. 

In  the  case  of  an  invading  tumor,  however,  the  concept  of  ‘impact’  cannot  be  used  anymore;  the 

increased  mechanical  pressure,  exerted  by  the  confining  microenvironment  due  to  cancer 

expansion,  elicits  a  much  slower  response,  and  the  instability  develops  over  a  much  larger  time 

scale.  This  suggests  that,  equivalently,  the  tumor  cell-matrix  interaction  could  be  a  critical 

parameter.  We  therefore  propose  that  the  deceleration  a  can  be  evaluated  starting  from  the 

confining  mechanical  pressure  P  exerted  by  the  host  tissue  on  the  growing  tumor.  Assuming  for 

simplicity a spherical shape for the tumor, where S and V are the surface and volume at the onset of 

invasion, respectively, we obtain: 

a= P S/ ρ V = 3 P / ρ R  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

It follows   

Nf = (PR/ σ) ½  

The value Nf = 1 separates the case of no branching (hence no tumor invasion) from that in which at 

least  one  branch  develops  (and  invasion  takes  place).  By  defining  the  dimensionless  Invasion 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

(5) 

Parameter, IP  

IP= PR /σ,  

 

we obtain that, provided that IP <1, (which implies large surface tension, small confining pressure 

and/or  radius  value),  tumor  invasion  cannot  occur,  while  for  IP>1  invasive  behaviour  is  expected 

(see Figure 3). 

Figure 3 

Discussion and Conclusions 

We  appreciate  the  obvious  differences  between  tumor  biology and  fluid  dynamics.  Yet,  solely  on 

the basis of the aforementioned perceived analogy, we argue here that the morphologic instability 

that drives tumor invasion is controlled by a dimensionless parameter (IP) which is proportional to 

the  confining  pressure  and  tumor  radius,  yet  inversely  proportional  to  its  surface  tension.  As  a 

consequence,  increasing  levels  of  confinement  at  larger  tumor  radii  should  promote  the  onset  of 

invasion, while larger values of adhesion-mediated surface tension can inhibit it. The former is in 

agreement  with  our  previous,  experimentally  driven  notion  of  a  feedback  between  the  key 

characteristics  of  proliferation  and  invasion  (Deisboeck  et  al.,  2001)  and  the  argument  of  a 

quantitative link between them (Deisboeck et al., 2005). The model’s parameters can be measured 

and monitored, as well as modified with a treatment regimen. The following ongoing experimental 

investigations seem to confirm our conjectures:  

a) Tumor surface tension: Winters et al. (2005) have investigated three different cells lines derived 

from malignant astrocytoma (U-87MG, LN-229 and U-118MG). Their work shows that (i) surface 

tension in the multicell aggregates they have used is independent from the compressive forces and 

4

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

that  the  spheres  practically  behave  as  liquid  and  not  as  elastic  aggregates;  (ii)  the  measured 

aggregate surface tension is about 7 dyne/ cm for U-87Mg, 10 for LN-229 and more than 16 for U-

118MG, and (iii) there is indeed a significant inverse correlation between invasiveness and surface 

tension;  (iv)  finally,  the  anti-invasive  therapeutic  agent  Dexamethason  increases  the  microscopic 

tumor’s  surface  tension  or  cohesivity  amongst  cells  in  direct  contact.  For  the  cell  lines  studied 

above,  surface  tension  is  therefore  a  predictor  for  in  vitro  invasiveness  and  the  authors  suggest  a 

threshold value for σ of about 10 dyne/cm. 

b)  Microenvironmental  pressure:  Some  papers  have  recently  addressed  the  problem  of  the 

mechanical  interaction  of the  matrix  with  the  embedded tumor.  For instance,  Paszek  et  al. (2005) 

claim  that  stiffer  tissues  are  expected  to  promote  malignant  behaviour.  Also,  an  experimental 

investigation by Georges and Janmey (2005) shows that a basic NIH3T3 fibroblast embedded in a 

soft polyacrilamide gel develops with a roughly spherical shape (suggesting prevalence for cohesive 

forces),  while  in  a  stiff  gel  it  exhibits  finger-like  features    (consistent    with  the  occurrence  of 

preponderant  adhesive  forces).  Another  recent  paper  (Kaufman  et  al,  2005)  investigates  how 

glioblastoma  spheroids  grow  in  and  invade  into  3D  collagen  I  matrices,  differing  in  collagen 

concentration and thus, in their average stiffness (the elastic modulus of the 0.5 mg/ml gel was 4 Pa, 

in the 1.0 mg/ml gel was 11 Pa and in the 1.5 mg/ml was about 100 Pa). Using in vitro microscopy 

techniques, the authors show that in the 0.5 mg/ml gel there are few invasive cells around the tumor. 

At  larger  concentrations  (1.5-2.0  mg/ml  gels)  invasion  occurs  more  quickly  and  the  number  of 

invasive cells increases. In conclusion, reducing the matrix stiffness seems to reduce the number of 

invasive cells and their invasion rate.  

c)  Tumor  radius:  Tamaki  et  al.  (1997)  investigated  C6  astrocytoma  spheroids  with  different 

diameters (i.e., 370, 535 and 855 µm on average) that were implanted in collagen type I gels. The 

authors  showed  that  spheroid  size  indeed  correlated  with  a  larger  total  invasion  distance  and  an 

increased rate of invasion.   

In summary, our model, while admittedly very simple, suggests - based on a striking fluiddynamics 

analogy  -  several  clinical  management  strategies  that,  separately  or  in  combination,  should  yield 

anti-invasive  effects.  They  include  (aside  from  the  obvious  attempt  to  first  reduce  the  tumor  size 

through 

surgical 

techniques  and  accompanying  non-surgical  approaches 

(radio-  and 

chemotherapy)):  

 

 

 

 

 

5

Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

(1)  Promoting  tumor  cell-tumor  cell  adhesion  and  thus  increasing  the  tumor  surface  tension 

σ. Interestingly, experiments on prostate cancer cells already showed that stable transfection of E-

cadherin (the prototype cell-cell adhesion molecule that is increasingly lost with tumor progression) 

results in cellular cohesiveness and a decrease in invasiveness, in part due to a down-regulation of 

matrix metalloproteinase activity (Luo, et al., 1999).    

(2)  Reducing  the  confining  mechanical  pressure  exerted  on  the  tumor.  This  refers  to 

pharmacological strategies that range from applying perioperatively corticosteroids, as it is standard 

for  treating  malignant  brain  tumors  (Chang  et  al.,  2005),  to  preventing  pressure-stimulated  cell 

adhesion, 

i.e.  mechanotransduction  by 

targeting 

the  cytoskeleton’s  actin  polymerization 

(Thamilselvan & Basson, 2004; 2005).   

Taken together, our model is not only being supported by a variety of experimental findings, but it 

offers  already  an  explanation  for  the  anti-invasive  and  anti-metastatic  effects  seen  in  the 

aforementioned experimental studies and clinical regimen, respectively. As such, this model has the 

potential  to  further  our  understanding  of  the  dynamical  relationship  between  a  tumor  and  its 

microenevironment, and, in its future iterations, may even hold promise for assessing the potential 

impact of combinatory treatment approaches.  

Acknowledgements:  This work has been supported in part by NIH grant CA 113004 and by the 

Harvard-MIT (HST) Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging and the Department of 

Radiology at Massachusetts General Hospital.  

References 

 
Anderson A.R.A. (2005). A hybrid mathematical model of solid tumour invasion: the importance of 

cell adhesion Math Med and Biol 22: 163-186. 

Bussmann  M.,  Chandra  S.,  Mostaghimi  J.  (2000).  Modeling  the  splash  of  a  droplet  impacting  a 

solid surface. Phys Fluids 12: 3123-3132. 

Chang  S.M.,  Parney  I.F.,  Huang  W.,  Anderson  F.A.  Jr.,  Asher  A.L.,  Bernstein  M.,  Lillehei  K.O., 

Brem H., Berger M.S., Laws E.R. (2005). JAMA 293: 557-564. 

6

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

Christofori G. (2006). New signals from the invasive front. Nature 441: 444-450.  

Cristini  V.,  Frieboes  H.B.,  Gatenby  R.,  Caserta  S.,  Ferrari  M.,  Sinek  J.  (2005).  Morphologic 

instability and cancer invasion. Clin Cancer Res 11: 6772-6779 

Deisboeck T.S., Berens M.E., Kansal A.R., Torquato S., Stemmer-Rachamimov A.O., Chiocca E.A. 

(2001). Pattern of self-organization in tumour systems: complex growth dynamics in a novel brain 

tumour spheroid model. Cell Prolif 34: 115-134. 

Deisboeck T.S., Mansury Y., Guiot C., Degiorgis P.G., Delsanto P.P. (2005). Insights from a novel 

tumor  model:  Indications  for  a  quantitative  link  between  tumor  growth  and  invasion.  Med. 

Fidler  I.J.  (2003).  The  pathogenesis  of  cancer  metastasis:  the  'seed  and  soil'  hypothesis  revisited. 

Hypotheses  65: 785-790. 

Nat Rev Cancer  3: 453–458. 

Physiol 98: 1547-1553. 

Georges P.C., Janmey P.A. (2005). Cell type-specific response to growth on soft materials. J Appl 

Habib  S.,  Molina-Paris  C.,  Deisboeck  TS.  (2003).  Complex  dynamics  of  tumors:  modeling  an 

emerging brain tumor system with coupled reaction-diffusion equations. Physica A  327: 501-524.  

Hanahan D., Weinberg R.A. (2000). The hallmarks of cancer Cell 100: 57-70. 

Kaufman  L.J.,  Brangwynne  C.P.,  Kasza  K.E.,  Filippidi  E.,  Gordon  V.D.,  Deisboeck  T.S.,  Weitz 

D.A. (2005). Glioma expansion in collagen I matrices: analyzing collagen concentration-dependent 

growth and motility patterns. Biophysical J 99: 636-650. 

Luo J., Lubaroff, D.M., Hendrix, M.J.C. (1999). Suppression of prostate cancer invasive potential 

and matrix metalloproteinase activity by E-cadherin transfection. Cancer Res 59: 3552-3665.  

Nakano  A.,  Tani  E.,  Miyazaki  K.,  Yamamoto  Y.,  Furuyama  J.  (1995).  Matrix  metalloproteinases 

and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases in human gliomas. J. Neurosurg. 83: 298-307. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

Paszek M.J., Zahir N., Johnson K.R., Lakins J.N., Rozenberg G.I., Gefen A., Reinhart-King C.A., 

Margulies  S.S.,  Dembo  M.,  Boettiger  D.,  Hammer  D.A.,  Weaver  V.M.  (2005).  Tensional 

homeostasis and the malignant phenotype. Cancer Cell 8: 241-254. 

Postovit  L.-M.,  Seftor  E.A.,  Seftor  R.E.B.,  Hendrix  M.J.C.  (2006).  Influence  of 

the 

microenvironment on melanoma cell fate determination and phenotype. Cancer Res 66: 7833-7836. 

Rioboo  R.,  Bauthier  C.,  Conti  J.,  Voue  M.,  De  Coninck  J.  (2003).  Experimental  investigation  of 

splash and crown formation during single drop impact on wetted surfaces. Exp in Fluids 35: 648-

652. 

Rozhkov A., Prunet-Foch B., Vignes-Adler M. (2004). Dynamics of a liquid lamella resulting from 

the impact of a water drop on a small target Proc R Soc Lond A  460: 2681-2704. 

Tamaki M., McDonald W., Amberger V.R., Moore E., Del Maestro R.F. (1997). Implantation of C6 

astrocytoma  spheroid 

into  collagen 

type  I  gels: 

invasive,  proliferative,  and  enzymatic 

characterizations. J. Neurosurg  87: 602-609.    

Thamilselvan V., Basson M.D. (2004). Pressure activates colon cancer cell adhesion by insight-out 

focal adhesion complex and actin cytoskeleton signalling. Gastroenterology  126: 8-18.   

Thamilselvan  V.,  Basson  M.D.  (2005).  The  role  of  the  cytoskeleton  in  differentially  regulating 

pressure-mediated  effects  on  malignant  colonocyte  focal  adhesion  signalling  and  cell  adhesion. 

Carcinogenesis 26: 1687-1679.  

Vander Wal R.L., Berger G.M., Mozes S.D. (2006). The combined influence of a rough surface and 

thin fluid film upon the splashing threshold and splash dynamics of a droplet impacting onto them  

Exp in Fluids  40: 53-59. 

Int J Cancer 114: 371-379. 

Fluid Mech  38: 159-192. 

Winters B.S., Shepard S.R., Foty R.A. (2005). Biophysical measurements of brain tumor cohesion. 

Yarin  A.L.  (2006).  Drop  impact  dynamics:  Splashing,  spreading,  receding,  bouncing...   Ann  Rev 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8

Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

Captions 

Figure 1.  Microscopy image of a multicellular tumor spheroid, exhibiting an extensive branching 

system that rapidly expands into the surrounding extracellular matrix gel. These branches consist of 

multiple invasive cells. (From Habib et al., 2003, with permission). 

Figure 2. Water drop impact on a solid surface. 

Figure 3. The surface IP = 1 according to Eqn. (5). 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9

 

 

 
 

 

Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

Figures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  

 

10

Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 2.  

 

11

Guiot C.G., Delsanto P.P. & Deisboeck T.S.: Morphological instability and cancer invasion 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 3.  

 

12

