A New Basis for Interpretation of the Planck Length 
 
C. L. Herzenberg 
 
 
Abstract 
A critical length has recently been identified that appears to provide a fundamental limit 
distinguishing quantum behavior from classical behavior. Because of the unique 
association between critical length and mass, it appears that we can correlate the mass 
of an object with the size over which its quantum behavior is manifested. When the 
expression for the critical length is set equal to the Planck length, we find an associated 
mass value that in magnitude corresponds to an approximation of the mass of the visible 
universe. This would appear to suggest that the quantum behavior associated with the 
universe as a whole would be manifested at distances comparable to or smaller than the 
Planck length. Accordingly, it would appear that all position measurements would be 
subject to uncertainties at the limit of the Planck length, so that the Planck length sets a 
fundamental limit on position determination.  
  
Key words: Planck length, critical length, quantum gravity, critical density, quantum 
uncertainty, quantum behavior, classical behavior, mass of universe 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The Planck length is a natural unit of length defined from three fundamental constants. It 
is given by: 
 

LP = (hG/2πc3)½                                                             (1) 

 
where h is Planck’s constant, G is the gravitational constant, and c is the speed of light.(1-
3) The Planck length has a magnitude of approximately 1.6 x10-35 meter. The Planck 
length is of particular interest because it combines constants associated with both 
gravitation and quantum theory, and therefore may be presumed to have a role in 
quantum gravity.  
 
The Planck length was originally introduced not on the basis of theory but rather on an ad 
hoc basis from dimensional analysis. Other heuristic approaches to arriving at the Planck 
length have been used. The significance of the Planck length has been interpreted in 
terms of the fact that it is roughly equal to the radius of a black hole having a 
Schwarzschild radius equal to its Compton wavelength.(1) Arguments have been 
developed on the basis of several approaches including gedanken experiments and 
dimensional analysis that the Planck length must set a limit on the precision with which 
an object’s position can be measured.(1,4) It is widely considered that at distances of the 
order of or below the Planck length, fluctuations in the geometry of space-time will be 
noticeable and dominate the geometry of space-time.(1-4) 
 

 

1 

We wish to propose a new and different basis for the interpretation of the Planck length, 
which also leads to the conclusion that quantum fluctuations will be important at length 
scales below the Planck length, and that the Planck length will set a fundamental limit on 
position determination. 
 
 
2. CRITICAL LENGTHS AND QUANTUM UNCERTAINTY 
 
Recent work suggests that a possible limiting factor responsible for quantum uncertainty 
is the presence of the intrinsic spread of Hubble velocities within any extended object. A 
critical length distinguishing quantum behavior from classical behavior of objects on the 
basis of this effect has been derived and is given by the equation:(5,6) 
 

Lcr = [h/4πmHo]½                                                               (2) 

 
Here, m is the mass of the object, and Ho is the Hubble constant. 
 
An object whose size is smaller than its critical length will exhibit quantum behavior as 
an entire object, except to the extent that other environmental sources of quantum 
decoherence may cause it to behave classically. An object whose size is larger than its 
critical length will exhibit classical behavior, but will also exhibit quantum uncertainties 
at the level of its critical length. That the quantum uncertainty in the behavior of an object 
is limited to a region smaller than its critical length seems also to be confirmed by further 
calculations based on stochastic quantum mechanics.(7,8) 
 
3. THE PLANCK LENGTH AS A CRITICAL LENGTH 
 
As part of an exploration of limiting cases, we will now examine what the implications 
may be of interpreting the Planck length as a critical length. 
 
We can set the Planck length equal to a critical length by combining Eqn. (1) with Eqn. 
(2).  From this, we can evaluate the magnitude of the mass associated with this particular 
critical length. An expression for the mass associated with a critical length equal to the 
Planck length is thus given by:  
  

m = c3/(2GHo)                                                                     (3) 
 

So what is the significance of this particular mass value? From the magnitudes of the 
quantities involved, this mass value clearly represents an extremely large mass, 
something comparable in magnitude to the mass of the visible universe.  
 
We may inquire whether the expression for a mass in Eqn. (3) enters physics in any other 
context, and whether there is an explicit reason to consider this mass value to be in fact 
an estimate of the mass of the visible universe. 
 
 

 

2 

3. ESTIMATION OF THE MASS OF THE VISIBLE UNIVERSE FROM 
COSMOLOGICAL CRITERIA  
 
There is a certain critical mass density that determines the overall structure of the 
universe. If the density of the universe is lower than this value, the universe will be 
infinite (open universe), whereas if the density is greater than this value, the universe will 
necessarily be finite (closed universe). General relativity predicts that an infinite universe 
will continue to expand forever, whereas a finite universe will expand for a finite time 
and then contract. If the mass density has exactly the critical value than the universe is 
also infinite, and is referred to as flat rather than as open in this case. Contemporary 
observational evidence indicates that we live in a universe that is expanding and that is 
flat. Thus, we appear to live in a critical density universe, - in a universe with an average 
matter density very close to the critical density. Accordingly, the parameter Ω, which 
represents the fraction of the critical density which is actually present in the universe, 
seems to be equal to 1 as closely as has been determined. 
 
An expression for the critical density can be calculated in a fairly straightforward 
manner; it is given by the equation:(9) 
 

ρ = 3Ho

2/(8πG)                                                                  (4) 

 
We will use this equation together with a value for the volume of the visible universe in 
order to estimate the mass of the visible universe.  The radius of the visible universe can 
be estimated as the product of the Hubble time (the inverse of the Hubble constant) with 
the speed of light; the volume of the visible universe would then be given by the volume 
of a sphere of that radius. If we take the product of this volume with the critical mass 
density in the preceding equation, we can obtain an estimate of the mass of the visible 
universe as: 
 

M ≈ (4πR3/3)ρ  ≈ (c3/2GHo)                                               (5)   
 

Thus, using these assumptions, we have arrived at an expression for the mass of the 
visible universe in terms of the gravitational constant, the speed of light, and the Hubble 
constant. 
 
 
5. MASS ASSOCIATED WITH THE PLANCK LENGTH 
 
Comparing Eqn. (3) with Eqn. (5), we see that the value of the mass associated with the 
Planck constant as a critical length as given in Eqn. (3), does correspond to the estimate 
of the mass of the visible universe given in Eqn. (5). Thus, the Planck length appears to 
be a measure of the critical length associated with the mass of the visible universe. 
                                
 
6. INTERPRETING THE PLANCK LENGTH: DISCUSSION AND 
CONCLUSIONS 

 

3 

 
We note that the original investigations that introduced the concept of a critical length 
and addressed its significance were specifically directed toward investigating effects 
caused by the presence of extremely small recessional velocities throughout extended 
objects, and the results, including Eqn. (2), were derived from basic principles of 
quantum theory in that context.(5-8) In the present paper, we started straightforwardly 
enough, looking beyond the realm of familiar objects in order to evaluate what the 
equations may be telling us in the case of an extraordinarily small critical length, the 
Planck length, and we found a prediction that the mass associated with the Planck length 
would correspond to the mass of the entire visible universe. However, although our 
approach was straightforward, we implicitly moved beyond the range of validity of the 
original assumptions on which Eqn. (2) is based. While the results that we have arrived at 
amount to extrapolations beyond the limitations of the original derivation, they appear to 
be sufficiently interesting to provide guidance for further analysis.  
 
Earlier results indicated that the quantum behavior of an object is limited to and 
manifested within a region of size characterized by the critical length.(5-8) This new result 
therefore seems to be telling us that the quantum behavior associated with the mass of the 
visible universe would be manifested within distances smaller than the Planck length. 
Accordingly, it appears that there would be a positional uncertainty associated with the 
mass of the universe that is approximately equal to the Planck length. Measurement of 
the position of any object relative to the rest of the universe would therefore be limited in 
precision by the quantum uncertainty in position associated with the universe as a whole, 
which is expressed by the critical length determined by the mass of the universe, and 
hence by the Planck length. 
 
Therefore, we may infer, within the limits of validity of these calculations, that all 
position measurements will come up against quantum uncertainties at the limit of the 
Planck length.  This analysis thus supports the idea that the Planck length sets a 
fundamental limit on position determination. 
 
 
References 
 
1. Wikipedia, “Planck Length,” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck_length (accessed 30 
September 2006). 
 
2. Baez, John, “Length Scales in Physics,” http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/lengths.html 
(accessed October 3, 2006). 
 
3. Baez, John, “The Planck Length,” http://math.ucr.edu/home./baez/planck/node2.html 
(Accessed October 3, 2006). 
 
4. Calmet, Xavier, Graesser, Michael, Hsu, Stephen D. H. “Minimum Length from 
Quantum Mechanics and Classical General Relativity,” ArXiv:hep-th/0405033, Phys 
Rev. Lett. 93, 21101 (2004). 

 

4 

 
5. Herzenberg, C.L., “Becoming classical: A possible cosmological influence on the 
quantum-classical transition,” submitted for publication to Physics Essays (2 May 2006). 
 
6. Herzenberg, C.L., “A possible cosmological effect on the quantum-to-classical 
transition,” ArXiv:physics/0603136. 
 
7. Herzenberg, C.L., “Interpretation of cosmic expansion effects on the quantum-classical 
transition,” submitted for publication to Physics Essays (19 September 2006). 
 
8. Herzenberg, C.L. “Interpretation of cosmological expansion effects on the quantum-
classical transition,” ArXiv: physics/0606070.   
 
9. Pagel, Bernard E. J., “Cosmology, Big Bang Theory,” in The Astronomy and 
Astrophysics Encyclopedia, ed. Stephen P. Maran (New York: Van Nostrand, 1992). 
 
 
C. L. Herzenberg 
1700 E. 56th Street #2707 
Chicago, IL 60637-5092 U.S.A. 
e-mail: carol@herzenberg.net 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interpretation planck length.doc 
16 October 2006 draft, revised 
 

 

 

5 

