REPRODUCTION OF HYPOPNEA PHENOMENON USING A
PHYSICAL AND NUMERICAL MODEL

F. Chouly1, A.Van-Hirtum2, P.Y.LagrØe3, X. Pelorson2 and Y. Payan1

ABSTRACT

Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome is now considered as a major health care topic. An
in-vitro setup which reproduces and simplifies upper airway geometry has been the
basis to study the fluid/walls interaction that leads to an apnea. It consists of a rigid pipe
((cid:147)the pharynx(cid:148)) in contact with a deformable latex cylinder filled with water ((cid:147)the
tongue(cid:148)). Air flows out of the rigid pipe and induces pressure forces on the cylinder. We
present a numerical model of this setup: a finite element model of the latex cylinder is
in interaction with a fluid model. Simulation of an hypopnea (partial collapsus of the
airway) has been possible and in agreement with observations from the in-vitro setup.
The same phenomenon has been simulated on a soft palate model obtained from a
patient sagittal radiography. These first results encourage us to improve the model so as
it could reproduce the complete apnea phenomenon, and be used for a planification
purpose in sleep apnea surgery.

1. INTRODUCTION

Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, which is due to intermittent closure of upper airway
during sleep (Ayappa & al), has a serious impact on everyday life of more than 4% of
men and 2% of women (Young & al), with consequences such as excessive daytime
sleepiness and hypertension (Malhotra & al). Among therapeutic approaches for
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome are surgeries such as uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
(Fujita & al) or maxillo-mandibular surgery (Riley & al).

Success of a surgical procedure underlies on ability to forecast positive or negative
effects of intervention on sleep apnea severity. Consequently, a mechanical model of
the fluid (airflow) / structure (soft tissue) interaction which causes an apneic episode
would be of great interest for surgical planning.

Keywords: Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome, Hypopnea, Fluid/Structure Interaction,
Boundary Layer.

1 TIMC Laboratory, UMR CNRS 5525, UniversitØ Joseph Fourier, 38706 La Tronche, France.
{franz.chouly, yohan.payan}@imag.fr
2 Institut de la Communication ParlØe, UMR CNRS Q5009, INPG, 38031 Grenoble Cedex, France.
{annemie, pelorson}@icp.inpg.fr
3  Laboratoire de ModØlisation en MØcanique, UMR CNRS 7607, B 162, UniversitØ Paris 6, 75252 Paris,
France.
pyl@ccr.jussieu.fr

As a result, the aim of this preliminary work is to present a numerical simulation of
hypopnea phenomenon, which is partial closure of upper airway with flow limitation
(Gould & al). Results of these numerical simulations are qualitatively compared with
observations on an in-vitro setup and from litterature.

2. MATERIAL AND METHODS

2.1. In-vitro setup

An in-vitro setup has been designed so as to reproduce soft-tissue deformation in
response to fluid flow circulation in a constricted channel. It is made from a square rigid
pipe and a latex cylinder filled with water (fig. 1 and fig. 2). Analogy might be
established between the pipe and a pharynx, also between the cylinder and a tongue.
Complete description of the setup can be found in (Van Hirtum & al). Alternatively, a
rigid metallic cylinder can be adapted instead of the latex cylinder, so as to proceed to
velocity and pressure measurements (Van Hirtum & al).

figure 1. In-vitro setup
photography.

2.2. Sagittal radiography

figure 2. In-vitro setup drawing. Psub is
upstream pressure (measured), hc is height
channel at constriction (controlled parameter),
and Pgd is pressure at constriction (measured).

From a pre-operative sagittal radiography of an apneic patient, a bidimensionnal
approximation of the soft palate geometry has been obtained (fig. 4). This provides a
more realistic geometry than the one in-vitro setup for simulations.

2.3. Structural models

First, a finite element model of the in-vitro setup has been designed (fig. 3). It
reproduces geometrical and mechanical boundary conditions of the latex cylinder. A
second model has been conceived from geometry of the soft palate (fig. 5). Boundary
conditions have been chosen in agreement with anatomy (nodes constrained to
immobility are those tighed to hard palate).

figure 3. Finite element model of
the in-vitro setup (axes in mm).

figure 4. Patient sagittal
radiography. In red: soft palate.

figure 5. Finite element
model of the soft palate.

Both latex and soft tissue material have been considered as linear, homogeneous,
isotropic, and nearly-incompressible. Young modulus are respectively 8.105 Pa for latex
(manufacturer data), and 5.104 Pa for the soft palate (human soft tissue). Poisson’s ratio
is 0.499. Structural analysis, under small deformation assumption, has been carried out
using Ansys(TM) Software.

2.4. Fluid models

Two fluid models have been confrontated for computation of pressure on the walls. The
first is based on an analytical formulation:

p x = p 0  (cid:0)

(cid:1) (cid:2) 2 

1 
2 

(cid:3)

1 
2 
A 0

1 
A x 2

(1) (cid:2)(cid:4) c(cid:5) A c

p 0  (cid:3) p s

(2)

2 
(cid:1)

1 
2

where, for a given abscissa x (fig. 2), p(x) is pressure and A(x) is channel section area.
p0 and ps are inlet and outlet pressure, r is fluid density, f is airflow rate, A0 is initial
section area, Ac is constriction area and c is a coefficient which determines position of
separation of the fluid from the wall (Payan & al). It is obtained from Bernoulli
equation as explained in (Payan & al) and in (Van Hirtum & al). The second model is
based on a numerical resolution of the Reduced Navier-Stokes / Prandtl equations:

u

(cid:6) u
(cid:6) x

(cid:0) v

= (cid:3)

(cid:6) u
(cid:6) y

(cid:6) p
(cid:6) x

(cid:0)

(cid:6) 2  u
(cid:6) y 2

(cid:3)

(cid:6) p
(cid:6) y

= 0

(cid:6) u
(cid:6) x

(cid:0)

(cid:6) v
(cid:6) y

= 0

(3)

where (u,v) are components of velocity vector, p is pressure (non-dimensionnal equation
with normalized variables). These equations are solved using finite difference method,
as described in (LagrØe & al). This formulation is appropriate for boundary layer fluid
flow circulation, which is the case in this context (Van Hirtum & al).

2.5. Interaction between structural and fluid models

An iterative algorithm enables fluid/structure interaction: pressure is computed using
the fluid model. Deformation is computed from pressure forces with the structural
model, which induces a new channel geometry for the fluid flow circulation, thus new
pressure forces. The algorithm stops when no more significative deformation is
computed (quasi-static assumption).

3. RESULTS

3.1. In-vitro setup

Deformations of the in-vitro setup latex cylinder (fig.6 and fig.7) in response to fluid
flow circulation governed by Bernoulli equation for parameters given in table 1 have
been simulated. Value of c = 1.05 has been chosen because it gives the best correlation
between experimental data and model prediction on the in-vitro setup with a rigid
cylinder (Van Hirtum & al). The channel at its narrowest part (constriction) becomes
narrower (fig.8) and flow limitation can be observed from computation of air flow rate
in response to pressure gradient (fig. 9). Same qualitative behaviour is obtained from
simulations with RNS/P fluid model (fig. 8).

figure 6. Front view of the finite
element model of the in-vitro setup at
rest (axes in mm).

figure 7. Front view of the finite
element model of the in-vitro setup
after deformation (axes in mm).

figure 8. Normalized constriction height for
both Bernoulli (blue) and RNSP (magenta)
fluid models.

figure 9. Airflow rate / pressure gradient curves
for both rigid (dashed line) and deformable
(solid line) models.

3.2. Sagittal radiography

Simulations results of the soft palate model response to flow circulation for parameters
given in table 1 are qualitatively the same as those of the in-vitro setup: decrease of the
channel area at the narrowest site (fig. 10) and flow limitation. Value of separation
coefficient (c = 1.2) has been taken from litterature (Payan & al).

Parameter

Value 

Value

(in-vitro
setup)

(soft palate
model)

600 Pa

70 Pa

1,05

1,2

1,1 mm

8,5 mm

pressure
gradient

separation
coefficient

constriction
height

table 1. Parameters for simulations.

figure 10. Deformation of the velum in
response to inspiration. In blue, soft palate at
rest. In magenta, deformed soft palate (axes in
mm).

4. DISCUSSION

First, both structural models adopt the same behaviour when in interaction with a fluid:
decrease of the channel section at the level of constriction, from which results flow
limitation. This corresponds to the hypopnea phenomenon as defined in (Gould & al).
Moreover, for the in-vitro setup, good qualitative agreement has been observed between
simulation results and reality.

Similar results are obtained from both Bernoulli and RNS/P fluid models although a
significative quantitative difference has been observed in constriction height variation
(fig. 8). Quantitative measurements of the latex cylinder deformation will be necessary
to determine what model is the best at prediction. Neverthesless, RNS/P model seems
more appropriate when looking at theoretical study and experimental measurements on
rigid cylinder (Van Hirtum & al).

These encouraging results are the first step toward a more realistic model, which should
integrate non-linearities of the structure and forces due to viscosity in the fluid (wall
shear stress). Integrating contact forces might enable simulation of a complete apnea.
Complete anatomy of upper airways obtained from CT-scans of apneic patients would
be also helpful to proceed to simulation of hypopnea/apnea in more realistic conditions.
Last but not least, ability of our modelling approach for quantitative prediction should
be evaluated by comparing results of simulations and measurements on in-vitro setup
with deformable latex cylinder.

AKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is partly funded by the Rhone-Alpes region, France.

REFERENCES

Ayappa, I., and Rapoport D.M., The upper airway in sleep: physiology of the pharynx,
Sleep Medicine Reviews, 2003, Vol. 7, 9-33.

Young, T., Palta M., Dempsey J., Skatrud J., Weber S. and Badr S., The occurence of
sleep-disordered breathing among middle-aged adults, The New England Journal Of
Medicine, 1993, Vol. 328, 1230-1235.

Malhotra, A., and White D.P., Obstructive sleep apnoea, The Lancet, 2002, Vol. 360,
237-245.

Fujita, S., Conway W., Zorick F. and Roth T., Surgical correction of anatomic
abnormalities
in obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: uvulopalatopharyngoplasty,
Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg., 1981, Vol. 89, 923-934.

Riley, R.W., Powell N.B., Guilleminault C. and Nino-Murcia G., Maxillary,
mandibular, and hyoid advancement: an alternative to tracheostomy in obstructive sleep
apnea syndrome,  Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg., 1986, Vol. 94, 584-588. 

Gould, G.A., Whyte K.F., Rhind G.B., Airlie M.A.A., Catterall J.R., Shapiro C.M. and
Douglas N.J., The sleep hypopnea syndrome, Am. Rev. Respir. Dis., 1988, Vol. 137,
895-898.

Van Hirtum, A., Pelorson X. and LagrØe P.Y., In-vitro study of some flow assumptions
for the prediction of the pressure distribution during obstructive sleep apnea. Medical &
Biological Engineering & Computing, submitted.

Payan, Y., Perrier P., Vilain C. and Pelorson X., Finite element models of the tongue
and velum for a physical understanding of sleep apnea syndrome, Proceedings of the
Fifth International Symposium on Computer Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical
Engineering, BBE2001, Rome, Italy, 2001. 

LagrØe, P.Y., and Lorthois, S., The RNS/Prandtl equations and their link with other
asymptotic descriptions: application to the wall shear stress scaling in a constricted pipe,
personnal communication, 2002.

