Preprint

05/07/06 10:43

Room-temperature tunnel current amplifier and experimental setup for high 
resolution electronic spectroscopy in millikelvin STM experiments

Hélène le Sueur and Philippe Joyez
Service de Physique de l'Etat Condensé (CNRS URA 2464) 
CEA Saclay
91191 Gif sur Yvette Cedex, France

abstract
The spectroscopic resolution of tunneling measurements performed with a scanning tunneling 
microscope is ultimately limited by the temperature at which the experiment is performed. To take 
advantage of the potential high spectroscopic resolution associated with operating an STM in a 
dilution refrigerator we have designed a room temperature tunnel current amplifier having very 
small back-action on the tunnel contact and allowing to nearly reach the predicted energy 
resolution. This design is a modification of the standard op-amp based tip-biasing current-voltage 
converter which implements differential voltage sensing and whose back action on the tip voltage is 
only ~2 µV rms for a 14 MV/A transimpedance and 22kHz bandwidth.

Introduction
Scanning tunneling microscopes (STM) operated in spectroscopy mode provides valuable local 
information on the energy dependence of electronic mechanisms in the sample. For this purpose, 
low temperature STMs are in particular widely used to investigate recently discovered 
superconductors, or proximity effects. In this tunneling spectroscopy technique, when one of the 
electrodes is non-superconducting, the energy resolution is ultimately limited by the temperature at 
which the experiment is carried out. Indeed, the most precise results in this field are obtained using 
STMs in dilution refrigerators [1-7] with which one can commonly cool experiments in the 10-100 
mK range. However, in these experiments the energy resolution usually achieved is in practice 
significantly less than the thermal fundamental limit. There is thus a need for better instrumentation 
allowing to fully exploit the potential of these low temperature measurements.
In this article we discuss the required characteristics of the experimental setup in order to achieve 
optimal spectroscopic resolution and we present a room temperature amplifier optimised to have a 
back-action noise on the tunnel contact low enough that the energy resolution is close to the 
temperature limited value in an experiment carried out at 40 mK.

Tunnel spectroscopy basics
For a perfect voltage bias between two electrodes made of good metals, the tunnel current can be 
expressed as

4 e∣∣2

I V =

ℏ ∫ nL −eV −nRL−eV  R d 

where nL,R(ε)  are the occupancies of the electronic states at energy ε in the left or right electrode, 
ρL,R(ε) are the densities of states in the electrodes and τ is the tunneling Hamiltonian matrix element 
between the two electrodes, assumed here to be independent of energy. When one knows the 
density of states and the occupation of the energy levels in one of the electrodes, the measurement 
of the I-V characteristic of the contacts allows to extract information on the electronic state of the 
second electrode. For instance, if the left electrode is a normal metal in equilibrium at zero 

1/8

Preprint

05/07/06 10:43

temperature, ρL can be assumed nearly constant near the fermi level and nL is a step function at the 
fermi energy. Then, the derivative  dI V 
dV , gives a direct measurement of ρR(eV). If the temperature 
T is finite, the step function becomes a Fermi function, i.e. a rounded step function. In this case, the 
differential conductance  dI V 
dI V 
dV

dV  is given by the convolution product   R∗ f ' L  :

R f ' LeV − d   (1)

∝∫

∞

−∞

where f 'L  is the derivative of the Fermi function fL of the left electrode which is a bell-shaped 
function having a width  kT. Such a convolution product smears out the details in ρR, limiting the 
energy resolution to ~ kT. 
In real life experiments the bias voltage cannot be perfectly fixed, however. It has fluctuations 
characterized by a distribution function P(V) and what is actually measured is the average value

〈

dI
dV

〉 V =∫

∞ dI V 
dV

−∞

P V dV  (2)

 [8] where  V =∫V P V  dV  is the average voltage. By inserting (1) into (2) and permuting 
integration orders,  Equ. (2) can rewritten under the same form as (1) with the convolution product 
P∗ f ' L  in place of f 'L. Thus, not surprisingly, noise will further blur the resolution and appear 
under most circumstances as an excessive temperature. If P(V) is Gaussian with an rms width Vn, 
the effective temperature can be evaluated as  T eff =T 23 e V n/ k 2  [9].

Experimental considerations
Following the above discussion, in order to reach the highest level of spectroscopic resolution in a 
tunneling spectroscopy experiment it appears necessary to perform the experiment at the lowest 
possible temperature, which in practice means in dilution refrigerator. It also appears equally 
important that the electromagnetic noise reaching the tunnel contact through the connecting wires 
has both a distribution and a spectrum compatible with the energy resolution sought. To reach such 
a low noise level in an experiment one must act at three levels. At the first level, the wires reaching 
the tunnel contact must be properly thermalized, so that the contact really “sees” an electromagnetic 
temperature equal to that of the refrigerator. This is achieved by careful shielding and filtering of 
the cables connected to the tunnel contact so that thermal radiation coming from room temperature 
apparatus is removed [10]. At the second level, the wiring of the experiment must follow well 
established low-noise techniques to avoid stray pick-up of electromagnetic signals in the laboratory 
ambient (mains, radio signals...) by the wires connected to the tunnel contact. In particular, if not 
using a magnetic shield enclosing the whole experimental setup, one has to select a proper circuit 
topology and grounding strategy to avoid noise due to inductive coupling in so-called ground loops 
[11]. At the third level, the intrinsic voltage noise of any instrument connected to the tunnel contact 
must be considered. Contrarily to the output noise of voltage generators which can usually be 
reduced to appropriate levels by using simple voltage dividers, the input noise of amplifiers is 
generally fully present on the tunnel contact in the bandwidth of the setup and can be seen as a 
back-action on the tunnel contact. Thus, in order to reach the ultimate energy resolution, one must 
use an amplifier with rms input voltage noise Vn such that  V n≪ kT / e . As experiments are 
performed at lower temperatures, this puts more stringent requirements on the amplifier noise 
characteristics. Yet, in the low-temperature STM literature, this back-action is seldom considered 
and the current sensitivity (i.e. output voltage noise density divided by the transimpedance ) is often 
the only figure of merit given to characterize the measurement chain.

2/8

Preprint

05/07/06 10:43

Implementation
In our installation of an STM in a dilution refrigerator we have followed systematically the above 
considerations. The electromagnetic thermalization of all the wiring connected to the STM is 
achieved using shielded lines and custom microfabricated low-pass filters described in Ref. [10]. 
Besides this, we realized that having a very good control of the effective bias voltage applied to the 
tunnel contact is almost impossible when one uses a standard current-voltage converter (CVC) 
because such a circuit does not follow the good practice of having a single voltage reference point 
in a low signal level circuit. Namely, the voltage reference (“ground”) of the CVC usually sitting at 
room temperature is physically separated from the electrode of the tunnel contact which should be 
precisely at the same potential. This makes the system prone to ground-loop noise problems. To 
overcome this problem we designed a modified CVC which allows differential sensing of the 
voltage on the tunnel contact. A simplified schematics of this amplifier in shown in Fig. 1. 

In this design, the tip and sample « cold ground » are connected to the amplifier through a shielded 
twisted pair. The « cold ground » signal is sensed by an LT1028 ultra-low voltage noise op-amp 
and added to the desired tip bias voltage. This sum is then used as the voltage reference of the CVC. 
This design allows to cancel tip voltage fluctuations due to magnetic noise pick-up from the lab 
environment at low frequency which cannot be easily shielded.  The current-voltage converter is 
made with an OPA627 which offers a good combination of current and voltage noises and 
bandwidth. Given the ~200 pF total capacitance to ground of the tunnel current line in the twisted 
pair cable, the 14 MΩ feed-back resistor and a ~1pF capacitor which limits output noise peaking at 
cut-off frequency [12], the OPA627 delivers a 22 kHz bandwidth, sufficient for STM imaging. The 
noise coming from the LT1028 is also limited by reducing its bandwidth using a 100 nF over-
compensation capacitor and RC low-pass filter (neither shown). The operational amplifiers used in 
the rest of the circuit are low noise op-amps (OP27 or similar) which add negligible noise to the 
signal.

The amplifier is constructed using surface mounted components and fits easily on a 45 x 50 mm 
printed circuit board. The circuit board is mounted in a small metallic box which plugs directly into 
the socket of the twisted pair cable at the output of the refrigerator to avoid adding further cable 
length and stray capacitance. The amplifier is battery-powered and ground loops with other 
instruments are strictly avoided by using differential instrumentation amplifiers both in front of the 
bias input and following the output of the amplifier. The batteries and the instrumentation 
amplifiers are placed in an EMI shielding cabinet and a continuous metallic shield between the 
refrigerator and the cabinet completely encloses the amplifier and its connections to the batteries 
and the instrumentation amplifiers.

Amplifier performance
We used Spice [13] simulations extensively during the design stage to optimize the level of noise of 
our amplifier and its dynamic behavior. Spice simulations offer a rapid and simple way to evaluate 
several design options and particularly regarding the choice of the op-amps to use, as most 
manufacturers provide Spice models for their op-amps and many of these models include noise 
characteristics.  In Fig. 2 we show the predicted frequency dependences for key properties of our 
amplifier. The ac response to changes in the tunnel contact resistance and in the bias voltage are flat 
up to a -3 dB bandwidth of 22 kHz and 30 kHz respectively. The input impedance of the amplifier 
as seen from the tunnel contact is 14 Ω at very low frequency and then rises linearly with frequency 
up to a maximum of 10 kΩ  at the cut-off frequency of the amplifier. The CVC thus delivers a good 
voltage bias at all frequencies for a tunnel contact in standard tunneling conditions (tunnel 

3/8

Preprint

05/07/06 10:43

resistance  ≫h/ e2≈ 26 kΩ ). We have also investigated the efficiency of the differential voltage 
sensing scheme implemented in the amplifier at different frequencies. For this we simulated an ac 
voltage difference between the cold ground and the room-temperature ground and looked how 
much of this voltage was present on the tunnel contact bias (Fig. 2D). This shows that this setup can 
efficiently suppress low frequency noises due to currents flowing in the ground, and thus, provided 
the twisted pair wiring avoids picking up flux, it should be effective against pick-up of mains power 
and its harmonics. 

In order to make accurate noise calculations, we need to properly take into account the noise due to 
the dissipative wires and filters sitting at different temperatures in our setup. Even though Spice 
normally has a single temperature for all elements in the model, it is fairly easy to make a model for 
resistors at different temperatures for this purpose [14]. What the noise calculations show is that the 
input voltage noise of the amplifier, i.e. the back-action of the amplifier on the tunnel contact, is 
essentially determined by the input voltage noise of the CVC (OPA627) and resistor noise in the 
twisted pair and its filters [15]. The input noise of the amplifier does not depend on the input 
current noise of the CVC, nor on the Johnson noise in the feed-back resistor which both only 
appear in the output noise of the OPA627 owing to the low input impedance of the CVC provided 
by feed-back loop. It does not depend neither on the LT1028 voltage sensor because its noise at the 
non inverting input of the OPA627 is negligible compared to the intrinsic voltage noise of the 
OPA627. For this setup, Spice simulations predict that when running the experiment at 30 mK, the 
amplifier and wiring make a  ~ 2.0 µV rms back action noise on the tip bias voltage. The smearing 
of the spectroscopic resolution due to this voltage noise has the same rms width than a 13 mK 
Fermi function, and its broadening of a 30 mK fermi function is similar to a 2.6 mK increase in 
temperature.  Since this noise level is essentially due to the input voltage noise of the OPA627, it 
could be reduced by narrowing the bandwidth or by substituting it by an op-amp with less voltage 
noise. For this purpose one could use for instance an AD745, but its greater current noise would 
adversely affect the output noise of the CVC, i.e. its current sensitivity. As stated above, the output 
noise also depends on the Johnson noise of the feed-back resistor of the CVC. In fact, for the large 
resistor value we use, at room temperature this is the dominant output noise contribution at low 
frequency. Consequently, the sensitivity of the amplifier can be significantly improved by reducing 
the temperature of this resistor [16], as shown in Fig. 3. Using one extra coaxial line in the 
refrigerator, we placed the feed-back resistor at the temperature of the microscope (see Fig.1) but it 
could also be placed at 4 K with no change in performance. This, together with the twisted pair 
cable, makes a total of three lines for the tunnel contact bias and measurement. In this 
configuration, the output noise of the amplifier is peaked around the cutoff frequency of the 
amplifier, typical of an optimized CVC [12]. At low frequency, it rises due to 1/f noise. In between, 
around 100 Hz, the output noise has a flat minimum corresponding to a current sensitivity of 
4 fA/Hz1/2. This minimum is the most favorable frequency range for lock-in measurements of 
differential conductance since it provides the highest signal-to-noise ratio for the weak ac current 
one needs to measure when using an ac bias voltage well below kT/e which is necessary to preserve 
the spectral resolution.

Experimental result
In Figure 4, we show a differential tunnel conductance measured with this amplifier. In this 
experiment the STM was equipped with a tungsten tip and the sample was a 25 nm-thick evaporated 
aluminium film deposited on an oxidized silicon substrate. The data were recorded at a temperature 
of ~ 40 mK, well below the superconducting transition temperature of the aluminium film, but 
above that of tungsten (15 mK). In this case, theory predicts that the differential conductance should 

4/8

Preprint

05/07/06 10:43

be simply proportional to a convolution product of the BCS density of states of the film with the 
derivative of the fermi function of the normal state tip. The only adjustable parameters in this curve 
are the superconducting gap of aluminium [17], the asymptotic value of the conductance at large 
voltage and the temperature of the tip. Fitting the data with theory should thus give access to the 
effective temperature of the tip, including all noise contributions. In our case, for a reason not 
presently understood, a precise fitting of the data within this model is not possible. Nevertheless, 
the peak height in the differential conductance of such normal metal-superconductor contact gives a 
good indication of the effective temperature of the normal metal. Based only on the height of the 
peak, the effective temperature would be around 45 mK for a measurement performed at 40 mK. 
The fact that the peak height still varies when temperature and ac excitation are lowered confirms 
such an estimate and it also proves that the amplifier input noise is close to the predicted value. 
Thus, the spectroscopic resolution of this measurement is very close to the ultimate thermal limit 
and a factor of  ~ 4 better than the best previously published resolution obtained with an STM.

Conclusion
In conclusion, we have discussed the requirements for a high resolution, low temperature tunneling 
spectroscopy setup. We have shown how to fulfill this requirements by designing a new low noise 
current voltage converter which implements differential voltage sensing. Measurements performed 
with this amplifier in a thoroughly filtered setup show that we indeed reach a spectroscopic 
resolution only limited by the fundamental thermal noise.

Acknowledgements 
We gratefully acknowledge discussions with G. Rubio-Bollinger and H. Courtois and useful 
comments of C. Urbina. This work was supported in part by the French Research Ministry project 
AC Nano 2003 NR110.

Figures

14 MΩ

Itunnel

STM tip

CStray

Sample

Cold GND

Dilution refrigerator

CBW

Vbias

OPA627
+

-

+

LT1028
-

5/8

1kΩ

1Ω

Bias Input=
-103 x Vbias 
 

Diff. Amp.2

Output
∝Itunnel

Diff. Amp.1

-

Cap.Comp.
+

Ambient GND

Preprint

05/07/06 10:43

Fig. 1 Simplified schematics of the amplifier and connection to the tunnel contact. The tip and 
sample « cold ground » are connected to the amplifier through a shielded twisted pair with filters 
(not shown).  The « cold ground » signal is sensed by an LT1028 ultra low voltage noise op-amp 
and used to offset the desired tip bias voltage. This sum is then used as the voltage reference of the 
current voltage converter. The first difference amplifier (Diff. Amp. 1) is made using high precision 
resistors (0.01%) to accurately subtract the bias voltage from the output of the CVC. The two other 
circuits (Diff. Amp. 2 and Cap. Comp.) compensate the ac currents flowing to ground in the stray 
capacitance CStray~200 pF. For best current sensitivity, the 14 MΩ feed-back resistor of the CVC is 
placed at low temperature and connected through a coaxial cable. Bandwidth of the CVC is adjusted 
to 22 kHz to limit noise peaking by the use of CBW~1pF.

1

10

1E4

1E5

1E6

100

1000
 frequency (Hz)

Fig. 2
Results of Spice simulations.  Panel A: normalized linear ac response at the output of the amplifier 
in response to a small variation of the tunnel resistance, as a function of frequency. The 
normalization value is 1.4 µV per % variation of a 1 MΩ tunnel resistance under a dc bias of 10 µV. 
Panel B: normalized linear ac response at the output of the amplifier in response to ac bias. The 
normalization value is 14 µV per µV ac bias on a  1 MΩ tunnel resistance. Panel C: Input 
impedance of the CVC as seen from the tunnel contact. Panel D: Assuming an ac voltage difference 
between hot and cold grounds, fraction of which still present in the tunnel contact bias.

 

 

 

 

 

A: tunnel resistance variation response

B: AC bias response

C: input impedance (W

)

D: Ground voltage noise transmission

 

 

0.1

1

1

 

0.1

1E4

1000

 

100

1

0.1

 

0.01

1E-3

)

2

/

.

1
z-
H
V
(
 
y
t
i

s
n
e
d

 

i

e
s
o
n

 

e
g
a

t
l

o
V

1E-6

1E-7

1E-8

1E-9

 

 

 

 

 

6/8

Fig. 3

1

10

100

1000

1E4

1E5

1E6

frequency (Hz)

Preprint

05/07/06 10:43

Noise performance of the amplifier. Dash-dotted curve : Predicted input noise voltage density on 
the tunnel contact. The input noise is independent of the feed-back resistor temperature in this 
range. The integrated noise gives ~2 µV rms. Thick top curves : predicted output noise with the 
feed-back resistor at room temperature (dashed line) or at low temperature (solid line). Thin gray 
line: measured output noise while experiment was at low temperature. No adjustable parameters are 
used. The discrepancy above 10 kHz is attributed to an additional stray feedback capacitor on the 
OPA627 in parallel with the CBW=1 pF installed capacitor (see Fig. 1).

)
S
µ
(
 
V
d

/
I

d

20

15

10

5

0

 

 T=45 mK, ac=1 µV
 T=40 mK, ac=0.5 µV
 Theory T=40 mK
 Theory T=45 mK
 Theory T=50 mK

D =182 µeV

 

 

 

 

 

-800 -600 -400 -200

0

200

800

160

180

200

220

240

400

600
V (µV)

Figure 4.
Experimental differential conductance taken on a 25 nm thick aluminium film with a tungsten tip 
for two different temperatures and ac excitations, and comparison with the prediction for Normal-
Superconductor tunnel spectrum at different temperatures, with a gap ∆=182 µeV. On the right 
panel, a close-up on the right hand side peak. In spite of the unexplained discrepancy, the aspect 
ratio of the peak and its dependence on ac amplitude and/or temperature in this range indicate that 
the effective temperature of the measurement is close to the refrigerator temperature and proves that 
the back-action of our amplifier is not larger than expected from the simulations. 

References
[1] L. Crétinon, A. K. Gupta, H. Sellier, F. Lefloch, M. Fauré, M. Fauré, A. Buzdin and H. 
Courtois, Phys. Rev. B 72, 024511 (2005)
[2]  M. Crespo, H. Suderow, S. Vieira, S. Bud’ko, and P. C. Canfield, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 027003 
(2006)
[3] B. Sacépé, C. Chapelier, C. Marcenat, J. Kačmarčik, T. Klein, M. Bernard, and E. Bustarret 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 097006 (2006) 
[4] T. Hanaguri, C. Lupien, Y. Kohsaka, D.-H. Lee, M. Azuma, M. Takano, H. Takagi & J. C. 
Davis, Nature 430, 1001 (2004)
[5] M. D. Upward, L. P. Kouwenhoven, A. F. Morpurgo, N. Kikugawa, Z. Q. Mao, and Y. Maeno, 
Phys. Rev. B 65, 220512 (2002) 
[6] E. Ishikawa, R. Shoda, N. Matsuura, M. Ono, T. Eguchi, A. Sakai, M. Kubota and Y. 
Hasegawa, e-J. Surf. Sci. Nanotech. Vol. 2, p.151 (2004) 
[7] H. Kambara, T. Matsui, Y. Niimi H. Fukuyama, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.  45, 1909 (2006)
[8] This result is valid if the measurement time is long compared to the typical timescales of voltage 
noise variations, themselves slow compared to the tunneling process. This is generally the case 
when performing lock-in measurements of the differential conductance. More detailed analysis is 
needed for peculiar noise sources, like slow telegraphic noise or for very high frequency noise for 
which photon assisted tunneling may appear.

7/8

Preprint

05/07/06 10:43

[9]  In tunnel spectroscopy experiments where the tip and the sample are both superconductors well 
below their transition temperature, the ultimate resolution is fixed by the width of the singularities 
in the density of states, and not by the temperature. However, the actual energy resolution is still 
affected in the same way by the bias voltage noise, and the amplifier we present here will also help 
improving these measurements.
[10] H. le Sueur and P. Joyez, Preprint.
[11] H.W. Ott, Noise Reduction Techniques in Electronic Systems,  2nd Edition, John Wiley and 
sons, ISBN: 0-471-85068-3 
[12] Texas Instrument application note SBOA055A available at 
http://focus.ti.com/lit/an/sboa055a/sboa055a.pdf
[13] Spice circuit simulation software. See SPICE entry at www.wikipedia.org, for instance.
[14] In Spice, a resistor at lower temperature can be simulated by a smaller resistor in series with a 
“noiseless resistor” made with a behavioral voltage source with a voltage proportional to the current 
in the small resistor. Some comercial versions of Spice can natively handle elements at different 
temperatures.
[15] Each line has a total resistance of ~300 Ω coming from two 80 Ω filters sitting at 4 K and 30 
mK, the rest being in the wires themselves, mostly between 4 K and 30 mK. The total capacitance 
of each line to ground is ~200 pF.
[16] N. Moussy, H. Courtois and B. Pannetier, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 72, 128 (2001).
[17] in Al thin films the actual gap depends on the impurity content of the film and on its thickness.

8/8

