Secure Classical Optical Communication and Microwave Communication: Wave
Implementation of the Unconditionally Secure Communicator Based on Kirchhoff's
1
Law and Johnson-like Noise

+Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3128, USA

+
LASZLO B. KISH

(Versions: October 13, 2006)

After  analyzing  the  difference  between  wire  lines  and  optical  fibers,  we  show  an  optical
implementation  of  the  classical  communicator  based  on Kirchhoff's  Law  and  Johnson-like  Noise
(KLJN)  (Physics  Letters  A  352  (2006)  178-182).  The  idealized  scheme  is  secure  against  passive
attacks. In the case of active attack of the idealized scheme, the eavesdropper can extract at most a
single  bit  before  she  is  discovered.  Thus,  similarly  to  the  idealized  wire-based  scheme,  the
communicator is more secure than idealized quantum communicators. The practical security of the
wave methods depends on how well the engineering design can approach the idealized conditions
and that is limited to relatively short distances (few kilometers). Out of the higher security, another
practical advantage of the proposed scheme is that it can be applied via existing and currently used
optical fibers with the help of proper filters and optical couplers. However, practical KLJN wire lines
are superior to the practical wave based solutions in many respects.

Keywords: Secure classical communication; secure key distribution; via optical fibers.

Introduction

1. 
Recently, a totally secure classical communication scheme was introduced [1,2] utilizing
two identical pairs of resistors and noise voltage generators, the physical properties of an
idealized  Kirchhoff-loop  and  the  statistical  physical  properties  thermal  noise  (KLJN
communicator). The resistors (low bit = small resistor  RL , high bit = large resistor  RH )
and their thermal-noise-like voltage generators (thermal noise voltage enhanced by a pre-
agreed factor) are randomly chosen and connected at each clock period at the two sides of
the wire channel. A secure  bit  exchange takes place when the states at the two ends are
different, which is indicated by an intermediate level of the rms noise voltage on the line,
or  that  of  the rms current noise in the wire. The most attractive properties of the KLJN
cipher are related to its security [1, 3-7] and the robustness of classical information. In the
idealized  scheme  of  the  Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson(-like)-noise  cipher,  the  passively
observing  Eve  (Eve)  can  extract zero bit  of  information  and  the  actively  eavesdropping
observer can extract at most one bit before getting discovered [3-7]. Moreover, when Eve
is  executing  a  man-in-the-middle  attack  can  extract  virtually  zero  bit  before  getting
discovered  [3].  The  KLJN  system  has  recently  became  network-ready  [6].  This  new
property [6] opens a large scale of practical applications because the KLJN cipher can be
installed as a computer card [6], similarly to Eternet cards.

2.  Some essential physical properties of the wire line with KLJN ciphers
In Figure 1, the core of the idealistic KLJN line is shown [1] with some of the additional
units such as protecting filters (for subsequent arguments) but without the current-voltage
analyzers, etc [3-8]. The noise voltage generators can be provided by the thermal noise
(Johnson noise) voltage in the resistors giving power density spectrum   Su ( f ) = 4kTR  in
the  KLJN  frequency  band  however  that  is  not  practical  because  Johnson  noise  is  too
weak. Instead [1], artificial noise generators providing much stronger noise   Su ( f ) = AR
(where    A >> 4kT )  with  the  same  type  of  scaling  law  as  Johnson  noise  versus  the

                                                  
1 A TAMU patent disclosure is submitted.

resistance  should  be  used.  For  unconditional  security,  this  circuitry  must  be  the  exact
model describing the situation and any deviation (delay effects, cable capacitance, cable
resistance, asymmetry of the resistors between the two sides, etc) needing to modify this
circuitry poses a security risk. Thus the practical security can never be absolute, just like
with  any  practical  physical  layers  such  as  quantum  communicators,  however  a
straightforward  engineering  design  can  provide  higher  practical  security  than  any
quantum-based security. It is important to note that any modification by Eve implies that
the  current-voltage  alarm  system,  which  is  publishing  and  comparing  the  instantaneous
current and voltage values at the two ends, goes on and that bit will not be used in the key
(zero  bit  key  security)  ;  or  alternatively  the  communication  is  shot  down  before
subsequent bits can be extracted by Eve (one bit eavesdropping security). From passive
measurements  of  the  current  and  the  voltage  on  the  line  Eve  is  able  to  calculate  the
resistor values used by the two communicators. However, when the resistors differ at the
two ends, Eve is unable to determine the location of these resistors.

The  total  security  of  the  idealized  system  is  based  on  the  Second  Law  of
Thermodynamics,  which  guarantees  that  the  power  flow  is  the  same  in  both  directions
and thus the crosscorrelation of the voltage and current in the wire is zero [1] (see below),
and  on  the  Rank  Theorem (Solubility  Condition) of  Linear  Equations  Systems  which
guarantees that from the two independent equations (current and voltage) at most the two
resistor values can be derived and no more hidden information about their location [1].

The practical system is never ideal and it is the main task of the engineering design to
sufficiently approach the idealized conditions in order to achieve the aimed security. Out
of  proper  choice  of  the  physical  parameters  of  the  line  and  the  bandwidth,  the  most
powerful  tool  to  design  the  information  leak  is  to  choose  the  clock  frequency  vs.  noise
bandwidth so that Eve can make only very poor statistics during a clock period [1,4,7] the
uncertainty relation between inaccuracy and sample size. The practical aim is to reach an
information leak of less than 1% of the bits which is less than the typical information leak
of  idealized  quantum  communicators,  a  situation  when  a  few  %s  of  bits  are  cloned  by
Eve  and  fed  back  into  the  line  thus  the  quantum  alarm  based  on  error  statistics  cannot
detect  because  it  is  buried  in  the  inherent  noise  in  the  quantum  schemes.  Then  the
exchanged  key  with  this  less  then  1%  information  leak  can  be  processed  by  a  privacy
amplifier [9,10] software which creates a shorter key with arbitrarily enhanced security
(the  higher  the  security  the  shorter  the  obtained  key).  Using  the  example  of  wire
resistance, it was shown in [4] that typically a 1% inaccuracy of parameters (there voltage
drop in a wire) still provides the desired security (there less than 0.7% information leak).
It is due the fact that there is only a finite time for making the statistics of the measured
noise and Eve has much less information (asymmetry in the noise) thus her statistics is
extremely poor [4] and her decisions about the information bit are almost totally random.

3. 

Important differences between the KLJN and wave-based classical secure lines

In the idealized  KLJN  wire  scheme,  in  the  allowed  frequency  band  (the  low  frequency
range secured by line filters to provide conditions of quasi-stationary  electrodynamics
[4,11]  for  the  validity  of  our  circuit  model  [1]),  the  instantaneous  voltage  and  current
amplitudes are the same all along the wire. This fact provides an extraordinary security
against  invasive  eavesdropping  when  Eve  injects/extracts  detectable  amount  of  energy
into/from the channel.

On  the  other  hand,  because  the  mean  values  the  current  and  voltage  amplitudes  are
zero and they are Gaussian processes, passive eavesdropping (observing the current and
voltage) can try to use only the power flow which is the crosscorrelation coefficient of the
current and voltage. However, due to the Second Law of Thermodynamics, the net power
flow  is  zero  at  the  idealized  conditions.  Indeed,  the  Fluctuation  Dissipation  Theorem

implies that there is no net power flow between two parallel resistors of arbitrary values
when  the  two  resistors  are  at  the  same  temperature.  Alternatively,  when  one  of  the
resistors is warmer than the other, the net power flow heats the colder resistor and cools
the  hotter  one.  In  a  specific  non-ideal  situation  Eve  could  use  this  effect  to  extract
information.  For  example,  if  communicators  A  (Alice)  and  B  (Bob)  would  use  real
thermal  noise  for  stealth  communication  [12]  and  the  temperature  of  one  of  Alice's
resistors would be colder, while all the other resistors along the line would be at the same
temperature; the situation when Alice is using the colder resistor could be identified by
current-voltage  crosscorrelation  measurements  provided  enough  time  is  available  for
that. Because these kinds of inaccuracy based practical non-idealities are always present
in practical realizations, the design of the information leak by the proper choice of clock
frequency  and  noise  bandwidth  (see  above)  is  very  important  in  practical  applications
[1,4,7].

Using  electromagnetic  waves  in  optical  fibers  or  microwave  lines  instead  of  quasi-
stationary electrical currents in wires [4,11] has several disadvantages. The instantaneous
electrical and magnetic fields (corresponding to the voltage and the current in the wire)
are not independent but they are totally correlated and their ratio is fixed (determined by
the  physical  parameters  of  the  line).  Thus  a  solution  similar  to  the  independent
comparison of voltage and current cannot be given. Moreover, because it is a wave, the
instantaneous  amplitudes  differ  along  the  line,  anyway,  due  to  propagation,  delay,
reflection  and  interference  phenomena.  Thus  statistical  methods  (averaging)  are
unavoidable for eavesdropper detection. However, due to the high frequencies involved,
not every statistics requires long time.

Moreover, when wave is the information carrier, Eve can apply directional couplers
to measure the intensity of the propagating waves in the two directions. This situation is
hard; and it had earlier prohibited the author and Peter Heszler (see Acknowledgement) to
find  a  proper  wave-based  solution  via  a  joint  effort.  Moreover,  Eve  can  try  to  obtain
interference measurements between these two wave components in the line nearby Alice
or Bob and assess the bit value there.

The  scheme  proposed  in  the  next  section  tries  to  get  around  these  difficulties  to

provide a secure communication channel with waves.

4.  The wave based implementation
The  schematics  of  the  wave-based  implementation  is  shown  in  Figure  2.  The
communicators A and B have non-coherent light sources to decrease the chance of any
interference. The intensities are  I A  and  I B . The communicators have variable  diffusor-
filter systems  DA  and  DB with reflectance  RA and  RB , and transmittance  TA  and  TB ,
respectively. The distance  d  between the diffusor-filter surface and the output point of
the  communicator  must  be  much  greater  than  any  imaginable  coherence  length  of  the
beam/diffusor  system,  so  no  interference  phenomena  can  be  detected  between  the
incoming and the reflected light. The light sources and the diffusor-filters can be in two
different states: low and high, corresponding to bits 1 and 0, see Table 1.

TA
RA

d

IA

L

d

TB
RB

IA

IA,B

IB,A

DA

Point of
Output

DB

Point of
Output

Figure 2. The optical implementation of secure communication. Only the intensity can be measured at the two
ends this the optical scheme is inherently less secure than the wire scheme. A microwave transmission lines can
naturally be constructed using similar philosophy and building elements with similar properties.

IA

TA

RA

LOW IA(0) TA(0) RA(0)
HIGH IA(1) TA(0) RA(0)

IB

TB

RB

LOW IB(0) TB(0) RB(0)
HIGH IB(1) TB(0) RB(0)

        

Table 1. The high and low bit situations at Alice and Bob.

First, to describe the core working principle and the base of security we suppose that
the system is ideal which means that there is no absorption in the line and the parameters
can  accurately  be  set.  Moreover,  we  suppose  that  we  are  already  in  the  secure  bit
exchange mode so for the moment we disregard transients. Later, in the practical system,
we allow some absorption (a few %) and inaccuracy and to provide the bit leak similarly
to quantum communicators we must use stochastic intensities so that the communication
will  be  based  on  statistics  where  Eve  has  no  time  to  build  a  sufficiently  good  statistics
similarly  to  the  situation  of  infrequent  bit  stealing  by  eavesdroppers  on  quantum
channels.

The base of the security pf the idealized core scheme is threefold.

i) During secure bit exchange (when Alice has bit 0 and Bob has bit 1 or vice verse):

I A, B(0,1) = I B, A(0,1) = I A, B (1, 0) = I B, A(1, 0)
  

         (1)

where  I A, B(0,1)   is  the  intensity  of  the  wave  component  propagating  in  the  Alice-Bob
direction when Alice has bit 0 and Bob has bit 1, and the other terms defined in a similar
fashion. Equation (1) must be true for all frequencies of the wave.

ii)  Interference  phenomena  are  excluded  by:  using  incoherent  light  sources,  diffusor
surfaces  on  the  diffusor  filters  (to  reduce  any  polarization  or  interference  effect  during
reflection) and by the choice of d, see above.

iii) The statistics of intensities  I A, B  and  I B, A  must be continuously monitored, published
and compared at both ends when the system is in the stationary bit state after the initial
clock transients (about transients, see next section). They must also be compared with the
nominal  (expected)  intensities  of  the  case  of  secure  bit  exchange.  Any  deviation  may
indicate eavesdropping. Thus the security of the idealized system will be similar to that of
the idealized KLJN systems.

Satisfying  Eq.  (1)  is  straightforward  by  optical  design  and  multiple  reflections  must  be
taken into the account. To illustrate the core idea, we show here a simplified situation by
supposing zero reflection in the zero bit state and that Alice has bit 0 and Bob has bit 1:

I A, B(0,1) = I A(0)TA(0) = I A(0)TA(0)RB(1) + I B (1)TB (1) = I B, A (0,1)   ,
  

[
I A(0)TA(0) 1- RB(1)
  

] = I B(1)TB(1)

,

         (2)

         (3)

         (4)

thus

I A(0)TA(0) =
  

I B (1)TB (1)
1- RB(1)

similarly, in the opposite secure bit pair situation:

I B(0)TB(0) =
  

I A (1)TA (1)
1- RA(1)

   .

Because  of  Eq.  1,  Eq.  2  and Eq. 5 are equal consequently security condition (i)  for  the
design of the physical parameters of the two sides is given as:

I A(0)TA(0) =
  

I B (1)TB (1)
1- RB(1)

= I B(0)TB(0) =

I A(1)TA(1)
1- RA (1)

5.  How to run it, how good it is?
The  system  must  be  run  with  stochastic  source  intensities  and  slow  and  stochastic
diffusor-filter  control  during  changing  the  states.  This  must  be  done  due  to  several
reasons:  hiding  transients  during  switching  the  states;  and  hiding  the  information  given
by  line  absorption  and  small  non-non-idealities  at  the  two  sides.  The  maximal
information leak to Eve can be designed in a similar fashion as in the case of KLJN [4,7].

Moreover, the strength of these stochastic modulations must follow similar relations
as between the Johnson noise and the resistance to provide a situation when Eq. 1 holds
also for the stochastic intensities propagating in the two directions.

A  strong  disadvantage  compared  to  KLJN  wire  lines  is  that  only  a  few  percent
absorption  can  be  allowed  in  the  line  which  limits  the  range  in  optical  fibers  to  a  few
kilometers.

The speed is limited in the very same fashion as in KLJN wire lines [1,4]:

         (5)

         (6)

         (7)

         (8)

  f s << c / L

  fc << f s

,

,

where f s   is  the  upper  frequency  cutoff  (to  avoid  information  leak  due  to
propagation/delay  effects)  of  the  stochastic  modulation  and  the  frequency  components
induced  by  the  slow  switching  of  diffusor-filters;  and  fc   is  the  clock  frequency  which
must allow enough clock period to make a good-enough statistics by Alice and Bob but
insufficient statistics by Eve when she tries to use non-idealities to extract information.
That implies at most a few kilobit/seconds speed via lines in the few kilometers range.

Anther disadvantage of the scheme is that it is impossible to build line  filters  (low-
pass filter for the variations of the intensity) for this low frequency range to avoid non-
allowed frequency components of the wave intensity, thus the exclusion of non-allowed
frequencies  must  be  exclusively  done  by  the  generators  of  the  stochastic  intensity
modulation  and  the  transient  characteristics  of  the  diffusor-filters  and  wave  sources
during the slow stochastic changing of state.

It is an related important deficiency compared to wires with line filters that here
Eve may send extremely short pulses in the line to probe the status of the diffusion filter
and because of the lack of line filters. Thus here the only protection against this type of
attack is if Alice and Bob have a sufficiently fast detection system for the intensity.

Finally, it would be very difficult and expensive to build an optical microchip to drive
e.g. 500 parallel communication lines to increase the speed. Such a task can very easily
be done with silicon technology for the KLJN wire line.

6.  The method can be implemented on currently used optical fibers
Using different wavelength ranges and proper filters for the regular communication line
and for the secure line and keeping the interference effects for the secure line away by
diffusors  (see  Figure  1),  currently  used  optical  fibers  and  microwave  lines  can  also  be
used  for  the  proposed  secure  communication  scheme.  This  is  a  strong  advantage
compared  to  quantum  communicators  based  on  single  photons  because  they  need  a
separate, well isolated optical cable (so-called "dark optical fiber" [10]) to function due to
the fragility of quantum information.

We  have  shown  a  possible  wave-based  secure  communication  scheme.  There  are  a
number  of  not  addressed  questions  such  as  the  man-in-the-middle  and  other  possible
attacks.  The  scheme  is  workable  and  has  certain  advantages  compared  to  quantum
channels,  such  as  higher  security  and  the  usability  of  currently  used  lines.  However  it
seems that for practical purposes, range, security, speed, easiness and robustness, the wire
based KLJN system communicators are superior to wave based solutions.

Conclusion

Acknowledgment

A year ago, during his visit of TAMU in the fall of 2005, Peter Heszler and the author
together tried to find out optical realizations of the KLJN cipher but they did not succeed
because  all  the  created  schemes  failed  the  security  tests.  However  through  those  joint
efforts,  and  via  earlier  interactions  about  quantum  computing  issues,  Peter  Heszler  has
certainly had a significant impact on the author's way of approach. Other inspiration has
been  that  during  the  last  year,  many  colleagues  have  been  asking  the  author  about  the
possibility  of  optical  realization,  and  especially  Derek  Abbott  has  been  insisting  that  it
must somehow be possible, even though it looked absolutely impossible that time. Gábor
Naggyörgy recently insisted that optical and microwave methods both should somehow
be possible. Terry Bollinger has produced inspiring educational pictures to illustrate the
working principles and security of these classical communicators by everyday analogies.

References
[1]  L.B.  Kish,  "Totally  secure  classical  communication  utilizing  Johnson  (-like)  noise  and
(2006)  178-182;  also  at

law",  Physics  Letters  A  3 5 2  

Kirchhoff's 
http://arxiv.org/physics/0509136.

[2]  Adrian Cho, "Simple noise may stymie spies without quantum weirdness", Science 309 (2005)

2148.

[3]  L.B. Kish, "Protection against the man-in-the-middle-attack for the Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson(-
like)-noise cipher and expansion by voltage-based security", Fluctuation  and  Noise  Letters 6
(2006) L57-L63; also at http://arxiv.org/physics/0512177.

[4]  L.B.  Kish,  "Response  to  Scheuer-Yariv:  "A  Classical  Key-Distribution  System  based  on
in  press;

-  How  Secure?" ,   Physics  Letters  A, 

Johnson 
doi:10.1016/j.physleta.2006.07.037 ; http://arxiv.org/physics/0602013.

(like)  noise 

[5]  L.B.  Kish,  "Response  to  Bollinger:  "On  the  Impossibility  of  Keeping  Out  Eves  Using  Only
Classical  Physics"  and  to  Some  Other  Comments  at  Bruce  Schneier's  Blog  Site",
http://www.ece.tamu.edu/~noise/research_files/Response_Bollinger.pdf .

[6] L.B.  Kish  and  R.  Mingesz,  "Totally  secure  classical  networks  with  multipoint  telecloning
(teleportation) of classical bits through loops with Johnson-like noise", Fluctuation and Noise
Letters 6 (2006) C9-C21.

[7]  L.B. Kish, "How Secure, How to Design, and How to Run Practical Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson-

like-Noise Ciphers", in preparation.

[8]  L.B. Kish, "Methods of Using Existing Wire Lines (Powerlines, Phonelines, Internet Lines) for
Totally Secure Classical Communication Utilizing Kirchhoff's Law and Johnson-like Noise",
manuscript, October 2, 2006; http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0610014

[9]  C.H. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Crepeau and U.M. Maurer, "Generalized Privacy Amplification",

IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 41 (1995) 1915-1923 .

[10] A.  Berzanskis, "Applications of Quantum Cryptography in Government Classified, Business,

and Financial Communications", Supercomputing'05, Seattle November 12-18, 2005.

[11] J.  D.  Jackson,  "Classical  Electrodynamics",  Second  Edition,  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  Inc.  New

York (1975).

[12] L.B.  Kish,  "Stealth  communication:  Zero-power  classical  communication,  zero-quantum
quantum  communication  and  environmental-noise  communication",  Applied Physics Lett. 87
(2005), Art. No. 234109.

