Messaging to Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence 

Alexander Zaitsev, IRE, Russia 

"It is more blessed to give than receive (Acts 20:35)." 

 

 

 

Those who propose, or oppose, sending Messages to Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence 

(METI) must contemplate the Hamlet-like question: “To send or not to send?” The 

science known as SETI deals with searching for messages from aliens. METI 

science deals with the creation of messages to aliens. Thus, SETI and METI 

proponents have quite different perspectives. SETI scientists are in a position to 

address only the local question “does Active SETI make sense?” In other words, 

would it be reasonable, for SETI success, to transmit with the object of attracting 

ETI’s attention? In contrast to Active SETI, METI pursues not a local, but a more 

global purpose – to overcome the Great Silence in the Universe, bringing to our 

extraterrestrial neighbors the long-expected annunciation “You are not alone!” 

Thus, it follows that in the context of METI, the answer to the general question of 

transmissions from Earth requires competence beyond the membership of the 

highly specialized SETI Permanent Study Group of the International Academy of 

Astronautics (IAA-SPSG). We therefore propose that, for solution to the various 

current METI problems, we establish both a METI Institute, and METI 

Permanent Study Group within the IAA (an IAA-MPSG). 

The respected SETI Institute has identified the following 7-dimensional space of 

unknown quantities for SETI consideration (see, for example: Jill Tarter, 1986. 

The Cosmic Haystack and Recent US SETI Programs): 

 

 

1.  Where to search? 

2.  When to search? 

3.  At what wavelength? 

4.  Type of polarization? 

5.  Power of radiation received? 

6.  How to demodulate the detected signals? 

7.  How to decode the received information? 

 

 

 

This list can be adapted to aid in decisions regarding transmissions from Earth of 

our own radio messages to possible extraterrestrial civilizations. Transmission of 

interstellar radio messages (IRMs) is essentially a new kind of human activity, 

involving radiation of coherent signals from the Earth into space, addressed to 

other reasoning beings. Humans have always peered at the sky, in the hope of 

finding there intelligences beyond our own. METI thus implies a special and 

purposeful transmission. We can thus replace the terms connected with a search for 

radio signals, with terms associated with the transmission of same. In a more 

general treatment, a transformation from SETI to METI can occur as a transition 

from the science of merely separating those messages that already exist in the 

nature from artificial ones – namely Their reasonable radio signals – to the art of 

creating messages that do not exist in nature – namely our deliberate radio signals 

directed toward Them. 

It would seem that there are two more new measurements in METI-space than 

there were in the case of SETI. Thus, the METI search space is a 9-dimensional 

one. We are compelled to consider such questions as "Why is it necessary to 

transmit and what we shall gain from doing so?” and “Is it dangerous to transmit 

messages to ETI?". In view of these two additional questions, we suggest that the 

proposed METI Institute should embrace the following 9-dimensional space of 

questions for consideration: 

1.  Where to transmit? 

2.  When to transmit? 

3.  At what wavelength? 

4.  What polarization to use? 

5.  What should be the energy of transmitting radio signal? 

6.  What modulation to apply? 

7.  What is the optimum structure for transmitted messages? 

8.  Why should we transmit interstellar radio messages? 

9.  What are the dangers of pursuing METI? 

 

 

 

 

We shall try to give answers to all of the above questions. It is important to note 

that any such answers will be not final, but only preliminary in nature. As we have 

already emphasized, METI is a new, emerging human activity, and nothing that it 

implies is yet settled. Therefore, readers have a rare opportunity to join in 

discussions leading to a new scientific endeavor. 

1)   Where to send interstellar radio messages? 

It has become much easier to answer this question since 1995, when an outstanding 

discovery was made. Swiss astronomer Michael Mayor and graduate student 

Didier Queloz announced in that year the detection of the first planet orbiting 

another Sun-like star, 51 Pegasus. Subsequent discoveries of well over 100 other 

exoplanets have made it clear that planets are ordinary celestial objects, as 

widespread as stars and galaxies. In our Galaxy alone, with on the order of 100 

billion stars, 1% of them are stars of solar or nearly solar types. Here, among this 

remarkable billion, it is plausible to select stars to which our interstellar radio 

messages can be addressees. We do not propose restricting our targets to only these 

stars, but they should be our main goal, defined by our present understanding, 

recognizing that the question of other life sites is not yet settled, and that there 

remains an opportunity for further creativity and research. Our present list of 

requirements for candidate stars includes the following characteristics: 

•  Main sequence stars; 

•  Constant luminosity; 

•  Age in the range of 4 to 7 billion years; 

•  Single stars of spectral classes close to that of the Sun are preferable; 

•  Position in the sky close to “preferable directions” – near the ecliptic plane, 

in the direction of remarkable astronomical objects, toward the center or the 

anti-center of the Galaxy, etc.; 

•  It is desirable that we fall in the direction of remarkable astronomical objects 

as viewed from There, so that They might find us in the course of Their 

usual astronomical observations; 

•  In case of targets representing known planetary systems, it is desirable that 

orbits of these exoplanets have low eccentricity, as such planetary systems 

are more stable, and there is no significant temperature fluctuation 

interfering with the origin of life; 

•  It is desirable to choose stars inside the "Belt of a Life" – that "hothouse" 

area of our Galaxy, where because of coincidence of speeds of movement of 

stars and spiral sleeves, conditions for origin and long development of a life 

are believed optimum. 

 

 

 

In due course, in the process of accumulating knowledge about the Cosmos, other 

criteria, and other locations than the stars addressed here, may emerge. For now, 

we propose concentrating on the above criteria.  

2)   When to send IRMs to the selected star? 

Questions of time synchronization between our transmission and Their searches 

(or, in the case of SETI, between Their transmission and our searches) are very 

important. By Peter Makovetsky's estimation, as reported in his book "Look in the 

Root" ("Science" Publishing House, Moscow, 1979), competent synchronization 

allows us to increase the probability of establishing radio contact by a factor of 

tens. One possible method is to bind the moments of transmission (“Here”) and 

searching (“There”) to some well-known universal event which is observable 

everywhere in our Galaxy. For example, we could synchronize to the moment of 

maximum intensity of such explosions as Novae or Supernovae. Proceeding from 

simple geometrical parities, Makovetsky has calculated "schedules" for some 

neighboring stars in the case of we and They carrying out search coordinated to a 
Nova in the constellation, Cygnus which was observed on Earth on August, 29th, 

1975. Using modern, large optical telescopes, it is now possible to register the 

moments of flashes of Supernovae in neighboring galaxies. These can also be used 

for time synchronization of messaging and searching in deep space. 

3)   At what wavelength? 

The frequency band in which it is necessary to transmit IRMs coincides with that 

band which earlier has been proved most suitable for SETI – from 20 cm up to 1 

cm, where the greatest range of radio communications is achieved. We define the 

energy potential of a space radio link as the product of power of the transmitter and 

the gain of the transmitting and receiving antennas, divided by the noise 

temperature of the receiving system. At current the state of development of our 

terrestrial technology, this relation is maximal in a centimetric band. We do not 

dismiss the possibility that, in due course, in the development of space 

communications, suitable energy potentials will be reached at infrared or optical 

wavelengths. Should that occur, our representations about optimum wavelength 

will of course change. Exact values of wavelength may even take on "magic" 

values. For example, 6.72 cm = 21 cm / Pi, would be known to all technological 

civilizations as the ratio of two universal constants, one physical (the radio 

emission line of interstellar neutral hydrogen) and the other mathematical. 

4)   What polarization to use? 

 

 

 

 

The polarization integrity of a radiated signal is one possible indicator of artificial 

origin. In addition, by using polarization modulation the direction of rotation of 

circular polarization, or the orientation of the plane of linear polarization, can be 

varied discretely or continuously, as a means of encoding an intelligent message. 

5)   What should be the energy of the transmitted radio signal? 

In the case of determining appropriate levels of power for dedicated transmitters 

specifically designed for continuous and systematic METI transmissions, estimates 

are readily computed. As for the somewhat different question of conducting METI 

now, using those instruments which currently exist, or will become available in the 

foreseeable future, a more important issue is the question not of transmitter power, 

but rather of realistic data rates to transmit meaningful information. The following 

summary shows computed data rates for METI experiments using the three most 

powerful transmitting radio systems now existing on Earth. The numbers in 

parentheses represent the diameter of the transmitting antenna, average power, and 

wavelength, respectively): 

1.  Radar Telescope in Arecibo, Puerto Rico (300 m; 1000 kW; 12.5 cm) – 

2.  Solar System Planetary Radar in Goldstone, California (70 m; 480 kW; 3.5 

3.  Planetary Radar near Evpatoria, Crimea (70 m; 150 kW; 6.0 cm) – 60 bits 

1000 bits per second; 

cm) – 550 bits per second; 

per second. 

In these calculations, we assume the distance to which it is necessary to send our 

message is on the order of 70 light years, and we further assume that Their 

receiving system has the antenna with an effective aperture in 1 million square 

meters. A project to deploy just such a large radio astronomical antenna, the 

 

 

 

 

Square Kilometer Array (SKA), is now under development on Earth, and could be 

constructed within the next decade. 

6)   What modulation to apply? 

After more than 45 years of nearly continuous searches for intelligent signals from 

other civilizations, the overwhelming majority of studies employ surprisingly 

similar detection algorithms. It is accepted practice to apply digital spectral 

analysis, with the number of parallel analysis channels reaching hundreds of 

millions, and even several billions. For example, in its project "Phoenix" targeted 

search, the SETI Institute used a digital spectral analyzer of two million channels, 

with bin widths on the order of ~1 Hz. That allowed them to analyze, in real time, 

a bandwidth on the order of 2 MHz and on the order of 2 GHz in off-line mode! 

Having assumed what exactly the optimum receiver should look for, not only in 

searching for radio signals from Other civilizations, but also in terms of such 

signals as we might transmit to ETIs, we come to the conclusion that such 

modulation should have a clear spectral signature, allowing decoding with minimal 

ambiguity, by means of the above-mentioned parallel spectral analyzers. One such 

modulation format, well known and widely used on Earth, is frequency modulation 

 

 

 

 

 

(FM). 

message? 

7)   What are the optimum structure and method of encoding a transmitted 

Having suggested that a radio message should be synthesized on the basis of self-

evident and physically proven spectral constituents, we now propose the following 

structure (Table 1). We identify three types of single-valued frequency function: 

"Constant", "Continuous", and "Discrete." A radio message to ETI message could 

employ a three-section structure and incorporates three specific languages, which 

we can call "the language of nature", "the language of emotions", and "the 

language of logic". In Table 1 the term "Sonogram" designates a visualization of 

the spectral structure of a signal in Cartesian coordinates [axis X = frequency, axis 

Y= time]. 

Table1. Spectral Language for Messaging to ETI 

 

Parameter 

Three types of single-valued frequency function 

Type 

Author 

(“Here”) 

Language 

1. Constant 

2. Continuous 

3. Discrete 

Radio Engineer 

Scientist 

Composer, Painter, 

Architect 

"of Nature" 

"of Emotion" 

"of Logic" 

Information 

Is absent 

Analog 

Digital 

Sonogram of 

transmitting 

signals 

Analysis 

(“There”) 

 

 

 

 

Astrophysical 

Art criticism 

Linguistic 

Here, we draw a pertinent analogy with a suggested triune structure of human 

thinking, wherein we distinguish three components – intuitive, emotional, and 

logical. The first part of such a three-part radio message is designed by radio 

engineers, and represents a coherent signal, for example, elementary 

monochromatic CW or periodic LFM (linear frequency modulation). It is possible 

to adjust its frequency for variable Doppler correction, such that our modulated 

signal will be observed by aliens as a constant frequency. We suggest that ETI will 

intuitively understand the significance of a sounding signal thus sent. The second 

part of the message is created by people versed in the arts – composers, artists, 

architects – and consists of analog variations of frequency, representing our 

emotional world and our artistic conceptions. An elementary example is classical 

musical melodies. The third part of our message consists of discrete frequency shift 

keying, a digital dataflow, representing our logic constructions – algorithms, 

theories, cumulative knowledge about us and about the world around us. In the line 

"Analysis" our representations are displayed in terms of how such signals will be 

investigated "There", on the reception side (or "Here", in case of success of 

terrestrial SETI). The first message part is optimized for astrophysical analysis, 

with the purpose of revealing the effects of the interstellar environment, and 

supporting diagnostics of a propagation channel. The second part is analyzed by art 

critics; the third, by linguists, logicians, and other scientists. 

8)   Why should we transmit interstellar radio messages? 

Here, we step onto the shaky ground of "fuzzy and imprecise" reasoning and 

assumptions. A strict proof of the necessity and practicality of METI is of course 

impossible. Emotional and ethical reasons of a messianic and altruistic nature, such 

as "to bring to Aliens a long-awaited message that they are not alone in the 

Universe", are convincing and inspirational to only the few. Nevertheless, we 

should understand a simple thing – if all civilizations in the Universe are only 

recipients, and not message-sending civilizations, than no SETI searches make any 

sense… 

9)   Is it dangerous to engage in METI? 

We can refer to a fear of transmitting from Earth as METI-phobia. It has its roots 

in fears expressed right after transmission of the first interstellar radio message, 

from Arecibo in 1974. The Nobel laureate Martin Ryle, a prominent radio 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

astronomer, publicly proposed imposing an interdiction of any attempts at 

messaging from Earth to prospective extraterrestrial civilizations. 

Our understanding of the given problem starts with a certain "double standard": 

many vocal and impressionable people are afraid of a super-powerful and super-

aggressive “Something” from which there is no salvation, and which has either 

already long ago found us, or which will by all means soon find us, from the radio 

emission of tens of powerful military radars in the USA and Russia, which formed 

the basis of their national ballistic missile warning systems, working continuously, 

day and night, since the sixties of the last century. Thus, even in the case of 

civilizations as primitive and power limited as we, detection over prodigious 

distances can already be assumed. 

Realized METI projects 

Throughout the entire history of our civilization, only four projects involving 

transmitting of interstellar radio messages (IRMs) have yet been fully developed 

and realized. In Table 2, these four projects are ordered by the dates of the first 

transmitting sessions (in total, as it can be concluded from the table, only 16 such 

sessions have ever taken place). The symbols T and E here represent the total 

transmit duration in minutes, and radiated energy in Mega Joules, of each of the 

four METI projects conducted to date. 

Table 2. Realized METI projects 

Name 

Cosmic Call 1 

Teen Age Message 

Cosmic Call 2 

Arecibo 

Message 

Date 

16.11.1974 

24.05, 30.06, 

29.08, 03.09, 

01.07.1999 

04.09.2001 

06.07.2003 

Type 

First IRM 

First multi page 

First analog and 

First international 

(digital) 

IRM 

digital IRM 

IRM 

 

 

 

Authors 

Dumas, Braastad, 

Gindilis, Zaitsev, et 

Dumas, Braastad, 

Chafer, Dutil, 

Pshenichner, 

Chafer, Dutil, 

Drake, Sagan, 

Issacman, et al 

Zaitsev, et al 

al. 

Zaitsev, et al 

Radar 

Arecibo 

Evpatoria 

Evpatoria 

Evpatoria 

Sessions 

T, min 

E, MJ 

Ref. 

1 

3 

83 

[1] 

4 

960 

8640 

[2] 

6 

366 

2200 

[3] 

5 

900 

8100 

[4] 

The noteworthy Arecibo Message of 1974 [1] had the size of 1679 bits, and was 

sent to globular cluster M13. It is extensively described in the literature and on the 

Internet; therefore we will not further elaborate on it. 

25 years later, transmitting of interstellar radio messages was renewed, using the 

Evpatoria planetary radar. In 1999, the “Cosmic Call 1” IRM [2] was transmitted 

to 4 Sun-like stars. It represented a peculiar encyclopedia, including a terrestrial 

overview about us and the world around us, written in a special language called 

Lexicon, as well as data about the “Cosmic Call” project and its participants. In 

structure, Cosmic Call 1 closely paralleled the Arecibo Message. The size of this 

"Encyclopedia" was 370967 bits. 

In 2001 the “Teen Age Message” [3] was sent to 6 Sun-like stars. Here is the first 

and, unfortunately, so far the only time the three-section structure described above 

has been applied – a monochromatic sounding signal was first radiated, then the 

analog information (music), and finally, a digital message was transmitted. As a 

source for the analog portion of the transmission, quasi-monochromatic signals 

with a low level of overtones from the “Theremin” electric musical instrument 

were included. Such a signal greatly facilitates detection and perception over 

interstellar distances. The digital part of the message consisted of 28 binary, 

Arecibo-like, images with a total size of 648220 bits. 

 

 

In 2003 IRM “Cosmic Call 2” [4] was sent to 5 Sun-like stars. This was the first 

international IRM, and fragments of all three previous radio messages were 

included in it. We consider that all future messages from the Earth should have 

precisely such international content. 

Table 3 summarizes the expected times at which the Arecibo and the three 

Evpatoria messages sent to date will arrive at their corresponding target stars. The 

second column of Table 3 predicts the time when the era of the “Great Silence of 

the Universe” can potentially end for those at the receiving side of the 

communications link, in the optimistic event that They are there, and given the 

"happy case" that they should happen to find these particular intelligent signals 

from our terrestrial Civilization.  

 

Table 3. Arrival Time of Terrestrial Radio Messages 

# 

Arrival 

Star 

Constellation 

Message 

Sent, d m y 

Distance, 

l.y. 

32.8 

37.1 

41.2 

45.9 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Aug 

2040 

May 

2044 

May 

2049 

1  Apr 2036  Hip 4872 

Cassiopeia 

Cosmic Call 2 

06.07.2003 

HD 

Orion 

Cosmic Call 2 

06.07.2003 

245409 

HD 75732 

Cancer 

Cosmic Call 2 

06.07.2003 

40.9 

Sep 2044  HD 10307  Andromeda 

Cosmic Call 2 

06.07.2003 

Jul 2047  HD 95128  Ursa Major 

Teen Age 

03.09.2001 

Message 

HD 95128  Ursa Major 

Cosmic Call 2 

06.07.2003 

45.9 

7  Apr 2051 

HD 

Cygnus 

Cosmic Call 1 

01.07.1999 

51.8 

8 

Feb 2057 

HD 

Sagitta 

Cosmic Call 1 

30.06.1999 

57.6 

190360 

190406 

9 

10 

May 

2057 

Dec 

2057 

HD 76151 

Hydra 

Teen Age 

04.09.2001 

55.7 

HD 50692 

Gemini 

Teen Age 

03.09.2001 

56.3 

11 

Jan 2059 

HD 

Virgo 

Teen Age 

03.09.2001 

57.4 

12 

Jan 2059 

HD 

Draco 

Teen Age 

04.09.2001 

57.4 

13  Oct 2067 

HD 

Sagitta 

Cosmic Call 1 

30.06.1999 

68.3 

14 

Nov 

2069 

HD 

Cygnus 

Cosmic Call 1 

24.05.1999 

70.5 

15  Feb 2070 

HD 

Delphinus 

Teen Age 

29.08.2001 

68.5 

Message 

Message 

Message 

Message 

Message 

16 

~25974 

Glob 

Hercules 

Arecibo 

16.11.1974 

~24000 

126053 

193664 

178428 

186408 

197076 

cluster 

M13 

 

 

As a matter of fact, at moment of such detection, They can be said to begin living 

in an inhabited Universe. This revolution, not only in Their consciousness, but also 

in the Universe as a whole, can potentially be made by us – by our intellect and our 

good will. In truth, this is the most worthy application of terrestrial Reason! 

Acknowledgments. I thank Paul Shuch for his hard work on correction of my 

imperfect English and for his useful remarks. I am grateful to Jon Lomberg, 

Donald Goldsmith, Seth Shostak, Michael Matessa, and Richard Braastad for their 

useful comments on the manuscript. 

 

References 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Arecibo Message <http://antwrp.gsfc.nasa.gov/apod/ap050313.html> 

2. Cosmic Call 1 <http://antwrp.gsfc.nasa.gov/apod/ap010109.html> 

3. Teen Age Message <http://www.seti.housenet.org/msg_idx_tam.html> 

4. Cosmic Call 2 <http://www.cplire.ru/html/ra&sr/irm/CosmicCall-2003/index.html> 

See also web pages “Interstellar Radio Messages” 

<http://www.cplire.ru/html/ra&sr/irm/index.html> (in English) 

<http://www.cplire.ru/rus/ra&sr/index.html> (in Russian). 

