On the Roles of the Secondary Circulation in the Formation of Hurricanes 
Chanh Q. Kieu+ 
Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Science, University of Maryland, College Park 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Secondary  circulations  (SC)  associated  with  hurricanes  are  traditionally  regarded  as  small 
perturbations superimposed on the primary circulations (PC). The reason behind this treatment 
roots in an observation that the magnitude of the SC is about 10 orders of magnitude smaller 
than  that  of  the  PC.  This  serves  a  wide  range  of  hurricane  theories  up  until  now  with  some 
considerable  successes.  Recently,  Kieu  (2004)  proposes  a  revitalizing  theory  for  the 
development of hurricanes in which the author is able to obtain a class of exact solutions of the 
primitive  equations  which  shares  some  of  the  most  important  dynamical  aspects  with 
observations.  According  to  this  theory,  the  SC  turns  out  to  be  particular  important  in 
determining  the  three-dimensional  structure  and  time  evolution  of  axisymmetric  hurricanes. 
Kieu’s theory, however, contains an infinite growth of the SC that all hurricane theories so far 
encounter in attempt to modeling the development of hurricanes. In this study, it will be shown 
that the infinite growth does not occur. In fact, the solution becomes stationary after a period of 
time  and  the  SC  is  able  to  maintain  itself  without  blowing  exponentially  with  time  if  the 
nonlinear terms in the vertical momentum equation are included. In addition, the SC tends to 
force  the  peripheral  convection  to  converge  toward  the  center,  and  thus  builds  up  a  more 
concentric  vortex  with  a  typical  hurricane  eye  structure.  Some  potential  roles  of  SC  in  the 
formation of hurricane eyes are also discussed. 
 
Keyword:  secondary  circulation,  formation  of  hurricanes,  hurricane  development,  tropical 
cyclones, kink of Navier-Stoke equations, static solitons, hurricane eyes 

 
1.  Introduction 

The  contemporary  approach  to  hurricanes  insofar  still  considers  the  secondary 
circulation  (SC)  associated  with  the  radial  and  vertical  motions  as  a  second-order 
approximation  superimposed  on  the  primary  circulation  (PC).  The  main  reason  for  this 
approximation is due to the weakness of the SC compared with the PC (about 10 orders 
of  magnitude  smaller).  Typical  examples  are  the  works  of  Charney  and  Eliassen  (1964), 
Yanai  (1964),  Willoughby  (1979),  Montgomery  and Farrell (1993).  Based on this  scale 
analysis,  one  is  able  to  expand  the  primitive  equations  in  terms  of  some  dimensionless 
numbers,  for  example  the  ratio  of  radial  wind  over  tangential  wind.  The  SC  is  then 
treated as an isolated system with the PC acting  as a known  basic flow. This treatment 
underlies  almost  all  of  the  hurricane  theories  up  to  now  with  some  considerable 
successes, especially during the mature stage of a hurricane. The immediate limitation in 
this approach is clear: it does not allow one to understand how the SC interacts with the 
evolution  of  the  PC.  At  least  to  date,  no  such  detailed  understanding  is  known.  In  this 
sense, the SC is just a passive agent in the whole development of hurricanes.  

Recently,  Kieu  (2004,  hereafter  referred  to  as  K04)  presents  a  refreshing  theory 

                                                 
+  Corresponding  author  address:  Chanh  Q.  Kieu,  Department  of  Atmospheric  and  Oceanic  Science, 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20740. Email: kieucq@atmos.umd.edu  

 

1

for  the  hurricane  development  which  is  completely  different  from  the  previous 
approaches. Instead of using the classical “perturbation” method, K04 tackles directly the 
system  of  primitive  equations  with  a  simple  assumption  of  positive  feedback  between 
latent  heat  release  and  vertical  motion.  With  some  simplifications,  a  class  of  analytical 
solutions for both SC and PC during the intensification period of axisymmetric vortices is 
obtained  exclusively,  which  share  some  striking  similarities  with  observations.  In  this 
theory, the SC turns out to be of notable importance. In fact, it is the vertical advection by 
the  SC  that  decides  the  whole  vertical  structure  of  the  PC  as  well  as  the  different 
intensification of the PC at the small and large radius limits. The contributions from the 
SC  to  the  intensification  of  the  PC  inside  the  radius  of  maximum  wind  (RMW)  are  so 
important  that  neglect  the  SC will  result  in  a  PC  that  is  no  longer  comparable  with  the 
observations (Willoughby 1982; McBride 1981a, b; K04).  

One of the most important observations in K04's theory is that given a feedback 
mechanism relating the heating rate with vertical/radial motions, one is able to obtain the 
SC  entirely  independent  from  the  PC.  This  is  because  the  system  of  the  primitive 
equations is separated into two subsystems; one involves the vertical momentum equation 
(VME) and the continuity equation, the other consists of radial and tangential momentum 
equations.  Given  the  solution  for  the  SC  from  former  subsystem,  the  development  and 
structure of the PC will be followed subsequently. The assumption of the feedback is a 
key thing in the whole argument because it assumes that the heating rate is a function of 
vertical  motion  only.  More  latent  heat  release  will  result  in  stronger  upward  motion, 
which  in  turn  can  induce  more  latent  heat  released.  In  reality,  the  feedback  mechanism 
roots  in  the  moisture  convergence  flux  and  this  flux  is  related  closely  to  the  PC  at  the 
surface (Emanuel 1986). By assuming the feedback mechanism, the connection between 
moisture flux and the PC is automatically taken into account (kind of parameterization). 
However, this connection should not be taken too far. K04’s model employs no Reynolds 
averaging  operator. Therefore, no  eddy terms in any way can appear and it is therefore 
unnecessary to have a truly parameterization for the eddy terms in all equations. 

Several  points  should  be  pointed  out  in  K04's  theory.  The  first  is  that,  like  all 
previous  theories  for  the  development  of  incipient  storms  (e.g.  Charney  and  Eliassen 
1964; Yanai 1964), the SC associated with the storm grows infinitely as an exponential 
function of time. Although the theory may apply for a short period of time for which the 
exponential grow may be expanded as a linear function, the growth will eventually blow 
up  and  the  theory  is  no  longer  applicable.  Second,  the  nonlinear  terms  (NLT)  in  the 
vertical  motion  have  been  neglected  to  make  the  system  of  the  primitive  equation 
solvable. This is an unexpected feature of the theory and, as noted in K04, it is closely 
related  to  the  infinite  growth  of  the  SC.  The  insurmountable  complications  when  all 

 

2

NLTs in the VME are included make the system of nonlinear equations unsolvable and 
K04 has to content with the limitations of the theoretical solutions. 

In this work, the full nonlinear VME will be employed to study the behaviors of 
the SC with time under the same positive feedback mechanism used in K04. The price we 
have to pay for using the full VME is that we now have to appeal to numerical methods 
to understand the behaviors of solutions. The inclusion of the NLTs in the VME turns out 
to be especially vital because this results in a stationary solution for the SC, a kink of the 
VME,  after  some  period  of  time  instead  of  evolving  infinitely.  The  implication  of  this 
result is significant. In fact, it supports the K04’s theory in the sense that the SC cannot 
be  merely  regarded  as  a  simple  perturbation  superimposed  on  the  PC  as  in  previous 
studies. If one concerns with the three dimensional structure as well as the time evolution 
of hurricanes, the SC has to be taken fully into account. Of interest, the stable solution of 
the  SC  shows  a  striking  connection  with  the  formation  of  hurricane  eyes.  Furthermore, 
the  SC  confirms  the  convergence  of  the  peripheral  convection  from  outside  toward  the 
center, and this builds up a concentric vortex with typical hurricane structures. It is worth 
to note promptly at this point that any numerical method, one way or another, contains 
some  weaknesses  and/or  spurious  solutions.  To  eliminate  as  many  weaknesses  of  a 
numerical method as possible, different sensitivity experiments are performed to ensure 
that the solutions obtained are physically good. In this sense, this work is not a complete 
mathematical  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  stationary  solution  of  the  SC,  but  instead 
provides a numerical evidence that the solution does appear.  

A small convention in this work: the author will refer generally an axisymmetric 
vortex as a hurricane for the ease of argument. The main focus here is a transition from 
tropical depression to hurricane stage and it is more appropriate to use the term “tropical 
storm”  to  describe  the  developing  vortex.  However,  no  such  detail  is  made  here  for 
simplicity. 

The structure of this paper is as follows. The basics equations used in this work 
are  given  in  section  2.  Model  setups  and  numerical  scheme  as  well  as  boundary  and 
initial  condition  are  addressed  in  section  3.  Section  4  presents  model  results  and  their 
implications. Section 5 provides several sensitivity experiments. The implicit roles of the 
SC on the formation of hurricane eyes are discussed in section 6, and the conclusions are 
given in the final section. 

 

2.  Basic equations 

The basic equations in this study are an extended version of the ones used in K04 
with all the NLTs in the VME included (these NLTs are neglected in K04). Because the 
main purpose  is to demonstrate the structure and temporal evolution of the SC,  the full 

 

3

system  of  primitive  equation  will  not  be  necessary.  This  is  because  the  VME  and  the 
continuity  equation  comprise  a  close  system  under  the  feedback  assumption  between 
latent heat release and vertical motion, and they are enough to resolve completely the SC. 
The PC will follow by using the same procedures as in K04 and it will not be addressed 
here. The two equations employed in this study are: 

                                            

u+

w+

J=

−

Nw

 

w
∂
t
∂

w
∂
r
∂

w
∂
z
∂

1
r

(ru)
∂
r
∂

+

w
∂
z
∂

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1)  

(2) 

                                              

=

0

  

 

where  J  is  a  source  term  representing  vertical  forcings  (the  source  term  J  contains  all 
possible contributions such as buoyancy force, perturbation pressure gradient, etc.), N is 
proportional  to  the  Brunt-Väisälä  frequency,  w  and  u  are  vertical  and  radial  winds, 
respectively. Except for the assumption of incompressibility of the atmosphere, these two 
equations  are  exact  because  no  approximation  was  made.  There  is  no  azimuthal 
dependence in Eqs. (1) and (2) because hurricanes are assumed to be axisymmetric1. As 
long  as  the  feedback  process  (the  J  term)  is  related  solely  to  vertical  motion  (or  radial 
motion), these two equations are closed: given the vertical wind w, the radial wind u will 
follow immediately and vice versa. The feedback can be expressed by: J = kw, where k is 
a positive constant coefficient, and it is expected to be effective when vertical motion is 
greater than some threshold value. Noted that both Eqs. (1) and (2) are not subject to any 
averaging  operator.  Therefore,  the  variables  are  exact  and  no  eddy  terms  appear  in  the 
equations. More discussion can be found in K04. 

As mentioned by Smith (1980), the source term J on the RHS of Eq. (1) consists 
of two dominant terms: one is the buoyancy force and the other is usually referred to as 
the  perturbation  pressure.  Because  these  two  terms  are  nearly  of  the  same  order  of 
magnitude (Zhang et al. 2000), it is supposed to be inaccurate to integrate Eq. (1) directly 
with  time,  and  vertical  wind  is  often  calculated  diagnostically  by  using  the  continuity 
equation.  In  this  study,  there  is,  however,  no  such  separation  between  the  buoyancy 
forcing and perturbation pressure. The source term J on the RHS of Eq. (1) represents the 
total forcing.  
 
3.  Model setup 

Numerical schemes 

It  is  a  huge  challenge  to  find  an  exact  solution  of  Eqs.  (1)  and  (2).  Numerical 

                                                 
1 According to the author point of view, the axisymmetry of hurricanes should be considered as an internal 
feature of hurricanes instead of as an assumption. All asymmetric features are due to the inhomogeneous 
environment that the hurricanes are embedded in.  

 

4

methods  are  therefore  the  most  useful  way  to  obtain  some  behaviors  of  the  solution  of 
these  equations.  In  this  study,  a  2D  simulation  in  the  radius-height  cross  section  is 
applied. The Runge-Kutta 4th order scheme will be used to integrate Eqs. (1) and (2) for 
up to 12 hours. The model consists of 2001 x 71 grid points in r and z dimensions with dr 
= 500 m and dz = 300 m. The feedback between J and w is turned on if vertical motion is 
greater than some threshold value, which is set to equal to 1 ms-1 in this study. Various 
model parameters are given in table 1. These default values are considered as a control 
run. Several supplementary sensitivity experiments will be addressed in section 5. 

One  of  the  difficulties  in  solving  Eqs.  (1)  and  (2)  by  numerical  methods  is  the 
generation  of  internal  gravity  waves  due  to  the  stable  stratification  of  the  atmosphere. 
These waves propagate vertically and horizontally, carrying significant amount of energy 
of the system out of the model domain. Numerically, these waves are the source for the 
instability  of  the  model  and  cause  the  model  to  overflow  after  few  time  steps.  To 
overcome this difficulty, a high-frequency wave filter is applied to get rid of the waves. 
In addition, sponge layers are added at the top and R = 1000 km to represent the radiation 
of  the  waves  into  outer  space  and  to  prevent  the  reflections  of  the  waves  from  the 
boundaries.  Even  though  this  filter  is  a  numerical  process  introduced  to  stabilize  the 
integration, it is worth to emphasize that, to some extent, the filter is very necessary to 
account for the actual loss of the energy in the real atmosphere consumed by the waves.     
 
Initial condition 
 
The initial condition for the vertical motion is assumed of the following form: 

                                  

w(r,

0
z,

ew=)
0

sin

(

)

−

ε

 

 

 

 

(3) 

(r
−−

2
a)

/

R
2
0

πz
H

where R0 is a scale radius beyond which the vertical motion is substantially small, wo is 
the  scale  of  vertical  motion,  H  is  the  depth  of  the  troposphere,  ε  is  a  small  positive 

constant  accounting  for  the  descending  motion  at  very  large  radius.  Physically,  this  ε 
guarantees the conservation of mass inside a closed domain: a very strong upward motion 
within a small area near the center of the storm is compensated by a very weak but broad 
descending motion at the large radius. This descending motion also appeared in previous 
studies, e.g., as one of the cycle legs in Emanuel’s theory (1986) or as an initial condition 
in  hurricane  simulations.  The  sine  function  in  Eq.  (3)  takes  into  account  the 
impenetrability  of  the  surface  and  the  upper  tropopause.  A  justification  for  using  the 
functional form (3) is that during the genesis stage of a hurricane, there usually appears a 
Mesoscale  Convective  Systems  (MCS,  see  e.g.,  Zhang  and  Fritch  1986)  with  a  broad 
cloud cluster hovering around. The cloudy area signals substantially stronger convective 
activities inside than those outside the cluster. The function (3) satisfies this observation 

 

5

fairly well. Different initializations sharing the same structure with (3) have been tested 
and  the  differences  in  the  results  are  minor.  Experiment  3  in  Section  5  provides  an 
example  in  which  an  ensemble  of  small-scale  cumulonimbus  columns  is  utilized  to 
initialize  the  model.  Having  obtained  the  vertical  wind,  the  radial  wind  will  follow  by 
simply  integrating  the  continuity  equation  outward  with  respect  to  the  radius.    For  the 
stratification of the atmosphere, a simple function of the form N = χexp(-µ2) is selected, 
where  χ is a constant and µ = (H0-z)/Z0 (H0 is the height of the top of the model, and Z0 
is a scale of stratification). The values of these parameters are provided in table 1. This 
gives a strong stable upper atmosphere but virtually neutral at the lower troposphere. A 
sensitivity experiment for the stratification is also provided in Section 5. 
 
Boundary condition 
 
Consider first the radial wind at the left boundary, i.e. r = 0, and at the outer boundary, 
i.e. r = R where R is the farthermost radius. Apparently, u must be equal to zero at r = 0 
due to the axisymmetric characteristic of hurricanes. However, it is not required to have 
the boundary condition for the radial wind at r = R because the continuity equation is of 
the first order. One just simply needs to integrate the continuity equation outward and the 
radial wind at r = R is obtained automatically. For the bottom and top boundaries, it is 
reasonable to utilize the Neumann boundary (NB) condition for the radial wind:  

                                       

uα=u 0
b
=z

dz=z

  and   

u

uα=
t

Hz=

0

Hz=

−0

dz

 

 

 

(4) 

where αb and αt are proportional constants. This boundary is consistent with K04's theory 
for  which  no  frictional  effects  are  included  (free-slip  boundary).  The  bottom  and  top 
boundary conditions for the vertical wind are set equal to zero (rigid boundary condition). 
At the outer boundary r = R, w is supposed to have a NB type (i.e, w|r=R = w|r=R-dr). The 
boundary  condition  for  w  at  the  center  r  =  0,  nevertheless,  should  be  paid  particular 
attention.  Using  Eq.  (1)  and  the  boundary  condition  for  the  radial  wind  at  r  =  0,  one 
obtains an equation for w at r = 0, which no longer contains the radial advection term. Eq. 
(1)  now  becomes  a  1D  hyperbolic  equation  that  has  no  physical  contact  with  the 
surrounding  environment  (unless  the  diffusivity  is  taken  into  account  at  r  =  0).  The 
vertical  motion  at  r  =  0  thus  propagates  just  up  and  down  between  the  top  and  bottom 
boundaries.  This  happens  because  we  have  here  a  totally  axisymmetric  model  and  the 
kinematical  point  r  =  0  turns  out  to  be  completely  isolated.  The  most  reasonable 
assumption here for the vertical motion at the point r = 0 is wr=0 = ηwr=dr, where η is a 
proportional constant. In the case of ideal fluid, η is equal to zero and this value will be 

the  default  one  in  the  control  run.  A  sensitivity  experiment  with  different  η  is  given  in 
Section 5 (experiment EXP 2).  

 

6

 
Table 1 
 

Parameter  Description 

U0 
w0 
H 
H0 
dr 
dz 
dt 
R 
R0 
k 
Rtime 
wthres 
ε 

Scale radial wind 
Scale vertical wind  
Depth of the troposphere (cf. Eq. 3) 
Model height (used in the stratification distribution) 
increment in radius 
increment in height 
time step 
Model dimension in r-direction 
Scale radius of initial cloud cluster (cf. Eq. 3) 
feedback coefficient (used in the feedback relationship) 
forecast time 
threshold at which feedback is effective 
Compensating vertical motion (cf. Eq. 3) 

Value 
10 
8 
15 
21 
500 
300 
5 
1000 
50 
10*U0/R0 
12 
1 
0.001 

Unit  
ms-1 
ms-1 
km 
km 
m 
m 
s 
km 
km 
s-1 
hour 
ms-1 
ms-1 
 
 
 

αb , αt  Coefficients for the bottom and top boundaries (cf. Eq. 4)  1 
4 
4 

Number of spongy layers in r-direction 
Number of spongy layers in z-direction 
Diffusive coefficient within the spongy layer (r-direction) 0.1*dr2/dt  ms-2 
Diffusive coefficient within the spongy layer (z-direction) 0.1*dz2/dt  ms-2 
Scaling stratification of the atmosphere 
Scale of the vertical distribution of the stratification 
cf. Eq. (3) 
Number of grid points in r-direction 
Number of grid points in z-direction 
Coriolis parameter 

10-3 
5000 
10 
2001 
71 
10-4 

s-1 
m 
km 
 
 
s-1 

Mr 
Mz 
Dr 
Dz 
χ 
Z0 
a 
Nx 
Ny 
f 

 

4.  Results 

(3). 

Fig.  1  shows  the  initial  condition  for 
both vertical and radial winds using the 
profile 
configuration 
This 
corresponds  roughly  to  the  early  stage 
of a hurricane with a broad cloud cluster 
as well as a fairly weak vertical motion 
at the center, which can be found in, e.g. 
(1969).  This 
Palmen  and  Newton 
initialization  results  in  a  large  radial 
wind  up  to  40  ms-1  at  the  surface 
because  the  ascending  motion  occurs 
everywhere  within  the  incipient  cluster 
according  to  the  profile  of  vertical 
motion given by expression (3). A more realistic initialization with an ensemble of VHTs 
(experiment EXP 3 in Section 5) will give more reasonable radial flow.  

Figure 1. Radius-height cross section of the vertical 
motion (shaded) superimposed by the in-plane flows 
at the initial time t = 0. 

 

7

Fig. 2 shows a time series of the vertical motion after the model is integrated. The 
SC  accelerates  rapidly  for  the  first  30  minutes  under  the  contributions  from  both  the 
feedback mechanism and the adjustment of the initial unbalanced flow (the adjustment is 
unavoidable because the vertical motion 
given  by  (3)  and 
the  radial  wind 
obtained  by  integrating  the  continuity 
the  VME 
equation  do  not  satisfy 
initially.  Therefore,  the  adjustment  is  a 
must).  However, 
the  growth  cannot 
intensify  infinitely  because  the  NLTs  in 
the VME will promptly start their roles. 
First,  the  vertical/radial  advections  will 
adjust  the  SC  so  that  the  circulation 
approaches  a  more  stable  configuration. 
The  unbalanced  flow  quickly  dissipate 
(e.g. Gill 1982), leaving behind the more 
stable  structure  as  seen  in  Fig  2b. 
internal 
the  NLTs  excite 
Secondly, 
gravity waves that propagate throughout 
the  domain.  A  considerable  amount  of 
the  total  energy  is  converted  into  the 
wave  activities,  and  these  waves  are 
supposed  to  radiate  away  in  the  real 
atmosphere, consuming the energy of the 
system quickly. In the model, this wave-
related energy sink is taken into account 
by the filtering operators. The role of the 
filter  is  thus  dual.  On  one  hand,  it  is 
introduced 
the  high-
to  eliminate 
frequency  waves  and  thus  makes  the 
model  integrable.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
reflects  a  real  process  in  which  gravity  waves  propagate  away  from  the  system, 
consuming  significantly  the  total  energy.  After  5-h  integration,  the  SC  attains  a  stable 
structure  for  which  the  energy  from  the  latent  heat  release  is  balanced  by  the  energy 
carried  away  by  the  gravity  waves.  No  infinite  growth  occurs.  Even  though  the  radial 
wind is fairly large at the initial time, the stable SC at the later time shows a reasonable 
magnitude and structure. The stability of the atmosphere forces the SC to confine within 

Figure  2.  Radius-height  cross-sections  of 
the 
vertical motion (contours) after 0.1-h, 5-h, and 12-h 
of integration. Superimposed is the in-plane flow at 
the  corresponding  time.  Shadings  denote  the  total 
radial and vertical advections from the VME 

 

8

the  troposphere,  which  bears  strong  resemblance  with  observations.  Of  interest,  the 
eyewall structure is built up immediately after the model is started (cf. Figs. 1 and 2a) and 
the  pattern  keeps  surviving  continuously  at  later  time.  The  evolution  seen  in  Fig.  2 
reveals  one  important  feature:  peripheral  convection  is  forced  to  converge  inward, 
creating a typical hurricane-eye structure. This is significant because this tells us that the 
SC itself has capability to gather convections from outside to feed its development. The 
eyewall structure, as will be shown in section 5, is however merely due to the boundary 
condition imposed on w at r = 0. It is hard for anyone to imagine a kinematical boundary 
at one mathematical point r = 0 can decide the structure of hurricane eyes. However, this 
result  may  have  more  implications  than  it  appears  because  the  formation  of  hurricane 
eyes  may  in  fact  depend  much  on  whether  an  incipient  cloud  cluster  is  able  to  find  an 
area with essentially no vertical motion to build the eye around. Those calm areas are not 
rare but turn out to be very common inside a cloud cluster of an incipient storm (Palmen 
and  Newton  1969;  Montgomery  et  al.  2006).  Even  though  the  eyewall  pattern  depends 
crucially on the boundary at r = 0, all other features such as the stable behaviors of the SC 
or  the  inward  convergence  are  still  valid.  Those  familiar  with  nonlinear  systems  will 
quickly realize that the stable SC obtained above is a kind of kink, a stationary soliton of 
the  VME.  The  kink  with  the  above  features  owns  its  existence  solely  to  the  boundary 
topology (Dirichlet type for both u and w at all boundaries except the Neumann type for u 
at the top and bottom). Hoverer, one should be especially careful that the kink obtained in 
this  study  is  not  a  completely  physical  kink,  whose  existence  is  completely  due  to  the 
topological  structure  of  boundaries.  This  is  because  the  VME  here  is  integrated  by  the 
numerical  method  and  the  kink  may  be  resulted  from  the  computational  procedures 
instead of from physical processes. The filter applied over the whole domain consumes a 
large part of energy of the system and the kink should be named “numerical kink (NK)” 
to reflect this fact. A little further scrutiny will show that Eqs (1) and (2) in fact accept an 
infinitive number of trivial solitons (given by any constant number, which is some kind 
of  “vacuum”).  A  systematic  treatment  should  re-write  Eqs  (1)  and  (2)  in  terms  of  a 
streamfunction (it is possible due to Eq. (2)). The resultant equation can be regarded as a 
field  equation  and  one  needs  to  find  an  appropriate  Lorentz-invariant  Lagrangian  and 
Hamiltonian  for  the  system  from  which  the  full  properties  of  the  kink  can  be  studied 
further (Rubakov 2002). However, this theoretical produce will not be pursued here.   

 

5.  Sensitivity experiments 

In  this  section,  several  sensitivity  experiments  are  conducted  to  ensure  that  the  results 
obtained in the control run are not artifacts of numerical procedures. This is a necessary 
step for any numerical model if one expects to get a sensible solution from the model.     

 

9

just 

few 

a. Boundary condition for w at r = 0: (EXP1) 
The results from Section 4 showed an 
interesting  behavior  of  the  SC  with 
the emergence of the eyewall pattern 
after 
steps  of 
integration.  As  mentioned  in  Section 
4,  this  is  due  to  the  boundary  for  w 
applied at r = 0. Experiment EXP1 is 
designed  to  investigate  more  about 
this  behavior  of  the  SC.  A  simple 
way  to  do  the  test  is  to  change  the 

time 

coefficient ηin the relationship wr=0 = 

Figure  3.  The  same  as  in  Fig.  2c  but  for 
experiment EXP 1. See text for detail 

ηwr=dr.  The  value  η  =  0  is  used  in  the  control  run  and  η  =  1  will  be  used  in  this 

experiment  (correspond  to  Neumann  boundary ∂w/∂r|r=0  =0).  Fig.  3  shows  the  SC 
after 12-hour of integration. Even though the SC still reaches the stable configuration 
after few hours of integration, one no longer sees the eyewall pattern of the SC as in 
the control run. All other main features such as the shrinkage of the initial cluster into 
a more concentric vortex at the later time are still valid. The boundary condition for w 
at r = 0 is therefore essential in deciding the formation of the eye, which is a universal 
property of a typical kink.  

b. Boundary condition for w at r =R:  (EXP2) 

The boundary condition of w at the outer boundary r = R is changed from Neumann to 
Dirichlet boundary w|r=R = 0 to see whether the vertical motion far from the center can 
have any impact on the stability or structure of the SC in the central region. The results 
show  that  the  outer  boundary  virtually  has  no  influences  at  all  to  the  final  solutions 
(not  shown).  There  is  no  experiment 
on the boundaries for both w and u at 
the  top  and  bottom  of  the  model 
because  of  the  assumption  of  the 
rigidity  of  the  boundaries  together 
with no frictional effects.  

c. Ensemble of vortical hot towers (VHT): 
(EXP3) 

This  experiment  utilizes  a  more 
for 
realistic 
vertical  motion  than  that  used  in  the 
control  run.  The  cloud  cluster  will 

initialization  profile 

 

10

Figure 4. The same as in Fig. 1 but for experiment 
EXP  3  with  an  initialization  from  an  ensemble  of 
VHTs 

now  consist  of  an  ensemble  of  small-scale  deep  cumulonimbus  convective  columns 
given by the expression: 

                   

w(r,

z,
0

w=)
0

sin(

9.0)
+

e

sin

(

)

−

ε

 

 

(5) 

⎛
⎜
⎝

r
.
π
L

(r
−−

a)

2

/

R
2
0

⎞
⎟
⎠

πz
H

where L is the scale of convective columns which is equal to 5 km in this experiment. 
The additive number 0.9 is added to ensure the existence of the downdrafts in between 
the  VHTs.  The  incipient  cloud  cluster  associated  with  a  real  MCS  does  not  consist 
simply of continuous updrafts distributed evenly over the whole area as in the control 
run but contains many small-scale VHTs. This is often observed during the genesis of 
in  high-
hurricanes  as  well  as 
resolution  numerical 
simulations. 
Fig. 4 shows the initial condition for 
vertical  and  radial  winds  initialized 
by profile (5). Unlike the control run, 
this 
the 
experiment  has  not  only  a  right 
structure  but  also  more  realistic 
magnitude  at  the  surface.  The  model 
integration  after  12-h  shows  similar 
behaviors of the SC as in the control 
run:  the  kink  is  conserved.  Other 
conclusions regarding the convergence and eyewall structure are still applied. 

Figure  5.  The  same  as  Fig.  2  but  for  experiment 
EXP 3 valid at t = 12h after integration 

initial 

radial 

flow 

in 

d. Different stratification of the atmosphere (EXP4) 

In  this  experiment,  the  stratification  is  modified  to  see  how  it  effects  the  SC.  The 
stratification at the upper level is kept nearly the same as in the control run but that at 
the lower levels is assumed a more stable than that in the control run. It turns out that 
the SC is damped out quickly after few hours of integration (not shown) and no SC is 
seen after 12-h. This is because too stable atmosphere will convert essentially almost 
all  of  the  vertical  motions  into  waves  over  the  whole  domain,  which  then  propagate 
quickly away from the center and no stationary configuration is resulted. Even though 
this sounds physically good, whether it is the case in a real atmosphere is still an open 
question and needs more investigations. In an additional experiment, the atmosphere is 
set  to  be  very  stable  above  z  =  10  km,  and  virtually  neutral  at  below  (given  by  the 
function: N2 = χexp(z/H) for z > 10 km, and reduce by a factor of two at levels below 
10km).  Results  show  that  there  is  no  essential  change  in  the  behaviors  of  the  SC 
except  that  the  SC  is  no  longer  confined  within  the  troposphere  (below  15  km)  but 
expand over the whole domain up to z = 18 km (not shown). Also, the maximal radial 

 

11

convergence occurs at the mid-level rather than at the top of planetary boundary as in 
the control run. 

e. Different feedback mechanisms: (EXP5) 

Because  of  the  important  roles  of  the  feedback  assumption,  it  is  of  interest  to 
investigate  how  the  results  obtained  from  the  control  run  are  altered  under  different 
feedback mechanisms. In this experiment, the feedback coefficient (the k parameter in 
the relation J = kw) will take two different values: k1 = 2k and k2 = 0.5k where k is the 
default value in the control run given in table 1. The simulation with k1 blows up after 
few  time  minutes  of  integration  (not  shown).  This  is  hardly  surprising  because, 
numerically,  the  strong  feedback  will  result  in  fast-growing  gravity  waves  that  the 
model can not handle accordingly, a common property of the nonlinear systems. The 
wave  energy  is  so  large  that  the  filter  becomes  useless.  Physically,  this  is 
corresponding to the case where the vertical motion is accelerated so enormously that 
the  flow  will  grow  infinitely  with  time.  For  the  case  with  coefficient  k2,  one  can 
anticipate a simple outcome: an unavoidable death for the SC (not shown). The waves 
consume  a  larger  amount  of  the  total  energy  than  the  feedback  contribution  can 
compensate.  This  experiment  indicates  that  hurricanes  can  only  develop  when  the 
“right”  feedback  mechanism  is  activated.  Too  weak  or  too  strong  both  result  in 
unphysical solutions. This explains for the scarcity of hurricanes in nature. One may 
want  to  try  quadratic  or  cubic  feedback  relations  but  these  experiments  are  not 
provided here.    
 

6.  Eye formation and its implications 

A  remarkable  result  from  the  control  run  is  the  emergence  of  a  well-defined  eye  after 
several  hours  of  model  integration.  This  eyewall  structure  does  not  depend  on  the 
feedback mechanism but merely on the boundary condition of w imposed at r = 0 as seen 
in EXP1. Changing the boundary of w at r = 0 results in a complete disappearance of the 
eye. One may be tempted at this stage to conclude that the eye-formation result therefore 
may not have any practical implications at all. For a typical hurricane, the appearance of 
an  eye  usually  signifies  the  mature  stage  of  the  hurricane  during  which  the  intensity 
fluctuation is minimal, and the hurricane can maintain its destructive status for a period 
of  time  before  landfalling.  An  important  question  is  how  the  eye  is  formed  during  the 
transition from the tropical depression to the mature stage. There are two potential ways 
to imagine the eye formation:  
a.  If one assumes a bell (Gaussian) shape for vertical motion with the maximal updraft 
at  the  center  of  a  cloud  cluster  at  the  initial  time,  then  the  transition  from  the  bell 
shape to the M shape may reflect an important characteristic of a nonlinear system: 

 

12

the transition is a metamorphosis from one unstable solution to another more stable 
one (Here the author borrows the M-shape to imagine the pattern of vertical motion 
at the mature stage during which the peaked updrafts are not exactly at the center of 
the storm but form an annulus around the center with virtually no vertical motion at 
the central region). This transition may be smooth or it could be an abrupt change. 
Any small trigger of the environment is able to activate such a transition. In order to 
fully understand this transition, one has to obtain the full picture of the solutions of 
the primitive equations as well as their stability behavior. So far, no such solutions 
exist.   

b.  The  appearance  of  an  eye  is  a  matter  of  “a  smart  choice”.  Observations  show  that 
during  the  genesis  of  a  hurricane,  there  always  exists  a  broad  cloud  cluster 
associated with some MCSs with strong pulses of vertical motion inside the cluster. 
High-resolution  numerical  simulations  also  reveal  the  existence  of  many  VHTs 
embedded within the cluster during the genesis phase. These VHTs are characterized 
by  strong  updrafts  inside  and  weak  descending  motions  outside  their  cores  (see  a 
sketch in Fig. 6). In the author’s opinion, these downdrafts, which have not received 
enough attentions in previous studies, provide potential embryos for the formation of 
the  eye.  The  cluster  can  always  pick  up  a  descending  area  somewhere  around  the 
central region and build up the eye around it. It is these downdrafts that give rise to 
the boundary condition for w at r = 0 as used in the control run. The formation of the 
eye  is  virtually  always  guaranteed  because  of  the  availability  of  the  descending 
areas. However, whether the eye can survive depends on many other factors such as 
when the feedback is activated or the stratification of the lower levels is too stable or 
not.  The  possibility  for  a  cluster  to  find  such  a  descending  location  at  the  right 
moment  with  the  right  feedback  will  mark  a  significant  change  in  its  lifecycle.  As 
soon as the cluster finds an eye, no matter how small it is, it will grow quickly and 
build  up  a  concentric  eye  structure.  Unlike  the  first  imagination  above,  the 
appearance of eye here is a game of selection rather than an internal behavior of the 
solution. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 6. Sketch of the distribution of VHTs within the initial cloud cluster during the genesis 
of a typical hurricane. The red/blue arrows represent the updrafts/downdrafts 

13

7.  Discussions and conclusions 

Contemporary works on hurricane theory are still limited in approximating the SC as a 
second-order perturbation compared with the PC. In this way, the SC owns its existence 
to  the  PC  instead  of  having  its  active  contributions  in  the  whole  development  of 
hurricanes. This classical point of view is dominant in most of the theoretical works of 
hurricanes  up  to  now.  The  author’s  point  of  view,  based  on  the  work  of  K04,  however 
inclines more on the decisive roles of the SC in establishing the structure and temporal 
evolution  of  hurricanes.  In  this  work,  the  SC  under  the  same  feedback  mechanism  as 
employed  in  K04  is  investigated,  using  a  numerical  method.  With  the  feedback 
assumption, the VME and the continuity equation form a close system which is enough to 
solve for the SC completely. The numerical solutions reveal that: 

i.  There is no infinite growth of the SC with time 
ii. The radial convergence toward the center is an internal property of the SC 
iii. The SC can develop and maintain itself through feedback mechanism 
iv. There appears a hurricane eye structure during the development of storms provided 

that a proper boundary condition is applied 

v.  Too stable atmosphere at the lower boundary is inimical to hurricane development 
The first feature is what we expect for a sensible theory. In K04, the NLTs in the VME 
are neglected and this results in an exponential growth of the SC with time. This happens 
with all current theoretical models which attempt to study the temporal evolution of an 
incipient storm. The inclusion of the NLTs makes the system of the primitive equations 
too  hard  to  solve  for  analytically  but  turns  out  to  be  very  important  in  controlling  the 
overall  evolution  of  the  system.  A  numerical  kink  emerges  with  finite  energy  after  few 
hours  integrated.  The  second  feature  is  an  interesting  result.  It  tells  us  that,  once  an 
incipient storm appears, the SC associated with the storm will tend to gather peripheral 
convection  toward  the  center  to  feed  its  development.  The  formation  of  new  peripheral 
convections  will  be  entrained  toward  the  center  to  attain  a  new  stable  structure.  The 
growth  of  the  storm  will  therefore  depend  remarkably  on  the  size  of  the  initial  cloud 
cluster. The larger the cluster, the quicker the storm can grow. This result also points out 
that  the  stable  structure  of  hurricanes  should  be  the  one  with  a  very-confined  eye.  The 
third  feature  is  an  arguing  property  because  it  depends  crucially  on  the  feedback 
assumption.  Ultimately,  the  feedback  is  linked  to  the  moisture  supply  at  the  surface, 
which relates to the PC. Therefore, the closure of Eqs. (1) and (2) is not guaranteed.  A 
question is: Is the SC be able to drive the whole development of the PC, or it is the PC 
that  determines  the  SC?  However,  the  central  point  here  is  that,  no  matter  what  is  the 
cause, the results in this work imply that the SC is more important than one previously 
thought.  Through  the  feedback  assumption,  it  can  maintain  itself  and  nurture  the  PC 

 

14

mutually. The vertical advection from the SC plays a key role in determining the vertical 
structure and the growth of the PC with time (e.g. the tangential wind close to the center 
grows much faster than that far from the center. See K04 for more detail). The evolution 
of  a  storm  is  one  of  the  most  important  and  interesting  stages  during  the  lifetime  of  a 
hurricane. By simply treating the SC as a secondary approximation superimposed on the 
PC,  one  has  throw  away  the  ability  to  explain  for  the  development  of  the  storm. 
Moreover,  the  structure  of  storm  is  unrealistic  without  the  SC.  One  possible  reason  for 
the important roles of the SC lies in its capability to provide a strong acceleration under 
the  impacts  of  the  Coriolis  torque.  One  can  imagine  a  situation  in  which  a  completely 
axisymmetric  radial  motion  converges  toward  a  center.  Under  the  Coriolis  force,  an 
anticyclonic  torque  will  intensify  the  tangential  wind  persistently.  The  tangential  wind 
therefore attains larger value as it approaches the center. Because of the centrifugal force, 
pressure will be lowered consequently, which is somewhat the same as one stirs a cup of 
water. The water surface will be adjusted by the speed one stirs the cup, an example of 
the wind field determining the mass field (Gill 1982) 
 
The  result  regarding  the  formation  of  hurricane  eyes,  as  one  has  seen 
throughout, is ultimately related to the boundary condition at r = 0. The eyewall structure 
will be more evident if w is zero not just exactly at r = 0 but over an (small) area (e.g. w 
= 0 inside a cylinder of radius r < 1 km). If one takes into account a further fact that w is 
slightly  negative  to  reflect  the  downdraft,  one  will  have  a  more  realistic  structure  of  a 
typical  eye.  So  the  question  is  whether  this  result  offers  a  realistic  mechanism  for  the 
formation  of  hurricane  eyes  or  it  is  just  an  artifact  of  numerical  method.  The  author’s 
answer is the former, which implies that the downdrafts within a cloud cluster during the 
genesis  phase  of  hurricanes  are  the  most  essential  factor  in  the  formation  of  hurricane 
eyes. It should be mentioned again that the assumption of positive feedback is essential 
for the first and third conclusions but has no significant impacts on the rest.   

 
Acknowledgement 
This work is supported by the research assistantship and partly by the Vietnam Education 
Foundation fellowship.  

 

REFERENCES 

Charney, J. G., and A. A. Eliassen, 1964: On the growth of the hurricane depression. J. Atmos. Sci., 21, 68-75. 
Emanuel, K. A., 1986: An air-sea Interaction Theory for Tropical Cyclone. Part I: Steady state maintenance,  J. 

Atmos. Sci., 43,  585-604. 

____, 2003: Tropical cyclones. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci., 31, 75-104   
Gill, A. E., 1982: Atmosphere-Ocean Dynamics. Academic Publisher, 662p. 
Kieu,  C.  Q.,  2004a:  An  Analytical  Theory  for  the  Early  Stage  of  the  Development  of  Hurricanes:  Part  I, 

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0407073  

 

15

____,  2004b:  An  Analytical  Theory  for  the  Early  Stage  of  the  Development  of  Hurricanes:  Part  II, 

McBride, J. L. 1981: Observational Analysis of Tropical Cyclone Formation. Part I: Basic Description of 

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0408044  

Data Sets. J. Atmos. Sci., 38, 1117-1131 

____, and R. Zehr, 1981: Observational Analysis of Tropical Cyclone Formation. Part II: Non-Developing 

versus Developing Systems. J. Atmos. Sci., 38, 1132-1151 

Montgomery, M. T., M. E. Nicholls, T. A. Cram, and A. B. Saunders, 2006: A Vortical Hot Tower Route to 

Tropical Cyclogenesis, J. Atmos. Sci., 63, 355-386 

____, and B. F. Farrell, 1993: Tropical Cyclone Formation, J. Atmos. Sci., 50, 285-311 
Palmen, E., and C. W. Newton, 1969: Atmospheric Circulation Systems. Academic Publisher, 603p 
Rubakov, V., 2002: Classical theory of Gauge field. Princeton University Press, 456p 
Smith, R. G., 1980: Tropical Cyclone Eye Dynamics. J. Atmos. Sci., 37, 1227-1232 
Willoughby, H.E., 1979: Forced secondary circulations in hurricanes. J. Geophys. Res., 84, 3173-3183. 
____, 1990: Gradient balance in tropical cyclones. J. Atmos. Sci., 47, 265-274. 
____, 1998: Tropical cyclone eye thermodynamics. J. Atmos. Sci., 126, 3053-3067. 
____,  H.E.,  J.A.  Clos,  and  M.  G.  Shoreibah,  1982:  Concentric  eye  walls,  secondary  wind  maxima,  and  the 

evolution of the hurricane vortex. J. Atmos. Sci., 39, 396-411. 

Yanai, M., 1964: Formation of tropical cyclones. Rev. of Geophys., 2, 367-414 

Zhang,  D.-L.,  and  J.  M.  Fritsch,  1988:  A  Numerical  Investigation  of  a  Convectively  Generated,  Inertially 
Stable, Extratropical Warm-Core Mesovortex over Land. Part I: Structure and Evolution. Mon. Wea. 
Rev., 116, 2660-2687 

____,  Y.  Liu,  and  M.K.  Yau,  2000:  A  multiscale  numerical  study  of  Hurricane  Andrew  (1992).  Part  III: 

Dynamically-induced vertical motion. Mon. Wea. Rev., 128, 3772-3788. 

⎯⎯, ⎯⎯, and ⎯⎯, 2001: A multiscale numerical study of Hurricane Andrew (1992). Part IV: Unbalanced 

flows. Mon. Wea. Rev., 129, 92-107. 

 

 

 

16

