A New Health Strategy to Prevent 
Pressure Ulcer Formation in Paraplegics 
using Computer and Sensory 
Substitution via the Tongue 

Alexandre MOREAU-GAUDRYa,c,1, Anne PRINCEb, 
Jacques DEMONGEOTa,c and Yohan PAYANc 
 
a University Hospital of Grenoble, France 
b University and Medical Center of  St Hilaire du Touvet, France 
c TIMC-IMAG-CNRS Laboratory, Grenoble, France 

Abstract.  Pressure  ulcers  are  recognized  as  a  major  health  issue  in  individuals 
with  spinal  cord  injuries  and  new  approaches  to  prevent  this  pathology  are 
necessary.  An  innovative  health  strategy  is  being  developed  through  the  use  of 
computer  and  sensory  substitution  via  the  tongue  in  order  to  compensate  for  the 
sensory  loss  in  the  buttock  area  for  individuals  with  paraplegia.  This  sensory 
compensation  will  enable  individuals  with  spinal  cord  injuries  to  be  aware  of  a 
localized  excess  of  pressure  at  the  skin/seat  interface  and,  consequently,  will 
enable them to prevent the formation of pressure ulcers by relieving the cutaneous 
area of suffering. This work reports an initial evaluation of this approach and the 
feasibility of creating an adapted behavior, with a change in pressure as a response 
to  electro-stimulated  information  on  the  tongue.  Obtained  during  a  clinical  study 
in 10 healthy seated subjects, the first results are encouraging, with 92% success in 
100  performed  tests.  These  results,  which  have  to  be  completed  and  validated  in 
the  paraplegic  population,  may  lead  to  a  new  approach  to  education  in  health  to 
prevent the formation of pressure ulcers within this population.  
Keywords:  Spinal  Cord  Injuries,  Pressure  Ulcer,  Sensory  Substitution,  Health 
Education, Biomedical Informatics. 

1. 

Introduction 

A pressure ulcer is defined as an area of localized damage to the skin and underlying 
tissue  caused  by  pressure,  shearing,  friction or a combination of these factors [1]. Its 
prevalence,  which  ranges  from  23%  to  39%  in  adults  with  spinal  cord  injuries  (as 
reported in two recent retrospective and one prospective studies), remains high in this 
population  [2-4].  Located  near  bony  prominences  such  as  the  ischium,  sacrum  and 
trochanter,  pressure  ulcers  are  recognized  as  the  main  cause  of  rehospitalization  for 
patients  with  paraplegia  [5].  Their  treatment,  which  can  be  medical  or  surgical,  is 
always long, difficult and expensive. Thus, this pathology appears to be a major health 
issue for this population. 

                                                           

1 

 Corresponding  Author:  Alexandre  Moreau-Gaudry.  TIMC-IMAG-CNRS  Laboratory.  GMCAO 

Team. Faculty of medicine,  Alexandre.Moreau-Gaudry@imag.fr 

Because of the need to identify effective intervention strategies that provide health 
education  for  skin  care  management  and  the  prevention  of  pressure  ulcers  for 
individuals with paraplegia, a new approach has been developed using computer-aided 
instruction  as  an  educational  tool  for  promoting  independent  skin  care  [6].  As  with 
traditional  approaches,  the  main  purpose  of  this  strategy  is  to  control  the  pressure 
applied at the seat/skin interface in order to prevent the formation of pressure ulcers. 
Nevertheless, to our knowledge, no approach has been developed that compensates for 
the sensory loss for paraplegics in the buttock area which would allow them to lead a 
similar lifestyle to that of healthy subjects in term of pressure ulcer prevention. Healthy 
subjects  prevent  this  pathology  by  moving  the  body  in  a  conscious  or  subconscious 
manner according to a “signal” arising from the buttock area. The main purpose of this 
research is to define a new health strategy that prevents the formation of pressure ulcers 
in  individuals  with  paraplegia  by  simulating  the  natural  performance  of  a  healthy 
subject via use of sensory substitution. The first results related to the feasibility of this 
approach in healthy seated subjects are reported in this work.  

2.  Material and Methods 

2.1. 

Which organ is best suited to sensory substitution? 

The concept of sensory substitution has its origins in the works of P. Bach-y-Rita, who 
has  studied  this  area  for  30  years  and,  in  particular,  sensory  substitution  for  blind 
people. Indeed, he states: “we do not SEE with the eyes”. The visual image does not go 
beyond the retina, but is turned into patterns of pulses along nerves and is carried to the 
brain [7]. To demonstrate this theory, a human-machine interface was developed: the 
Tactile  Vision  Substitution  System  (TVSS),  which  allows  visual  information  to  be 
emitted from a TV camera to an array of stimulators in contact with the skin on one or 
several  parts  of  the  body  (abdomen,  back,  and  forehead).  After  training  with  this 
device,  blind  people  are  able  to  perform  complex  perceptual  and  “eye”-hand 
coordination  tasks.  Furthermore,  when  the  human-machine  interface  is  moved  from 
one  area  of  skin  to  another,  there  is  no  loss  of  correct  spatial  localization.  Thus,  the 
trained  blind  subject  does  not  perceive  the  image  on  the  skin,  but  in  fact  locates  it 
correctly in space. 

More recently, P. Bach-y-Rita has focused on the tongue as the most ideally suited 
organ  for  the  human-machine  interface  because  of  outstanding  tactile  and  physical 
properties.  He  also  reported  the  possibility  of  developing  a  cosmetically  acceptable 
interface into an orthodontic retainer thanks to recent technological improvements [8]. 
For these reasons, and because the sensory and motor nervous pathways for the tongue 
are  preserved  in  paraplegia,  this  organ  was  chosen  for  sensory  substitution  in  spinal 
cord injury individuals. 

 

2.2. 

The implementation of sensory substitution. 

A new device has been developed to compensate for sensory loss in paraplegics in the 
buttock area. It consists of three components (Figure 1). The first is a pressure mapping 
system  which  allows  real-time  acquisition  of  the  pressure  applied  on  the  seat/skin 
interface. The second is the human-machine interface. In a preliminary experiment, this 
device was the Tongue Display Unit (TDU) developed by P. Bach-y-Rita and colleagues. 

 

 
Figure 1. A new device has been developed, attempting to compensate for sensory loss in paraplegics. 
The  pressure  mapping  system  (A)  allows  real-time  acquisition  of  the  pressure  applied  on  the  seat/skin 
interface.  The  computer  (B)  enables  communication  between  the  pressure  mapping  system  and  the 
Tongue  Display  Unit  (TDU).  From  the  laptop,  electrotactile  stimuli  can  be  delivered  to  the  tongue 
surface  via  a  flexible  electrode  array  (C)  placed  in  the  mouth.  This  new  device  allows  paraplegics  to 
receive informative signals on their tongue that originate from the buttock area. 

 

 
 
The  third  device  is  a  laptop,  which  has  been  programmed  to  enable  communication 
between  the  pressure  mapping  system  and  the  TDU.  From  the  laptop,  electrotactile 
stimuli  can  be  delivered  to  the  dorsum  of  the  tongue  via  a  flexible  electrode  array 
(6x6), which is placed in the mouth and lightly held between the lips. 

Each  electrode  can  be  activated  independently.  This  whole  device  thus  allows 
electro-stimulation  of  parts  of  the  tongue  according  to  a  “signal”  received  from  the 
pressure  applied  on  the  buttock  area  of  the  paraplegic.  This  information,  that  is  lost 
after spinal cord injuries, is therefore felt again via the tongue. We hope and claim that 
the  paraplegic  will  be  able  to  develop  an  adapted  behavior  according  to  the  electro-
stimulated information in order to prevent the formation of pressure ulcers. 

 

2.3. 

An evaluation of the feasibility of this approach. 

In this preliminary work, the feasibility of the approach was evaluated by the subject’s 
capacity to adopt an adapted behavior, with changes in pressure, according to electro-
stimulated  information.  Our  objective  was  therefore  to  demonstrate  this  capacity  as 
without  it,  sensory  substitution  is  of  no  use  for  this  purpose.  The  electro-stimulated 
signal is not efficiently interpreted, since there is no change in pressure at the seat/skin 
interface,  and  therefore  there  is  no  possibility  of  relieving  the  cutaneous  area  of 
suffering and of preventing the formation of pressure ulcers. 

After  obtaining  informed  written  consent  from  each  subject,  this  evaluation  was 
performed with 10 healthy seated subjects, at rest. For each subject, the TDU was first 
calibrated.  This  step  was  necessary  as  the  perception  of  electrotactile  stimuli  on  the 
tongue is subjective and decreases from the anterior to the posterior part of the tongue. 
To perform this first step, a C++ program was developed which enabled this calibration 
to be both user-friendly and interactive.  

Following this, healthy subjects were asked to move their chest according to the 
felt electro-stimulated direction. More precisely, when the six electrodes placed in front 
of the electrode array were activated, subjects were asked to move their chest forward 
(Figure 2a). The instructions for movements were similar for stimulation towards the 
back (Figure 2b), and the left (Figure 2c) or the right sides (Figure 2d) of the electrode array. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

a 

b 

c 

d 

 
Figure 2. Different patterns for electro-stimulation. 
When the six electrodes placed in front of the electrode array were activated, subjects were asked to move 
their chest forward (a). In the same way, they were asked to move their chest backward, to the left or to 
the right if electrodes situated behind (b), on the left (c) and on the right (d) were activated. 
   

The  pressure  map  applied  at  the  seat/skin  interface  was  then  recorded  in  real-time. 
After  each  movement  following  the  electro-stimulated  direction,  a  new  record  of  the 
pressure  map  was  improved. By computing the differences between the two pressure 
maps  (before  versus  after  electro-stimulation),  we  determined  whether  or  not  the 
movement  was  adapted  to  the  electro-stimulated  information.  In  the  first  case,  the 
result was marked as “one”, and otherwise, as “zero”. For each subject, this experiment 
was carried out 10 times, thus obtaining a total score out of 10. The entire procedure 
was performed in an automated manner with specifically developed software.   

3.  Results 

No difficulty was reported during the calibration stage. The electro-stimulation of the 
tongue  was  very  well  accepted.  This  procedure  was  completed  by  each  seated  and 
healthy subject. The mean score was 9.2, with a standard deviation at 0.79. 

This  encouraging  result  demonstrates  three  main  points:  first,  the  subject  has  a 
strong  perception  of  the  electro-stimulated  information;  second,  this  information  is 
both  meaningful  and  correctly  interpreted;  and  third,  the  action  resulting  from  the 
interpreted information is adapted, with changes in pressure, to the electro-stimulatory 
information.  

4.  Discussion 

To our knowledge, there has been no study to date that uses sensory substitution via the 
tongue in order to prevent the formation of pressure ulcers in paraplegics. One of the 
main  difficulties  of  using  sensory  substitution  reported  by  P.  Bach-y-Rita  was  the 
development  of  a  practicable  user-friendly  human-machine  interface.  Indeed,  it  is 
evident  that  the  TDU  used  in  this  first  experiment  is  not  practicable  for  daily  use  by 
individuals with paraplegia. As this device has to be wholly accepted by paraplegics, it 
is  therefore  essential  to  solve  this  problem.  We  developed,  in  collaboration  with  the 
CORONIS  SYSTEMS  and  the  GUGLIELMI  TECHNOLOGIES  DENTAIRES 
companies,  a  new  cosmetic  interface  incorporated  into  an  orthodontic  retainer,  with 
wireless  transmission  from  a  laptop  to  the  tongue  device  unit  (Figure  3).  A  clinical 
evaluation of this prototype will start shortly. Collaboration has also been established 
with  the  VISTA  MEDICAL  Company  in  order  to  improve  the  pressure  mapping 

system (Figure 4). 

in  pressure,  according 

The  major  finding  of  this  study  is  that  a  healthy  subject  is  able  to  acquire  an 
to  electro-stimulatory 
adapted  behavior,  with  changes 
information on the tongue. In other words, communication from the organ of sensory 
substitution towards the region of sensory loss is achieved. The reverse communication 
from  the  buttock  area  to  the  tongue  has  not  yet  been  evaluated.  If  this  reverse 
communication is validated, it would then enable the simulation of the whole conscious 
or subconscious loop defined in the healthy subject by perception of a stimulus coming 
from the buttock area, analysis of this signal and action adapted to the signal in order to 
correct the cause of this alert. The evaluation of this complete cycle will be the purpose 
of a further clinical study.  
 

 
Figure 3. A new cosmetic interface. 
On the left, the electronic interface with wireless transmission from/to the laptop is shown. On the 
right, this system is integrated into an orthodontic retainer, which is placed into the upper part of the 
mouth (bottom view). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 4. The pressure mapping system of the VISTA MEDICAL Company. 
On the left, the pressure mapping system is shown. On the right, a colorized example of a pressure 
map  at  the  seat/skin  interface  in  a  healthy  subject  is  shown.  In  this  example,  the  yellow  and  red 
colors correspond to the areas of maximum pressure.   

 

 

Finally, it will be necessary to specify the type of information that will be applied 
through  tongue  electro-stimulation.  The  following  questions  need  to  be  examined. 
Should  low-level  information  be  used  as  pressure  that  is  applied  to  the  seat/skin 
interface,  with  the  subject  having  to  interpret  this  information  and  moving  in 
accordance  with  the  stimuli  in  order  to  prevent  the  formation  of  pressure  ulcers?  Or 
should  high-level  information  be  used,  such  as  an  optimal  direction  of  movement 
computed in an automated way from pressure maps (by minimizing a cost function of 
time  and  pressure,  for  example)?  To  obtain  the  best  “therapeutical”  acceptance,  the 
most  appropriate  type  of  information  would  be  the  one  that  which  would  lead  to  a 
reflex-adapted behavior in the paraplegic. Further clinical evaluations should enable us 
to determine the most suitable information for electro-stimulation.  

5.  Conclusion 

Because pressure ulcers are still a major health issue for individuals with spinal cord 
injuries  (as  shown  in  the  high  prevalence  of  this  pathology  in  this  population),  it  is 
necessary to develop new health strategies to address this problem. This paper reports 
the  principles  of  a  new  approach  using  computer  and  sensory  substitution  via  the 
tongue and the first performed evaluations of this technique. Initial encouraging results 
with healthy seated subjects, which have yet to be confirmed with paraplegics, provide 
the possibility of developing new strategies in health education for persons with spinal 
cord injuries in order to prevent the formation of pressure ulcers. 

References 

[1]  http://www.epuap.org/gltreatment.html (last accessed Jan. 30, 2006). 
[2]  Garber  SL,  Rintala  DH.  Pressure  ulcers  in  veterans  with  spinal  cord  injury:  a  retrospective  study.  J 

Rehabil Res Dev 2003; 40(5): 433-41. 

[3]  Raghavan  P,  Raza  WA,  Ahmed  YS,  Chamberlain  MA.  Prevalence  of  pressure  sores  in  a  community 

sample of spinal injury patients. Clin Rehabil 2003; 17(8): 879-84. 

[4]  Nair KP, Taly AB, Maheshwarappa BM, Kumar J, Murali T, Rao S. Nontraumatic spinal cord lesions: 
a prospective study of medical complications during in-patient rehabilitation. Spinal Cord 2005; 43(9): 
558-64. 

[5]  Cardenas  DD,  Hoffman  JM,  Kirshblum  S,  McKinley  W.  Etiology  and  incidence  of  rehospitalization 
after traumatic spinal cord injury: a multicenter analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2004; 85(11): 1757-
63. 

[6]  Pellerito,  Jr,  JM.  The  effects  of  traditional  and  computer-aided  instruction  on  promoting  independent 

skin care in adults with paraplegia. Occup Ther Int 2003; 10(1): 1-19. 

[7]  Bach-y-Rita P. Brain Mechanisms in Sensory Substitution. New York, Academic Press, 1972: 182. 
[8]  Sampaio  E,  Maris  S,  Bach-y-Rita  P.  Brain  plasticity:  'visual'  acuity  of  blind  persons  via  the  tongue. 

Brain Res 2001; 908(2): 204-7. 

 

