 

 

 

 

1

 
Journal logo 

 Contribution of High Energy Physics Techniques to the Medical 
Imaging Field 

Pierre-Etienne Vert,a* Jacques Lecoq,a Gerard Montarou,a Nicoleta Pauna,a Baptiste 
Joly,a Madjid Boutemeur,b Hervé Mathez,b Renaud Gaglione,b Patrick Le Dûc

aLaboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, 24 avenue des Landais, 63177 Aubière Cedex, France 

bInstitut de Physique Nucléaire de Lyon, Domaine scientifique de la Doua, 4  rue Enrico Fermi, 69622 Villeurbanne cedex, France 

cCEA/DAPNIA, 91191 Gif sur Yvette, France 

Abstract 

The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  show  how  advanced  concepts  of  compact,  lossless  and  "Time  Of  Flight"  (TOF)  capable 
electronics similar to those foreseen for the LHC and ILC experiments could be fairly and easily transferred to the medical 
imaging  field  through  Positron  Emission  Tomography  (PET).  As  a  wish  of  explanation,  the  two  overriding  weaknesses  of 
PET camera readout electronics, namely dead-time and timing resolution, were investigated analytically and with a Monte-
Carlo simulator presently dedicated to this task. Results have shown there was room left for count rate enhancement through a 
huge decrease of the timing resolution well below the nanosecond. The novel electronics scheme suggested for PET in this 
paper has been partly inspired by the long experience led in High Energy Physics where the latter requirement is compulsory. 
Its structure entirely pipelined combined to a pixelation of the whole detector should allow dead-times to be suppressed, while 
the absence of devoted timing channel would remove the preponderant contributions to the timing resolution. To the common 
solution for timing would substitute an optimal filtering method witch clearly appears as a good candidate as timing resolution 
of a few tens of picoseconds may be achieved provided the shape of the signal is known and sufficient samples are available 
with enough accuracy.  First investigations have yield encouraging results as a sampling frequency of 50 MHz with a 7 bits 
precision appears sufficient to ensure the 500ps coincidence timing resolution planed. At this point, there will be a baby step 
ahead to draw benefice from a TOF implementation to the design and the enormous noise variance enhancement that would 
come with. 

PET, dead-time, NECR, timing resolution, electronics, TOF  

——— 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +33 (0)47-340-5146; fax: +33(0)47-326-4598; e-mail: vert@clermont.in2p3.fr. 

2 

 

 

1. Introduction 

In  3D  PET,  the  selection  of  events  naturally 
applies  in  coincidence  and  is  performed  by  the 
electronics alone. A coincidence window is hardware 
implemented  and  serves  as  a  tolerance  for  the  two 
photons  to  hit  any  part  of  the  detector  wherever  lies 
the annihilation in the patient. Scattered and random 
events  may  arise  in  time  and  be  accepted  by  the 
electronics,  whereas  they  effectively  act  as  noise. 
the  acquisition  chain  and 
Besides  occupying 
saturating it sometimes due to the dead-times shared 
along, the impeding presence of noise may appear as 
magnified at saturation as true events can be missed. 
Overall,  it  clearly  contributes  to  alter  the  instrument 
sensitivity. The motivations behind our study was to 
evaluate  the  limitations  in  term  of  sensitivity  of 
"recent" scanners and the potential improvement left 
when  going  to  an  architecture  with  performances 
pushed to their limits. In a first time, the results that 
outcome  from  a  Monte-Carlo  program  specifically 
written  to  undertake  the  physics  of  emission  in  PET 
were re-injected into a simple behavioural model of a 
typical  detection  chain  to  compute  intermediate  and 
overall dead-times effect on count-rates as a function 
of  the  input  entries.  In  a  second  time,  we  went 
through the timing resolution aspect and refer for that 
to  a  published 
the  respective 
investigation  of 
contributions  of  the  components  that  make  up  the 
system  regarded  [1].  With  the  program,  we  checked 
the 
factor  on  count-rate 
 
performances  when  lowered  to  its  physical  limit  by 
reflecting  it  to  the  coincidence  window  width. 
Finally, we merged both ideas and figured out the net 
gain  that  could  be  drawn  from  a  lossless  and  high 
timing  resolution  electronics  before  suggesting  the 
synoptic  of  what  is  actually  being  designed.  The 
minimisation  of  the  timing  resolution  opens  the 
opportunity  for  the  TOF  to  be  re-introduced  in  PET 
as  it  used  to  in  the  1980s.  Indeed,  the  new  heavy 
scintillator  crystals  like  LSO  or  LaBr3  now  offer 
possibilities  in  terms  of  sensitivity  and  spatial 
resolution  that  were  unattainable  in  the  early  years 
and prevent from major tradeoffs to be done [2]. For 
our  approach  to  be  global,  we  figured  out  the 

influence  of 

this 

subsequent  gain  in  noise  variance  that  a  TOF 
implementation could bring. 

In  the  remainder  of  this  paper,  we  will  present  a 
study that sticks to the HR+ PET camera from CTI. A 
simple reason to that is that most of the literature we 
found  with  sufficient  details  about  the  architecture 
covered  this  scanner  in particular  [3]  [4]. We  paid  a 
special attention to make a comparison with an up-to-
date  instrument,  the  Accel  from  CPS.  Both  camera 
belong  to  the  same  family,  as  Siemens  subsidiaries, 
and share parent ring hardware properties. Literature 
indicates 
they  were  developed  with  common 
electronics  philosophy  [1]  [3].  Hence,  replacing 
initial BGO scintillator of the HR+ by LSO to match 
the Accel on this point too, we re-adjusted parameters 
of  the  dead-time  model  so  that  the  new  camera,  yet 
hypothetical,  finally  yields  count  rate  performances 
close to the Accel [5]. 

2. Count rate performances 

through 

the  hardware, 

incoming  events 

As  mentioned  in  introduction,  a  simulator  was 
specifically developed to run the physics of emission 
relative  to  the  HR+  PET  camera,  along  with  the 
behaviour  of 
the 
the 
acquisition system.  
Details  about 

the  dead-time 
modelling  and  the  considerations  made  to  undertake 
those simulations may be found in our previous work 
[6]  along  with  the  literature  already  mentioned. 
Results  obtained  reflect  the  count  rate  capability  of 
the  given  architecture  based  upon  the  hardware 
configuration  from  geometry  to  readout  electronics. 
The net  gain  attainable  when  compared  to a  lossless 
design  is  computed  as  well  as  the  Noise  Equivalent 
Count  Rate  (NECR)  to  favour  the  comparison  in 
cases of change applied to the layout. 

The  NECR    is  computed  from  the  rates  of  Trues 
(T),  Scattered  (S)  and  Randoms  (R)  effectively 
recorded  and  used  for  the  images  reconstruction 
according to formula 1.  

 

 

NECR

=

T 2
ST
2++

R

  (1) 

 

 

to 

figure  of  merit 

NECR  has  been  introduced  many  years  ago  as  a 
compare  PET 
standard 
performances  and  yields  an  assessment  of 
the 
effective  rate  at  which  trues  would  be  collected  if 
noise  were  in  trues  alone  [3].  Such  a  formalism  is 
sensitive  to  adjustments  made  to  the  source  or  the 
geometry [7] but find its usefulness in predicting how 
subsequent changes in Trues, Scattered and Randoms 
do affect the image quality.  

Besides the scattered event inherently appearing as 
a  function  of  the  experimental  configuration,  the 
random  rate  is  easily  predictable  in  PET.  For  an 
individual line of response (LOR), it is given by: 

 

R

rate

2=

NN
a

τ
b

coinc

 

(2) 

where  Na  and  Nb  are  the  single  event  rate  for  the 
two crystals defining the LOR and τcoinc the hardware 
coincidence timing window width. The total number 
of random in the image is the sum over all the LORs, 
keeping  overall  the  linear  dependence  on  τcoinc  [7]. 
Singles of which energy agrees with the expectations 
involve  the  electronics  to  trigger  and  then  recording 
of  the  hit.  Again  the  rate  depends  on  the  layout  and 
following  the  two  counterparts  energies,  they  are 
regarded either as trues or scattered at this stage. Part 
of  the  signal  is  purely  noise  from  randoms  which 
naturally  outline  the  importance  of  the  coincidence 
window  time  setting.  An  assessment  of  the  random 
rate  may  be  performed,  but  after  the  fact  only.  The 
latter  aspect  is  none  the  least,  no  doubt  about  the 
random rate calculation and the subtraction reliability 
but  the  noise  resulting  from  the  statistical  variations 
in  this  rate  remains  [7].  A  reduction  of  the  time 
coincidence  window  towards  the  limit  will  find  its 
usefulness  in  further  veto  events  prior  recording, 
increasing  by  the  way  the  NECR.  It  will  only  be 
possible  through  an  improvement  of  the  timing 
resolution. 

3

 

limit  the  overall  timing  resolution  in  the  Accel, 
associating each to a contribution as listed in table 1. 
The experimental setup is given in figure 1.  

Fig. 1. Setup used to determine the time contributions. 

Table 1. Individual contributions to the timing resolution 

Component 

Contribution (fwhm) 

LSO (3x3x30mm2) 

Light sharing (block) 

PMT 

PMT array 

CFD 

TDC 

336ps 

454ps 

422ps 

274ps 

1354ps 

2000ps 

 
The  first  channel  was  left  unchanged  along  the 
study  and  consisted  in  a  sequence  of  very  high-end 
electronics  parts  which  serves  as  reference.  The 
crystal  used  here  is  BaF2,  well  designed  for  timing. 
On  the  right  hand  side  a  similar  chain  appears,  in 
which  the components were replaced in turn by their 
production  counterpart  used 
the  commercial 
camera.  Value  for  the  LSO  contribution  was  drawn 
from [8] so as to better fit with the PET crystals size 
requirement. It clearly appears that the CFD and TDC 
bring  the  main  contributions  and  hence  limit  the 
minimum  resolution  achievable.  To  be  noticed,  the 
value for the CFD is a "raw" value and would have to 
be  increased  to  account  for  the  shaping  that  will  be 
used in practice.  

in 

 
The  worst  case  scenario  involving  a  positron 
annihilation  at  the  far  end  of  a  patient  while  into 
contact with the instrument gantry as shown in figure 
2 imposes a minimum coincidence windows of 

 
 
 

 

 

3. Timing resolution 

In  state  of 

the  art 
a  minimum 

fast 
timing 
scintillators, 
resolution of 2-3ns fwhm can be achieved [7]. In [1] 
and  [8]  the  authors  pointed  out  the  components  that 

tomographs  with 
coincidence 

 

τ

coinc

min

=

D
max
c

+

2

Σ×

(

contributi

ons

)

2

 

(3) 

 
required for the photons to flight across the detector. 

4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

noise  in  the  reconstructed  image  as  long  as  the 
emission  source  is  longer  in  size  than  the  line 
segment  so  regarded  [2]  [7].  An  expression  for  the 
noise variance reduction is given by equation 5 

f

=

D
x
Δ

=

2
D
tc
Δ

 

(5) 

 
with  D  the  object  diameter.  The  reduction  in 
variance  does  not  concern  trues  only  but  also 
scattered and randoms as shown in [9] and [10]. This 
important consideration involves that the noise added 
by  randoms  continues  to  diminish  with  the  timing 
resolution 
hardware 
coincidence  window  remains  at  the  2ns  bounded  by 
the geometry.  

enhancement, 

the 

yet 

In  [7],  “For  random  and  scattered  events,  the 
effective  diameter  of  the  emission  source  (i.e.,  the 
diameter  of  the  object  that  would  be  reconstructed 
using  just  the  random  or  scattered  events)  is  larger 
than 
the  actual  emission  source  and  can  be 
approximated by the camera’s patient port diameter.” 
So  regarded  and  recalling  equation  5,  the  efficiency 
gain  from  scattered  and  randoms  are  expected  to 
outclass  that  of  trues,  hence  assuming  a  global 
effective source diameter of size that of the phantom 
(patient), the possible noise variance improvement in 
the final image will be underestimated. 

5. Reducing dead-time and noise through a novel 
electronics scheme  

A  solution  for  dead-times  to  be  lowered  at  bocks 
and  buckets  would  be  to  pixelise  the  detector.  A 
minimum  integration  time  would  then  be  allowed  at 
blocks while leaving the surrounding crystals active. 
A  more  powerful  solution  would  be  to  use  a  free-
running  electronics  that  constantly  integrates  the 
incoming  signals  and  clears  out  count  losses  that 
might occur. Merging the two ideas, the light sharing 
and  PMT  array  contributions  to  the  time  resolution 
would also be suppressed.  

The number of channels imposed by the pixelation 
of the ring tends towards ASICs for  reasons of cost 
and space. However, while very high-end TDC have 
successfully  been  integrated  in  the  past  years  (not 

Fig. 2. Sketch of the least favourable location of emission 

 
A  numerical  application  of  equation  3  with  the 
informations provided and Dmax of about 60cm gives 
a  minimum  possible  setting  for  the  coincidence 
window  of  about  5.5ns  (2ns  +  3.5ns),  which  well 
agrees with the typical value for this machine.  

4. TOF Implementation 

In  the  concern  of  pure  optimization  of  the 
coincidence  time  window,  the  latter  may  not  be  set 
smaller  than  the  physical  limit  of  2ns  for  a  ring  of 
80cm diameter according to formula 3. This prevents 
from extra noise variance reduction beyond that point  
due  to  the  number  of  detected  randoms  in  non-TOF 
PET. In the latter indeed, the location of the emission 
point along the LOR is left unknown by conception, 
so  the  algorithm  used  to  reconstruct  the  image 
uniformly increments all the pixels of the chord. 
to  measure 

the 
difference  between  times  arrivals  of  back-to-back 
photons  with  high  resolution  to  compute  somehow 
the “depth” of interaction along the LOR of concern. 
This leads in a kind of 3-dimensional localization of 
the  positron  position  of  which  accuracy  may  be 
measured using 

A  TOF  solution  proposes 

 

c
t
Δ×=Δ
2

x

 

(4) 

with Δx the error committed on the position, c the 
speed  of  light  and  ΔT  the  coincidence  timing 
resolution  of  the  scanner.  With  a  ΔT  of  500ps  the 
position  location  would  be  constrained  to  a  line 
segment of about 7.5cm. Even if it was realized that 
such  depth  accuracy  did  not  yield  in  any  spatial 
resolution  improvement,  it  reduces  the  statistical 

5

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

compromise-free  on  complexity,  consumption,  die 
surface area and noise), there is still a lack of on-chip 
CFD  at  the  present  time  as  difficulties  arise  when 
delay  lines  are  needed.  Both  analogue  derivation  of 
the  signal  and  shared-constant  networks  have  been 
imagined  to  make  up  for  that  issue,  but  electrical 
noise  seems  the  major  trade-off  when  very  small 
timing resolution is aimed.  

require 

Successive events passing through the very front-
end  electronics 
to  be 
freely  would 
discriminated one from the others in energy and time 
at some point. The originality of our design resides in 
suppressing the need of dedicated timing channel and 
the  presence  of  CFD  and  TDC  that  comes  with.  A 
conversion of the shaped signal to digital applies and 
information about the energy time are recovered from 
samples using an optimal filtering method similar to 
those  used  in  HEP.  This  well  fulfils  the  integration 
requirement  whereas  it  makes  possible  the  pile-up 
suppression  and  removing  of  the  CFD  and  TDC 
contributions to the timing resolution by the way.  

Overall,  such  a  scheme  would  suppress  all  the 
dead-times  with  respect  to  a  conventional  chain, 
optimize  the  timing  resolution  by  keeping  only  the 
very  necessary  contributions  and  virtually  leave  no 
limitation after digitization about the algorithm to be 
implemented, including TOF. 

 
In  practice,  we  followed  our  strategy  and  pitched 
on  a  free  running  pipelined  architecture  of  which  a 
synoptic is shown in figure 3. So far, the very front-
end electronics including the charge preamplifier and 
the  differential  CR-RC  shaper  has  been  processed 
and is being tested. The design has been optimized to 
handle a charge of 50fC from an Hamamatsu APD. A 
view  of  the  layout  of  this  very  front-end  electronics 
for one channel is presented in figure 4.  

Concerning  the  sampling  differential  flash  ADC, 
the  design  is  ongoing,  with  a  7  bits  encoding  at 
50MHz. These properties have been laid down to suit 
the  optimal  filtering  needs  for  a  500ps  coincidence 
timing resolution. Only will remain the trigger logic, 
supposed  to  proceed  to  the  online  selection  of  the 
events of interest for later image reconstruction. 

 
 
 
 

Fig. 3. Synoptic of the lossless and TOF capable 
electronics proposed. 

Fig. 4. Layout of the preamplifier and the shaper.

6. Signal reconstruction with Optimal filtering 

Optimal  filtering  consists  in  a  weighted  sum  of 
signal samples to work out the energy and time while 
minimizing  the  noise  impact.  For  this  method  to  be 
efficient  and  its  implementation  worthwhile,  the 
incoming  signal  must  be  reproducible  in  shape,  not 
necessarily  in  amplitude  as  a  normalization  applies. 
Literature covers this subject in details [11] [12]. 

Measurements we carried out for LSO and LYSO 
showed that the naturally occurring signal shape was 
near  constant  whereas  no  shaping  was  employed  at 
first. This tendency was further noticed with shaping 
as expected, shaping in any way necessary to remove 
the electrical noise and slow the signal at ADC input. 
Optimal  filtering  adapted  to  our  particular  case 
yields the results listed in the table 2. Figures express 
one  channel 
in  nanoseconds 
(sigma).  As  suspected,  a  compromise  between  the 
sampling  frequency  and  the  number  of  bits  is  to  be 
accepted. Simulations have shown that a 7 bits ADC 
may  play  the  role  with  satisfaction  with  a frequency 
of 37MHz or over. A solution involving a 8 bits ADC 
would  do  the  same  at  a  frequency  close  to  20MHz 
only,  but  would  require 
the  number  of 
comparators. For this reason, we preferred to stick to 
the 7 bits architecture. 

timing  resolutions 

twice 

All  the  results  summarized  in  this  table  represent 
the mathematical limits computed for an ideal signal 
free  of  electrical  noise.  It  will  not  possibly  be 
the 
transcended  and 

to  compensate 

the  need 

6 

 

 

potentially  added  noise  appears  mandatory.  This 
bring us to the 50MHz 7 bits ADC already mentioned 
in  section  5.  The  related  error  distribution  gives  a 
timing  accuracy  of  300ps  fwhm,  or  430ps  in 
coincidence. 
 

Table 2. Optimal filtering technique applied to PET signals 

Samples 

8 

12 

16 

24 

28 

F/MHz 

24.4 

36.6 

48.8 

73.2 

85.4 

N bits 

 

 

 

 

 

20 

61 

 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

1.473 

1.213 

0.993 

1.046 

0.890 

0.699 

0.743 

0.585 

0.513 

0.456 

0.419 

0.371 

0.366 

0.298 

0.259 

0.229 

0.206 

0.194 

0.184 

0.152 

0.129 

0.115 

0.105 

0.096 

0.094 

0.082 

0.065 

0.058 

0.052 

0.049 

0.05 

0.052 

0.034 

0.030 

0.027 

0.025 

10 

0.03 

0.041 

0.02 

0.018 

0.014 

0.013 

7. Results and discussion 

Simulations  were  performed  for  a  hypothetical 
cylindrical  phantom  of  human  size  (175cm  long, 
40cm diameter). As we hinted at, the camera basis is 
the  HR+,  updated  to  better  fit  with  the  present 
situation and come closer to the Accel. It involved the 
replacement  of  the  BGO  by  LSO,  a  modification  of 
the  processing  times  at  blocks  and  buckets,  and  the 
narrowing  of  the  coincidence  window  down  to  6ns. 
The  activity  considered  was  of  5.5kBq/cc.  A  first 
the 
simulation  showed  a  17%  saturation  of 
electronics  with  respect  to  a  lossless  design,  which 
leaves  only  a  20%  room  for  improvement  on  count-
rate. With the latter design and according to what has 
been developed in section 3, only the scintillator and 
photo-detector  contributions  to  the  timing  resolution 
would  remain.  Assuming  an  APD  as  the  photo-
detector with its typical 50-100ps timing resolution, it 
would not penalize the LSO characteristics and make 
the 
the  500ps  achievable.  In 
coincidence window width might be set at 2.5ns (2ns 
+  0.5ns).  A  Related  simulation  showed  that  the 
NECR goes up by a factor 1.7, to be weighted by the 
possible 1.2 gain from electronics. It leads overall to 
a net improvement of the NECR by a factor 2. With 

these  conditions, 

such  a  configuration, 
the  TOF  algorithm  will 
naturally be included and we expect a noise variance 
enhancement of about 5 according to formula 5. 

8. Conclusion 

their 

improves 

significantly 

timing  resolution  drops  below 

It  has  been  known  for  long  that  enhancing  the 
timing  resolution  of  the  detection  chain  in  PET 
scanners 
events 
collection  efficiency  through  a  possible  decrease  of 
the 
coincidence  window  width.  A  TOF 
implementation  begins  to  be  worthwhile  when  the 
coincidence 
the 
nanosecond  by  bringing  an  information  about  the 
depth of interaction along the LORs. Besides this, the 
electronics  schemes  actually  employed  still  display 
dead-times that make them to saturate. Merging both 
ideas,  we  proposed  a  new  electronics  synoptic  well 
inspired  of  HEP  experiments  that  appears  inherently 
a  high-end  candidate both  for  count-rate  and  timing. 
A  TOF  implementation  would  be  considered  as  a 
resolution  of  500ps  may  be  achieve  via  optimal 
filtering, 
in  an  awaited  noise  variance 
improvement  of  5  in  the  final  images.  Concerning, 
the NECR, the net gain expected is of about 2. 

leading 

References 

[1]  W.W. Moses, M. Ullisch, Proc. IEEE-NSS/MIC Conf., Rome, 

Italy, 16-22 Oct., 2004. 

[2]  S. Surti & al., IEEE Trans. Med. Im., 25-5 (2006) 529. 
[3]  M.E. Casey, PhD Thesis Dissertation, University of 

Tennessee, Knoxville, Dec. 1992. 

[4]  J.L. Humm, A. Rosenfeld and A. Del Guerra, Eur.J.Nucl. 
Med. Mol. Img., review article, 30-11 (2003) 1574. 

[5]  L. Le Meunier, F. Mathy and Pr D. Faget, IEEE Trans. Nucl. 

Sci., 50 (2003) 1462 

[6]  P.-E. Vert & al., Proc. 14th IEEE-NPSS Real Time 
Conference, Stockholm, Sweden, 4-10 May, 2005. 
[7]  W. W. Moses, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 50-5 (2003) 1325. 
[8]   W. W. Moses and S. E. Derenzo, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 46-

[9]  B. Bendriem & al., J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr., 10 (1986) 

[10] D. G. Politte and D. L. Snyder, IEEE Trans. Med. Img., 10 

3 (1999) 474. 

287. 

(1991) 82. 

[11] W. E. Cleland and E. G. Stern, Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res 

A, 338 (1994) 467. 

[12] D. Prieur, ATL-LARG-PUB, 2005-001. 

