A Scaling Law for the Cosmological Constant from Quantum Cosmology with
Seven Extra Dimensions
Scott Funkhouser
Dept. of Physics, The Citadel, 171 Moultrie St. Charleston, SC 29409

ABSTRACT

According  to  the  quantum  cosmology  of  Mongan  almost  all  of  the  entropy  that  could  ever  be
contained in the three Friedmann dimensions was originally contained within seven compact dimensions in
their initial excited state in which gravity and the strong force were unified.   The holographic conjecture
requires that the entropy in the initial seven-sphere be proportional to the area of the seven-sphere, which is
proportional to the sixth power of the radius of curvature of the compact dimensions.  It is shown here that
quantum cosmology with seven compact dimensions and the holographic conjecture lead to a scaling law
for the cosmological constant that is identical to an independently obtained scaling in which the vacuum
energy density is proportional to the sixth power of the mass of the nucleon.

1. Introduction

In  the  quantum  cosmology  of  Mongan  the  Universe  began  with  a  quantum
fluctuation from nothing into a homogeneous 10-dimensional space.  That quantum state
then  tunneled  into  another  state  in  which  seven  of  the  dimensions  were  excited,
subsequently  collapsing  to  their  ground  state.   That  collapse  to  the  ground  state,  as  it
were,  caused  inflation  in  the  three  Friedmann  dimensions.   In  such  models  the  seven
compact dimensions should manifest as a scalar field in our Friedmann three-space.  That
scalar field would have frozen after inflation and could account for the vacuum energy
associated with the cosmological constant Λ. [1]

Certain parameters of the excited and ground states of the putative seven extra
dimensions can be specified by considering the relative strengths of the gravitational and
strong forces.   In order to unify gravity and the nuclear force in the early Universe the
gravitational force must have been much stronger at the beginning of inflation and it must
have weakened during inflation.  This change in the strength of the gravitational force is
typically modeled by allowing G, Newton’s constant of gravitation, to vary.  Initially, the
coefficient of gravitation is hypothesized to have been equal to Gi, which is defined by

2
Gimn
hc

  

= 1,

(1)

(2)

where mn is the nucleon mass,   
light in a vacuum.  Eq. (1) leads directly to
2
mP
mn

Gi
G

€ 

=

€ 

2 ≈ 1.69 ×1038

h is the reduced constant of Planck and c is the speed of

(hc /G)1/ 2.   As  the  seven  compact  dimensions  collapsed
where mP  is  the  Planck  mass 
  
from  the  excited  state  to  the  ground  state,  Gi  was  reduced  to  G.   That  change  in  the
coefficient  of  gravitation  would  have  presumably  caused  the  initial  Planck
li ≡ (hGi /c 3)1/ 2 to decrease to its current value by the end of inflation. Note that li/lP
length
  
is equal to (Gi/G)1/2 and the Planck mass was initially of order the nucleon mass. [1]

€ 

€ 

In  that  scenario  the  seven  compact  dimensions  injected  entropy,  or  available
information,  into  the  three  Friedmann  dimensions  during  inflation.   The  available
information  associated  with  a  space  may  be  determined  through  the  holographic
conjecture.   According to the thermodynamics of black holes, the maximum number of
available bits of information in a space is one fourth of the area of the space measured in

€ 

Planck units.  The area A7(r) of a homogeneous seven-sphere of characteristic radius r is
given by

A7(r) =

16π3
15

r 6.

€ 

€ 

The actual area 
′ A 7 ≡ fA7 of the seven-sphere that was part of the early Universe in its
excited state may have been larger than the area in Eq. (3) by a factor f that represents
possible convolutions of the surfaces.   However, it is presumed that f6 is much smaller
than  10122.   Since  the  objective  of  this  present  work  is  to  introduce  a  scaling  law,  the
factor f and other geometrical factors of order much less than 10122 will be henceforth
ignored.  In order to unify gravity and the nuclear force the initial radius of curvature of
the compact extra dimensions is hypothesized to have been of order the initial Planck
length  li.   Thus  the  number  of  available  bits  of  information,  or  entropy,  in  the  initial
seven-sphere therefore would be roughly given by [2]
6
 
 
 

 
li
 
lP
 
The maximum number N0 of bits of information available to the three Friedmann

′ A 7(li)
4lP

N 7 =

2 ~

(4)

.

dimensions in this current epoch is given by
2
R0
2 ~ 10122.
lP

N 0 ~

€ 

Mongan has shown that, in order for the number N7 of bits in the initial seven-sphere to
amount to the N0 bits present in the Universe today, the initial Planck length must have
been ~1021/f6  times  larger  than  the  current  Planck  length.   That  requirement,  based  on
holographic considerations, is consistent with the requirement of Eq. (2) that is based on
force-unification considerations, which suggest that the initial radius of curvature of the
excited  compact  dimensions  must  have  been  of  order  near  1019  times  larger  than  the
current  Planck  length.   In  that  manner,  a  convincing  connection  between  quantum
cosmology with seven extra dimensions and the hierarchy problem was made. [2]

€ 

2. A Scaling Law for the Cosmological Constant

It is here shown that relating the initial entropy of the seven-sphere to the eventual
entropy  of  the  Friedmann  dimensions  implicitly  suggests  a  scaling  law  for  the
cosmological constant.  Furthermore, that scaling law is found to be identical to a scaling
for Λ that was obtained from altogether different considerations.  In order to make those
connections it is first necessary to state another expression for the maximum number of
bits of information N0 that are available to our Universe in this epoch.  In this epoch the
vacuum energy density attributed to the cosmological constant has begun to dominate the
total energy density of the Universe.   This is known as the cosmic coincidence.   As a
consequence  of  the  cosmic  coincidence,  the  Friedmann-Robertson-Lemaitre-Walker
equations and the Raychaudhuri equation, the current particle horizon R0 is of order near
the characteristic horizon RΛ of the corresponding deSitter space defined by

(3)

(5)

(6)

RΛ ≡

c
Λ

.

€ 

Since  the  number  of  available  bits  of  information  in  the  Friedmann  dimensions  is
proportional to the square of the particle horizon, the current entropy N0 is of order near
the critical value NΛ defined by

2

RΛ
2 ~
lP

c 5
GhΛ

.

N Λ ~
  

(7)

(9)

Thus, as a result of the cosmic coincidence the entropy N0 of our present Universe may be
related to fundamental parameters including the cosmological constant.

Following Mongan, let the maximum number of available bits in the Friedmann
dimensions be limited by the number N7 of bits in the initial seven-sphere.  However, in
this present work the term NΛ will be used to represent the characteristic entropy limit of
the Friedmann dimensions.  Equating NΛ to N7 leads to

€ 

6
 
 
 

~

c 5
GhΛ
  

 
li
 
lP
 
Eq. (8) could be considered a fundamental requirement of models in which entropy is
transferred  from  collapsing  compact  dimensions  into  Friedmann  dimensions  that
asymptotically approach a deSitter space.   Let the initial size li of the excited compact
€ 
dimensions be defined by Eq. (2), as required in models that unify gravity and the strong
force.   Substituting mP/mn for li/lP in Eq. (8) leads to

(8)

.

6

G 2c 2mn
h

4

.

Λ ~
  

This is to say that the cosmological constant would be scaled to the sixth power of the
nucleon mass.

€ 

Remarkably,  the  scaling  in  Eq.  (9)  is  identical  to  the  scaling  law  proposed
independently  to  resolve  a  coincidence  problem  among  large  numbers  [3].   Using  the
definitions of the Planck length and mass, Eq. (9) may be re-written as
c 2
G

(10)

Λ ~

2
Gmn
4
ln

where  ln  is  the  Compton  wavelength  of  the  nucleon.   The  scaling  in  Ref.  [3]  was
presented  in  the  form  of  Eq.  (10),  which  is  to  say  that  the  energy  density  of  the
cosmological constant was proposed to be proportional to the characteristic gravitational
energy  density  of  the  nucleon.   It  was  shown  that  if  Eq.  (10)  were  to  represent  a  real
scaling  law  then  it  would  explain  why  the  large-number  coincidence  of  Dirac  and
Eddington occurs only in the same epoch in which the cosmic coincidence occurs.  The
scaling in Eq. (10) was also shown to resolve a number of other lingering coincidence
problems including the Eddington-Weinberg relation. [3]

€ 

The scaling of the cosmological constant to the sixth power of the nucleon mass
that  was  proposed  in  Ref.  [3]  may  have  been  an  intimation  of  the  existence  of  seven
compact dimensions.  The fact that the quantum cosmology of Mongan leads to the same
independently  obtained  scaling  law  for  the  cosmological  constant  is  a  compelling
motivation  to  consider  that  both  Eq.  (9)  and  quantum  cosmology  with  seven  extra
dimensions are physically meaningful.   It is also interesting to note that the ratio of the
Planck  energy  density  to  the  vacuum  density  of  the  cosmological  constant  is,  by
definition, proportional to 

c 5 /(GhΛ).
  

€ 

Acknowledgments: This work benefited greatly from conversations with T. Mongan.

REFERENCES
[1] T. R. Mongan, Gen. Rel. Grav. 33 (2001) 1415-1424
[2] T. R. Mongan, Gen. Rel. Grav. 35 (2003) 685-688
[3] S. Funkhouser, Proc. Roy Soc. A, DOI: 10.1098/rspa.2006.1748

