Klaus Gottstein 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Max-Planck-Institut für Physik 
(Werner-Heisenberg-Institut) 
Föhringer Ring 6 
D-80805 Munich, Germany 
26 February, 2002 

 
New insights? 
Heisenberg’s visit to Niels Bohr in 1941 and the Bohr letters1 
 
The documents recently released by the Niels Bohr Archive do not, in an unambiguous way, 
solve  the  enigma  of  what  happened  during  the  critical  brief  discussion  between  Bohr  and 
Heisenberg  in  1941  which  so  upset  Bohr  and  made  Heisenberg  so  desperate.  But  they  are 
interesting, they  show what  Bohr remembered 15  years  later.  What  Heisenberg remembered 
was already described by him in his memoirs “Der Teil und das Ganze”. The two descriptions 
are  complementary,  they  are  not  incompatible.  The  two  famous  physicists,  as  Hans  Bethe 
called it recently, just talked past each other, starting from different assumptions. They did not 
finish  their  conversation.  Bohr  broke  it off  before  Heisenberg had  a  chance  to  complete  his 
intended mission.  
 
Heisenberg and Bohr had not seen each other since the beginning of the war in 1939. In the 
meantime,  Heisenberg  and  some  other  German  physicists  had  been  drafted  by  Army 
Ordnance to explore the feasibility of a nuclear bomb which, after the discovery of fission and 
of  the  chain  reaction,  could  not  be  ruled  out.  How  real  was  this  theoretical  possibility?  By 
1941 Heisenberg, after two years of intense theoretical and experimental investigations by the 
drafted group known as the “Uranium Club”, had reached the conclusion that the construction 
of  a  nuclear  bomb  would  be  feasible  in  principle,  but  technically  and  economically  very 
difficult.  He  knew  in  principle  how  it  could  be  done,  by  Uranium  isotope  separation  or  by 
Plutonium production in reactors, but both ways would take many years and would be beyond 
the  means  of  Germany  in  time  of  war,  and  probably  also  beyond  the  means  of  Germany’s 
adversaries.  (When  Heisenberg  heard  about  the  Hiroshima  bomb,  almost  four  years  later 
while interned in Farm Hall, at first he could not believe it.)  Heisenberg and von Weizsäcker 
were  very  glad  about  this  result.  It  meant  that  they  were  spared  a  difficult  moral  decision. 
They were able to  concentrate on the construction of a reactor for power production, a goal 
easily  compatible  with  their  value  system.  If  a  bomb  would  have  been  within  reach,  how 
could they have avoided being forced to build it without sacrificing their lives as saboteurs? 
But what about the long-range future? Was the construction of nuclear weapons unavoidable? 
Was  it  conceivable  that  the  then  small  community  of  nuclear  physicists  could  come  to  an 
agreement  not to work on  bomb construction?  Heisenberg and  his  friend and  colleague  von 
Weizsäcker decided that it would be helpful to have discussions with Bohr, their father figure. 
In a kind of naiveté they did not realize that their old cordial relationship with Bohr had been 
affected  by  the  events  of  the  war.  For  Bohr  his  old  friend  Heisenberg  was  now  a 
representative  of  an  enemy  country,  of  the  occupying power  of  his  native  Denmark,  whose 
remarks would have to be looked upon with suspicion.  
 

                                                        
1 Klaus Gottstein was a member of the Max Planck Institute for Physics from 1950 to 1970 under the 
directorship of Werner Heisenberg. For several years he was head of the experimental division of the 
Institute.  In  1969  he  asked  Heisenberg  about  his  visit  to  Bohr  in  1941,  and  Heisenberg  told  him. 
Immediately afterwards K.G.  dictated  into a  recorder  what  Heisenberg  had said. This record  and  its 
transcription are still available. 

 

2 

Heisenberg  managed  to  make  the  trip  to  Copenhagen  in  September  1941,  using  the 
opportunity  of  a  scientific  conference  arranged  by  the  German  Culture  Institute  in 
Copenhagen, boycotted by Bohr. Heisenberg spent several days in Copenhagen and probably 
saw  Bohr  several  times,  in  Bohr’s  office,  in  Bohr’s  home  and  on  a  walk.  On  the  latter 
occasion when there was no danger of being overheard by the Gestapo, Heisenberg undertook 
to broach the questions which were the real reasons for his trip.  
 
What  is written above is the gist of what Heisenberg wrote and what he explained to friends 
and  colleagues  when  questioned.  But  his  explanations  were  not  accepted  everywhere, 
particularly  not  by  some  of  his  British  and  U.S.  colleagues  and  by  some  later  writers  who 
were convinced that Heisenberg did all he could to make the bomb for Hitler, but failed, and 
after the war tried to white-wash himself. The situation became even worse in 1956 when the 
American  journalist  Robert  Jungk  published  a  book  "Heller  als  tausend  Sonnen"  (Brighter 
Than a Thousand Suns) in which he described, greatly exaggerating, Heisenberg's satisfaction 
with  the  technical  difficulties  of  bomb  construction  and  the  lack  of  enthusiasm  for 
overcoming these difficulties, as a secret plan to prevent, for moral reasons, the construction 
of  an  atomic  bomb  for  Hitler  which  otherwise  he  could  have  built.  Heisenberg,  and 
particularly  von  Weizsäcker,  wrote  letters  to  Robert  Jungk  in  which,  while  appreciating 
Jungk's extensive research and detailed accounts of the developments, criticized some of his 
generalisations  and  exaggerations.  Cathryn  Carson, 
in  her  article  “Reflexionen  zu 
‘Kopenhagen’”, appended to the German edition of Frayn’s play “Copenhagen”, quotes from 
these letters. In the Danish translation of his book, which appeared in 1957, Jungk published 
an extraction of Heisenberg's letter, but only the laudatory part. It was known that Bohr took 
exception  to  Jungk's  book  which  he  had  read  in  the  Danish  edition.  Jungk's  book, 
unfortunately,  did  much  to  harm  Heisenberg's  credibility,  particularly  as  the  wrong 
impression had arisen in some quarters that Heisenberg had commissioned it. Heisenberg was 
unaware  of  this.  He  never  "portrayed  himself  after  World  War  II  as  a  kind  of  scientific 
resistance hero who sabotaged Hitler's efforts to build a nuclear weapon", as was suggested by 
James  Glanz  in The New  York Times  recently.  Heisenberg always stressed  how  content  he 
had  been that nuclear weapons did not seem to be feasible  for several  years to come so that 
Hitler and his government made no efforts to build them when this had become clear to them. 
 
Meanwhile, all kinds of rumours circulated about the "real" motives behind Heisenberg's 1941 
visit to Bohr. It was suggested that he wanted to do some spying, to find out what Bohr knew 
about  the  nuclear  efforts  in  the  U.S.  and  Great  Britain.  It  was  suspected  that  Heisenberg 
wanted  to  enlist  the  support  of  Bohr  for  the  German  project.  On  the  basis  of  some 
conversations  which  Heisenberg  and  von  Weizsäcker  had  had  with  members  of  Bohr's 
institute there was also the version that the real reason for Heisenberg's visit was the intention 
to  convince  Bohr  that  Germany  was going  to  win  the  war,  that this  outcome was  desirable, 
and that Bohr had better end his unwillingness to cooperate with German authorities.  It  was 
generally  held  that  the  formerly  cordial  relationship  between  Bohr  and  Heisenberg  was 
severely  disturbed,  if  not  severed,  ever  since.  Few  members  of the  international  community 
knew  that  they  continued  to  have  friendly  relations  after  the  war,  visiting  each  other,  with 
their families, in their homes in Copenhagen and Göttingen, spending their vacations together 
in Greece, and that Bohr wrote an article for the Festschrift to Heisenberg's sixtieth birthday 
in 1961. 
 
When  it became known that the Niels Bohr Archive in Copenhagen held a letter by Bohr to 
Heisenberg,  written  after  the  appearance  of  Jungk's  book  but  never  sent,  speculation 
concentrated on this document, to be published 50 years after Bohr's death, i.e. in 2012, from 
which the solution of all the open questions was expected. However, to end speculation, the 

 

3 

Niels  Bohr  Archive  released  11  documents  pertaining  to  Heisenberg's  visit,  including  the 
much-discussed  unsent  letter,  preceded  by  an  article  by  Aage  Bohr,  published  in  1967,  on 
"The  War  Years  and  the  Prospects  Raised  by  Atomic  Weapons".  The  documents,  with  the 
exception of one letter written by Heisenberg to Bohr, are unfinished drafts written by Bohr in 
the late 1950s and early 1960s, addressed to Heisenberg, but never sent. As the director of the 
Niels Bohr Archive, Finn Aaserud, points out, the documents have to be viewed with caution. 
They  were  written  16  years  or  more  after  the  event  and  represent  just  drafts,  not  finished 
papers. Nevertheless, the contents of the documents are interesting and, depending on the pre-
established views and opinions of the readers of today, surprising to a lesser or greater degree. 
Here  are  some  of  the  general  characteristics  of    the  documents,  with  my  comments  in 
brackets: 
 
•  Bohr's tone in addressing Heisenberg is extremely cordial and friendly. 
•  Bohr  was  still  highly  interested  in  clarifying  Heisenberg's  intentions  and  motivations 
behind his 1941 visit. His sentences in Document 11 c "I have long been meaning to write 
to you ..." and "I have written in such length to make the case as clear as I can for you and 
hope  we  can  talk  in greater  detail about this  when  opportunity  arises"  are  proof of this. 
(This is new information. Heisenberg was under the impression that Bohr and he, having 
differing recollections of their discussion, had come to the conclusion that it would be best 
to  let  rest  the  spirits  of  the  past.  It  is  a  pity  that  the  letter  was  not  sent.  Several 
opportunities  for  clarifying  conversations  were  missed  at  later  meetings  of  Bohr  and 
Heisenberg. It seems that Bohr was afraid he might hurt Heisenberg's feelings by insisting 
too much on his interpretation of the events.) 

•  Document 1 contains the confirmation that Bohr and Heisenberg met several times during 
Heisenberg's visit to Copenhagen in 1941: Bohr refers to "our conversations" in the plural, 
and  he  mentions  "our  conversation  in  my  room  at  the  institute"  as  well  as  the  strong 
impression  Heisenberg's  remarks  made  "on  Margrethe  and  me".  Since  it  is  unlikely that 
Bohr's wife Margrethe was present at the confidential conversation in Bohr's room in the 
institute one may assume that Heisenberg's recollection is correct that he was also invited 
to Bohr's home. Moreover, there is Heisenberg's and von Weizsäcker's testimony that the 
critical discussion took place during a walk, to avoid unwanted earwitnesses.  

•  Bohr  was,  at  the  time  of  the  visit  in  1941,  highly  distressed  by  the  circumstances  of 
Heisenberg's  visit,  his  lecture  at the  German  Culture  Institute  and    his  contacts  with the 
German  Embassy  (more  correct:  Legation)  in  Copenhagen.  (Heisenberg  had  assumed 
Bohr  would understand  that  without  such  contacts  he  would  not  have  obtained  visa  and 
permission to enter occupied Denmark.) 

•  Bohr  understood  and  appreciated  that  one  of  Heisenberg's  reasons  for  the  visit  was 
genuine care: to see how Bohr and his institute fared under German occupation and to be 
of assistance, if at all possible (Document 11 c).  

•  For Bohr it was of central and sad significance that Heisenberg during his visit expressed 
his conviction of a German victory whereas Bohr, as a Danish patriot, had placed all his 
hopes in a German defeat. Since towards the end of the war Heisenberg's conviction must 
have  disappeared,  Bohr  wondered  whether  Heisenberg,  in  retrospect,  had  forgotten  or 
repressed  his  earlier  views.  (Again,  for  Heisenberg,  mentioning  the  prospects  for  a 
German  victory,  was  not  central  to  his  mission.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  he  had,  in 
private, expressed the view that Hitler would lose the war like a chess-player would lose a 
game  into  which  he  entered  with  one  castle  less  than  his  opponent.  However,  after  the 
surprisingly fast defeats of Poland and France, the occupation of large parts of Europe and 
the  initial  great  victories  and  advances  in  the  Soviet  Union,  with  the  U.S.  still  neutral, 
Heisenberg like most non-nazi Germans had come to the conclusion that a German victory 

 

4 

now seemed likely. They feared that a German defeat  would mean Soviet occupation of 
Europe  which,  even  for  anti-nazis,  was  considered  an  even  greater  evil  than  German 
domination. Auschwitz and the full extent of nazi crimes was not yet known, but Stalin's 
massacres  were.  The  hope  -  completely  unrealistic  as  we  now  know  but  considered 
realistic at the time - was that after a German victory the German army would get rid of 
Hitler and  his  henchmen. The anti-nazi  stance of many German generals, who  later took 
part in the assassination plot of July 20, 1944, was known to persons who, like Heisenberg 
through the "Wednesday Society", were close to opposition circles. For Heisenberg, it was 
part  of  his  care  for  Bohr  to  think  in  sober  terms  of  the  future  and  of  Bohr's  and  his 
institute's survival. It would be advisable to end opposition to a victorious Germany. It is 
obvious  that  Heisenberg's  assessment  of  Germany's  chance  to  win  the  war  must  have 
changed a few months later when the U.S. entered the war and the German army suffered 
severe setbacks in Russia.) 

•  Bohr mentions several times his reticence caused by his suspected surveillance by German 
police.  (There  is  no  indication  of  an  awareness  by  Bohr  that  Heisenberg  was  under  the 
same handicap. He had to be extremely cautious in choosing his language. Mentioning to 
Bohr the existence of a German nuclear programme and of his involvement in it, could be 
interpreted, and probably was, treason punishable by death. In public conversations, also 
in the cafeteria of Bohr's institute, he may have had to say things which did not represent 
his opinion. This situation is well-known to people having lived under cruel dictatorships.) 
•  Document  6  says  that  Heisenberg  "did  not  wish  to  enter  into  technical  details  but  that 
Bohr should understand that he knew what he was talking about as he had spent 2 years 
working  exclusively  on this  question."  Bohr  had  known  about the  possibility of  nuclear 
weapons  only  in  a  very  general  way  and  at  that  time  still  had  held  the  opinion  that  the 
technical  difficulties  were  insurmountable.  Therefore  Heisenberg  found  it  necessary  to 
mention his two years of investigations in order to convince Bohr that he was not "talking 
moonshine". Bohr had been "doubtful looking" (Document 11 a). 

•  Bohr wondered (and this  is  new  information) who had authorized  Heisenberg to  discuss 
with him military secrets. (Heisenberg had assumed Bohr would understand that he spoke 
in  his  private  capacity  as  Bohr's  old  friend  and  colleague  who,  however,  because  of the 
delicacy of the  subject  discussed, had to use very  involved  language. Bohr,  on the other 
hand, could not imagine that Heisenberg acted on his own  initiative, without any special 
permission, let alone orders. But this was so. Heisenberg had thought, naively, that Bohr 
would  be  ready,  as  he  always  had  been  in  earlier  times,  to  discuss  with  him  possible 
solutions  for  complicated  problems.  He  had  lacked  the  sensitivity  for  Bohr's  patriotic 
feelings and misgivings under the changed circumstances of war and occupation. On the 
other  hand,  it  is  justified  to  say  that  it  took  great  moral  courage  to  talk  to  Bohr  about 
implications of his secret work. Heisenberg risked his neck.) 

•  Constant  German  propaganda  talks  of  the  imminent  use  of  "new  weapons"  fortified 
suspicions  by  Bohr  and  his  Danish  colleagues  that  there  was  a  German  nuclear  bomb 
programme. Assertions by Jensen to the contrary were not trusted though he himself was 
considered  honest.  But  Jensen was  working  on  the reactor  programme,  and  it  had  to  be 
doubted that he was privy to all aspects of the programme.  

•  After  Bohr's  escape  to  Sweden  and  subsequent  flight  to  Great  Britain  in  the  autumn  of 
1943 "it was quite clear already then, on the basis of intelligence reports, that there was no 
possibility  of  carrying  out  such  a  large  undertaking  in  Germany  before  the  end  of  the 
war".  (Document  11  b).  This  is  a  remarkable  confirmation  of  Heisenberg's  own 
conclusion.  It  is  also  interesting  that  these  intelligence  reports  had  no  influence  on  the 
progress of the Manhattan project. 

 

5 

•  Aage  Bohr  writes  "After  the  outbreak  of  war  and  especially  after  the  occupation  of 
Denmark  we  in  Copenhagen  were  completely  cut  off  from  following  the  allied  nations' 
efforts in the  field of atomic energy." Niels  Bohr confirms this  in Document 11 c. (Also 
Heisenberg  knew  that.  How  could  he  expect  to  do  some  spying,  as  some  writers  have 
suggested?)  In a  footnote to  his  article Aage  Bohr  assures  the  reader that  no secret  plan 
was  submitted  to  his  father  by  Heisenberg  "aimed  at  preventing  the  development  of 
atomic  weapons  through  a  mutual  agreement  with  colleagues  in  the  allied  countries." 
Again, in Document 11 c, this is what Bohr remembers. It is quite true, also according to 
Heisenberg.  It  had  indeed  been  Heisenberg's  intention  to  get  Bohr's  opinion  on 
possibilities for such an agreement or on other ways out of the impasse presented by the 
basic  feasibility  of  atomic  weapons.  But  Heisenberg  never  had  a  chance  to  present  his 
questions  because  of  Bohr's  reticence  and  Bohr's  unwillingness  to  continue  the 
conversation  when  Heisenberg,  as  an  introduction,  had  told  Bohr  that  atomic  weapons 
were technically possible, and that he knew it. He was not even allowed to add, as he had 
intended,  that  the  technology  was  very  difficult  and  would  take  a  long  time,  thereby 
giving  the  small  international  community  of  atomic  scientists  a  chance  to  use  their 
influence  in  the  meantime.  Bohr  had  stopped  listening.  This  is  admitted  by  Bohr  in 
Document 11 c where he writes "During the conversation, which because of my cautious 
attitude was only brief ...".   

 
 
 
 
New insights 
 

