Abridged version is submitted to MNRAS 

Singular-Turbulent Structure Formation in the Universe and 
the Essence of Dark Matter I. Unified model for dark matter 
and quintessence 
 
Reza Dastvan 
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Tehran, P.O. Box 13145-1384, 
Tehran, Iran. dastvan@khayam.ut.ac.ir  
 
Received ??/??/2006, ??? 
 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
Based  on  superfluid  behavior  of  a  (boson)  dark  matter  as  the 
light itself, a unified model for dark matter and quintessence is 
proposed. Inspired by (O’Dell et al. 2000) which in an exciting 
study  showed  that  particular  configurations  of  intense  off-
resonant  laser  beams  (simulate  the  Bose-Einstein  condensate) 
can  give  rise  to  an  attractive  1/r  interatomic  potential,  I  infer 
electromagnetic  origin  of  inertia  and  gravity.  Time  varying 
dark  components  result  in  time  varying  electromagnetic  fine 
structure  constant  (α)  or  the  quantities  given  in  its  definition 
(even  an  invariant  α  would  not  exclude  the  possibility  that 
these  values  might  be  changing  in  ratio  to  one  another),  in 
either case variable speed of light (VSL) with  c& <0. According 
to (Wetterich 2003a) a bound |R| = |∆α(z = 0.13)/∆α(z = 2)| < 
0.02 strongly favors quintessence with a time varying equation 
of  state  w  =  p/ρ,  where  the  value  of  (1+w)  at  present  is 
substantially  smaller 
than  for  z  =  2  and  equivalently 
compressibility  is  increased  in  the  medium  and  this  process 
has  significant 
the  process  of  structure 
formation.  It  is  possible  that  this  monotonically  increasing 
trend  of  w  extends  to  high-redshifts.  These  models  typically 
require quintessence coupling to a photon which would require 
large  coupling  between  non-baryonic  dark  matter  and  the 
scalar  field  therefore  consistent  with  our  model,  quintessence 
may  couple  to  both  non-baryonic  dark  matter  and  radiation. 
Wetterich (2003b) observe that Ωquint does not affect the time 
evolution of the fundamental couplings and α depends only on 
the  equation  of  state  w  and  this  fascinating  result  further 
support the common essence of light and boson dark matter. 

influences  on 

 

1

 

Key  words:  Cosmology:  Structure 
Formation,  Dark  Matter,  Variable 
Dark Energy, Superfluidity 

 

 
  

‘‘All things are connected.’’ Chief Seattle (1854) 

 

 

1   Introduction 
 
  The  possible  discrepancies  between  theory  and  observation  have 
motivated  new  proposals  for  the  nature  of  dark  matter.  Each  proposed 
variation  from  standard  cold,  collisionless  dark  matter  (SCDM)  has  two 
properties: (1) it can “solve” some or all of the problems described in the 
subsequent  section,  and  (2)  it  leads  to  additional  predictions  that  would 
distinguish it from all the other alternatives. 
  The  hierarchical  gravitational  collapse  of  cold  collisionless  particles 
leads  to  dense,  singular  dark  matter  halos  –  a  result  that  is  central  to 
several  fundamental  problems  with  this  model  on  small  scales.  Self-
interacting  dark  matter  has  been  proposed  to  alleviate  some  of  the 
problems  of  galaxy  formation  arising  in  the  standard  cold  dark  matter 
models (Spergel & Steinhardt 2000), (Wandelt et al. 2001). The Spergel-
Steinhardt  proposal  has  stimulated  the  interesting  possibility  that  dark 
matter  consists  of  particles  that  interact  through  the  strong  force  with 
ordinary matter. 
 
  Since all theories unifying gravity with other interactions involve scalar 
fields, more “interesting” scenarios consider dark matter in the form of a 
scalar field coherent on a very large scale, similar to those associated with 
quintessence  sources.  Even  if,  until  now,  these  remnants  of  primordial 
scalar  fields  have  not  been  directly  detected,  their  use  as  models  for 
quintessence  or  dark  matter  in  galactic  halo  structures  has  become 
widespread  (Hernández  et  al.  2004).  I  propose  a  unified  theory  for 
quintessence  and  dark  matter  in  galactic  halos  based  on  bosonic  scalar 
field  dark  matter  (Nishiyama,  Morita  &  Morikawa  2004;  Fukuyama  & 
Morikawa  2006;  Mangano,  Miele  &  Pettorino  2003;  Sahni  &  Wang 
2000) and vacuum superfluid (Winterberg 2002; Volovik 2002; Guzman 
2001;  González-Díaz  2003).  So  far,  most  of  the  attempts  to  model 
galactic dark matter halos out of real or complex scalar fields assume that 
each  galactic  halo  is  a  spherical  Bose-Einstein  condensate  of  scalar 

2

 

particles.  Subsequent  studies  added  self-interaction  and  generalized  the 
previous Newtonian analysis to be fully general relativistic. Other authors 
contributed more detailed studies which used two kinds of coupling of the 
scalar field to gravity, i.e. either minimal or non-minimal.  
  Various  bosonic  and  scalar  field  dark  matter  and/or  quintessence 
candidates with different mass and time of transition to superfluid (BEC) 
state  (at  z  >  zd  or  LTPT)  are  proposed  in  literature  (Ratra  and  Peebles 
1988;  Press  et  al.  1990;  Schramm  1990;  Gradwohl  1991a,  b;  Frieman, 
Hill & Watkins 1992; Sin 1994; Ji & Sin 1994; Lee & Koh 1996; Larsen 
and Madsen 1996; Hu, Barkana & Gruzinov 2000; Goodman 2000; Sahni 
& Wang 2000; Matos & Ureña-López 2000; Peebles 2000; Dymnikova & 
Khlopov  2000;  Arbey,  Lesgourgues  &  Salati  2001;  Guzman  2001; 
Silverman & Mallett 2001a, b, 2002; Volovik 2002; Winterberg 2002; Yu 
&  Morgan  2002;  Alcubierre  et  al.  2002;  Mangano,  Miele  &  Pettorino 
2003; Guzmán & Ureña-López 2003; Arbey, Lesgourgues & Salati 2003; 
Christianto 2003; Nishiyama, Morita & Morikawa 2004; Hernández et al. 
2004;  Ferrer  and  Grifols  2004;  Amendola  &  Barbieri  2005;  Guzmán  & 
Ureña-López  2006;  Fukuyama  &  Morikawa  2006).  Although  the 
alternative  models  could  very  well  lead  to  particle  masses  different  by 
several  orders  of  magnitude,  but  that  would  not  affect  the  principal 
conclusion  -  the  possible  existence  of  a  Bose–Einstein  condensate  of 
cosmic  extent  -  since  this  phenomenon  could  occur  throughout  a  very 
wide range of masses. For example, particles with masses as large as 10−6 
eV − which are still lower than any hypothesized for massive neutrinos − 
would  form  a  Bose–Einstein  condensate  at  critical  temperatures  below 
1000 K (Silverman & Mallett 2001a).   
  Most  of  literature  based  on  theoretical  calculations  and  galactic 
information  (rotation  curves,  luminous core size of galaxies, mean mass 
density,  etc.)  proposed  an  ultra  low  or  low  mass  boson  (Silverman  & 
Mallett 2001b, 2002; Hu, Barkana & Gruzinov 2000; Sin 1994; Frieman, 
Hill & Watkins 1992; Sahni & Wang 2000; Matos & Ureña-López 2000; 
Larsen  &  Madsen  1996)  and  the  boson mass estimated in most of these 
approaches roughly coincides with the value ~ 1.1-2× 10−23 −10−22 eV/c2. 
(Nishiyama,  Morita  &  Morikawa  2004;  Fukuyama  &  Morikawa  2006) 
proposed the upper limit of the boson mass < 2 eV and proposed that if 
the  boson  temperature  is  smaller  than  the  radiation  temperature,  we 
cannot set the upper limit of the boson mass. One of the proposed boson 
candidates is ultra light pseudo Nambu-Goldstone boson (Schramm 1990; 
Sin  1994;  Ji  &  sin  1994;  Frieman  et  al.  1995;  Yu  &  Morgan  2002). 
Although  the  others  proposed  massive  scalar  fields  (Goodman  2000; 
Peebles  2000;  Arbey  et  al.  2003)  or    Planck  mass  Bose  particles 
(Winterberg 1992, 2002). 
 

3

 

  In these two papers, I aim to reconstruct the jigsaw puzzle of structure 
formation  in  the  universe  and  I  propose  the  outline  of  a  comprehensive 
and unifying theory of dark matter and quintessence leaning on superfluid 
or  Bose-Einstein  condensate  essence  of  dark  matter.  In  this  immense 
jigsaw puzzle, some fragments are not discovered yet but the frame of the 
scenario  is  proposed.  In  the  subsequent  papers  several  aspects  of  the 
scenario  are  discussed.  In  section  2,  I  describe  a  unified  theory  for 
quintessence  and  dark  matter  in  galactic  halos  and  the  nature  of  dark 
matter. In section 3, based on the latest progresses in theoretical physics, 
new  insights  into  the  essences  of  wave-particle  duality  of  matter,  light, 
gravity  and  inertia,  SCQGP,  and  CMB  have  proposed.  In  the  final 
section, we investigate the relevancy of time varying constants with time 
varying dark components.  
 
 
2   Unified model for dark matter & quintessence and superfluid 
behavior of DM 
 
 
2.1 bosonic scalar field dark matter 
 
 Basic model we construct would have the following general features:  
 
1.     Boson  dark  matter  or  self-interacting  (the  dark  matter  interacts 
strongly with ordinary baryonic matter, as well as with itself) normal 
part  (excitations)  of  superfluid  boson  dark  matter,  which  possesses 
some  nonvanishing  amount  of  viscosity  and  friction  is  introduced  as 
dark  matter  which  initially  dominates  the  energy  density  and  in 
literature, the condensate (superfluid) part of the superfluid boson dark 
matter  is  identified  as  quintessence  and  SFDM  (scalar  field  dark 
matter, equivalent of ΛCDM; Alcubierre et al. 2002) or FCDM (fuzzy 
cold  dark  matter  (Hu,  Barkana  &  Gruzinov  2000),  a  similar  stuff  of 
axion dark matter*). 

2.     One of the major differences of my model to the others is the nature 
of  the  observed  universe  acceleration.  In  this  model,  there  is  no 
obligation about the negative pressure of the quintessence which is a 
liquid  in  BEC  state.  In  section  4,  I  introduce  my  convincing  reasons 
about this exciting and adventuresome feature of the dark component.  
3.     When the energy density of BEC exceeds some critical value around 
z  =  zc,  the  inhomogeneous  components  of  the  condensate  would 

                                             
* An  ultra  light  pseudo-Goldstone  boson  which  is  cold  by  virtue  of  being  born  in  a 
Bose condensate. 

 

4

 

rapidly  collapse  on  the  turbulent  coherent  structures  (maybe  into 
massive  object  made  of  scalar  field  particles  in  quantum  coherent 
states like boson stars or black holes) which recognized as SFDM in 
literature  (Alcubierre  et  al.  2002,  Silverman  &  Mallett  2002;  Yu  & 
Morgan  2002)  and  work  as  the  standard  cold  dark  matter  halo  of 
galaxies  with  the  equation  of  state  p  =  0  (Fukuyama  &  Morikawa 
2006;  Nishiyama,  Morita  &  Morikawa  2004;  Yu  &  Morgan  2002; 
Alcubierre  et  al.  2002).  New  observations  show  that  supermassive 
central objects lying in active galactic nuclei seem to be related to the 
velocity  dispersion  of  the  dark  matter  composing  the  dark  halo, 
suggesting  therefore  that  the  central  object  was  formed  at  the  same 
time  than  the  halo  (Ferrarese  &  Merritt  2000;  Gebhardt  et  al.  2000). 
This  is  probably  contrary  to  the  standard  idea  about  galactic  nuclei 
that proposes the existence of a central black hole, since it should be 
formed a time after the disc, i.e. much more after the formation of the 
halo, therefore the last word has not been said. These rapid collapses 
take  place  well  after  the  decoupling  stage,  and  therefore  observed 
pattern  in  CMB  fluctuations  would  not  strongly  be  violated.  I  have 
developed  a  unified  cosmological  model  of  quintessence  and  DM 
using the Bose-Einstein condensation of a light boson and further the 
mechanism  for  the  early  formation  of  nonlinear  objects.  If  we  adopt 
this  scenario,  the  quintessence  dominance  means  that  our  universe  is 
in almost the ground state described by a macroscopic wave function. 
Thus the largest scale of the Universe, as well as the smallest, would 
turn out to be described by quantum mechanics. 

 
  I  introduce  the  following  simplest  model  for  the  BEC:  SFDM  is 
identified as CDM with the equation of state p = 0 and the quintessence 
with  p  =  <w>  ρ  (w  ≥  0).  Although  in  this  manner,  the  quintessence 
doesn’t have negative pressure and it’s not dark energy at all. I prefer to 
use its primary name and not to add a new member in essence family.     
  Let  us  consider  the  non-linear  stage  of  the  condensate  collapse.  I 
suppose a uniform spherically distributed region of BEC of the radius r. 
Self gravity of the sphere would further accelerate the collapse especially 
in  the  later  stage.  The  collapse  would  continue  until  the  Heisenberg 
uncertainty  principle  begins  to  support  the  structure,  or  a  black  hole  is 
formed. Not all fluctuations will collapse into stable objects. Anyway the 
collapsed  condensate  forms  localized  compact  objects  classified  as  cold 
dark matter. Cold dark matter made up of a condensate of light particles 
would  be  frustrated  in  its  attempts  to  cluster  on  small  scales  because  of 
the  uncertainty  principle,  the  resulting  SFDM  (equivalent  of  FCDM, 
Sahni  &  Wang  2000;  Hu,  Barkana  &  Gruzinov  2000)  might  provide  a 
natural explanation for two major difficulties faced by the standard CDM 

5

 

scenario. (i) The dearth of halo dwarf galaxies: the number of dwarf’s in 
the  local  group  is  an  order  of  magnitude  smaller  than  predicted  by  N-
body  simulations  of  SCDM.  (ii)  The  discrepancy  between  observed 
shapes of galaxy rotation curves and simulated dark matter halos. Recent 
observations  of  low  surface  brightness  (LSB)  galaxies  show  them  to 
possess  rotation  curves  which  indicate  a  constant  mass  density  in  the 
central  core  region.  These  observations  are  difficult  to  accommodate 
within  the  SCDM  model  since  high  resolution  N-body  simulations  of 
SCDM halos indicate a cuspy central density profile having the form ρ  ∝  
r−1.5  in  the  core  region.  SFDM  inhibits  gravitational  clustering  on  small 
scales and could provide a natural resolution to the core density problem 
for  disc  galaxy  halos.  As  a  consequence  of  the  quantum  uncertainty 
principle,  the  particles  of  a  BEC  cannot  be  localized  to  regions  smaller 
than  the  condensate  coherence  length  (as  determined  by  equilibrium 
between  quantum  pressure  and  gravitational  attraction  and  this  length  is 
equivalent to the Jean’s scale λJ for the onset of gravitationally unstable 
mass density perturbations) which, for particles of sufficiently low mass, 
corresponds to a size of the scale of the luminous core of galaxies. In this 
way  SFDM  within  a  galactic  halo  can  provide  the  non-luminous  mass 
needed  to  keep  the  galaxy  together,  yet  not  give  rise  to  spike-like 
structures  in  the  core  or  an  excessive  number  of  satellite  structures 
(Alcubierre  et  al.  2002;  Silverman  &  Mallett  2001a,  b,  2002;  Sahni  & 
Wang 2000; Matos & Ureña-López 2000). 
  Based  on  Silverman  &  Mallett  (2002),  some  galactic  properties  are:   
Condensate coherence length ξC, 
 

ξ
c

=

2

h
GMm

2

=

⎛
⎜⎜
⎝

2

3
h
4
Gm
ρπ

2

⎞
=⎟⎟
⎠

⎛
⎜⎜
⎝

2
6
λ
c
Λ

c

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

1
4

1
4

                                                                 (1) 

determined by the boson mass, m, and condensate mass, M, irrespective 

of  the  radial  variation  in  density.  The  second  equality  in  equation  (1) 

expresses  ξC  in  terms  of  the  mean  density  defined  by  M  =

4
π 3
ρξ
C
3

;  the 

third equality expresses ξC in terms of the boson Compton wavelength λc 

and the condensate density parameter 

≡Λ
c

(which differs from the 

8
G
ρπ
2
c

cosmological constant Λ since ρ >> ρc). 

  Quantum Jeans scale, 

6

 

λ
JQ

~

2

h
mG
ρ

2

⎛
⎜⎜
⎝

4/1
⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

                                                                                        (2) 

this  corresponds  to  within  a  numerical  factor  of  order  unity  to  the 
coherence length ξC. Thus, density perturbations of a size less than ξC are 
gravitationally  stable.  For  fluctuations  of  a  size  much  greater  than  ξC, 
SFDM behaves like ΛCDM.  
  Theoretical slightly increasing rotation curve of luminous matter,  

u

tanh
u

)(
uv

v
= ∞

1

−

                                                                                   (3)  

SFDM is more like a wave than a particle, and the galactic halos are giant 
systems of condensed bose liquid. Three predictions are made:  
  (1) Mass profile ρ ~ r−1.6 (Sin 1994);  
  (2) There are ripple-like fine structures in rotation curve (Sin 1994; Yu 
& Morgan 2002);  
  (3) As is well known, the bulk of a stationary superfluid, in contrast to a 
normal  fluid,  will  remain  stationary  when  its  container  is  rotated. 
However,  if  a  sample  of  superfluid  of  size  R  is  rotated  at  angular 
frequency  ω  which  exceeds  a  critical  frequency,  then  localized  vortices 
can form. Yu & Morgan (2002) studied vortices in a rotating dark matter 
condensate comprehensively and showed that the presence of vortices is 
consistent with observed rotation curves of galaxies although even in the 
presence  of  vortices,  the  rotational  motion  of  superfluid  dark  matter 
vortices would not show up as red- and blue-shifted subgalactic regions. 
Evidence of dark matter vortices, however, could conceivably be sought 
through 
in  rotationally-induced  frame-dragging  effects  manifested 
gravitational lensing or variation in polarization of transmitted light from 
distant background sources. 
   
  We  now  turn  our  attention  to  the global evolution of quintessence/DM 
in the expanding Universe. The evolution of the various energy densities 
is  governed  by  the  set  of  equations  (the  energy  density  of  the 
quintessence  part  falls  off  and  an  expansion  term  must  be  subtracted 
from quintρ&

), 

a
=&
a
Γ′−

8 ρπG
3
  ,
ρρ
&
quint
n

 ρ = ρquint + ρn + ρl, H ≡

, ρBEC = ρquint + ρl                              (4) 

3

H

3
−=

H

n

−

quint

quint

ρ

ρ
n

z
)(

Γ−

Γ=

ρρρ
&
l

ρ
&
Γ=Γ
where ρquint, ρl and ρn are the energy densities of quintessence part of the 
BEC, localized energy density of SFDM (~ΛCDM) part of the BEC after 
the  collapse  and  excited  part  of  DM  (which  dominates  initially),  
respectively.  The  sedimentation  of  BEC  in  the  expanding  Universe 

ρ
l

ρ

quint

  

n

3
−=

Γ′+

H

  ,

  ,

7

 

from 

the  superfluid  vacuum, 

slowly  proceeds  with  the  time  scale  Γ−1  but  the  rate  of  superfluid  and 
BEC  density  increment  is  decreased  along  with  aging  of  the  universe, 
therefore  the  Γ  is  a  dynamic  value.  Nishiyama,  Morita  &  Morikawa 
(2004) proposed that cycle of gradual sedimentation (transition of excited 
part to BEC) and rapid collapse of condensate (to SFDM) repeats many 
times and self-regularizes the ratio of quintessence and dark matter to be 
order  one.  But  in  this  model,  after  the  formation  of  cosmic  coherent 
structures  (described  in  the  second  paper)  because  of  the  matter  flow 
induced by fluid dynamics of the cosmic foam, the condensation of boson 
dark  matter  to  BEC  proceeds  continuously  with  the  time  scale  Γ−1  and 
above  a  critical  ρBEC,  a  part  of  BEC  rapidly  collapses  on  coherent 
structures to form SFDM halo and central object of galaxies as described 
above.  In  addition  to  the  z-dependent  reduction  in  the  rate  of 
sedimentation  which  determines  the  trend  of  quintessence  density 
increment,  based  on  the  so-called  Landau  critical  velocity  criterion, 
anywhere  the  relative  velocity  |vquint  −  vn|  of  the  coherent  flow  of  the 
excitations  (excited  part  of  DM)  in  the  cosmic  foam  with  respect  to  the 
vacuum (quintessence part of the BEC) is larger than the Landau critical 
velocity, |vquint − vn|> vLandau, new excitations (excited part of DM) can be 
created 
is 
reconstructed  due  to  created  quasiparticles  but  remains  superfluid  (non-
dissipative)  with  reduced  density.  These  two  processes  regularize  the 
ratio of quintessence and dark matter. 
 
  For  the  scalar  φ-field  to  remain  subdominant  until  recently  its  energy 
density must decrease rapidly at early times. Such behavior clearly cannot 
arise for polynomial potentials V (φ)  ∝  φ  p, 0 < p < few, for which ρquint 
will  rapidly  dominate  the  total  density  resulting  in  a  colossal  Λ-term 
today if ρquint ~ ρrad initially.  
  Bassett  et  al.  (2000)  proposed  a  model  of  dark-matter  candidates  in 
which, if V (φ) has a quadratic minimum, the φ-field will oscillate about 
this minimum and its average equation of state will be that of dust. This 
implies  that  the  φ-field  will  behave  like  axions  or  cold  dark  matter. 
Similarly if the potential is quartic, the average equation of state will be 
that of radiation. 
 
  An interesting potential which interpolates between an exponential and a 
power law is: 
V
(Sahni  &  Wang  2000;  Matos  &  Ureña-López 
2000)                                                                                                        (5) 
where λ and p are constants, has the property that the scalar field equation 
of state mimics background matter w ≃ wB at early times whereas <w> = 

the  vacuum 

therefore 

[
cosh(

)
=Φ

−Φ

1)

] p

V
0

λ

(

 

8

 

−

λφ

λφ

V

V

λφ

−∝ e

V )(
φ

]1)
−

[
cosh(

~
≈ eV
0
−
λφ

)(
φ
≈ eV
0

(p  −  1)/(p  +  1)  at  late  times.  Consequently,  SFDM  and  maybe 
quintessence (at low z, if wφ be a dynamic and z-dependent value) for p = 
1.  Thus  the  cosine  hyperbolic  potential  is  able  to  describe  both  dark 
matter  and  quintessence  within  a  tracker  framework  (Sahni  &  Wang 
2000;  Sahni  2004).  ρquint  /  ρtotal  <  0.2  is  necessary  in  order  to  satisfy 
nucleosynthesis constraints. After transition to superfluidity ρquint /ρB (ρB 
of background matter) begins to grow.  
φ V
)(
  As  mentioned  above,  for  p  =  1, 
  which  combine 
=
0
the  properties  of  a  tracking  solution  with  a  minimum  that  provides  the 
quintessence at late times; V(φ) gives a very similar result as one would 
obtain  for  a  simple  exponential  potential 
  at  early  times. 
Therefore,  for  |λφ|  >>  1,  i.e.  far  from  the  minimum  it  has  asymptotic 
form: 
; this is similar to exponential quintessence potential: 
V
)(
φ
  (Ratra  &  Peebles  1988;  Wetterich  1988a;  Ferreira  & 
Joyce 1998) thus the proposed potential preserving some of the desirable 
properties  of  the  simplest  exponential  potential  case  (Peebles  &  Ratra 
2003). 
  A unified picture of quintessence and SFDM in which both components 
are  described  by  a  pair  of  scalar  fields  evolving  under  the  action  of  the 
potential but with different values of the exponent p; similar values bring 
together the potential of them: 
)
(
(
p
1)
cosh(
cosh(
V
V
−
φ
                       (6) 
ψ
pψ = 1 in the case of SFDM and in the case of quintessence the exponent 
pφ  should  have  a  value  which  the  wφ  be  ≥  0.  If  pφ  =  1  then  there  is  no 
difference  in  the  potential  of  SFDM  and  quintessence  in  the  present 
epoch, both of them as the BEC (superfluid) state of boson dark matter. 
This  approach  ameliorates  the  ‘coincidence  problem’  between  dark 
matter  (CDM)  and  quintessence  which  arises  in  standard  cosmology.  It 
also  significantly  reduces  the  discrepancy  between  the  present  value  of 
ρm/ρr and that at the end of inflation (Sahni & Wang 2000).  
 
  The collapsing process occurs on the small (ex. galaxy scale) and large 
scale (clusters and super clusters) in the foam sheets.  
  Since the strong non-linearity is formed in the very early stage, no extra 
biasing process is necessary in this model. 
 
 
2.2   ‘‘Vacuum aether superfluid’’ as dark matter and quintessence 
 
‘‘nature abhors vacuum’’ 
 

,(
)
ψφ

ψλ
ψ

φλ
φ

1)
−

) ψ

V
φ

=

+

p

9

 

  According  to  Christianto  (2003),  we  should  mention  there  are  at  least 
two  groups  of  approaches  in  attempting  to  model  perfect  fluid  as  the 
omnipresent medium in our universe: 
(i) the geometrical approach; and (ii) the medium approach. 
  All theories based on geometrical approach consider vortices as part of 
their  inherent  topology  structure.  In  the  second  model,  it  is  superfluid, 
which  induces  vortical  structures  not  the  spacetime  structure  an  sich.  In 
these  groups,  the  spacetime  remains  Euclidean,  while  the  superfluid 
aether drags celestial bodies around. Proponents of this view include: 
 

•  Volovik’s 3He superfluid model 
•  Winterberg’s phonon-roton superfluid vacuum aether 
•  Consoli’s Higgs boson condensate vacuum medium 
•  Barceló’s bosonic induced gravity 
•  DeAquino’s superconducting state model of vacuum quantum 

 
  This  group  sounds  like  an  ad-hoc  (inducing  aether  medium);  their 
models  apparently  were  confirmed  by  the  superfluid-superconducting 
structure of neutron stars. There are also recent hypothetical boson stars, 
P-stars,  and  quark  strange  stars,  which  all  considers  boson  in  their 
inherent structures (Christianto 2003). 
 
    For  applications  to  cosmology,  it  is  presumed  that  the  “vacuum”  is  a 
superfluid-like  continuum  in  which  the  formation  of  topological  defects 
as  “vortices”  generates  the  stars  and  galaxies  as  components  of  the 
normal fluid. A question arises as to how to describe the physical origin 
of  wave  mechanics  of  such  large-scale  structures.  This  leads  to  the 
Winterberg  hypothesis  (Winterberg  1992,  2002)  of  the  superfluid 
phonon-roton  as  a  quantum  vacuum  aether.  In  effect,  the  background  is 
the  “vacuum  aether  superfluid”  and  the  stars  and  galaxies  are  the 
“condensed objects” within it (Christianto 2003; Winterberg 2002). In a 
unified  view,  universe  filled  with  fluids  which  unitarily  describe  as  a 
single  vacuum  entity  either  both  dark  matter  and  quintessence,  so 
respectively  unifying  the  notion  of  quintessence  and  that  of  all  dark 
components  (González-Díaz  2003).  An  analog  of  Maxwell’s  aether  as  a 
frictionless  fluid  with  small  vortices,  vacuum  aether  superfluid  is  a 
quantum  fluid  made  up  of  Bose  and  Fermi  particles  with  excitation 
energy spectrum similar that of helium. 
 
  A fluid dynamic model, of course, implies that the vacuum is a medium. 
As  Planck  had  shown  back  in  1911,  quantum  theory  demands  that  the 
vacuum is not empty but rather filled with the quantum mechanical zero 
point  energy,  by  Nernst  called  aether.    According  to  Landau,  superfluid 

10

 

the  1970’s 

He-II corresponds to a flowing vacuum state, similar to a cosmic aether, 
in  which  quasiparticles  –  bosonic  zero  modes  of  quantum  vacuum  – 
move.  Winterberg  (2002)  called  it  ‘Planck  aether’  (aether  composed  of 
densely  packed  Planck  mass  particles  which  one  may  simply  call  the 
Planck aether). 
 
  Apart from the kind of Bose particle which comprises the vacuum aether 
superfluid, I investigate the properties of that as the dark components of 
the universe.  
 
  Winterberg proposed a Planck aether which in its ground state is a two 
component  positive-negative  mass  superfluid  with  phonon-roton  energy 
the  discovery  of 
spectrum  for  each  component  (in 
supersymmetry  led  to  the  hope  that,  since  bosons  and  fermions  (of 
identical  mass)  contribute  equally  but  with  opposite  sign  to  the  vacuum 
expectation  value  of  physical  quantities,  the  cosmological  constant 
problem  may  be  resolved  by  a  judicious  balance  between  bosons  and 
fermions  in  nature.  However,  it  is  well  known  that  there  is  no 
supersymmetry  in  our  low-energy  world. This means that there must by 
an energy scale ESuSy below which the supersymmetry is violated and thus 
there is no balance between bosons and fermions in the vacuum energy).  
 
  Assuming  that  the  excitation  spectrum  measured  in  superfluid  helium 
4He or  3He-A is universal. The vacuum of space is a superfluid made up 
of  Bose  and  Fermi  particles,  with  the  particles  of  the  standard  model 
explained as quasiparticle- excitations of this superfluid.  
 
 
 
3   Superfluidity and universality 
 
  According to Landau, superfluid He-II corresponds to a flowing vacuum 
state,  similar  to  a  cosmic  aether,  in  which  quasiparticles  –  bosonic  zero 
modes of quantum vacuum – move. The quanta of these collective modes 
of  the  vacuum  form  a  rarefied  gas  which  is  responsible  for  the  thermal 
and  viscous  effects  ascribed  to  the  presence  of  the  normal  component.  
Feynman’s  first  superfluid  paper  argued that in spite of the inter-atomic 
interactions, superfluid helium was a Bose-Einstein condensate similar to 
what  happens  in  the  ideal  gas  where  the  interactions  are  absent.  In 
transition  to  superfluidity,  a  system  of  strongly-interacting  particles  is 
replaced  by  a  collection  of  non  (or  weakly)  interacting  “elementary 
excitations”  or  “quasiparticles”.  The  normal  fluid  is  a  gas  of  excitations 
where  the  vacuum  is  the  superfluid.  The  dense  system  of  strongly 

11

 

interacting  4He  atoms  can  be  represented  in  the  low-energy  corner  by  a 
dilute  system  of  weakly  interacting  quasiparticles  (phonons  and  rotons). 
In addition, the state without excitation (the ground state, or vacuum) has 
its  own  degrees  of  freedom:  it  can  experience  the  coherent  collective 
motion. After the works of Onsager (1949) and Feynman (1955), it was 
understood  that  rotational  degrees  of  freedom  were  related  to  quantized 
vortices. The lowest energy level related to rotational motion is provided 
by a vortex ring of minimum possible size whose energy ~ ħ2/ma0
2 is in 
agreement with Landau’s suggestion.  
   
  Universe  fluid  in  the  post-inflationary  period  behaved  as  if  was  a 
mixture of two different fluids. One of these (boson dark matter) behaves 
like a superfluid after the transition to superfluidity. The other is a normal 
viscous  fluid  (ordinary  matter),  so  above  the  Tc,  superfluid  transition 
temperature of boson dark matter, we have a completely viscous universe. 
The  existence  of  these  two  flows  is  seen  especially  clearly  when  a 
rotating  superfluid  structure  rotates  about  its  axis.  In  this  situation  the 
superfluid  part  remaining  at  rest.  Consequently,  the  total  moment  of 
inertia  I  of  the  rotating  structure  is  less  than  the  moment  of  inertia  I0 
calculated  on  the  assumption  that  the  whole  fluid  rotates,  and  a 
measurement of the ratio I/I0 enables us to find at once what parts of the 
fluid  are  normal  and  superfluid.  The  superfluid  flow  has  two  other 
important properties: it does not involve entropy and heat transfer, and it 
is  always  potential  flow.  Hence  it  follows  that  a  superfluid  flow  is 
thermodynamically  reversible.  Since  superfluid  flow  is  potential  flow,  a 
steady  superfluid  flow  exerts  no  force  on  a  solid  body  (d’Alembert’s 
paradox). The normal flow, on the other hand, exerts a drag force. If the 
flow  is  such  that  the  superfluid  and  normal  mass  transfers  balance,  we 
have a very unusual flow: a force acts on a body immersed in dark matter, 
but  there  is  no  net  mass  transfer.  The  thermo-mechanical  effect  in 
superfluid  is  as  follows:  when  superfluid  flows  out  of  the  bulk  stream 
through  the  thin  spaces,  a  rise  in  temperature  occurs  in  the  bulk  fluid. 
This phenomenon has the natural explanation that the flow of superfluid 
part transfers no heat, so that the heat remaining in the bulk is distributed 
over a smaller quantity of matter (Landau & Lifshitz 1987).   
 
  The liquid phase of the  4He, is currently used as a system for exploring 
the  dynamics  of  second  order  phase  transitions  analogous  to  the  GUT 
symmetry breaking phase transition of the early universe. The symmetry 
breaking  associated  with  superconductivity  and  superfluid  transitions  is 
gauge symmetry breaking. The low mass of the helium atom will imply a 
large value of EZ (zero-point energy). In the  4He, the stable phase at T = 
0; P = 0 must be the liquid. 

12

 

 
 
 

 

 

Figure  1.    Normal  and  superfluid  densities  of  HeII,  ρn  and  ρs, 
divided  by  the  total  density  ρ  of  the  liquid,  as  functions  of 
temperature T; (Andronikashvili 1971). 

is 

superfluid 

two-fluid  model  of 

 
 
 
3.1 superfluidity and wave-particle duality 
 
a  non-fundamental 
  The 
phenomenological  explanation  presented  by  Landau  (1941).  We  assume 
that  we  are  dealing  with  HeII  in  the  linear  regime:  i.e.  all  velocities, 
temperature gradients, pressure gradients and so on will be assumed to be 
not too large. These ideas can be developed quantitatively by deriving the 
relevant  equations  of  motion  for  the  two-fluid  system.  They  are 
sometimes known as the thermohydrodynamical equations because of the 
peculiar  necessity  of  intermingling  thermodynamics  and  hydrodynamics 
in  their  derivation.  Based  on  Landau  theory,  two  fluids  interpenetrate 
freely, passing through each other entirely without interaction but where 
velocities,  or  gradients  in  T  and  P,  become  sufficiently  large,  quantized 
vortices  are  created  in  the  superfluid  component.  These  result  in  the 
development of a so-called mutual friction between the two components 
whenever  their  relative  velocity  is  non-zero,  in  partial  violation  of  this 
premise of the two-fluid model. In most physical situations, the measured 

13

 

sυ

0≠

0=

×∇ sυ

critical velocities in HeII are found to be much smaller than vLandau. This 
is  because  of  the  assumption,  that  excitation  spectrum  for  helium  II 
includes  all  the  permitted  low-lying  excited  states  of  the  liquid,  is  not 
entirely  justified.  While  it  is  true  that  the  indicated  dispersion  curve 
includes  all  permitted  elementary  excitations,  it  turns  out  that  other 
(metastable)  excitations  involving  quantized  vortex  rings  and  lines  can 
also  exist  and  that  their  creation  is  often  characterized  by  critical 
velocities which are smaller than vLandau. Also the Landau critical velocity 
vLandau  is  vanishingly  small  in  3He-A  because  of  the  gapless  fermionic 
energy  spectrum  (vLandau  ~  Δ/p0).  Also  derived  from  Landau  theory  the 
superfluid  component  carries  no  entropy  and  experiences  no  flow 
resistance  whatever;  that  is,  its  viscosity  is  identically  zero  and  no 
turbulence  can  be  created  in  it, 
  so  the  superfluid  flow  is 
×∇
potential,  but  later  Onsager  (1949)  and  Feynman  (1955)  found  that  this 
statement must be generalized: 
 at singular lines, the quantized 
vortices,  around  which  the  phase  of  the  order  parameter  winds  by  2πN. 
The  discovery  of  superfluid  3He-A  further  weakened  the  rule:  the 
nonsingular vorticity can be produced by the regular texture of the order 
parameter – the wave function of Cooper pair with spin S = 1 and orbital 
momentum L = 1 – according to the Mermin-Ho relation (Mermin & Ho 
1976). As distinct from superfluid  4He, in  3He-A there is no energy gap 
between  rotational  and  irrotational  motions.  This  is  the  reason  why  the 
bulk  3He-A  behaves  as  normal  fluid.  Thus  none  of  the  conditions 
representing the signatures of superfluidity in Landau’s sense are strictly 
valid in a system like 3He-A (Volovik 2003). 
 
  Superfluidity  must  be  explained  as  macroscopic  quantum  phenomena. 
The  existence  of  Bose-Einstein  condensation  does  not  directly  imply 
superfluidity, because an ideal Bose gas is not a superfluid. The lambda 
transition does, in fact, correspond to Bose-Einstein condensation, albeit 
in  a  modified  form  because  of  the  presence  of  interatomic  forces.  The 
superfluid  vacuum  is  thus  more  complicated  than  its  predecessor  –  the 
Bose–Einstein  condensate.  For  example,  experiments  show  that  the 
condensate fraction of superfluid  4He at T = 0 is c. 14%, rather than the 
100%  expected  of  an  ideal  gas  (see  Fig.  2)  and  this  is  an  expected 
consequence  of  the  finite  interatomic  forces,  which  cause  some  of  the 
particles  to  occupy  what  are  called  depletion  levels,  even  at  T  =  0, 
depleting the fraction of particles in the condensate, although, the trends 
of the increment in superfluid and condensate fraction is rather identical. 
Nevertheless,  like  some  cosmological  literature  (Nishiyama,  Morita  & 
Morikawa  2004;  Silverman  &  Mallett  2002),  sometimes  in  this  theory  I 
use  Bose–Einstein  condensation  instead  of  transition  to  superfluidity. 

14

 

Also,  in  spite  of  the  knowledge  that  Landau  two-fluid  model  of 
superfluidity is a non-fundamental and defective theory, in some parts of 
this theory, we are compelled to utilize it. 
 
  Although the two-fluid model describes most aspects of the behavior of 
HeII remarkably well, it is important always to remember that there can 
be no suggestion of two physically distinct materials being present. HeII 
is  an  assembly  of  4He  atoms,  all  of  which  are  identical.  The  rotating 
cylinders measure the normal fluid; the thin tubes measure the superfluid 
flow.  One  of  these  motions  is  normal,  has  the  same  properties  as  the 
motion  of  an  ordinary  viscous  fluid,  but  the  other  is  the  motion  of 
superfluid.  Maybe  the  two  motions  occur  without  any  transfer  of 
momentum (Landau & Lifshitz 1987). 
 
 
 

 
Figure  2.    The  condensate  fraction  of  liquid  4He  (Sears  et  al. 
1982;  Campbell  1983).  The  full  curve 
theoretical 
temperature-dependence fitted to the data points. 

is  a 

 

 
 
 
  “Light”  like  the  “superfluid  dark  matter”  has  a  dual  behavior. 
Surprisingly, we cannot separate these two behaviors in each case rather 
we can only distinguish them. “Wave and particle behavior of light” and 
“superfluid and normal flow of superfluid dark matter” are coupled with 

15

 

each  other.  Superfluid  dark  matter  is  reminiscent  of  the  aether  and 
modeling the universe using superfluid aether is compatible. 
  (Chiao 2000) showed the possibility that photons, which are bosons, can 
form  a  2D  superfluid  due  to  Bose-Einstein  condensation  inside  a 
nonlinear Fabry-Perot cavity filled with atoms in their ground states. The 
effective  mass  and  chemical  potential  for  a  photon  inside  this  fluid  are 
nonvanishing.  This  implies  the  existence  of  a  Bogoliubov  dispersion 
relation for the low-lying elementary excitations of the photon fluid, and 
in particular, that sound waves exist for long-wavelength, low-frequency 
disturbances  of  this  fluid.  These  fascinating  experiments  provide 
evidence for the superfluid nature of photons. 
 
  The  world  consists  of  interacting  particles  and  waves.  In  our  ordinary 
perception  of  reality,  we  are  fairly  confident  that  we  can  distinguish 
easily between waves and particles, but in fact they can sometimes switch 
identities. Light waves may be regarded as a stream of massless particles, 
also  called  photons,  and  particles  of  matter  sometimes  have  a  wavelike 
nature.  Generally  speaking,  the  corresponding  wavelength  is  extremely 
short,  but  for  atoms  that  move  slowly,  it  may  be  observable.  Einstein 
predicted  that  if  a  gas  is  cooled  to  very  low  temperatures,  all  the  atoms 
should gather in the lowest energy state. Matter waves of the individual 
atoms then merge into a single wave; indeed, they can be said to ‘‘sing in 
unison.’’  Thousands  of  atoms  behave  like  one  big  super  atom.  This  is 
Bose-Einstein  condensation  (Sune  Svanberg,  Nobel  Prize  in  Physics 
2001).  
 
Laser light as a Bose-Einstein condensate   
 
  It should be noted that the most familiar examples of the situation where 
particles  occupy  a  single  wave  state,  so  that  the  wave  function  can  be 
considered  classical,  are  electromagnetic  waves  and  laser  lights.  The 
invention of the laser led to the discovery of a new state of light, namely 
the  coherent  state,  which  is  a  very  robust  one.  Ketterle  was  also  able  to 
extract a beam of coherent matter from the condensate, thus achieving the 
first atom laser. An ordinary laser yields coherent radiation, an atom laser 
a stream of coherent matter. 
  Bose-Einstein condensates are formed by cooling gas atoms to a fraction 
of a degree above absolute zero. At that temperature, the atoms all drop 
into  the  same  quantum  state.  That  makes  them  coherent,  all  possessing 
the same quantum wave function, a state comparable to that of photons in 
laser  systems.  Cubic  nonlinearities  show  up  in  the  Landau-Ginzburg 
equations  for  coherent  macroscopic  order  parameters  or  giant  effective 

16

 

quantum  wavefunctions  in  second  order  phase  transitions  including 
superfluids and lasers. 
 
  It is now believed that most systems displaying free motion of particles 
well  below  some  characteristic  degeneracy  temperature  transform  to  the 
superfluid state or undergo condensation. 
 
  According  to  the  de  Broglie  theory  of  wave-particle  duality  of 
everything,  this  duality  can  be  interpreted  as  superfluidity  of  everything 
in  the  universe  but  based  on  the  extended  and  unified  model  of 
superfluidity  as  described  above.  The  Universe  includes  fermionic 
quasiparticles  in  Fermi  superfluids  and  bosonic  quasiparticles  in  Bose 
superfluids. 
 
  Bose-Einstein condensate behaves as a single quantum object despite its 
size.  Because  of  this  behaviour,  it  is  hoped  that  fundamental  tests  of 
Quantum  Mechanics  can  be  made.  An  example  of  this  Quantum 
Mechanical  behaviour  is  the  interference  between  two  condensates.  Just 
as  water  ripples  or  light  waves  interfere  (as  in  Young's  double  slit 
experiment),  two  separate  condensates  can  be  released  from  their  traps 
and  interfere  as  they  overlap.  This  was  first  observed  in  1996  at  MIT, 
demonstrating the wave-like behaviour of the condensate. 
 
  Every  fermionic  material  must  pair  (BCS  or  Cooper  pair,  etc.)  before 
transition  to  superfluidity  or  Bose-Einstein  condensation.  The  basic 
concept of the BCS-BEC crossover is as follows: As long as the attractive 
interaction  between  fermions 
the 
superfluidity characterized by the energy gap in the BCS mechanism. On 
the other hand, if the attractive interaction is strong enough, the fermions 
first form bound molecules (bosons). Then they start to condense into the 
bosonic zero-mode at some critical temperature. These two situations are 
smoothly connected without the phase transition. One of the most striking 
features of the crossover is that the critical temperature in the BEC region 
is independent of the coupling for the attraction between fermions. This is 
because the increase of the coupling only affects the internal structure of 
the  bosons,  while  the  critical  temperature  is  determined  by  the  boson’s 
kinetic energy. 
 
  The  naive  calculations  of  the  energy  density  of  the  superfluid  ground 
state  in  the  framework  of  the  effective  theory  suggests  that  it  is  on  the 
order of the zero-point energy of the bosonic field in Bose superfluids and 
on  the  order  of  the  energy  of  the  Dirac  vacuum  of  fermionic 
quasiparticles in Fermi superfluids.  

the  system  exhibits 

is  weak, 

17

 

  Our  Universe  contains  quantum  Bose  and  Fermi  fields,  describing  the 
interaction of the elementary quasiparticles (fermionic quasiparticles and 
collective  bosons)  with  each  other  and  with  the  quantum  [bosonic  and 
fermionic] vacuums. In this model of wholly superfluid universe, leptons, 
gauge  fields,  Higgs  fields,  gravitons,  W-bosons  and  etc.  are  interacting 
Fermi and Bose quantum fields.  
 
  An  effective  theory  in  condensed  matter  does  not  depend  on  details  of 
microscopic  (atomic)  structure  of  the  substance.  Once  the  universality 
class  is  determined,  the  low-energy  properties  of  the  condensed  matter 
system  are  completely  described  by  the  effective  theory,  and  the 
information  on  the  underlying  microscopic  physics  is  lost.    The 
microscopic  details  provide  us  only  with  the  “fundamental  constants”, 
which enter the effective phenomenological Lagrangian, such as speed of 
“light”  (say,  the  speed  of  sound),  superfluid  density,  modulus  of 
elasticity, etc. 
 
  Volovik  (2003)  described  that  various  cosmological  phenomena  could 
be represented using 3He superfluid medium. He argued that the Universe 
and  its  broken-symmetry  ground  state  (the  physical  vacuum)  could  be 
represented with condensed matter system.  
 
  Ordinary  baryonic  matter  acts  as  a  part  of  fermionic  quasiparticles  of 
quantum  fermionic  vacuum  or  impurities  in  the  superfluid  boson  dark 
matter.  If  accumulation  of  ordinary  baryonic  matter  on  the  interface  of 
two  phases  (surface  of  hydrodynamic  bubbles  or  other  interfaces)  be 
energetically  favorable  (like  the  formation  of  electron  bubble;  when  an 
electron as a fermion is injected into bosonic helium, it forms a spherical 
cavity- an “electron bubble”- from which helium atoms are excluded. The 
bubble  forms  because  the  electron  is  strongly  repelled  by  helium) 
therefore  it  stabilizes  the  bubbles  (voids)  and  cosmic  foam  on  the 
interface  of  two  phases.  Also,  magnetic  field  can  affect  the  stability  of 
MHD  bubbles.  In  this  study  we  must  pay  attention  to  the  effect  of 
adsorbed ordinary baryonic matter on the surface of bosonic sea of dark 
matter  and  bubbles,  on  the  motion  of  bubbles  and  hydrodynamical 
properties of the interface.  
 
  In  the  course  of  the  expansion  of  universe,  at  high  temperature  the 
bosonic  universe  fluid  has  all  the  symmetries  that  ordinary  condensed 
matter can have: translational invariance, global U(1) group and... . When 
the  temperature  decreases  further  the  boson  dark  matter  reaches  the 
superfluid  transition  temperature Tc, below which it spontaneously loses 
each of its symmetries except for the translational one - it is still liquid.  

18

 

  At low energy corner, the fermionic quasiparticles in the vicinity of the 
Fermi point - the fermion zero modes - represent chiral (left-handed and 
right-handed) fermions; the collective bosonic modes of superfluid boson 
dark  matter  represent  some  gauge  and  gravitational  fields  acting  on  the 
chiral  quasiparticles.  They  all  gradually  emerge  and  arise  as  fermionic 
and  bosonic  collective  modes  of  such  a  system.  Also,  this  emerges 
together  with  the  ‘laws  of  physics’  and  together  with  such  notions  as 
chirality,  spin,  isotopic  spin,  etc.  At  high  energy  (on  the  Planck  scale) 
these modes merge with the continuum of all the high-energy degrees of 
freedom  of  the  ‘Planck  condensed  matter’  (Volovik  2003)  and  thus  can 
no longer be separated from each other. 
 
  On the basis of Landau two-fluid model of superfluidity, the fermionic 
quasiparticles  and  collective  bosons  (normal  component  of  boson  dark 
matter)  perceive  the  homogeneous  ground  states  of  condensed  bosonic 
and fermionic matters as an empty space - a vacuum - since they do not 
scatter on particles comprising this vacuum state: quasiparticles move in a 
quantum liquid without friction just as particles move in empty space. For 
the  perception  of  quasiparticles,  the  value  of  Landau  critical  velocity 
vLandau is determinant, although, on the basis of the extended and unified 
model  of  superfluidity  instead  of  Landau  two  distinct-fluid  model,  this 
interpretation must be slightly modified. 
 
  In  my  model,  inspired  by  low-temperature  4He,  we  argue  that  dark 
matter  content  of  the  universe  can  undergo  Bose  condensation.  At  the 
beginning  of  the  dark  ages  after  transition  to  superfluidity  and 
electromagnetically induction of gravity, the superfluid boson dark matter 
interacts strongly with ordinary baryonic matter, as well as with itself, so 
instead of flying past each other, as in a gas, the whole liquid moves more 
coherently. For T <Tc, the dark matter will be superfluid and according to 
Landau two-fluid model, Superfluid flow/part of superfluid dark matter is 
always potential flow and it does not involve entropy and heat transfer, a 
steady  superfluid  flow  exerts  no  force  on  a  body  and  the  normal 
flow/part, on the other hand, exerts a drag force. Along with aging of the 
universe (further cooling), the superfluid part (in BEC state) of superfluid 
dark  matter  will  increase.  Therefore  the  superfluid  boson  dark  matter 
seems  to  gradually  decouple  from  ordinary  baryonic  matter  after  the 
transition to superfluidity and BEC state. It is not surprising therefore that 
there is an increasing amount of investigation in using superfluid model 
to  represent  cosmology  dynamics  (Zurek  1996;  Volovik  2001,  2002, 
2003; Silverman & Mallett 2002).  
 

19

 

  Matter  and  anti-matter  are  created  in  equal  amounts  in  the  universe, 
however,  in  cosmology,  for  instance,  people  are  trying  to  explain  why 
there  is  more  matter  than  anti-matter  in  the  universe.  Existence  of  bare 
particles comprising the quantum vacuum of quantum liquids represents 
the main difference from the relativistic quantum field theory (RQFT). In 
RQFT, particles and antiparticles which can be created from the quantum 
vacuum  are  similar  to  quasiparticles  in  quantum  liquids.  According  to 
Volovik (2003) [based on fermions], positive energy states correspond to 
real  particles,  the  negative  energy  states  to  the  Dirac  Sea,  which  is  the 
(quantum) vacuum; a hole in the Dirac Sea corresponds to an antiparticle, 
with effectively a positive energy. The creation of a real particle usually 
takes  place  when  a  particle  in  the  Dirac  sea  of  negative  energy  states  is 
excited to a positive energy state. Then matter and anti-matter are created 
in  equal  amounts  because  of  the  simultaneous  creation  of  a  hole,  i.e.  an 
antiparticle.  The  process  leading  to  matter  creation  can  be  studied  and 
will be explained in the context of superfluid helium.   
 
 
3.1 Gravity 
 
  Bose-Einstein  condensates  (BEC)  have  recently  been  the  subject  of 
considerable  study  as  possible  analogue  models  of  general  relativity 
(Garay et al. 2000; Garay et al. 2001; Barceló et al. 2001; Barceló et al. 
2003;  Novello  et  al  2002;  Ferrer  &  Grifols  2001).  The  basic  idea  that 
gravity  is  a  semi-classical,  long-wavelength  effect  induced  by  an 
underlying quantum field theory is now more than twenty years old. This 
approach  is  very  appealing  since,  in  fact,  one  can  get  a  picture  of  the 
world with only three elementary interactions and where the origin of the 
fourth, gravitation, has to be searched in the structure of the vacuum. This 
leads  to  consider  the  implications  of  spontaneous  symmetry  breaking 
through  an  elementary  scalar  field.  Their  picture  suggests  that  Einstein 
general relativity may represent the weak field approximation of a theory 
generated from flat space with a sequence of conformal transformations. 
This explains naturally the absence of a large cosmological constant from 
symmetry  breaking  (Consoli  2000).  The  central  idea  of  a  condensed 
matter analog model of GR is that the modifications to the propagation of 
a  field/wave  due  to  curved  spacetime  can  be  reproduced  (at  least 
partially)  by  an  analog  field/wave  propagating  in  some  material 
background  with  space  and  time  dependent  properties  (Barceló  et  al. 
2001).  As  Garay  et  al.  (2000,  2001)  have  shown,  perturbations  in  the 
phase  of  the  condensate  wavefunction  satisfy,  in  the  low-momentum 
regime,  an  equation  equivalent  to  that  of  a  massless  scalar  field  in  a 
curved  spacetime  (the  d’Alembertian  equation 
0=Δφ ),  but  with  the 

20

 

spacetime  metric  replaced  by  an  effective  metric  that  depends  on  the 
characteristics of the background condensate. 
 
  The  condensed  matter  analogy  gives  us  examples  of  how  the  effective 
gravity  appears  as  an  emergent  phenomenon  in  the  low-energy  corner. 
Quantum liquids also provide examples of how the metric field naturally 
emerges as the low-energy collective mode of the quantum vacuum. The 
action for this mode is provided by the dynamics of quantum vacuum in 
accordance  with  Sakharov's  theory,  and  even  the  curvature  term  can  be 
reproduced  in  some  condensed  matter  systems  in  some  limiting  cases. 
From  this  point  of  view,  gravity  is  not  the  fundamental  force,  but  is 
determined  by  the  properties  of  the  quantum  vacuum:  gravity  is  one  of 
the collective modes of the quantum bosonic vacuum.  
 
  If gravity emerges in the low-energy corner as a low-energy soft mode 
(zero mode) of the underlying quantum boson dark matter, then it would 
indicate  that  quantum  gravity  simply  does  not  exist.  If  there  are  low-
energy modes which can be identified with gravity, it does not mean that 
these modes will survive at high energy. Most probably they will merge 
with  the  continuum  of  all  other  high-energy  degrees  of  freedom  of  the 
Planck condensed matter (corresponding to the motion of separate atoms 
of  the  liquid  in  the  case  of  4He  and  3He)  and  thus  can  no  longer  be 
identified as gravitational modes. The condensed matter analogy supports 
the  extreme  point  of  view  expressed  by  Hu  (1996)  that  one  should  not 
quantize gravity again. What is allowed in effective theory is to quantize 
the  low-energy  modes  to  produce  phonons  from  sound  waves  and 
gravitons from gravitational waves but one should not use the low-energy 
quantization  for  the  construction  of  Feynman  loop  diagrams  containing 
integration  over  high  momenta.  Thus  deeper  quantum  theory  of  gravity 
makes  no  sense  in  this  philosophy.  Our  knowledge  of  the  physics  of 
phonons/gravitons  does  not  allow  us  to  make  predictions  on  the 
microscopic structure of the bosonic vacuum (Volovik 2000, 2003). 
 
  The vacuum energy cannot interact with gravity, and cannot serve as a 
source of the effective gravity field: the vacuum is not gravitating. On the 
other  hand,  the  long-wavelength  perturbations  of  the  vacuum  are  within 
the  sphere  of  influence  of  the  low-energy  effective  theory,  and  such 
perturbations  can  be  the  source  of  the  effective  gravitational  field. 
Deviations  of  the  vacuum  from  its  equilibrium  state,  described  by  the 
effective theory, are gravitating. 
 
  Consoli  (2000,  2002)  described  gravitation  was  originated  from  Higgs 
boson condensate. Consoli (2000) argued that the basic idea that gravity 

21

 

can be a long-wavelength effect induced by the peculiar ground state of 
an underlying quantum field theory leads to consider the implications of 
spontaneous  symmetry  breaking  through  an  elementary  scalar  field.  He 
point out that Bose-Einstein condensation implies the existence of long-
range order and of a gap-less mode of the Higgs-field. This gives rise to a 
1/r potential and couples with infinitesimal strength to the inertial mass of 
known particles. If this is interpreted as the origin of Newtonian gravity 
one  finds  a  natural  solution  of  the  hierarchy  problem.  Consoli  (2000, 
2002)  has  also  considered  similarity  between  his  condensate  model  and 
superfluid aether hypothesis, in the spirit of Landau. It is obvious that in a 
description  where  gravity  is  a  long-wavelength  excitation  of  the  scalar 
condensate  there  are  differences  with  respect  to  the  standard  ideas.  For 
instance, the gravitational force is naturally instantaneous.  
 
 
Electromagnetically Induced ‘‘Gravity’’  
 
  Landau and Khalatnikov (see the book by Khalatnikov (1965)) proposed 
the  simplest  effective  field  theory  of  superfluids,  where  only  the 
gravitational  field  appears  as  an  effective  field.  In  this  theory,  a  weakly 
excited state of the collection of interacting 4He atoms can be considered 
as  a  small  number  of  elementary  excitations  –  quasiparticles,  phonons 
and rotons. In addition, the state without excitation – the ground state or 
vacuum – can have collective degrees of freedom. The superfluid vacuum 
can  move  without  friction,  and  inhomogeneity  of  the  flow  serves  as  the 
gravitational  and/or  other  effective  fields. The matter propagating in the 
presence  of  this  background  is  represented  by  fermionic  (in  Fermi 
superfluids)  or  bosonic  (in  Bose  superfluids)  quasiparticles,  which  form 
the  so  called  normal  component  of  the  liquid.  Such  two  fluid 
hydrodynamics  introduced  by  Landau  and  Khalatnikov  (Khalatnikov 
1965) is the example of the effective field theory which incorporates the 
motion  of  both  the  superfluid  background  (gravitational  field)  and 
excitations  (matter).  This  is  the  counterpart  of  the  Einstein  equations, 
which incorporate both gravity and matter. One must distinguish between 
the particles and quasiparticles in superfluids. The particles describes the 
system  on  a  microscopic  level,  these  are  atoms  of  the  underlying  liquid 
(3He  or  4He  atoms).  The  many-body  system  of  the  interacting  atoms 
forms  the  quantum  vacuum  –  the  ground  state.  The  conservation  laws 
experienced by the atoms and their quantum coherence in the superfluid 
state determine the low frequency dynamics – the hydrodynamics – of the 
collective  variables  of  the  superfluid  vacuum.  The  quasiparticles  – 
fermionic and bosonic – are the low energy excitations above the vacuum 
state.  They  form  the  normal  component  of  the  liquid  which  determines 

22

 

2

.

μν

=

=

−

   ,0

2
pc

svp
.

pp
νμ

~
(
E
or  

the  sound  waves 

                                                       (7)  

represent 
freedom.  The  Lagrangian 

the thermal and kinetic low-energy properties of the liquid. Note that for 
the  only 
the  curl-free  superfluids 
“gravitational”  degree  of 
these 
for 
the  smoothly  varying 
“gravitational  waves”  propagating  above 
background  is  obtained  by  decomposition  of the superfluid velocity and 
density into the smooth and fluctuating parts: vs = vs smooth +  ∇ α. 
  The  energy  spectrum  of  sound  wave  quanta,  phonons,  which  represent 
the “gravitons” in this effective gravity, is determined by 
)
2

g
 
  In Bose superfluids the fermionic degrees of freedom are absent, that is 
why the quantum field theory there is too restrictive, but nevertheless it is 
useful  to  consider  it  since  it  provides  the  simplest  example  of  the 
effective  theory.  On  the  other  hand  the  Landau-Khalatnikov  scheme  is 
rather  universal  and  is  easily  extended  to  superfluids  with  more 
complicated order parameter and with fermionic degrees of freedom. We 
can  expect  that  the  analysis  of  the  condensed  matter  analogues  of  the 
effective  gravity,  in  particular,  of  the  Landau-Khalatnikov  two-fluid 
hydrodynamics and its extensions will allow us to solve the longstanding 
problem of the cosmological constant (Volovik 2000). 
 
 
  O’Dell  et  al.  (1999)  in  an  exciting  study  showed  that  particular 
configurations  of  intense  off-  resonant  laser  beams  (simulate  the  Bose-
Einstein  condensate)  can  give  rise  to  an  attractive  1/r  interatomic 
potential  between  atoms  located  well  within  the  laser  wavelength.  Such 
an r−1 attractive potential can simulate gravity between quantum particles. 
Such  a  “gravitational-like”  interaction  is  shown  to  give  stable  Bose 
condensates that are self-bound (without an additional trap) with unique 
scaling  properties  and  measurably  distinct  signatures.  This  suggests  it 
might be possible to study gravitational effects, normally only important 
on  the  stellar  scale,  in  the  laboratory.  Particularly  interesting  is  the 
possibility  of  experimentally  emulating  Boson  stars  (a  system  of 
condensed  Boson 
gravitating  Bosons): 
configurations  of  finite  volume,  in  which  the  zero-point  kinetic  energy 
balances the gravitational attraction and thus stabilizes the system against 
collapse.  
  Ferrer & Grifols (2004) showed that scalar mediated interactions among 
baryons  extend  well  above  the  Compton  wavelength,  when  they  are 
embedded  in  a  Bose-Einstein  condensate  composed  of  the  mediating 
particles. Indeed, this non-trivial environment results in an infinite-ranged 
interaction.  They  have  entertained  the  possibility  that  the  dark  matter  is 

gravitationally 

bound 

23

 

composed by a Bose-Einstein condensate of light scalar particles coupled 
to the baryonic component of the Universe. The long-range forces among 
baryons  caused  by  the  pair  exchange  of  dark  matter  particles  in  the 
presence  of  the  condensate.  It  has  been  recently  proposed  that  the 
observed 511 keV emission from the Galactic bulge could be the product 
of very light annihilating scalar dark matter particles. Inspection of these 
results immediately leads us to realize an important consequence of Bose-
Einstein  condensation.  Namely,  at  low  temperature  (i.e.,  below  Tc),  the 
force, that was finite ranged at high temperature (i.e., above Tc), becomes 
infinite ranged. 
  The instantaneous nature of the long-range gravitational interaction is a 
direct  consequence  of  its  non-local  origin  from  the  scalar  condensate. 
Indeed, one can imagine that removing at spatial infinity all gravitational 
sources  produces  an  infinite  flow  of  the  scalar  condensate  and,  as  a  net 
result, the vacuum becomes ‘empty’ around a given body and its inertia 
vanishes.  Therefore,  one  cannot  speak  of  absolute  accelerations  with 
respect to empty space since the inertial mass of a test particle depends on 
the existence of the scalar condensate whose density is determined by the 
distribution of gravitating matter (Consoli 2000). In this sense, the ‘Mach 
Principle’ represents a concise formulation of the inextricable connection 
between  inertia  and  gravity  due  to  their  common  origin  from  the  same 
physical phenomenon: the condensation of the [bosonic] scalar field. 
 
 
3.2   Black hole 
 
  Though  the  corresponding  ‘Einstein  equations’  for  ‘gravity’  itself  are 
not covariant, by using the proper superflow fields we can simulate many 
phenomena  related  to  the  classical  and  quantum  behavior  of  matter  in 
curved space-time, including black-hole physics (Volovik 2000). 
  There  is  a  close  analogy  between  sound  propagation  on  a  background 
hydrodynamic  flow,  and  field  propagation  in  a  curved  spacetime;  and 
although  hydrodynamics  is  only  a  long-wavelength  effective  theory  for 
physical  (super)fluids,  so  also  field  theory  in  curved  spacetime  is  to  be 
considered  a  long-wavelength  approximation to quantum gravity (Garay 
et al. 2000). 
  The physical mechanism of the sonic black hole is quite simple: inside 
the horizon, the background flow speed (speed of the condensate flow) v 
is larger than the local speed of sound c, and so sound waves are dragged 
inwards and these regions very closely mimic the key kinematic features 
of  black  hole  physics  (Garay  et  al.  2000;  Barceló  et  al.  2001).  (Unruh 
1981, 1995) urged a specific motivation for examining the hydrodynamic 
analogue  of  an  event  horizon,  namely  that  as  an  experimentally  and 

24

 

theoretically  accessible  phenomenon  it  might  shed  some  light  on  the 
Hawking effect (thermal radiation from black holes, stationary insofar as 
the back reaction is negligible). 
  Condensates can be produced in a vortex state, wherein the gas rotates, 
reminiscent  of  water  going  down  the  drain.  A  pulse  of  slow  light 
traveling through a vortex would find itself dragged along with the gas-
very  similar  to  a  phenomenon  expected  to  occur  near  black  holes.  With 
slow light, we can study this and some other black hole phenomena in the 
laboratory. 
 
 
3.3   Quark-gluon plasma 
  Dense  quark  matter  at  low  temperatures  is  expected  to  be  in  a  BCS-
paired (Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer pairing before they can collapse into a 
Bose  condensate  or  superfluid)  superfluid  state  induced  by  attractive 
coupling in the color- 3  channel, with the pairs having zero total angular 
momentum,  J  (Iida  &  Baym  2002).  Therefore  the  essence  of  gluon  like 
the  graviton  which  is  the  superfluid  vacuum  (condensate)  of  superfluid 
bosonic  dark  matter  or  ‘light’,  is  the  superfluid  vacuum  of  superfluid 
fermionic  quark  matter  and  the  coherent  and  strongly  coupled  quark-
gluon  plasma  is  actually  the  BCS-paired  superfluid  quark  matter. 
Recently,  physicists  at  MIT  have  found  conclusive  evidence  for 
superfluidity in an ultracold Fermi gas by observing quantized vortices in 
a rotating gas of  6Li atoms. The results could shed new light on systems 
as  diverse  as  high-temperature  superconductors,  neutron  stars  and  the 
quark-gluon  plasma.  This  is  the  first  ‘‘high-temperature’’  superfluid, 
measured  in  terms  of  the  ratio  of  the  critical  temperature  (Tc),  at  which 
the superfluid transition takes place, to the Fermi temperature (Tf).  
  Strongly  Coupled  Quark  Gluon  Plasma  (SCQGP)  is  a  new  state  of 
matter which should have existed a few microseconds after the Big Bang. 
Recently,  researchers  at  the  Relativistic  Heavy  Ion  Collider  (RHIC)  at 
Brookhaven National Laboratory recreate the quark-gluon plasma (QGP). 
Their  experiments  suggest  the  quarks  in  the  plasma  are  exhibiting 
incredibly  synchronized  group  behavior  and  interacting  strongly  with 
each  other  and  the  surrounding  gluons.  This  makes  the  plasma  more 
similar  to  a  liquid  than  a  gas.  In  fact,  the  strength  of  interactions  in  the 
quark-gluon  plasma  makes  it  the  most  ideal  liquid  ever  observed-  10  to 
20  times  as  liquid-like  as  water.  It  seems  that  from  the  time  of  the  big 
bang until 10 μsec later, the universe was liquid: “And the assumption is 
that provided you can create a large enough droplet, it will evolve in the 
same way as the early Universe.” 
 

25

 

  Superfluid quark matter is an ultrarelativistic color superconductor that 
is  homogeneous,  in  the  sense  that  the  real  gluon  field  vanishes 
everywhere  and  the  order  parameter  is  everywhere  continuous  in 
magnitude  and  orientation  (Iida  &  Baym  2001).  Such  homogeneity  is 
similar  to  that  in  superfluid  3He  and  superfluid  neutron  matter,  as  noted 
by  (Bailin  &  Love  1984),  because  in  both  cases  breaking  of  the  global 
U(1)  gauge  symmetry  is  accompanied  by  global  symmetry  breaking 
associated  with  the  internal  degrees  of  freedom.  In  superfluid  quark 
matter,  the  possible  order  parameters  are  generally  anisotropic  in  color 
space,  a  situation  analogous  to  superfluid  3He  in  which,  as  seen 
experimentally, the anisotropy lies in spin space. 
 
  Color  superconductivity  in  quark  matter  becomes  an  astrophysically 
interesting  problem  if  neutron  star  interiors  are  sufficiently  dense  that 
they  contain  quark  matter  cores.  Generally,  a  quark  superfluid  in  a 
neutron  star  would  not  be  electrically  neutral  since  each  quark  has 
fractional  electric  charge;  rather  it  would  coexist  with  electrons  (and 
muons)  in  such  a  way  as  to  ensure  electric  neutrality  in  the  system. 
Because  of  the  dually  charged  nature  of  the  quarks,  macroscopic 
manifestations of both color and electromagnetic superconductivity such 
as  Meissner  effects,  generation  of  London  fields,  and  vortex  formation 
are  expected  from  magnetic  fields  and  rotations  as  observed  in  these 
celestial objects. Iida & Baym (2001) discussed these issues, which may 
be relevant to magnetic structure, cooling, and rotational evolution of the 
neutron stars.  
 
 
 
4  Time  varying  dark  components  result  in  time  varying 
constants 
 
 
4.1 time varying constants 
 
  Hypotheses  about  the  time  varying  electromagnetic  fine  structure 
constant  (α)  which  are  proposed  by  (Aspden  &  Eagles  1972)  and 
(Winterberg  1992,  2002)  are  deficient  and  even  in  some  parts  incorrect, 
although  the  overall  picture  of  the  vacuum aether constituents is similar 
to our theory (in the theory if we attribute opposite signs to the bosonic 
and  fermionic  superfluids,  this  representation  is  analogous  to  the  SuSy 
and  above  authors’  thoughts),  therefore,  inspired  by  (Aspden  &  Eagles 
1972;  Winterberg  1992,  2002)  and  according  to  Mach’s  Principle,  the 

26

 

electromagnetic  fine  structure  constant  (α)  depends  on  the  characteristic 
and  dynamic  properties  of  the  dark  components  (aether)  such  as 
quintessence  energy  density  of  the  universe.  Along  with  aging  of  the 
universe,  increment  in  the  quintessence  (condensate)  fraction  of  the 
universe with a trend similar to that of superfluid 4He (decelerated rate of 
increase  in  the  quintessence  energy  density)  result  in  a  monotonically 
increment  in  α  with  alike  trend.  Surprisingly,  this  picture  is  fully 
consistent with cosmological observations (Fig. 3).  
 
 
  

 
Figure 3.  The data points are the QSO results for the changing α 
(Magueijo 2003). The solid line depicts theoretical prediction in 
several varying-α models. 

 

 
 
 
  As  mentioned  in  previous  section,  studies  have  attempted  to  determine 
whether quintessential scalar fields could explain both cosmological dark 
the  universe.  The  most 
matter  and 
observationally  sensitive  ‘constant’  is  the  electromagnetic  fine  structure 
constant,  α  =  e2/ħc  and  recent  observations  motivate  the  formulation  of 
varying-α  theories.  (Shea  2005)  has  made  a  list  of  the  criterions 
measuring change in the fine structure constant:  
 

the  recent  acceleration  of 

27

 

1- Quasars  
2- Cosmic Microwave Background  
3- Big bang nucleosynthesis  
4- The Oklo Reactor 
5- Rhenium Isotopes 
6- Atomic Clocks 
 
Quasar (QSO) spectra  
 
  The new observational many-multiplet technique of Webb et al. (1999), 
exploits the extra sensitivity gained by studying relativistic transitions to 
different ground states using absorption lines in quasar (QSO) spectra at 
medium redshift. It has provided the first evidence that the fine structure 
constant might change with cosmological time. The trend of these results 
is that the value of α was lower in the past, with ∆α/α = −0.72±0.18×10−5 
for z ≈ 0.5−3.5. The ‘‘many-multiplet’’ method additionally improves on 
the  calculations  in  a  second  respect  in  that  it  minimizes  possible 
systematic sources of experimental error. The only identified source for a 
isotopic  abundance 
systematic  error,  atmospheric  dispersion  and 
evolution, would only accentuate the change in α.  
 
Cosmic Microwave Background and Big Bang Nucleosynthesis  
 
  Recent  measurements  of  a  peak  in  the  angular  power  spectrum  of  the 
cosmic  microwave  background  appear  to  suggest  that  geometry  of  the 
universe  is  close  to  being  flat.  But  if  other  accepted  indicators  of 
cosmological  parameters  are  also  correct  then  the  best  fit  model  is 
marginally closed, with the peak in the spectrum at larger scales than in a 
flat universe. Such observations can be reconciled with a flat universe if 
the  fine  structure  constant  had  a  lower  value  at  earlier  times  (Battye, 
Crittenden  &  Weller  2001),  which  would  delay  the  recombination  of 
electrons  and  protons  and  also  act  to  suppress  secondary  oscillations  as 
observed.  Battye,  Crittenden  &  Weller  (2001)  discussed  evidence  for  a 
few  percent  increase  in  the  fine  structure  constant  between  the  time  of 
recombination and the present. 
  A smaller value of α in the past would change the ionization history of 
the universe, postponing the recombination of electrons and protons, i.e. 
last-scattering would occur at lower redshift. It would also alter the ratio 
of  baryons  to  photons  at  last-scattering,  leading  to  changes  in  both  the 
amplitudes  and  positions  of  features  in  the  CMB  power  spectrum, 
primarily  at  angular  scales  ≤  1°,  therefore,  limits  on  the  temperature 
fluctuations of the CMB could lead to a measurement with experimental 
sensitivity  of  |∆α/α|  <  10−2  −  10−3,  at  z  ~  1000  (Hannestad  1999; 

28

 

Kaplinghat,  Scherrer  &  Turner  1999;  Avelino,  Martins  &  Rocha  2000; 
Battye,  Crittenden  &  Weller  2001;  Kujat  &  Scherrer  2000).  Analysis  of 
data from the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) provides 
a bound −0.06 < ∆α/α < 0.02 at 95% CL. More refined measurements of 
the  cosmic  microwave  background  could  feasibly  check  for  this  and 
would lead to an independent verification of the quasar results.  
  (Battye,  Crittenden  &  Weller  2001)  mentioned  that  realistic  models  in 
which α vary may contain one or more light scalar fields which mediate 
the precise variation. Clearly, if such a field exists it should be included 
in the calculation of the CMB anisotropies in the Boltzmann hierarchy of 
CMBFAST, either explicitly or as an extra relativistic degree of freedom. 
This  would  allow  a  subsequent  analysis  to  include  effects  of  the  time 
variation  of  α,  rather  than  just  a  change  between  the  time  of 
recombination  and  the  present  day.  It  may  even  be  possible  for  such  a 
field to act as a quintessence field, removing the need for Λ.  
  Other  investigations  have claimed preferred non-zero values of ∆α < 0 
to best fit the Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN) data at z ≈ 1010 (Avelino 
et al. 2000; Battye, Crittenden & Weller 2001).  
 
  Barrow & Mota (2003) calculated that α may behave differently within 
the  galaxy  than  inside  emptier  regions  of  space.  Once  a  young  galaxy 
condenses  and  relaxes  into  gravitational  equilibrium,  α  nearly  stops 
changing  inside  it  but  keeps  on  changing  outside.  In  contrast  to  current 
belief,  in  my  model,  quintessence  can  be  a  fluid  or  quantum  liquid  as  a 
consequence like Bekenstein-type models (where changes in α are driven 
by  the  matter  density)  my  model  allows  local  spatial  variation,  which 
could provide different dynamics for ∆α in our local environment (Oklo 
and  meteorites)  and  over  cosmological  scales  (QSO  data).  Thus,  the 
terrestrial  experiments  that  probe  the  constancy  of  α  suffer  from  a 
selection bias.   
It is found that at present 
α&  ≈ 2.98 × 10−16 h year−1 
α
with H0 = 100 h km s−1 Mpc−1, ΩΛ = 0.71 and Ωm = 0.29. For h = 0.7 this 
gives  a  fractional  variation  in  alpha  of  about  2  ×  10−16  per  year,  which 
should  soon  be  within  the  reach  of  technology.  Such  an  observation 
would  be  an  incredible  vindication  of  the  Webb  results.  On  the  other 
hand, this effect would become a further annoyance for those concerned 
with  the  practicalities  of  defining  the  unit  of  time.  Without  lambda  the 
current rate of variation in α would be of the order of 10−14 per year. 
 
  Another remarkable set of recent observations is of Type Ia supernovae 
in  distant  galaxies.  These  data  have  extended  the  Hubble  diagram  to 

29

 

redshifts,  z  ≥  1.  They  imply  an  accelerated  expansion  of  the  universe. 
When  combined  with  CMB  data,  the  supernovae  observations  favour  a 
flat  universe  with  approximate  matter  density,  Ωm  ≈  0.3  and  vacuum 
energy  density,  Ωquint  ≈  0.7.  The  idea  that  the  fine  structure  constant  is 
varying  over  the  history  of  the  universe  has  a  long  history,  and  if  this 
discovery is confirmed by further observations and analyses, then it will 
have a profound impact on the future of physics. 
  Theories have been considered which introduce new scalar fields whose 
couplings with the Maxwell scalar FμνFμν allow time varying α. There are 
a  variety  of  possible  physical  expressions  of  a  changing  α.  Bekenstein 
proposed  a  varying  e  theory  (Bekenstein  1982).  Sandvik,  Barrow  & 
Magueijo (2002) show that by applying a generalisation of Bekenstein’s 
varying-e  theory  in  a  cosmological  setting  including  the  cosmological 
constant,  Λ,  we  are  able  to  explain  the  magnitude  and  sense  of  the 
observed change in α. The main assumption is that the cold dark matter 
has  magnetic  fields  dominating  their  electric  fields.  The  magnetostatic 
energy then drives changes in α in the matter dominated epoch, but as the 
Universe  starts  to  accelerate  these  changes  become  friction  dominated 
and  come  to  a  halt.  This  gives  a decelerated rate of change in α, just as 
the  universe  starts  to  accelerate,  in accord with both data sets. The only 
energy  scale  they  introduce  is  of  the  order  of  Planck  scale,  which  also 
makes  the  model  attractive.  Sandvik,  Barrow  &  Magueijo  (2002)  have 
shown  how  a  cosmological  generalization  (including  the  cosmological 
constant,  Λ)  of  Bekenstein’s  theory  of  a  varying  e  (the  electromagnetic 
coupling)  can  naturally  explain  the  reported  variations  in  the  fine 
structure  constant.  Bekenstein’s  original  theory  takes  c  and  ħ  to  be 
constants and attributes variations in α to changes in e, or the permittivity 
of free space. This is done by letting e take on the value of a real scalar 
field  which  varies  in  space  and  time  e0  →  e  =  e0ε  (x  μ),  where ε  is  a 
dimensionless scalar field and e0 is a constant denoting the present value 
of  e.  This  theory  generalizes  Bekenstein’s  approach  by  including  the 
effects of the varying ε (or ψ) field on the gravitational dynamics of the 
expanding  universe.  The  scalar  field  ψ  couples  only  to  electromagnetic 
energy. They find that in this theory the ψ and α, remains almost constant 
in the radiation era where baryonic species become relativistic, undergoes 
small increase in the matter era, but approaches a constant value when the 
universe  starts  accelerating  because  of  the  presence  of  a  positive 
cosmological  constant.  This  trend  in  ψ  and  α  is  compatible  with  my 
unified theory of time varying boson scalar dark components.  
 
  The  model  of  Sandvik,  Barrow  &  Magueijo  (2002)  can  be  seen  as  a 
more conservative alternative to (Moffat 1993; Barrow 1999; Albrecht & 

30

 

Magueijo  1999;  Barrow  &  Magueijo  2000;  Moffat  2001;  Magueijo 
2003),  where  a  VSL  (varying  speed  of  light)  scenario  was  proposed 
which  could  explain  the  observed  acceleration  of  the  universe  and 
variations in α, as well as their remarkable coincidence in redshift space. 
Barrow  &  Magueijo  (2000)  proposed  that  the  Supernovae  results, 
implying evidence for an accelerating Universe may be closely related to 
the recent discovery of redshift dependence in the fine structure constant 
α They examined a class of varying-c theories in which changes in c are 
driven  by  a  scalar  field  which  is  coupled  to  the  gravitational  effect  of 
pressure.  (Moffat  2001)  like  (Barrow  &  Magueijo  2000)  has  studied  a 
simple model that incorporates a VSL behavior in a cosmological setting 
but assuming that the electric charge e and Planck’s constant ħ are truly 
constants  of  nature.  They  have  shown  that  a  varying  speed  of  light  can 
explain  the  reported  variations  in  the  fine  structure  constant,  while 
satisfying  all  the  observational  bounds  (fits  the  spectral  line  data). 
(Moffat  2003a)  proposed  a  model  in  VSGW  metric  frame  in  which,  the 
speed of light is constant but the speed of gravitational waves varies with 
time. Conversely, (Bassett et al. 2000) proposed a model in which cphoton 
varies  while  cgravity  is  fixed.  Therefore  the  Lorentz  symmetry  is  “softly 
broken” (VSL theories often entail breaking Lorentz invariance, whereas 
dilaton theories do not), the “geometrical interpretation” is preserved, and 
the  Bianchi  identities  are  fulfilled.  In  particular,  these  “soft  breaking” 
VSL scenarios are based on straightforward extensions of known physics, 
such as anomalous electromagnetic propagation in gravitational fields and 
so represent “minimalist” implementations of VSL theories. (Teyssandier 
2002; 2004) showed that relativistic theories may be characterized in such 
a way that c is not linked to any type of physical interaction and develops 
a theory of non-minimal coupling between electromagnetism and gravity 
in which the speed of light (as distinguished from c) varies. In our theory, 
the  speed  of 
is  a  variable  quantity  and  gravity  has  an 
electromagnetically  induced  nature  though  the  speed  of  gravitational 
waves can be quite unrelated to the speed of light.  
 
  In  view  of  this,  we  find  that  the  possibility  of  a  heterotic  model  (VSL 
plus  inflation)  is  more  attractive,  even  though  our  understanding  of 
special  relativity,  general  relativity  and  space-time  will  be  significantly 
altered.  However,  the  real  significance  of change in the fine structure is 
that such an anomaly necessarily indicates a change in one (VSL alone) 
or  more  of  the  quantities  given  in  its  definition  (more  probable),  all  of 
which  are  very  important  in  determining  the  physical  behavior  of  the 
universe.  Assuming  that  a  fundamental  constant,  say  c,  is  in  fact  a 
function  of  time  requires  a  close  examination  of  all  the  other  constants, 
here  called  concomitants  that  with  c  enter  in  expressions  that  have  a 

light 

31

 

physical meaning. Even an invariant α would not exclude the possibility 
that these values might be changing in ratio to one another (Shea 2005). 
For instance, Bel (2003) in addition to the time dependency of c, derived 
the  concomitant  dependence  of  the  electric  permittivity ε,  the  magnetic 
permeability  μ,  the  unit  of  charge  e  and  Plank’s  constant  h  under  the 
assumption  of  the  constancy  of  the  fine  structure  constant  α.  Marciak-
Kozlowska and Kozlowski have examined the possibility of both c and ħ 
changing. Thus, in the equation for α discussed above, ħ increases and c 
decreases  so  as  to  offset  one  another,  allowing  for  an  invariant  fine 
structure  constant  even  with  variation  in  its  parameters.  One  of  the 
interesting  consequences  of  Marciak-Kozlowska  and  Kozlowki’s  theory 
is  that  the  universe  becomes  increasingly  more  quantum  in  nature  as  it 
ages.  
  As the last section should have made clear, the future of VSL is in the 
hands of observers. In such circumstances theorists are bound to continue 
with their musings. 
 
 
 
4.2  Time  varying  dark  components  result  in  time  varying  α  or  the 
quantities given in its definition (invariant α), in either case VSL 
 
  Various models are proposed in literatures which join the variation of α 
to  the  evolution  of  the  quintessence  field  (Anchordoqui  &  Goldberg 
2003;  Chiba  &  Kohri  2002;  Wetterich  2003a,  b;  Dvali  &  Zaldarriaga 
2002;  Lee,  Olive  &  Pospelov  2004;  Olive  &  Pospelov  2002;  Lee  2005; 
Bassett  et  al.  2000;  Damour,  Piazza  &  Veneziano  2002a,  b;  Barrow  & 
Magueijo 2000). It is a characteristic feature of the quintessence scenario 
that  fundamental  coupling  constants  depend  on  time  even  in  late 
cosmology where such a time variation could be observable and no such 
time dependence would be connected to dark energy if the latter occurs in 
the  form  of  a  cosmological  constant  (Chiba  &  Kohri  2002;  Dvali  & 
Zaldarriaga  2002;  Wetterich  1988a,b,  2003b).  Any  field-theoretical 
description  of  a  cosmological  time  variation  of  fundamental  constants 
almost  necessarily  involves  a  scalar  field  which  continues  to  evolve  in 
time in the recent cosmological history. It is then quite natural (although 
not  compulsory)  to  associate  the  potential  and  kinetic  energy  of  this 
scalar field with quintessence (Wetterich 2003b). 
 
  If  the  recent  observations  suggesting  a  time  variation  of  the  fine 
structure  constant  within  a  4D  field  theory  are  correct,  they  necessarily 
imply  the  existence  of  a  time-dependent  ultra-light  scalar  particle  φ 
(Chiba & Kohri 2002; Dvali & Zaldarriaga 2002). This particle inevitably 

32

 

long 

force”-type 

couples  to  nucleons  through  the  α-dependence  of  their  masses  and  thus 
mediates  a  composition-dependent  “fifth 
range 
interaction. Due to an interesting coincidence of the required time-scales 
(typically  the  onset  of  quintessence  dominance  suppresses  variations  in 
whatever ‘varying’ constant), the scalar filed in question can at the same 
time  play  the  role  of  a  quintessence  field.  If  the  field  φ  driving  the 
variation  in  α  is  a  quintessence  field,  then  its  evolution  is  further 
constrained  by  observation.  In  particular,  it  must  provide  about  70%  of 
the total energy density at present. The observed present value Ωm ≈ 0.3 
indicates  that  the  effective  “stop”  in  the  quintessence  field  evolution 
should have happened rather recently - a value z ≈ 1 for the drop in the 
variation  rate  of  the  fundamental  couplings  seems  rather  natural  in  this 
respect.  
  The evolution of the quintessence field, and therefore of α, is determined 
by the quintessence potential and such time variation can be explained for 
a  wide  class  of  quintessential  potentials.  Indeed,  the  quadratic  coupling 
for  the  cosh-like  potential  (potentials  similar  to  Sahni  &  Wang  2000) 
shows  that  the  ratio  ∆α(z  =  1.5)/  ∆α(z  =  3)  can  be  as  small  as  0.01 (see 
Figs. 4 and 5). This implies that in certain models the non-zero result of 
Webb et al. (2001) and Murphy, Webb & Flambaum (2003) for ∆α/α that 
spans a rather large range of redshifts and the better-sensitivity zero-result 
measurement  of  ∆α/α  at  one  redshift  z  =  1.5  may  not  necessarily  be 
contradictory (Lee, Olive & Pospelov 2004). In order to have a O(10−5 − 
10−6)  relative  change  of  α  at  redshifts  z  ~  1,  interestingly,  these  models 
typically  require  larger  values  of  coupling  between  the  scalar  field  and 
electromagnetic radiation. 
 
 
 

 

33

 

 
Figure 4. The evolution of Ωφ and wφ for the simple exponential 
potential  (solid)  and  the  cosh  potential  (dotted).  The  main 
difference  between  two  potentials  appears  at  late  times;  (Lee, 
Olive & Pospelov 2004). 

λφφ
−
e
)(
 in which 
)
(
αφ
B
−

]
eA

V
0

+

[

−

Vp
λφ

 
 
 
  Anchordoqui  &  Goldberg  (2003)  have  tied  the  variation  of  α  to  the 
evolution  of  the  quintessence  field  proposed  by  (Albrecht  &  Skordis 
2000): 
)(
V
φ
=

                                   (8) 

A
;

V

(
)
αφ
B
−

)(
φ

V
0

=

+

p

V

)(
φ

=

                                                                  (9)  
→
Interestingly,  as  mentioned  above,  Albrecht  &  Skordis  (2000)  is  similar 
~
to the asymptotic form of Sahni & Wang (2000) in which 
V  is replaced 
0
by  aφ-dependent  term 
.  Both  of  them  have  analogous  tracking 
properties with a minimum.  
Δ
α Δ
∝
α
The  most  general  expansion  of  the  function  α(φ)  about  its  present  day 
value α0 = α(φ=φtoday) can be written as 

 (Anchordoqui & Goldberg 2003; Chiba & Kohri 2002)     (10)  

φ
PlM

)(φpV

λαα
0

=

+

+

...

  (Dvali & Zaldarriaga 2002)                                    (11) 

φ
PlM

 
 

34

 

 

 
Figure 5. The cosh(λφ) potential (Lee, Olive & Pospelov 2004). 
The  cosmological  evolution  of  the  equation  of  state  parameter, 
wφ, and the energy density parameters, Ωi, of each component for 
λ = 5. 

 
 
 
  Crossover  quintessence  (CQ)  (Wetterich  2003a)  predicts  that  the  time 
variation of fundamental couplings is substantially faster at redshift z ≈ 2 
than  over  the  past  few  billion  years.  This  could  reconcile  the  reported 
time variation of the fine structure constant from quasar absorption lines 
with severe bounds from archeo-nuclear physics and high precision tests 
of the equivalence principle. The variation of α shows (through equation 
10) that the motion of φ as it comes to its present value is overdamped, so 
that the change in α is a monotonically decreasing function of z, therefore 
if  there  is  some  fluctuations,  they  can  be  because  of  the  local  spatial 
variation  of  matter  density  or  Landau  transitions.  QSO  measurements  at 
larger redshifts should continue to show a monotonic decrease in ∆α. This 
will allow for more precise restrictions on the shape of the function α(z) 
which can be directly compared with the model predictions. 
=
z

 requires a quintessence model where 

  A small value of |R|= 

)13.0
)2
=

(
z
α
(
α
Δ

Δ

the  evolution  of  the  scalar  field  has  considerably  slowed  down  in  the 
recent  history  as  compared  to  a  redshift  z  ≈  2.  In  particular,  a  constant 
equation of state with w independent of z over a range 0 < z < 3 will have 
severe  difficulties  to  explain  R  <0.1,  also  a  bound  R  <  1/50  strongly 
favors quintessence with a time varying equation of state w = p/ρ, where 
the  value  of  (1+w)  at  present  is  substantially  smaller  than  for  z  =  2 
(Wetterich 2003a) and equivalently the velocity of sound in the medium 
is  reduced  (compressibility  is  increased)  and  this  process  has  the  main 
influence on the process of structure formation (transition to gravitational 
instability).  On  the  level  of  the  equation  of  state  CQ  corresponds  to  a 
crossover from a value w ≈ 1/3 during the radiation dominated universe to 
a  value  w  <  1/3  for  z  <  0.5.  Wetterich  (2003a)  for  a  crossover 
quintessence predicts the fraction of quintessence at last scattering, to be 
0.019 or 0.0083 for two CQ models. 
 
  In  view  of  the  bounds,  coupling  of  quintessence  is  very  small  for 
ordinary  matter  -  a  larger  coupling  to  dark  matter  remains  possible, 
however  (Wetterich  2003b).  Chiba  &  Kohri  (2002)  explain  the  recent 
QSO  data  and  the  Oklo  in  terms  of  quintessence  coupling  to  a  photon 
which  would  require  to  a  model  with  a  large  coupling  between  non-

35

 

baryonic  dark  matter  and  the  scalar  field  therefore  consistent  with  our 
model,  quintessence  may  couple  to  both  non-baryonic  dark  matter  and 
radiation (Olive & Pospelov 2002; Wetterich 2003a). Taking the reported 
time  variation  of  α  at  face  value  would  fix  the  coupling  strength  of  the 
scalar  field 
to  matter  and  radiation  (Wetterich  2003b).  Because 
quintessence  as  a  ultra-light  scalar  field  would  be  dynamical  and  the 
exchange of light fields gives rise to long range forces, the interaction of 
the  field  with  ordinary  matter  would  result  in  the  time  variation  of  the 
constants of nature (like α or the ratio between the nucleon mass and the 
Planck mass) over cosmological time scales and the violation of the weak 
equivalence  principle.  The  differential  acceleration  of  two  test  bodies 
with equal mass can now be quantitatively related to the time variation of 
α  in  terms  of  observable  cosmological  parameters.  If  these  QSOs 
observations prove valid, the proposed satellite experiment for testing the 
equivalence principle (STEP) should be able to detect the violation of the 
weak  equivalence  principle  induced  by  a  scalar  force  mediated  by 
quintessence.  
 
  In a grand unified theory the time variation of α is directly related to a 
time  variation  of  the  strong  gauge  coupling  and  therefore  also  to  a  time 
variation of the nucleon mass mn. 
 

3

5

−

−

×

+

×

10

10

4.1

7.6

−=

ln
Z
∂
F
ln
φ
∂

                                                   (12)  

L
∂
∂
α
Wn
ln
ln
∂
∂
φ
φ
More explicitly, we need to derive the rate of change of the cosmon field, 
dlnφ/dt  for  a  given  model  of  quintessence.  Then  we  can  translate 
equation  (12)  into  an  equation  for  the  time  dependence  of  the  fine 
structure constant and similar for other quantities (Wetterich 2003b).  
( )
z
∂
α
z
∂

                                                                 (13) 

ln
∂
αφ
ln
z
∂
∂
φ

∂
α
ln
∂
φ

( )zG

=

=

∂

We will relate G(z) to the equation of state of quintessence. 
)

∂

lnφ
z
∂

−=

1
4
+

B

(
13
+
1
+

⎧
⎨
⎩

w
z

A

−

/
dw
1
−

dz
w

⎫
⎬
⎭

( )
zG

=

                                                 (14)    

 
  The dependence of the fundamental constants on z is not linear. Even for 
w  constant  the  rate  of  change  of  the  couplings  decreases  for  large  z 
proportional (1 + z) −1. The change in αem is reduced during cosmological 
epochs when w decreases with decreasing z (Wetterich 2003b). 
  Wetterich  (2003b)  observe  that  Ωquint  does  not  appear  in  the  relation 
between  φand  z  and  therefore  does  not  affect  the  time  evolution  of  the 
fundamental  couplings.  The  latter  depends  only  on  the  equation  of  state 
w. Therefore according to Wetterich (2003b), time varying couplings are 

36

 

possible even if the scalar field plays no role in late cosmology, i.e. Ωquint 
<< 1. 
 
  Already now, the reported QSO observation of ∆α, if confirmed, places 
important  restrictions  on  quintessence.  Models  with  a  rather  slow  time 
evolution  of  the  scalar  field  in  a  recent  epoch  (z  ≤  1)  and  a  more  rapid 
evolution  in  the  earlier  universe  (z  ≥  1)  are  clearly  favored  (Wetterich 
2003b).  
 
 
 
4.3  Acceleration  of  universe  expansion  is  imaginary  and  the  negative 
pressure of quintessence is not obligatory  
 
  Until  recently,  there  was  strong  prejudice  against  the  idea  that  the 
Universe could be accelerating. There simply is no compelling theoretical 
framework  that  could  accommodate  an  accelerating  universe.  Since  the 
case  for  an  accelerating  universe  continues  to  build,  attempts  have  been 
made  to  improve  the  theoretical  situation,  with  some  modest  success. 
Still,  major  open  questions  remain.  All  attempts  to  account  for 
acceleration  introduce  a  new  type  of  matter  (the  “dark  energy”  or 
“quintessence”) with an equation of state p = w ρ (w < 0) relating pressure 
and  energy  density.  Although  we  now  know  the  present  density  of 
universe  fairly  accurately,  we  know  precious  little  else  about  the  dark 
energy. 
 
  The  CMB  has  no  sensitivity  to  evolution  of  w  (Frieman  et  al.  2003). 
CMB  anisotropy  alone  cannot  tightly  constrain  the  properties  of  dark 
energy because of a strong degeneracy between the average equation-of-
state and the matter density. Recent observations of high-redshift (z > 0.3) 
Type  Ia  supernovae  (SNe  Ia)  provide  the  backbone  of  the  body  of 
evidence  that  we  live  in  an  accelerating  universe  (Riess  et  al.  2000a) 
whose  content  is  dominated  by  vacuum  energy  (Riess  et  al.  1998; 
Perlmutter  et  al.  1999).  The  observations  of  supernovae  in  distant 
galaxies  offer  evidence  for  the  detection  of  dark  energy,  under  the 
assumption that distant and nearby supernovae are drawn from the same 
statistical sample (that is, that they are statistically similar enough for the 
purpose  of  this  test).  This  is  not  at  a  very  high  level  of  statistical 
significance.  There  is  no  direct  way  to  check  this,  and  it  is  easy  to 
imagine  differences  between  distant  and  nearby  supernovae  of  the  same 
nominal  type.  More  distant  supernovae  are  seen  in  younger  galaxies, 
because of the light travel time, and these younger galaxies tend to have 
lower  heavy  element 
more  massive  rapidly  evolving  stars  with 

37

 

abundances.  How  do  we  know  the  properties  of  the  supernovae  are  not 
also different? If SNe Ia are evolving, how are previous measurements of 
cosmological parameters from SNe Ia affected? 
  Also, the incomplete understanding of a number of astrophysical effects 
and  processes  (evolution,  intergalactic  dust,  etc.)  means  that  the 
supernovae  results  are  preliminary  and  not  yet  definitive.  Therefore,  we 
have  to  consider  that  there  may  be  a  significant  systematic  error  from 
differences  between  distant,  high  redshift,  and  nearby,  low  redshift, 
supernovae.  I  recommend  Leibundgut’s  (2001)  cautionary  discussion  of 
astrophysical  uncertainties:  the  unknown  nature  of  the  trigger  for  the 
nuclear  burning,  the  possibility  that  the  Phillips  correction  to  a  fiducial 
luminosity actually depends on redshift or environment within a galaxy, 
and  possible  obscuration  by  intergalactic  dust.  There  are  also  issues  of 
physics  that  may  affect  this  test  (and  others):  the  strengths  of  the 
gravitational  or  electromagnetic  interactions  may  vary  with  time,  and 
photon-axion conversion may reduce the number of photons reaching us. 
All of this is under active study (Peebles & Ratra 2003). 
 
 
4.3.1 Time varying constants 
 
  As  proposed  in  previous  section,  the  main  reason  for  the  observed 
acceleration  of  universe  expansion  and  the  negative  pressure  of 
quintessence is the time varying constants, specially the variable speed of 
light (VSL). Recent VSL theories are firmly entrenched in the successes 
(and  remaining  failures)  of  the  hot  big  bang  theory  of  the  universe. 
Observers  in  the  VSL  metric  frame  see  the  dimming  of  supernovae, 
because of the increase of the luminosity distance versus red shift, due to 
an increasing speed of light in the past universe, ~ 10% between z = 0 and 
z  ~  2−3.  Moreover,  in  this  frame,  the  scalar  field  φ  describes  a 
quintessence component in the Friedmann equation for the cosmic scale 
without acceleration. 
 
  Albrecht  &  Magueijo  (1999)  showed  that  E ∝ c2  for  photons  in  free 
flight. They also showed that quantum mechanics remains unaffected by 
a  changing  c  if  ħ  ∝ c  (in  the  sense  that  quantum  numbers  are  adiabatic 
invariants;  a  varying-c  implied  a  varying-  ħ.  This  connection  has  clear 
physical  implications.  But  there  is  more:  it  could  be  that  some  of  the 
strange  properties  of  quantum  mechanics—such  as  its  non-locality-  are 
the result of a form of ‘faster than light’ communication, Magueijo 2003). 
Then all relativistic energies scale like c2. If for non-relativistic systems ħ 
∝ 1/c, the Rydberg energy ER = mee4/ (2ħ2) also scales like c2. Hence all 
absorption  lines,  ignoring  the  fine  structure,  scale  like  c2.  When  we 

38

 

compare  lines  from  near  and  far  systems  we  should  therefore  see  no 
effects due to a varying c; the redshift z is still 1 + ze = ao/ae, where o and 
e label epochs of observation and emission (Barrow & Magueijo 2000). 
  In  order  to  examine  luminosity  distances,  we  need  to  reassess  the 
concept of standard candles. For simplicity let us first treat them as black 
bodies.  Then  their  temperature  scales  as  T  ∝   c2  (Albrecht  &  Magueijo 
1999), their energy density scales as ρ  ∝ T 4/(ħc)3  ∝ c2, and their emission 
power  as  P  =  ρ/c ∝ c,  implying  that  standard  candles  are  brighter  in  the 
early universe if  c&  < 0. However, the power emitted by these candles, in 
free flight, scales like c; each photon’s energy scales like c2, its speed like 
c, and therefore its energy flux like c. The received flux, as a function of 
c, therefore scales like: 

P
r

=

2

cP
e
2
cr
4π

∝

c

                                                                                        (15) 

where  r  is  the  conformal  distance  to  the  emitting  object,  and  the 
subscripts  r  and  e  label  received  and  emitted.  In  an  expanding  universe 
we therefore still have 
⎛
⎜⎜
⎝

                                                                                   (16) 

P
e
0
P
=
r π
2
ar
4

a
a

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

2
0

,

2

0

where Pe0 is the emitting power of standard candles today. Notice that the 
above  argument  is  still  valid  if  the  candles  are  not  black  bodies;  it 
depends only on the scaling properties of emitted and received power. 
 
  We can now set up the Hubble diagram. Consider the Taylor expansion 
2 (t − t0)2 + ...]                                     (17) 
a(t) = a0[1 + H0(t − t0) −1/2 q0H0
a&
a

is  the  Hubble  constant,  and  q0  =

where  H0  = 

is  the 

aa
00

&&−

/ a
&

2
0

0

0

2 (t − t0)2, or 

deceleration  parameter.  Hence  up  to  second  order z  =  H0  (t0  −  t)  +  (1  + 
q0/2) H0
t0 − t =1/H0 [z − (1 + q0/2) z2 + ...].                                                        (18) 
From equation (16) we find that the luminosity distance dL is  

d

L

=

⎛
⎜⎜
⎝

P
0
e
4
P
π
0

2/1
⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

r
a

The  conformal  distance 
( )
( )tadt
 
/
tc

r

t

0∫=

t

=

a

2
0

=

ra
0

(
1

+

z

e

).

                                                          (19) 

to 

the  emitting  object 

is  given  by 

. From equation (17) we have that  

1 n−
2

 H0(t0 − t)2 + ...]                                                     (20) 
r = c0 [(t0 − t) +
where we have assumed that locally c = c0an (that is c = c0[1 + nH0(t − t0) 
+ ...]).  
Substituting (18) we finally have: 

39

 

dL = 

[z + 

c
0
H

0

1 (1 − (q0 + n)) z2 + ...]                                                     (21) 
2

0

0

~
H ) [z + 1/2 (1 − (q0 (1 + 4n) + n))z2], with 

(Had we assumed that ħ  ∝ c for all systems we would have got instead dL 
~
= (c0/
H  = (1 − 4n)H0. This 
does not affect any of the conclusions.) 
  We see that besides the direct effects of VSL upon the expansion rate of 
the  universe,  it  also  induces  an  effective  acceleration  in  the  Hubble 
diagram  as  an  “optical  illusion”  (we  are  assuming  that  c  decreases  in 
time:  n  <  0).  This  is  easy  to  understand.  We  have  seen  that  VSL 
introduces  no  intrinsic  effects  in  the  redshifting  spectral  line  or  in  the 
dimming  of  standard  candles  with  distance  and  expansion.  The  only 
effect VSL induces on the construction of the Hubble diagram is that for 
the  same  redshift  (that  is,  the  same  distance  into  the  past)  objects  are 
farther away from us because light travelled faster in the past (Barrow & 
Magueijo 2000).  
 
 
4.3.2 Photon - pseudoscalar field conversion 
 
−1 ~ few × 103 
  Because the SNe observations probe length scales l ~ H0
Mpc  which  are  inaccessible  to  any  particle  physics  experiments,  it  is 
natural to consider alternative explanations to the supernova data without 
cosmological dark energy. A simple such alternative is that light emitted 
by  a  distant  supernova  encounters  an  obstacle  en  route  to  us  and  gets 
partially  absorbed.  Recently  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  dimness  of 
high  redshift  supernovae  is  not  due  to  the  accelerated  expansion  of  the 
universe,  but  rather  due  to  mixing  between  the  photons  coming  from 
these  objects  and  a  pseudo-scalar  axion  field  in  the  intervening 
intergalactic  plasma  (Csaki,  Kaloper  &  Terning  2002).  This  mechanism 
works only if the initial axion flux is much smaller than the initial photon 
flux. Grossman, Roy & Zupan (2002) find it likely that the initial axion 
flux  is  very  small  and  therefore  does  not  pose  a  problem  to  the  CKT 
mechanism. This results in a luminosity-distance vs. redshift curve almost 
indistinguishable from that produced by the accelerating Universe, if the 
axion mass and coupling scale are m ~ 10−16 eV, M ~ 4 · 1011 GeV. In our 
model,  light  is  the  boson  dark  matter  (equivalent  of  axion  dark  matter) 
itself,  therefore  the  above  mechanism  for  dimming  of  supernovae  is  a 
probable one.  
 
4.3.3 Systematic errors 
 

40

 

  High redshift (0.3 < z <1.0) Type Ia supernovae are unexpectedly dim, a 
phenomenon  readily  attributed  to  a  cosmological  constant  and  an 
accelerating  universe  (Riess  et  al.  1998;  Perlmutter  et  al.  1999).  These 
cosmological  conclusions  rely  on  the  assumption  that  SNe  Ia  have  not 
evolved.  Although  systematic  effects  such  as  luminosity  evolution, 
dimming  by  intervening  extragalactic  material  (alternatively  brightening 
due  to  gravitational  lensing)  continue  to  be  a  cause  of  some  concern  – 
recall that a luminosity evolution of ~ 25% over a lookback time of ~ 5 
Gyr  is  sufficient  to  nullify  the  cosmological  conclusions  (Riess  et  al. 
1999). (Riess et al. 1999) has stressed that we cannot directly determine 
the  impact  of  the  apparent  evolution  on  determinations  of  cosmological 
parameters (Sahni 2004). 
  Sources  of  systematic  error  from  K-corrections,  extinction,  selection 
effects,  Malmquist  bias  and  evolution  are  investigated  in  literature,  and 
their effects estimated. 
  Selection  effects  can  introduce  systematic  errors  as  a  function  of 
redshift,  as  can  uncertain  K-corrections,  or  an  evolution  of  the  SN  Ia 
progenitor  population  as  a  function  of  look-back  time.  These  effects,  if 
they  are  large,  will  limit  our  ability  to  measure  the  (DL,  z)  relation 
accurately, and have the potential to sap the potency of high-redshift SN 
Ia for measuring cosmological parameters. 
  Additional  complications  arise  because  magnitude-limited  selection 
might  prevent  extinguished  objects  from  being  discovered  with  equal 
efficiency  in  both  nearby  and  distant  samples,  or  because  the  smaller 
angular size of distant objects makes it more difficult to detect SN deep 
inside spirals — those likely to be extinguished. In short, it would not be 
surprising to have systematic differences between the average extinctions 
of objects discovered in the nearby and distant supernova searches. 
  The  systematic  uncertainty  in  translating  between  filter  systems  limits 
the  accuracy  with  which  we  are  able  to  measure  luminosity  distances  at 
high redshift. 
  It is a very difficult task to  ensure systematic errors in (B − V) < 0.02 
mag  in  either  the  nearby  or  distant  sample,  and  we  believe  that  this 
uncertainty will be our largest source of systematic error. 
  It has been pointed out by Kantowski, Vaughan, & Branch (1995) that 
large-scale structure could magnify (or demagnify) a SN’s light through 
weak gravitational lensing as it travels to an observer. Given the size of 
other systematic errors, uncertainties due to gravitational lensing are not 
likely to be of major concern up to z ≈ 1. 
  The  data  presented  by  Garnavich  et  al.  (1998)  and  Riess  et  al.  (1998) 
indicate  that  we  can  measure  the  distances  to  high-z  supernovae  with  a 
statistical  uncertainty  of  σ  =  0.2  mag  (10%)  per  object.  With  only  10 
objects a comparison of z ≈ 0 and z ≈ 0.5 can be made to a precision of 

41

 

better  than  5%  –  leaving  systematic  uncertainties  as  a  major  contributor 
to the total error budget. A summary of the contributions to high-redshift 
supernova distance uncertainties is given in Table 1. This table shows that 
programs  to  measure  cosmology  will  most  likely  be  limited  by  the 
possibility  of  the  evolution  of  SN  Ia  explosions  with  look-back  time. 
Future  work  to  address  this  possible  problem  will  be  as  important  as 
obtaining large numbers of objects at high redshift. 
 
 
 

 

Table 1. Summary of Error Contributions to High Supernova Distances
(Schmidt et al. 1998)
 

 

Statistical 
Uncertainties 
Individual Zero Points  

Systematic 
Uncertainties(1σ) 

(mag) 

0.05 

Photometric System 
Zero Pointa 
Selection Effects 
Evolution  
Evolution  of  Extinction 
Law  
Gravitational Lensing  
aIncludes propogated effect on extinction, 3.1 σ E (B − V). 

0.02 
< 0.17 
0.02 

0.02 

Shot noise 
K-corrections  
Extinction  

σ of SN Ia 

 

(mag) 

0.02 

0.15 
0.03 
0.1 

0.15 

 
  With  a  single  object  it  is  difficult  to  make  serious  conclusions  about 
cosmological  parameters,  regardless  of  the  distance  precision  it  offers, 
because there is no way to judge systematic errors in an empirical way. 
 
 
4.3.4 Intergalactic dust and Evolution 
 
  The  two  sources  most  likely  to  obscure  distant  SNe  Ia  and  affect 
interpretation  of  them  are  dust  (Aguirre  1999a,  1999b;  Totani  & 
Kobayashi  1999)  and  evolution.  Although,  Riess  et  al.  (2000a) 
observations  disfavor  a  30%  opacity  of SN Ia visual light by dust as an 
alternative to an accelerating universe.  
  Rest-frame  evolution  is  the  potential  pitfall  in  using  high-z  SNe  Ia  to 
measure the cosmological parameters. The lack of a complete theoretical 
model  of  SNe  Ia  including  the  identification of their progenitor systems 
makes it difficult to access the expected evolution between z = 0 and 0.5 
(Livio 2000; Umeda et al. 1999; Höflich, Wheeler, & Thielemann 1998). 
An  impressive  degree  of  similarity  has  been  observed  between  the 
spectral and photometric properties of nearby and high-z SNe Ia (Schmidt 
et al. 1998; Perlmutter et al. 1998, 1999; Riess et al. 1998; Filippenko et 
al.; but see also Riess et al. 1999; Drell, Loredo, & Wassermann 2000). 

42

 

is 

therefore  critical  for 

However, it is not known what kind or degree of change in the observable 
properties  of  SNe  Ia  would  indicate  a  change  in  the  expected  peak 
luminosity by 30%. The detection of such a change would cast doubt on 
the reliability of the luminosity distances from high-z SNe Ia (Riess et al. 
2000a).  A  continued  failure  to  measure  any  difference  between  SNe  Ia 
near  and  far  would  increase  the  confidence  (although  never  prove)  that 
evolution  does  not  contaminate  the  cosmological  measurements  from 
high-z SNe Ia. We expect dimming from systematic effects to grow larger 
with increasing redshift (Coil et al. 2000). Obtaining data for SNe at z ≥ 
testing  systematic  bias  versus  real 
0.8 
cosmological effects and the presence of a nonzero ΩΛ. 
 
 
4.3.5 Fluid dynamics of the cosmic foam (large coherent velocity flows) 
 
  Type  Ia  supernovae  have  recently  been  employed  to  measure  the 
peculiar motions of galaxies. The great distances to which SNe Ia can be 
seen  make  them  particularly  well-suited  to  constraining  large-scale 
velocity flows (Riess 2000b). 
 
  (Riess 2000b) reviewed the use of SNe Ia to measure the motion of the 
Local Group (include 44 SNe Ia). Hudson believes that most of the bulk 
motion  of  the  405  km  s-1  which  is  required  to  agree  with  the  predicted 
motion of the Local Group is due to sources beyond 8000 km s-1. Using 
28 primarily photographically observed SNe Ia, Miller & Branch (1992) 
were  able  to  discern  the  gravitational  influence  of  the  Virgo  cluster,  i.e. 
Virgocentric  infall.  Because  the  average  depth  of  their  sample  was  only 
about cz=2000 km s−1, their analysis was insensitive to the motion of the 
Local Group and the influence of the Great Attractor. 
  Riess in an analysis in his thesis (Riess, Press, & Kirshner 1995) of 13 
new SNe Ia from the Calan/Tololo Search made the first detection of the 
motion  of  the  Local  Group  using  SNe  Ia.  The  sample  had  an  effective 
depth of cz =7000 km s−1 and a typical distance precision of 6%. 
  The  predicted  peculiar  velocities  of  SNe  Ia  are  a  function  of  the  local 
mass in the Universe ΩM as well as the degree to which the positions of 
galaxies indicate the location of mass (i.e., the bias parameter). 
  Riess  (2000b)  mentioned  an  analysis  by  Zehavi,  Riess,  Kirshner  & 
Dekel  (1998)  which  gives  a  marginal  indication  of  a  so-called  “Hubble 
Bubble”. From 44 SNe Ia, Zehavi et al. (1998) found an indication at the 
2-3σ confidence level of a local excess expansion of 6% within 7000 km 
s−1.  This  increase  in  the  global  Hubble  expansion  appears  to  be 
compensated  by  a  small  decrease  beyond  this  depth  after  which  the 
Hubble  expansion  appears  to  settle  to  its  global  value.  The  model 

43

 

proposed by the authors is that we may live within a local void bounded 
by  a  wall  or  density  contrast  at  ~100  Mpc.  More  SNe  Ia  (and  other 
distance indicators) will be required to test this provocative result. 
 
  We live in a universe which one of the largest clustered structures like 
Great Attractor are largely affected by the fluid dynamics of the cosmic 
foam  (Mathewson  &  Ford  1994),  therefore,  it  is  probable  that  the 
observed acceleration of the SNe Ia expansion be real (with respect to us) 
but because of the dynamical evolution of the cosmic foam itself, without 
the need to exotic and strikingly unusual theoretical framework that could 
accommodate an accelerating universe.  
 
 
  In  VSL  theories,  the  link  between  luminosity  distance  and  look-back 
time is obviously modified: with a higher c in the past, objects with the 
same  look-back  time  are  further  away  (Moffat  2003b;  Barrow  & 
Magueijo 2000; Belinchon 2000; Alvarez & Bel 1973). If, however, one 
takes  into  account  the  QSO  observations  (Webb  et  al.  1999),  one  finds 
that any corrections to the construction of the Hubble diagram, because of 
VSL  alone,  must  be  small  (Barrow  &  Magueijo  2000;  Magueijo  2003), 
unless  as  mentioned  above,  in  addition  to  the  VSL,  variations  in  some 
other  quantities  (like  e,  G  or  ħ)  (Bel  2003;  Magueijo  2003)  and/or  the 
influence of dynamical evolution of the cosmic foam are also introduced. 
This  might  enable  one  to  consider  models  where  the  extra  energy 
component of the universe is not a cosmological constant or quintessence 
with negative pressure but a fluid with a different equation of state. 
 
 
4.4 The ‘speed of light’ c is not a fundamental constant 
 
  The ‘speed of light’ c - the maximum attainable speed of the low-energy 
quasiparticles  like  phonons  or  rotons  (quantized  vortices)  -  is  not  a 
fundamental constant, but a material parameter. Since the ‘speed of light’ 
is  not  a  fundamental  quantity,  but  is  determined  by  the  material 
parameters of the liquid, it cannot enter explicitly into any physical result 
or  equation  written  in  covariant  form.  The  ‘speed  of  light’  c(n) depends 
on n = N/V, the particle density, in the vacuum. However, the ‘speed of 
light’ c becomes the fundamental constant of the effective theory arising 
in  the  low-energy  corner.  The  structure  of  the  quasiparticle  spectrum  in 
superfluid  4He  becomes  more  and  more  universal  the  lower  the  energy. 
Inspired  by  superfluid  4He,  in  the  low-energy  limit  of  superfluid  boson 
dark  matter,  one  obtains  the  linear  spectrum,  E(p,  n)  →  c(n)p,  which 
characterizes the phonon modes - quanta of sound waves. Their spectrum 

44

 

0≠

the  number  of  rotons 

depends  only  on  the  ‘fundamental  constant’,  the  speed  of  ‘light’  c(n) 
obeying  
c2(n) = (n/m)(d2ε/dn2),                                                                            (22) 
m of the particle as a microscopic parameter, ε(n) vacuum energy density; 
 
  All other information on the microscopic particle nature of the liquid is 
lost.  Since  phonons  have  long  wave-length  and  low  frequency,  their 
dynamics is within the responsibility of the effective theory.  
 
  At  sufficient  low  temperature,  the  phonon  excitations  are  the  more 
numerous  and  dominate  the  thermal  properties,  whereas  at  higher 
increases  exponentially  with 
temperatures 
thermodynamically 
rotons  become  predominant 
temperature,  and 
therefore  we  have  mainly  roton  radiation  against  phonon  radiation.  The 
effective theory is unable to describe the high-energy part of the spectrum 
- the rotons - which can be determined in a fully microscopic theory only 
(Volovik  2003).  Onsager  (1949)  and  Feynman  (1955)  found  that 
  at  singular  lines,  the  quantized  vortices. Penrose’s twistor is a 
×∇ sυ
vortex ring, as is a magnetic field. It is interesting to note that vortex rings 
can  sustain  transverse  vibrations  (analogous  to  guitar  string  vibration). 
The subject of vortices and the equations which apply to them were fully 
calculated by Kelvin (1880) and lead to exactly the correct equations for 
electromagnetism  as  explained  by  Stowe  (1996).  Kelvin  proved 
mathematically that linear disturbances in a saturated 3D vortex fluid (he 
termed  a  vortex  sponge)  would  produce  propagation  of  pure  transverse 
waves  identical  to  the  equations  and  properties  that  describe  the 
propagation  of  light  through  space.  It  also  is  interesting  to  note  that 
Maxwell used this conceptual model as the basis for his derivation of the 
EM  relationships  (Mingst  and  Stowe).  Mingst  and  Stowe  infer  the 
superfluidity of the aether from presence of the vortex rings. Winterberg 
(1992, 2002) proposed that vacuum aether should be modeled as phonon-
roton  superfluid  and  the  roton  hypothesis  can  explain  both  of  the  CDM 
and  quintessence.  The  Planck  aether  is  superfluid,  and  it  can  without 
expenditure  of  energy  form  a  tangle  of  quantized  vortex  filaments 
permitting the transmission of two types of waves: One associated with a 
symmetric  displacement  of  the  vortex  lattice  leading  to  gravitational 
waves, and one associated with an antisymmetric displacement leading to 
electromagnetic waves.   
 
  The  ground  states  of  the  quantum  bosonic  and  fermionic  liquids 
correspond  to  the  vacuum.  The  low-energy  bosonic  and  fermionic 
quasiparticles  in  the  quantum  liquids  correspond  to  matter.  The  low-
energy  modes  with  linear  spectrum  E  =  cp  can  be  described  by  the 

45

 

relativistic  type  effective  theory.  The  speed  c  of sound plays the role of 
the speed of light. This ‘speed of light’ is the ‘fundamental constant’ for 
the effective theory. As mentioned in previous section, if ‘speed of light’ 
c be a decreasing function of time with a decelerated rate and the ‘speed 
of  light’  is  in  fact  the  speed  c  of  sound  in  superfluid  boson  dark  matter 
therefore the ‘speed of light’ depends only on the equation of state w and 
the quasiparticle spectrum of superfluid dark matter should bents upwards 
en route for high energy. 
 
 
 

 

Figure  6.  The  dispersion  relation  of  an  elementary  excitation  in 
the weakly interacting Bose gas, here the photon fluid (Chiao & 
Boyce 1999). 

 

 
 

 
  In the mid-nineteenth century, the mathematical concept of the field was 
developed  to  describe  the  apparent  continuity  of  matter,  light,  and 
gravity.  A  field  has  a  value  at  each  point  in  space,  in  contrast  to  the 
properties of a particle which are localized to a tiny region of space. Note 
that  fields  appeared  in  reductionist  physics  over  a  century  ago.  Pressure 
and  density  are  two  examples  of  matter  fields.  In  continuous  elastic 
media,  pressure  and  density  propagate  as  sound  waves  when  the  media 
are  excited.  As  the  phenomena  of  electricity  and  magnetism  became 
better  understood,  they  were  also  described  in  terms  of  fields.  When 
Maxwell  discovered  that  the  equations  which  united  electricity  with 
magnetism  called  for  the  propagation  of  electromagnetic  waves  in  a 
vacuum  at  the  speed  of  light,  it  was  suggested  that  the  vacuum  was  not 
empty  but  filled  with  an  elastic  medium  -  the  aether  -  whose  excitation 
produced  the  phenomenon  of  light  (Stenger  1992).  The  resemblance 

46

 

between elastodynamics and electromagnetism has been known for a long 
time, and was first pointed out by Sir William Thomson. The mechanical 
version  of  aether  in  classical  physics  was  introduced  by  Christian 
Huygens  in  order  to  explain  the  transmission  of  light  via  compression 
waves, analogous to the transmission of sound in air. In this form Aether 
became  the  potential  mediator  of  all  mysterious  ‘action  at  a  distance 
forces’  such  as  gravity,  magnetism  and  electricity.  Karlsen  (1998) 
proposed that by redefining some of the terms used in elastodynamics in 
an elastic medium of infinite extension, one can readily show that Navier-
Stokes equation can be brought over to a form that exactly matches that 
of  Maxwell’s  electromagnetic  equations  even  when  the  equations  are 
written out in a four-dimensional manifold. 
 
 
  Superfluid  dark  matter  is  converted  to  normal  fluid  at  a  heat  source, 
flows  away  from  it  and,  in  giving  up  its  entropy  to  the  heat  sink,  is 
converted  back  to  superfluid  again;  As  T  →  0,  a  small  heat  pulse 
produces a group of virtually non-interacting phonons (or photons) which 
travel ballistically at velocity of first sound between the source and sink. 
 
  When  an  external  observer  measures the propagation of ‘light’ (sound, 
or  other  massless  low-energy  quasiparticles),  he  or  she  finds  that  the 
speed  of  light  is  coordinate-dependent.  Moreover,  it  is  anisotropic:  for 
instance,  it  depends  on  the  direction  of  propagation  with  respect  to  the 
flow of the superfluid vacuum. On the contrary, the inner observer always 
finds  that  the  ‘speed  of  light’  (the  maximum  attainable  speed  for  low-
energy  quasiparticles)  is  an  invariant  quantity.  This  observer  does  not 
know that this invariance is the result of the flexibility of the clocks and 
rods  made  of  quasiparticles:  the  physical  Lorentz-Fitzgerald  contraction 
of length of such a rod and the physical Lorentz slowing down of such a 
clock (the time dilation) conspire to produce an effective special relativity 
emerging in the low-energy corner. These physical effects experienced by 
low-energy  instruments  do  not  allow  the  inner  observer  to  measure  the 
‘aether  drift’,  i.e.  the  motion  of  the  superfluid  vacuum:  the  Michelson-
Morley-type  measurements  of  the  speed  of  massless  quasiparticles  in 
moving  ‘aether’  would  give  a  negative  result.  The  low-energy  rods  and 
clocks  also  follow  the  anisotropy  of  the  vacuum  and  thus  cannot  record 
this  anisotropy.  As  a  result,  all  the  inner  observers  would  agree  that  the 
speed  of  light  is  the  fundamental  constant.  Living  in  the  low-energy 
corner,  they  are  unable  to  believe  that  in  the  broader  world  the  external 
observer finds that, say, in superfluid boson dark matter ‘speed of light’ 
varies, depending on the direction of propagation. The invariance of the 
speed  of  sound  in  inhomogeneous,  anisotropic  and  moving  liquid  as 

47

 

measured by a local inner observer is very similar to the invariance of the 
speed  of  light  in  special  and  general  relativity.  In  the  same  manner,  the 
invariance of the speed holds only if the measurement is purely local. If 
the measurement is extended to distances at which the gradients of c and 
vs  become  important,  the  measured  speed  of  light  differs  from  its  local 
value.  
 
  Therefore  factorization  of  α  in  terms  of  the  dimensionful  parameters  - 
electric  charge  e  and  speed  of  light  c  -  would  be  artificial,  especially  if 
one must choose between two considerably different speeds of ‘light’, c┴ 
and c║. Such a factorization can be appropriate for an inner observer, for 
whom  the  ‘speeds  of  light’  in  different  directions  are  indistinguishable, 
but not for an external observer, for whom they are different. 
 
  The  simplest  interpretation  and  most  correct,  of  Michelson-Morley  is 
that - light is the aether or superfluid dark matter. Both signal and carrier 
waves  are  the  aether  (Twain  1997).  Nature  is  continuous  and  self-
connected and the aether is not a gas but a quantum liquid. The aether is 
light  and  plasma  -  with  an  insignificant  amount  of  gas,  liquid  and  solid 
thrown  in  as  contaminant.  The  quantum  liquid  vigorously  churned  by  a 
strong  shear  flow,  mainly  from  expansion  itself,  in  the  dark  ages  and  a 
cosmic  foam  of  ‘contaminants’  as  large  scale  structure  forms  on  the 
surface  of  the  ‘ocean  of  light’.  This  picture  is  the  brief  history  of  the 
universe.  
 
  When, some seventy years after Einstein’s prediction of the existence of 
a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC), the first BEC gas was prepared from 
Rb  vapour  in  1995,  project  co-director  and  Nobel  Prize  winner  Eric 
Cornell  remarked:  “This  state  could  never  have  existed  naturally 
anywhere in the universe. So the sample in our lab is the only chunk of 
this  stuff  in  the  universe...”  Investigations  of  the  nature  of  dark  matter 
have led us to the diametrically opposite conclusion, viz. that a BEC may 
well  be  the  most  abundant  form  of  matter  in  the  cosmos–  and  a  viable 
solution  to  the  problem  of  “missing  mass’’  and  even  quintessence. 
Therefore,  this  statement  is  the  most  inexperienced  sentences  in  the 
whole science history! 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I thank Sepehr Arbabi Bidgoli for wide-ranging discussions.  
 
 
REFERENCES 

48

 

 
 
Aguirre A., 1999a, ApJ, 512, L19 
Aguirre A., 1999b, ApJ, 525, 583 
Albrecht A., Magueijo J., 1999, Phys. Rev. D, 59, 043516 
Albrecht A., Skordis C., 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett., 84, 2076 
Alcubierre  M.,  Guzmán  F.S.,  Matos  T.,  Núñez  D.,  Ureña-López  L.A., 
Wiederhold P., 2002, Class. Quantum Grav., 19, 5017 
Alvarez E., Bel L., 1973, ApJ, 179, 391 
Amendola L., Barbieri R., 2005, CERN-PH-TH/2005-163 
Anchordoqui L., Goldberg H., 2003, Phys. Rev. D, 68, 083513 
Andronikashvili E., 1971, in Galasiewicz Z.M., ed., Helium 4. Pergamon Press, 
Oxford, p. 154 
Arbey A., Lesgourgues J., Salati P., 2001, Phys. Rev. D, 64, 123528 
Arbey A., Lesgourgues J., Salati P., 2003, Phys. Rev. D, 68, 023511 
Aspden H., Eagles D.M., 1972, Physics Letters, 41A, 423 
Avelino P.P., Martins C.J.A.P., Rocha G., 2000, Phys. Lett. B, 483, 210 
Bailin D., Love A., 1984, Phys. Rep., 107, 325 
Barceló C., Liberati S., Visser M., 2001, Class. Quant. Grav., 18, 1137  
Barceló C., Liberati S., Visser M., 2003, Phys. Rev. A, 68, 053613 
Barrow J.D., 1999, Phys. Rev. D, 59, 043515 
Barrow J.D., Magueijo J., 2000, ApJL, 532, L87 
Barrow J.D., Mota D.F., 2003, Class. Quant. Grav., 20, 2045 
Bassett B.A., Liberati S., Molina–París C., Visser M., 2000, Phys. Rev. D, 62, 
103518 
Battye R.A., Crittenden R., Weller J., 2001, Phys. Rev. D, 63, 043505 
Bekenstein J.D., 1982, Phys. Rev. D, 25, 1527 
Bel L., 2003, preprint (gr-qc/0309031) 
Belinchon J.A., 2000, Gen. Rel. Grav., 32, 1487 
Campbell L.J., 1983, Phys. Rev. B, 27, 1913 
Chiao R.Y., 2000, Optics Communications, 179, 157 
Chiao R.Y., Boyce J., 1999, Phys. Rev. A, 60, 4114 
Chiba T., Kohri K., 2002, Prog. Theor. Phys., 107, 631 
Christianto V., 2003, Apeiron, 10, 231 
Coil A.L. et al., 2000, ApJ, 544, L111 
Consoli M., 2000, preprint (hep-ph/0002098) 
Consoli M., 2002, Phys. Lett. B, 541, 307 
Csáki C., Kaloper N., Terning J., 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett., 88, 161302 
Damour T., Piazza F., Veneziano G., 2002a, Phys. Rev. D, 66, 046007 
Damour T., Piazza F., Veneziano G., 2002b, Phys. Rev. Lett., 89, 081601 
Drell P.S., Loredo T.J., Wasserman I., 2000, ApJ, 530, 593 
Dvali G., Zaldarriaga M., 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett., 88, 091303 
Dymnikova I., Khlopov M.Y., 2000, Mod. Phys. Lett. A, 15, 2305 
Ferrarese L., Merritt D., 2000, ApJL, 539, L9 
Ferreira P.G., Joyce M., 1998, Phys. Rev. D, 58, 023503 
Ferrer F., Grifols J.A., 2001, Phys. Rev. D, 63, 025020 

49

 

Ferrer F., Grifols J.A., 2004, JCAP, 12, 012 
Feynman R.P., 1955, in Gorter C.J., ed., Progress in Low Temperature Physics 
1. North-Holland, Amsterdam, p. 17 
Filippenko  A.V.,  Riess  A.G.,  1999,  in  Niemeyer  J.,  Truran  J.,  eds,  Type  Ia 
Supernovae: Observations and Theory. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 
Frieman J. A., Hill C.T., Stebbins A., Waga I., 1995, Phys. Rev. Lett., 75, 2077 
Frieman J. A., Hill C.T., Watkins R., 1992, Phys. Rev. D, 46, 1226 
Frieman  J.A.,  Huterer  D.,  Linder  E.V.,  Turner  M.S.,  2003,  Phys.  Rev.  D,  67, 
083505 
Fukuyama T., Morikawa M., 2006, Prog. Theor. Phys., 115, 1047 
Garay L.J., Anglin J.R., Cirac J.I., Zoller P., 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett., 85, 4643 
Garay L.J., Anglin J.R., Cirac J.I., Zoller P., 2001, Phys. Rev. A, 63, 023611  
Garnavich P. et al., 1998, ApJ, 493, L53 
Gebhardt K. et al., 2000, ApJL, 539, L13 
González-Díaz P.F., 2003, Physics Lett. B, 562, 1 
Goodman J., 2000, New Astronomy, 5, 103 
Gradwohl B.A., 1991a, Phys. Rev. D, 44, 1685 
Gradwohl  B.A.,  1991b,  Proc.  Sixth  Marcel  Grossmann  Meeting  on  General 
Relativity, Kyoto, p. 24, Fermilab-Conf-91/239-A 
Grossman Y., Roy S., Zupan J., 2002, Phys. Lett. B, 543, 23 
Guzmán  F.S.,  2001,  in  Durrer  R.,  Garcia-Bellido  J.,  Shaposhnikov  M.,  eds, 
Proc.  AIP  Conference  Vol.  555,  Cosmology  and  Particle  Physics.  American 
Institute of Physics, NY, p. 560 
Guzmán F.S., Ureña-López L.A., 2003, Phys. Rev. D, 68, 024023 
Guzmán F.S., Ureña-López L.A., 2006, ApJ, 645, 814 
Hannestad S., 1999, Phys. Rev. D, 60, 023515 
Hernández  X.,  Matos  T.,  Sussman  R.A.,  Verbin  Y.,  2004,  Phys.  Rev.  D,  70, 
043537 
Höflich P., Wheeler J.C., Thielemann F.K., 1998, ApJ, 495, 617 
Hu  B.L.,  1996,  Invited  talk  at  the  Second  Sakharov  Conference,  Moscow, 
preprint (gr-qc/9607070) 
Hu W., Barkana R., Gruzinov A., 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett., 85, 1158 
Iida K., Baym G., 2001, Phys. Rev. D, 63, 074018 
Iida K., Baym G., 2002, Phys. Rev. D, 66, 014015 
Ji S.U., Sin S.J., 1994, Phys. Rev. D, 50, 3655 
Kantowski R., Vaughan T., Branch D., 1995, ApJ, 447, 35 
Kaplinghat M., Scherrer R.J., Turner M.S., 1999, Phys. Rev. D, 60, 023516 
Karlsen  B.U.,  1998,  in  The  Great  Puzzle,  Sketch  of  a  Matter  Model  in  an 
Elastic Universe. (http://home.online.no/~ukarlsen)  
Khalatnikov  I.M.,  1965,  An  Introduction  to  the  Theory  of  Superfluidity. 
Benjamin, New York 
Kujat J., Scherrer R.J., 2000, Phys. Rev. D, 62, 023510 
Landau L.D., 1941, J. Phys. (USSR), 5, 71 
Landau L.D., Lifshitz E.M., 1987, Fluid mechanics. Pergamon Press, London, 
Sec. 8  
Larsen G.B., Madsen J., 1996, Phys. Rev. D, 53, 2895 

50

 

Lee J.W., Koh I.G., 1996, Phys. Rev. D, 53, 2236 
Lee S., 2005, Phys. Rev. D, 71, 123528 
Lee S., Olive K.A., Pospelov M., 2004, Phys. Rev. D, 70, 083503 
Leibundgut B., 2001, ARA&A, 39, 67 
Livio  M.,  2000,  in  Niemeyer  J.C.,  Truran  J.W.,  eds,  Type  Ia  Supernovae, 
Theory and Cosmology. Cambridge University Press, p. 33 
Magueijo J., 2003, Rep. Prog. Phys., 66, 2025 
Magueijo J., 2003, Rep. Prog. Phys., 66, 2025 
Mangano G., Miele G., Pettorino V., 2003, Mod. Phys. Lett. A, 18, 831 
Mathewson D.S., Ford V.L., ApJ, 434, L39 
Matos T., Ureña-López L.A., 2000, Class. Quant. Grav., 17, L75 
Mermin N.D., Ho T.-L., 1976, Phys. Rev. Lett., 36, 594 
Miller D.L., Branch D., 1992, AJ, 103, 7603 
Mingst  B.,  Stowe  P.,  Derivation  of  Newtonian  Gravitation  from  LeSage's 
Attenuation Concept. (http://www.mountainman.com.au/le_sage.htm) 
Moffat J.W., 1993, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D, 2, 351 
Moffat J.W., 2001, preprint (astro-ph/0109350) 
Moffat J.W., 2003a, Astrophys. Space Sci., 283, 505 
Moffat J.W., 2003b, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D, 12, 281 
Murphy M.T., Webb J.K., Flambaum V.V., 2003, MNRAS, 345, 609 
Nishiyama M., Morita M., Morikawa M., 2004, in Proc. of the 39th Rencontres 
de Moriond, p. 143, preprint (astro-ph/0403571) 
Novello  M.,  Visser  M.,  Volovik  G.E.,  2002,  Artificial  Black  Holes.  World 
Scientific, Singapore 
O’Dell D., Giovanazzi S., Kurizki G., Akulin V.M., 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett., 84, 
5687 
Olive K.A., Pospelov M., 2002, Phys. Rev. D, 65, 085044 
Onsager L., 1949, Suppl. Nuovo Cimento, 6, 249; reprinted in Thouless D.J., 
1998,  Topological  Quantum  Numbers  in  Nonrelativistic  Physics.  World 
Scientific, Singapore, p. 177 
Peebles P.J.E., 2000, ApJ, 534, L127 
Peebles P.J.E., Ratra B., 2003, Rev. Mod. Phys., 75, 559 
Perlmutter S. et al., 1998, Nat, 391, 51 
Perlmutter S. et al., 1999, ApJ, 517, 565 
Press W.H., Ryden B.S., Spergel D.N., 1990, Phys. Rev. Lett., 64, 1084 
Ratra B. and Peebels P.J.E., 1988, Phys. Rev. D, 37, 3406 
Riess A.G. et al., 1998, AJ, 116, 1009 
Riess A.G. et al., 2000a, ApJ, 536, 62 
Riess  A.G.,  2000b,  in  Courteau  S.,  Willick  J.,  eds,  ASP  Conf.  Ser.  Vol.  201, 
Cosmic Flows Workshop, Astron. Soc. Pac., p. 80 
Riess A.G., Filipenko A.V., Li W., Schmidt B.P., 1999, AJ, 118, 2668 
Riess A.G., Press W.H., Kirshner R.P., 1995, ApJ, 445, L91 
Sahni  V.,  2004,  in  Papantonopoulos  E.,  ed.,  Lect.  Notes  Phys.  Vol.  653,  The 
Physics of the Early Universe. Springer, Berlin, p. 141 
Sahni V., Wang L., 2000, Phys. Rev. D, 62, 103517  
Sandvik H.B., Barrow J.D., Magueijo J., 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett., 88, 031302 

51

 

P., 

(Superfluidic). 

Field  Theory 

1996,  New  Quantum 

Schmidt B.P. et al., 1998, ApJ, 507, 46 
Schramm  D.N.,  1990,  Proc.  IUPAP  Conference,  Primordial  nucleosynthesis 
and evolution of early universe, Tokyo, p. 225 
Sears V.F., Svensson E.C., Martel P., Woods A.D.B., 1982, Phys. Rev. Lett., 
49, 279 
Shea R., 2005, Examination of Possible Variation in aplha 
Silverman M.P., Mallett R.L., 2001a, Class. Quantum Grav., 18, L37 
Silverman M.P., Mallett R.L., 2001b, Class. Quantum Grav., 18, L103 
Silverman M.P., Mallett R.L., 2002, Gen. Rel. Grav., 34, 633 
Sin S.J., 1994, Phys. Rev. D, 50, 3650 
Spergel D.N., Steinhardt P.J., 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett., 84, 3760 
Stenger V.J., 1992, The Humanist, 53, 3, 13 
Stowe 
(http://www.mountainman.com.au/p_stowe.html) 
Teyssandier P., 2002, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A, 17, 2777 
Teyssandier P., 2004, Annales de la Fondation Louis de Broglie, 29, 173 
Thomson W. (Lord Kelvin), 1880, Philos. Mag., 10, 155 
Totani T., Kobayashi C., 1999, ApJ, 526, L65 
Twain M., 1997, The RAPR Dissident Physics Newsletter 
Umeda H. et al., 1999, ApJ, 522, L43 
Unruh W.G., 1981, Phys. Rev. Lett., 46, 1351 
Unruh W.G., 1995, Phys. Rev. D, 51, 2827 
Volovik G.E., 2000, Grav. Cosmol. Suppl., 6, 187 
Volovik G.E., 2001, Phys. Rep., 351, 195 
Volovik  G.E.,  2002,  in  Novello  M.,  Visser  M.,  Volovik  G.,  eds,  Artificial 
Black Holes. World Scientific, p. 127 
Volovik  G.E.,  2003,  The  Universe  in  a  Helium  Droplet.  Oxford  Science 
Publications, Oxford 
Wandelt  B.D.,  Davé  R.,  Farrar  G.R.,  McGuire  P.C.,  Spergel  D.N.,  Steinhardt 
P.J.,  2001, in Cline D.B., ed., 4th International Symp., Sources and Detection 
of  Dark  Matter  and  Dark  Energy  in  the  Universe.  Springer-Verlag,  Berlin,  p. 
263 
Webb J.K. et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 091301 
Webb  J.K.,  Flambaum  V.V.,  Churchill  C.W.,  Drinkwater  M.J.,  Barrow  J.D., 
1999, Phys. Rev. Lett., 82, 884 
Wetterich C., 1988a, Nucl. Phys. B, 302, 668  
Wetterich C., 1988b, Nucl. Phys. B, 302, 645 
Wetterich C., 2003a, Physics Lett. B, 561, 10 
Wetterich C., 2003b, JCAP, 10, 002 
Winterberg F., 1992, Z. Naturforsch., 47a, 1217 
Winterberg F., 2002, Z. Naturforsch., 57a, 202 
Yu R.P., Morgan M.J., 2002, Class. Quantum Grav., 19, L157 
Zehavi I., Riess A.G., Kirshner R.P., Dekel A., 1998, ApJ, 503, 483 
Zurek W.H., 1996, Phys. Rept., 276, 177 
  
 

52

 

