The Development of the College Park Tornado of 24 September 2001

By

KENNETH L. PRYOR

A scholarly paper in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree  
of  Master of Science

October 2004
Department of Meteorology, University of Maryland
College Park, Maryland

Advisor: Prof. Da-Lin Zhang

1

ABSTRACT

The 24 September 2001 College Park, Maryland, tornado was remarkable because 

of  its  long-track  that  passed  within  a  close  range  of  two  Doppler  radars.    This  tornado 

featured  many  similarities  to  previous  significant  tornado  events  that  resulted  in 

widespread damage in urban  areas,  such  as  the Oklahoma  City tornado of 3 May 1999.  

The  College  Park  tornado  was  the third  in a  series  of  three  tornadoes associated  with a 

supercell storm that developed over central Virginia.  It was initiated 3 - 4 km southwest 

of  College  Park  and  dissipated  over  eastern  Howard  County,  near  Columbia.    The 

supercell that produced the tornado tracked approximately 120 km from Stafford County, 

Virginia  to eastern Howard County in about 126 minutes.  

This  paper  presents  a  synoptic  and  mesoscale  overview  of  favorable  conditions 

and  forcing  mechanisms that resulted in the  severe convective outbreak  associated with 

the College Park tornado.  Convective morphology will be examined in terms of Doppler 

radar  and  satellite  imagery.    MM5  output  data  and  GOES  imagery  on  24  September 

revealed many  critical elements of the tornadic  event, including a negative-tilted upper-

level short-wave trough over the Ohio Valley, a jet stream with strong vertical shear, and 

a  warm,  moist  tongue  of  the  air  associated  with  strong  southerly  flow  over  central 

Maryland  and  Virginia  during  the  mid-afternoon.  Operational  WSR-88D  and  Terminal 

Doppler  Weather  Radar  (TDWR)  data  showed  a  high  reflectivity  knob  within  the hook 

echo,  the  evolution  of the parent storm from a supercell  structure to a  bow echo,  and a 

tornadic  cyclone  signature.    Many  of  the  features  identified  in  the  MM5  data  were 

verifiable by observations.  In addition, a major non-observable feature identified in the 

MM5 data was a solitary wave associated with a density current that was a likely trigger 

2

for deep convection.  This study concludes with a discussion of the effectiveness of using 

MM5  guidance  in  conjunction  with  satellite  and  radar  imagery  in  the  operational 

environment of forecasting severe convection.

3

Acknowledgements

The author wishes to thank Mr. Steven Zubrick of the National Weather Service Forecast 

Office, Sterling, Virginia) for providing a comprehensive radar data set for analysis in this 

research  effort.    Dr.  Weizhong  Zheng  (University  of  Maryland)  provided  technical 

support and guidance in the generation of model simulations featured in this paper.

4

Chapter 1.  Introduction

1. The College Park tornado

A remarkable F-3 tornado struck College Park, Maryland, hereafter referred to as 

the  College  Park  tornado,  on  24  September  2001  with  its  track  passing  within  a  close 

range of two Doppler radars.  The College Park tornado was the third in a series of three

tornadoes  produced  by  a  supercell  storm  that  developed  from  the  splitting  of  a  pre-

existing supercell at its right flank around 1944 UTC over Stafford County, Virginia.  Its 

left-flank  storm  was  weaker  than  the  right-flank  supercell  and  eventually  dissipated  by 

2029 UTC.  However, the right-flank supercell was maintained as a quasi-steady storm in 

which three tornadoes were spawned.  The first tornado (F0 intensity) had an 18-km path 

through Stafford and Prince William Counties between 2010 and 2032 UTC and touched 

down on Quantico Marine Base (see Fig. 1).  The second tornado (F1 intensity) had a 25-

km  path  from  Fort  Belvior,  Virginia  to  the  U.S.  Capitol  in  the  District  of  Columbia, 

between 2044 and 2112 UTC.  The College Park tornado, the third and most intense one 

(F3 intensity), developed 3-4 km southwest of College Park at approximately 2116 UTC 

and eventually dissipated over eastern Howard County by 2150 UTC. The supercell that 

spawned the College Park tornado tracked approximately 120 km from Stafford County, 

Virginia to eastern Howard County, Maryland in about 126 minutes.  Throughout its 120-

km track, radar reflectivity shows a distinct hook echo associated with the supercell.  

The College Park tornado produced heavy damage from just west of the campus 

of  University  of  Maryland  to  downtown  Laurel.  On  and  near  the  campus,  the  tornado 

caused  approximately  $15  million  in  damage,  including  10  destroyed  trailers  (used  as 

temporary  facility  for the Maryland Fire  and Rescue  Institute), several heavily damaged 

1

buildings, many tossed and destroyed vehicles and two fatalities.  The tornado then struck 

the U.S. Department of Agriculture Research Center, causing an estimated $41 million in 

damage  to  buildings  and  research  documents.  It  continued  north  through  Beltsville, 

damaging homes, businesses, and schools.  In downtown Laurel, the tornado tore the roof 

off  a  wing  of  the  Laurel  High  School  and  then  destroyed  a  single-level  house  in  the 

neighborhood  behind  the  school.    Moving  from  Prince  Georges  County  into  Howard 

County, the tornado caused damage to 43 homes before finally dissipating in Columbia.   

Overall,  $16  million  in  damage  resulted  in  Prince  Georges  County  that  included  861 

residential  homes, 560 vehicles, and at least 23 commercial businesses.  Approximately 

an  additional  $1  million  in  damage  was  caused  in  Howard  County.    Total  damage  in 

Maryland was estimated to be over $73 million.     

Tornado climatology as compiled by the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC) 

indicates  that,  on  average,  one  strong  to  violent  (F2  to  F5  intensity  damage)  tornado 

occurs  in  the  state  of  Maryland  each  year.    This  climatology  is  based  on  data  collected 

between the years 1950 and 1995.  The occurrence of the College Park tornado and the 28 

April 2002 La Plata, Maryland tornado of F4 intensity within a one-year period possibly 

indicates a significant increasing trend in tornado occurrence in this region.  Based on this 

apparent  increasing  trend,  the  U.S.  Congress  considered  tasking  the  National  Weather 

Service  to  initiate a study on the occurrence of the two  tornadoes.   The  purpose of  this 

study,  as  stated  in  the  Maryland  Tornado  Study  Team  Charge  drafted  by  Dr.  P. 

Hirschberg (NWS), was to “determine whether the recent occurrence of tornadoes in the 

state of Maryland is indicative of an increasing trend in these events and if so, what this 

trend  is  attributable  to”.    Also  addressed  in  this  study  was  the  question  of  whether  this 

2

increasing trend is resulting from natural and/or anthropogenic climate change.     

             In  addition  to  the  intensity  of  the  College  Park  tornado  and  the  damage  it 

produced,  another curious aspect of this event was the real-time, operational forecast of 

the  mesocyclone  associated  with  the  tornado.    That  is,  the  real-time  forecast  using  the 

Pennylvania State University-National Center for Atmospheric Research fifth generation 

mesoscale, nonhydrostatic, nested-grid model, referred to as the MM5, identified a vortex 

associated  with  the  mesocyclone.    The  predicted  timing  and  location  of  this  vortex, 

especially  apparent  in  the  MM5-predicted  radar  reflectivity,  was  within  2400  s  (40 

minutes) and 20 km of the observed, respectively.  The model predictions were made on 

three nested domains with a grid size of 36 km in the outer domain, a grid size of 12 km 

in  the  next  inner  domain  and  a  grid  size  of  4  km  in  the  inner-most  domain.  The  inner 

domain (12 km grid size) and the inner-most domain (4 km grid size) use progressively 

finer  resolution  terrain  data.    To  help  gain  insight  into  the  small-scale  features  of  the 

storm, the  MM5 was rerun for the present study with all the model settings identical to 

the then real-time forecast except that the finest grid of 1.33 km was nested inside the 4-

km resolution domain. The model utilizes a terrain-following (sigma) coordinate with 24 

layers and a radiative upper-boundary condition at 50 hPa.

2. Previous research

There  has  been  considerable  progress 

in 

the  observational  studies  and 

understanding  of  various  facets  of  tornadoes.    An  example  of  worth  mentioning  is  the 

development  of  a  large  tornado  that  occurred  around  Oklahoma  City on  3  May  1999.

This case has generated a number of publications, and may serve as a model for a strong 

tornado  that  had  a  major  impact  on  a  metropolitan  area.    For  example,  Burgess  et  al. 

3

(2002) identified the importance of analyzing data from multiple radars at close range to 

such  a  large  tornado,  which  provided  an  opportunity  to  investigate  the  structure  and 

evolution of the tornado and the rotational flows surrounding it as well as the relationship 

of the radar signatures to tornado intensity.  

Bikos  et  al.  (2002)  identified  important  features  causing  convective  morphology 

from GOES imagery, including a deepening upper-level trough over the western United 

States  and  a  rapidly  propagating  jet  streak.  Differing  cloud  fields  were  utilized  to 

delineate  air masses and boundaries. Several key findings, identified in visible imagery, 

were  related  to  the  outbreak  of  severe  convection:    (a)  developing  and  dissipating 

cumulus  convection  in  the  dry  air  west  of  a  dryline  over  western  Texas  as  the  leading 

edge  of  jet  stream  cirrus  moved  into  the  area;  (b)  towering  cumulus  convection 

developing  in  southwestern  Oklahoma  that  would  eventually  evolve  into  tornadic 

supercell  activity  in  the  Oklahoma  City  area;    (c)  a  pre-existing  mesoscale  boundary 

separating  a region of  cumulus cloud lines in an  unstable  air mass from  a  stable  region 

characterized  by  wave  cloudiness  and  its  interaction  with  the  evolving  supercell  storm; 

(d)    the  development  of  the  first  storm  over  southwestern  Oklahoma,  its  rapid 

intensification  and  evolution  into  a  tornadic  supercell,  and  its  movement  along  the 

mesoscale boundary toward Oklahoma City, as displayed by animated imagery.       

Foster  et  al.  (2000)  analyzed  the  evolution  of  surface  meteorological  fields  and 

found  four  distinct  air  masses  across  the  southern  Plains  that  contributed  to  convective 

initiation  and  organization.    The  four  air  masses  included:  (a)  cool,  moist  air  mass 

produced  by  heavy  rainfall  that  occurred  on  the  previous  day  in  north  Texas  that  was 

advected by southerly flow into central Oklahoma during the day of 3 May; (b) a warm, 

4

moist,  air  mass  west  of  a  previously  existing  dry  line  segment  over  western  Oklahoma 

and western Texas that had resulted from diabatic heating due to solar radiation and the 

subsequent  evaporation  of  antecedent  rainfall;  (c)  a  dry  air  mass  over  extreme  western 

Texas  and  the  Oklahoma  Panhandle  characterized  by  deep  mixing  that  resulted  in  the 

development of a new dry line segment during the afternoon of 3 May; and (d) a dry air 

mass originating over southwestern Texas characterized by mixing of deep moisture and 

momentum  that  surged  northeastward  during  the  afternoon  of  3  May,  resulting  in  the 

development  of  a  bulging  dryline  segment  over  west  Texas.    The  cool,  moist  air  mass 

over central Oklahoma and the warmer, more unstable air mass over western Oklahoma 

resulted in the establishment of the mesoscale boundary, previously discussed in Bikos et 

al.  (2002)  that  served  to  enhance  convergence  and  the  intensity  and  longevity  of  the 

tornadic supercell storm that struck the Oklahoma City area. The bulging dryline segment 

further to the southwest over western Texas initiated additional deep, moist convection.  

Addition of mesonet data into the analysis revealed more detail:  a mesoscale low near the 

dryline  bulge  over  western  Texas  as  well  as  low  pressure  trough  extending  east  of  the 

low.  Most importantly, the surface moisture flux divergence field revealed a large area of 

moisture  convergence  over  southwest  Oklahoma  where  convective  initiation  occurred.  

The  convergence  along  the  dry  line  segments  and  the  mesoscale  boundary  over  central 

Oklahoma in an unstable  air mass characterized by strong vertical wind shear enhanced 

the  favorability  for  intense,  rotating  updrafts  and  the  development  of  tornadic 

supercellular convection.  These surface features also interacted with upper-tropospheric 

features such as a jet streak and vorticity maximum to enhance convective updrafts.

Roebber et al. (2002) utilized the MM5 in forecast mode to explore the sensitivity 

5

of  the  3  May  1999  tornado  outbreak  to  several  features,  and  found  that:  (a)  convective 

initiation  in  the  weakly  forced  environment  was  achieved  through  modification  of  the 

existing  cap  by  both  surface  heating  and  synoptic  scale  ascent  associated  with  the  PV 

anomaly;  (b)  supercellular  organization  was  supported  regardless  of  the  strength  of  the 

southern PV anomaly; and (c) the cirrus shield was important in limiting development of 

convection and reducing competition between storms.

Research of other tornado outbreaks has also identified specific features relevant 

to  the  study  of  tornadic  supercell  storm  structures.  For  example,  research  from  the 

tornado  events  of  the  Union  City,  Oklahoma  tornado  of  24  May  1973,  the  Stillwater, 

Oklahoma tornado of 13 June 1975, and the Binger, Oklahoma tornado of 22 May 1981, 

found  characteristics  similar  to  the  College  Park  tornado.    The  Union  City  and  Binger, 

Oklahoma tornadoes were both strong tornadoes (at least F4 intensity damage) that lofted 

large amounts of debris, and thus made possible the inference of tornado location as well 

as  the  flow  field  surrounding  the  tornado  (Brown  et  al.  1978,  Lemon  et  al.  1982).  

Doppler  radar  measurements  in  the  Union  City  tornado  resulted  in  the  discovery  of  the 

tornadic vortex signature (TVS) in the field of mean Doppler velocity data because of its 

anomalous  character  relative  to  the  surrounding  mean  velocity  field.    The  TVS  can  be 

identified as a couplet of extreme mean Doppler velocity values that occur approximately 

one-half beamwidth on either side of the tornado when the sampling volume is centered 

at the same range as the tornado (Brown et al. 1978).  It was also found in the study of the 

Union City tornado that the TVS signature could not be resolved unless the peak-to-peak 

Doppler  velocity  shear  is  appreciably  greater  than  the  background  cyclonic  shear 

produced by the parent mesocyclone.  Similar to the supercell that produced the College 

6

Park tornado, the storm that produced the Union City tornado was an isolated storm that 

developed  ahead  of  a  convective  line.    In the  Union City case,  the  TVS  coincided very 

closely  with  the  surface  damage  path.  In  the  Stillwater  tornado  case,  the  TVS  was 

detectable  at  the  lowest  levels  while  the  tornado  was  inflicting  damage  on  the  ground.  

The intense shear of the TVS was at the mesocyclone center, coinciding with the reported 

tornado  location.    The  anomalous  character  of  the  Stillwater  TVS,  like  the  Union  City 

TVS,  distinguished  it  in  the  velocity  field.    In  addition  to  the  TVS  identified  in  earlier 

tornado studies, the study of the Binger, Oklahoma tornado revealed a distinct reflectivity 

maximum in excess of 50 dBZ that coincided with the TVS near the surface.  The low-

level reflectivity maximum associated with the TVS in the Binger case may be related to 

the debris cloud composed of large missiles (Lemon et al. 1982).           

3.  Objectives of this study

The  College  Park  tornado  featured  several  similarities  to  previous  significant 

tornado events causing widespread damage in urban areas.  The objectives of the present 

scholarly paper are to

a) document favorable conditions and forcing mechanisms at both the synoptic and 

mesoscale  that  resulted  in  the  severe  convection  outbreak  and  tornadic  genesis 

using  GOES  imagery,  upper-air  observations  from  Dulles  Airport,  Virginia 

b)    examine  the  morphology  of  the  mesocyclone  associated  with  the  College  Park 

tornado using the Doppler radar data obtained at Sterling , Virginia, and Baltimore 

(KIAD) and MM5 output.  

Airport, Maryland.

c) validate  the  MM5  forecast  data,  initialized  at  1200  UTC  24  September  2001, 

7

against  the  radar  and  satellite  imagery  in  order  to  assess  its  performance  during 

the severe convection outbreak, and

d) diagnose  some  peculiar  features  that  were  not  apparent  in  the  observations  (e.g. 

radar  and  satellite  imagery),  such  as  a  solitary  wave  associated  with  a  rapidly 

propagating density current.  

The  next  chapter  provides  a  larger-scale  overview  of  the  upper-level  and  surface 

features  that  are  favorable  for  severe  convection  and  tornadic  activity  utilizing  satellite 

imagery  and  MM5  output  data.  Chapter  3  shows  the  structure  and  evolution  of  the 

tornado and its parent supercell, as well as convective morphology using high-resolution 

Doppler  radar  and  satellite  imagery.    Chapter  4  presents  the  prediction  of  the  tornado-

related  events  using  MM5.    A  summary  and  concluding  remarks  are  given  in  the  final 

chapter.

8

Chapter 2.  Larger-Scale Overview

1.   Synoptic overview

Figure  3  shows  the MM5’s  12-h  forecast  overlying  GOES  water  vapor  imagery 

near  0000  UTC  25  September  2001. A  negative-tilted  upper-level short- wave  trough 

extended from the eastern Great Lakes region to the Delaware Bay.  Note the presence of 

a  wide  belt  of  moisture  ahead  of  the  trough  that  was  associated  with  a  broad  quasi-

geostrophic  ascent  due  to  the  presence  of  positive  differential vorticity  advection  and 

warm advection. Moreover, widespread deep convection extended from New York to the 

eastern North Carolina.

Regional,  high-resolution  visible  imagery  was  available  every  30  minutes  from 

1715  to  2145  UTC,  which  allowed  for  tracking  the  evolution  of  the  tornado-producing 

supercell.    Figure  2a,  visible  imagery  at  1915  UTC,  displays  transverse  bands  in  cirrus 

clouds  over  the  western  Virginia  and  West  Virginia,  which  are  typical  for  jet  streams 

(Conway 1997).  The transverse bands occur at a direction perpendicular to the jet stream 

and,  in  this  case,  indicate  strong  southwesterly  flow  aloft.    The  MM5  forecast  data 

indicate that a wind speed maximum was most apparent over the region at 500 mb (not 

shown). Note that College Park was in a favorable region of upward motion in addition to 

the above-mentioned quasi-geostrophic forcing. 

Imagery  at  1915  UTC  also  shows  breaks  in  the  cirrus  deck  associated  with 

widespread cumulus congestus, and cumulus lines over the east-central Maryland and the 

eastern  shore,  respectively  (Fig.  2a),  revealing  the  presence  of  conditional  instability 

beneath the jet core prior to the tornadic event.  In accordance with the satellite imagery, 

an analysis of the MM5 output shows similar conditions (see Figs. 1, 4, and 5).  Namely, 

9

the large scale and regional surface analyses (Figs. 1 and 4), and the 850-mb (cid:1)e (Fig. 5) 

show  the  presence  of  a  warm,  moist  and  unstable  tongue  of  air  associated  with  strong 

southerly flow over central Maryland and Virginia during the mid-afternoon ahead of an 

eastward progressing cold front.

As is typical with northeastward-moving supercells, the low-level air approaches 

from the southeast and rises through the updraft.  Thus, the updraft of the supercell storm 

that  would  eventually  produce  the  College  Park  tornado  was  predominantly  “fed”  by  a 

warm, moist and  positively buoyant air mass from  the  right front quadrant of the storm 

(Rotunno 1986).  The warm air and moist advection in the low levels result in the large 

positive  buoyancy  present  over  central  and  eastern  Maryland.    Note  that  the  low-level 

southeasterly flow overlain  by strong southwesterly  flow  aloft indicated the presence of 

strong  directional  wind  shear  that  was  to  be  a  major  contributor  to  the  development  of 

storm rotation and the favorability for splitting supercell storms.  

A  further  analysis  of  the  MM5  output  data  indicates  conditions  favorable  for 

large-scale ascent over the eastern one-third of the United States during the afternoon of 

September 24.  For example, the presence of a deep 500-mb trough (not shown) over the 

Ohio  Valley  implied  positive  differential  vorticity  advection  (PDVA)  over  the  eastern 

United  States.  The  surface  analysis  at  2200  UTC  indicates  that  low-level  warm  air 

advection (WAA) was occurring over central Maryland ahead of a frontal surface trough 

(see  Fig.  4).    The  combined  effects  of  PDVA  and  WAA  resulted  in  large-scale  ascent 

over  central  Maryland  during  the  development  of  the  College  Park  tornado  as  inferred 

from  the  omega  equation.    In  the  study  of  the  synoptic  regulation  of  the  3  May  1999 

tornado  outbreak,  Roebber  et  al.  (2002)  identified  that  PDVA  was  important  in  the 

10

generation of midlevel synoptic-scale ascent that promoted deep convection.   In addition, 

MM5-derived  cross  sectional  imagery  at  2200  UTC  indicates  that  strong  surface  

convergence  was  occurring  over  central  Maryland  prior  to  the  arrival  of  the  supercell 

(Fig. 5a).  Foster et al. (2000), in their study of the evolution of surface features prior to 

the  3  May  1999  tornado  outbreak,  identified  a  large  area  of  surface  convergence  over 

southwestern and central Oklahoma prior to convective initiation.  

2.   Mesoscale overview

Modified  radiosonde  observation  (RAOB)  at  2100  UTC  from  nearby  Dulles 

Airport,  Virginia  (KIAD),  shows  a  significant  amount  of  buoyant  energy,  a  moist  layer 

from  the  surface  to  700  mb  and  a  well-defined  dry  layer  aloft,  that  was  favorable  for 

severe  convection  and  tornadic  supercell  development  (Fig.  6).    McGinley  (1986)  and 

Weisman and Klemp (1986) have identified that a dry air layer in the midlevels (650-500 

mb) enhances storm severity by maximizing the vertical lapse rate of equivalent potential 

temperature  ((cid:1)e),  thereby  increasing  convective  instability  and  parcel  energy.    Another 

means by which a mid level dry layer can enhance storm severity through the process of 

entrainment  of  dry  air  into  the  moist  downdraft.    This  process  results  in  evaporational 

cooling that increases the strength of the downdraft and storm outflow, thereby enhancing 

convergence  along  the  gust  front  and  subsequent  updraft  redevelopment  (Weisman  and 

Klemp 1986).   In addition, the strong vertical wind shear was evident from the surface to 

approximately  700  mb.    A  comparison  of  the  RAOBs  between  2100  and  1200  UTC 

shows  the  backing  of  low-level  winds  as  well  as  highlights  the  increasing  potential  for 

strong convection (Fig. 6).  This resulting strong directional shear was a major contributor 

to  the  development  of  storm  rotation  and  the  favorability  for  splitting  supercell  storms.  

11

This rotation could induce a vertical  pressure  gradient that might enhance  and maintain 

the storm updraft (Weisman and Klemp 1986).  In addition, the 2100 UTC KIAD RAOB 

displayed a considerable amount of buoyant energy available to "fuel" deep convection as 

indicated by the Convective Available Potential Energy (CAPE/B+) value of 1606 J/Kg.  

An  analysis  of  the  mesoscale  model  ensemble  forecasts  of  the  May  3,  1999  tornado 

outbreak  (Weiss  and  Stensrud  2000)  revealed  the  presence  of  an  axis  of  strong  CAPE 

over  the  central  and  southern  Plains  prior  to  the  development  of deep  convection.   The 

Lifted  Index  (LI)  calculated  from  this  sounding  was  -5,  underscoring  the  strong 

convective instability of the ambient atmosphere.  The Bulk Richardson Number (BRN) 

of 32 and the Severe Weather Threat Index (SWEAT) Index value of 402 were indicative 

of  the  presence  of  strong  low-level  directional  wind  shear  and  the  potential  for  the 

development  of  tornadic  supercell  thunderstorms.    The  Bulk  Richardson  Number 

expresses a relationship between storm type, wind shear, and buoyancy and is represented 

by the formula

                                                        R=B/0.5U2,                                                 (1)

where  B  is  the  buoyant  energy  in  the  storm’s  environment  and  U  is  a  measure  of  the 

vertical  wind  shear  (Weisman  and  Klemp  1982,  Weisman  and  Klemp  1984).    R  values 

between 10 and 40 signify the potential for supercell development.  The computed Total 

Totals  (TT)  Index  of  51  indicated  the  potential  for  the  development  of  severe 

thunderstorms and isolated tornadoes.

The  MM5  output  indicates  the  presence  of  a  persistent  (cid:1)e  ridge  extending  from 

central Maryland southward into Virginia (Fig. 5b).  Chaston (1995) states that such a (cid:1)e

12

ridge, acting upon by a lifting mechanism (i.e., WAA, frontal lifting), can serve as an axis 

of  available  potential  energy  that  is  convertible  into  kinetic  energy  of  the  subsequent 

convection.    In  this  case,  the  (cid:1)e  ridge  provided  a  source  of  warm,  moist  and  positively 

buoyant  air  to  feed  the  supercell  as  it  tracked  northeastward  into  Maryland,  producing 

strong  convective  updrafts.    In  addition,  the  cross  section  at  2200  UTC  indicates  a 

decrease of (cid:1)e in the lower troposphere with a minimum value near 800 mb (Fig. 5a), a 

potentially  unstable  condition  for  deep  convection  over  central  Maryland  prior  to  the 

arrival of the tornadic supercell.  It follows that lifting of a potentially unstable layer can 

result  in  severe  convection.    The  cross  section  also  reveals  that  upward  motion  was 

increasing  in  strength  and  depth  along  and  ahead  of  a  frontal  boundary  as  it  tracked 

eastward across Virginia and central Maryland. 

The model-generated soundings between 2000 and 2100 UTC are given in Fig. 7, 

which  reveals  gradual  increases  in  CAPE  and  in  vertical  wind  shear.    As  previously 

discussed,  the  large  amount  of  buoyant  energy  resulted  in  the  enhancement  of  the 

supercell updraft as it tracked into central Maryland.  Increased updraft strength resulted 

in the upward tilting of horizontal vorticity associated with the large vertical wind shear, 

leading  to  the  intensification  of  the  vertical  component  of  relative  vorticity  and 

cyclonically rotating updrafts (Rotunno 1986).

13

Chapter 3.  Radar and Satellite Morphology

Scans  of  the  College  Park  tornado  were  available  from  the  Sterling,  Virginia 

WSR-88D  (KLWX)  radar  and  the  Baltimore-Washington  International  Airport  (KBWI) 

Terminal  Doppler  Weather Radar (TDWR).   During  its lifetime, the tornado was 39-59 

km  from  KLWX  and  approximately  37-56  km  from  the  BWI  TDWR.    The  centerline 

heights of the lowest elevation angle beam were approximately 400-700 m AGL for the 

KLWX  radar  which,  operated  in  volume coverage  pattern  (VCP) 11 (scans at elevation 

angles  up  to  19.5°  with  updates  every  5  min),  collected  reflectivity  and  velocity  data 

continuously during the tornado.  The BWI TDWR, with an elevation scan of 0.3°, also 

collected data continuously during the event.  

TDWR provides a higher resolution display compared to the WSR-88D by virtue 

of its radar characteristics (see Table 1).  Since azimuth resolution is proportional to the 

antenna  beam  width  of  the  radar  system  while  range  resolution  is  proportional  to  the 

pulse length, the narrower beamwidth and shorter pulse length of the TDWR compared to 

the WSR-88D result in higher azimuth and range resolution, respectively.  Thus, TDWR 

can provide a more precise display of radar reflectivity signatures. 

Figure 8 displays a well-defined hook echo within the supercell as it tracked from 

Washington,  DC  to  eastern  Howard  County.    The  hook  echo  has  been  identified  as  an 

indicator  of  the  existence  of  a  mesocylone,  defined  as  a  3-dimensional  vortex  in  a 

convective storm that rotates cyclonically and is closely correlated with severe convective 

activity  (Rinehart  1997).    As  the  supercell  tracked  northeastward,  the  hook  echo 

developed a prominent "knob" (Burgess et al. 2002) defining the location of the tornado 

(see  Figs.  8c  and  8d).    Higher  reflectivities  in  the  knob  (i.e.,  >55  dBZ)  began  at 

14

approximately 2121 UTC near College Park and continued beyond 2146 UTC, when the 

tornado  was  located  near  Columbia,  Maryland.    During  the  period  of  reflectivity 

maximum, the tornado traveled almost exclusively through populated areas in Maryland, 

including  College  Park,  Beltsville,  and  Laurel,  with  significant  amount  of  debris  being 

generated.    Maximum  reflectivities  in  the  knob  were  60  dBZ,  rivaling  reflectivities 

observed in the parent supercell.

The knob  feature has long been associated with tornado-producing hook echoes, 

showing tornadic velocity signatures (Lemon et al. 1982, Burgess et al. 2002).  Burgess et 

al. (2002)  postulated that the localized reflectivity maximum in the knob of the hook is 

the primary result of large amount of debris being lofted by the tornado.  The existence of 

high reflectivities in the  knob of  the hook  echo, in this case, signifies the presence of a 

tornado that was inflicting significant amount of damage to structures.

Similar to KLWX WSR-88D radar, KBWI TDWR reflectivity data also displays a 

well-defined hook echo associated with the supercell throughout most of its lifetime (Fig. 

9).  The  higher  resolution  of  the  TDWR  system  afforded  a  more  detailed  display  of 

reflectivity signatures associated with the tornado (i.e., hook echo, high reflectivity knob).  

Especially  apparent  was  the  “wrapping  up”  of  the  hook  echo  as  the  supercell  was  in 

transition  from  the  mature  to  the  collapse  stage  and  tracked  from  District  of  Columbia 

into  Maryland  between  2113  and  2118  UTC.    Also  evident  was  the  rapid  development 

and intensification of the high reflectivity “knob” between 2118 and 2128 UTC.  During 

this  time,  the  tornado  touched  down  and  rapidly  intensified  as  it  tracked  from  College

Park  to  Beltsville.    The  well-defined  appearance  of  the  hook  echo  and  “knob”  was 

maintained for the remainder of the tornado’s lifetime, until approximately 2147 UTC. 

15

At the end of the lifetime of the tornado, TDWR reflectivity imagery observed the 

evolution of the parent supercell to a bow echo (Figs. 9g and 9h).  Fujita (1978) defined 

the bow echo as a "bow or crescent"-shaped radar echo with a tight reflectivity gradient 

on the convex (leading) edge, the evolution and horizontal structure of which is consistent 

with outflow-dominated systems.  Bow echoes are typically associated with downbursts, 

defined by Fujita as strong downdrafts that result in an outburst of damaging winds on or 

near the earth's surface.  By 2152 UTC, reflectivity imagery indicated that the hook echo, 

now in the vicinity of Columbia, was becoming less defined.  At the same time, a weak 

echo channel was developing on the western edge of the parent supercell, signifying the 

development of a downburst.  By 2157 UTC, the hook echo had dissipated.  In addition, 

the  supercell  had  evolved  into  a  linear  pattern  that  displayed  the  following  radar  echo 

characteristics  typical  of  a  distinctive  bow  echo  (Przybylinski  and  Gery  1983):  (a) 

concave-shaped  echo  configuration;  (b)  strong  low-level  reflectivity  gradient  along  the 

leading  edge  of  the  concave-shaped  echo;  and  (c)  a  weak  echo  channel.    A  distinctive 

bow echo at this time indicated the presence of damaging downburst winds, the strongest 

occurring in the vicinity of the weak echo channel near the bow center.  Klimowski et al. 

(2000) identified 21 observed cases of supercell to bow echo evolution and noted that the 

bows were associated with both severe winds and very large hail. 

In the analysis of the 3 May 1999 Oklahoma City tornado, Burgess et al. (2002) 

defined  the  maximum  velocity  difference  in  the  tornado  vicinity,  across  a  horizontal 

distance of less than 1.85 km, and identified a small-scale couplet referred to as a tornado 

cyclone signature (TCS).  They found that the TCS, at low elevation angles, for which the 

radar beam was less than 1 km AGL, corresponded well to the tornado location, and that 

16

the trend in its magnitude was similar to that of the tornado F-scale.  The term of tornadic 

cyclone  has  been  applied  to  circulations  larger  than  the  tornado  (Burgess  et  al.  2002). 

They  also  noted  that  in  most  observations  of  tornadoes,  such  as  those  collected  by  the 

WSR-88D  radar,  the  vortex  core  is  narrower  than  the  effective  radar  beamwidth.    The 

signature of the tornado in the radar data thus depends greatly on the characteristics of the 

flow  surrounding  the  core  and  on  the  positions  of  the radar  beam  relative  to  the  vortex 

center.

Burgess et al. (2002) defined the quantity Delta-V as the TCS velocity difference.  

This strong correspondence was demonstrated well in the present case.  As displayed in 

Fig.10,  by  2116  UTC,  the  Delta-V  had  rapidly  exceeded  40  m  s-1  as  the  tornado  was 

developing southwest of College Park and then continued to increase to near 45 m s-1 by 

2121 UTC  as the tornado reached  F3 intensity.    Peak Delta-V of greater than 50 m s-1 

was  observed  at  2126  UTC  (Figure  10d)  as  the  tornado  was  tracking  rapidly 

northeastward toward Beltsville.  After 2130 UTC, Delta-V decreased to 40 m s-1 as the 

intensity of the tornado weakened to F2.  By 2146 UTC (Fig. 10f), the tornado, moving 

northeast  toward  Columbia,  was  near  the  end  of  its  lifetime  and  its  intensity  had 

decreased to F1.  Consequently, Delta-V had decreased significantly to 35 m s-1.  It was 

also  observed  that  as  the  tornado  intensified  from  F1  to  F3,  the  TCS  moved  from  a 

location on the left front quadrant of the hook to the center of the knob.

The time-height section of TCS Delta-V (Fig.11) reveals significant values before 

tornado development (> 35 m s-1) with higher values aloft (2-4 km AGL) and lower ones 

near the surface.  At the time of tornado development (i.e., 2116 UTC), significant values 

of  Delta-V  had  formed  through  a  deep  column  with  maximum  values  (>  40  m  s-1) 

17

observed much closer to the surface (~ 1 km AGL).  By the time of peak tornado intensity 

(i.e., 2121 UTC), maximum Delta-V had increased to near 50 m s-1 and had lowered to 

near the surface.  After 2136 UTC, weakening of the tornado was apparent as maximum 

values  of  Delta-V and the height of the column through which large values had formed 

had decreased significantly.

The supercell storm that produced the College Park tornado was first seen at 1915 

UTC (Fig. 2a).  By 2015 UTC (not shown) there was an overshooting top associated with 

the supercell, indicative of intense, deep convection.  At this time, the storm was splitting 

over Stafford County, Virginia, and was  well  within  the  right entrance  region  of  the jet 

core.    The  right-flank  supercell  continued  to  track  northeastward,  steered  by  strong 

southwesterly flow aloft and the right entrance region of the jet maximum, and eventually 

produced  the  F3  College  Park  tornado.    At  2015  UTC,  the  overshooting  top  was  much 

more  apparent  as  it  was  casting  a  shadow  on  the  surrounding  cloud  mass.    The 

development  of  the  overshooting  top  was  signifying  the  further  intensification  of 

convection associated with the supercell and the possibility that the storm was becoming 

severe, producing large hail and damaging winds.  At 2115 UTC (Fig. 2b), the supercell 

had  attained  its  largest  areal  extent  with  the  most  distinctive  overshooting  top  of  its 

lifetime.    This  was  an  indication  that  the  storm  was  near  its  peak  intensity  with  very 

strong updrafts.  Note the elongated shape of the supercell in the southwest to northeast 

direction  (Fig.  2b)  that  is  indicative  of  the  strong  shearing  aloft  associated  with  the  jet 

stream.   Based on analysis of the visible imagery, two major conclusions can be stated.  

First,  intense,  deep  convection and supercellular  activity can  be related to  the  enhanced 

upward  motion  in  the  jet  core.    Second,  the  overshooting  top  was  an  important 

18

characteristic  of  deep  and  intense  convective  morphology.  We  may  conclude  that  the 

storm updraft rotation was correlated closely to the existence of an overshooting top. 

The reflectivity cross section also displays signatures that are highly indicative of 

tornadic activity (Fig. 12).  A distinctive bounded weak echo region (BWER) was present 

during  the  lifetime  of  the  supercell.    A  complete  description  of  the  three  stages  in  the 

evolution  of  a  tornadic  supercell  are  featured  in  Rotunno  (1986).    At  2111  UTC  (Fig. 

12a), the mature supercell displayed the following characteristics:  the echo top was at its 

maximum  height  (~10  km)  with  a  well-defined  BWER,  suggesting  the  existence  of  a 

strong  updraft  and  intensification  of  the  mesocyclone  as  it  was  building  down  to  the 

lower  levels.    Weisman  and  Klemp  (1986)  noted  that  the  storm  rotation  originates 

through the tilting of horizontal vorticity inherent in the vertically sheared flow.  At this 

time, a  hook  echo was developing on the right rear flank as indicated in the 2111 UTC 

reflectivity image (see Fig. 8a).  By 2121 UTC (Fig. 12b), the BWER ceiling had lowered 

as it began to fill, indicating that the supercell was in a collapsing phase (Rotunno 1986).   

The 2121 UTC reflectivity (Fig. 8c) reveals that the hook echo was "wrapping up" south 

and  east  of  the  parent  cell,  signifying  high  probability  of  tornadic  development.    The 

development  of  the  hook  echo  and  BWER  collapse  demonstrated  the  intensification  of 

the supercell downdraft and a surge of the gust front as it became highly contorted in the 

vicinity of the main updraft.  It was also apparent that the location of the tornadic cyclone, 

to be described in the next section, had moved toward the center of the mesocyclone.  

19

Chapter 4.  Model Prediction

In this chapter, the MM5 forecasts, initialized at 1200 UTC 24 September 2001, are 

first verified against the available observations and then the model results could be used 

to understand some non-observable phenomena.

1.  Model verification 

In  general,  the  model  captures  many  observed  features  in  satellite  and  radar 

imagery,  and  surface  and  upper-air  observations.  For  example,  the  MM5  reproduced  a 

midlevel,  negatively-tilted  short-wave  trough,  most  apparent  at  700  mb  (Fig.  3),  a  jet 

stream, most pronounced at 500 mb (not shown), and the presence of a warm and moist 

tongue  of  air  associated  with  strong  southerly  flow  over  central  Maryland  and  Virginia 

during  the  mid-afternoon.    Low-level  southerly  flow  can  be  inferred  from  the  strong 

north-to-south  oriented  pressure  gradient  ahead  of  an  eastward  progressing  cold  front. 

The cumulus lines apparent over the eastern shore were indicative of a warm, moist and 

unstable south to southeasterly flow originating from the western Atlantic Ocean and the 

Gulf Stream (Fig. 2a). 

It should be reiterated that the updraft of the supercell storm that would eventually 

produce  the  College  Park  tornado  was  predominantly  “fed”  by  a  warm,  moist  and 

positively buoyant air mass from the right front quadrant of the storm.  It should be noted 

again  that  the  low-level  southeasterly  flow  overlain  by  strong  southwesterly  flow  aloft 

indicated the presence of strong directional wind shear that was to be a major contributor 

to  the  development  of  storm  rotation  and  the  favorability  for  splitting  supercell  storms.  

Also  inferred  from  the  visible  imagery  are  veering  winds  with  height,  which  indicated 

20

warm  air  advection  and  the  resultant  large-scale  ascent  over  central  Maryland.    In 

addition, Fig. 7 shows a gradual increase in  CAPE  between  2000  and  2100 UTC while 

the vertical wind shear increases, especially in the lower levels.  They were verifiable by 

the radiosonde  observation  (RAOB) at 2100  UTC from  nearby Dulles Airport, Virginia 

(KIAD).  

A  comparison  of  the  model-predicted  and  observed  radar  reflectivity  at  KBWI 

reveals  a  similar  feature  of  a  convective  line  with  a  bow-echo  signature  over  central 

Maryland (cf. Figs. 9 and 13). This bow-echo signature develops within an hour after the 

tornado touch down in College Park.  The MM5 also reproduces the conditions that were 

favorable  for  deep  convection  in  the  Washington,  DC  area  during  the  late  afternoon  of 

September  24.    A  cross  section  of  radar  reflectivity,  shown  in  Fig.  12a,  shows  the 

development  of  a  deep  rotational  convective  storm  that  produced  the  College  Park 

tornado.    The  west-east  cross  section  through  the  greater  Washington,  DC  area reveals 

intense moisture convergence in the boundary layer and upward motion above ahead of a 

density  current.    Accordingly,  the  radar  reflectivity  cross  section  displays  deep,  strong 

updrafts as indicated by the presence of a bounded weak echo region (BWER).  Thus, the 

effectiveness of the MM5 during the College Park tornado event was underscored by the 

verification  of  many  of  the  identified  features  by  satellite,  radar  and  radiosonde 

observational data. 

 2.  Diagnosis of non-observed features

A  major  feature  identified  in  1.33  km  resolution,  MM5  output  was  the 

development  and  propagation  of  a  solitary  wave  associated  with  a  density  current.    Lin 

and  Goff  (1988)  identified  a  mesoscale  solitary  wave  in  the  atmosphere.    Their  study, 

21

based  on  an  event  that  occurred  on  6  March  1969,  revealed  that  solitary  waves  are 

propagating features that have the potential to trigger convective storms.  Karyampudi et 

al. (1995) noted that a density current, associated with a Pacific cold front and downslope 

windstorm, initiated a bore when it descended the Rocky Mountains and impinged on a 

low-level  inversion.    The  authors  of  this  study  highlighted  the  role  of  the  bore  as  an 

effective mechanism for releasing convective instability through parcel lifting. 

In  this  case,  the  density  current-produced  solitary  wave  developed  over  the 

Appalachian  Mountains  during  the  afternoon  of  24  September,  and  then  progressed 

rapidly eastward into the Maryland and Virginia Piedmont region.  Vertical cross sections 

of  potential  temperature  ((cid:1)),  given  in  Figure  14,  show  the  presence  of  a  solitary  wave 

over  the  Shenandoah  Valley  at  2000  UTC.    Meanwhile,  strong  downslope  (westerly) 

winds, behind the cold front, had resulted in the formation of a stationary mountain wave 

just east of the Appalachian Mountains.  Since no low-level inversion was present east of 

the Appalachian Mountains, the density current retained its identity for its entire period of 

motion.  By 2100 UTC, the solitary wave had moved rapidly eastward and was well east 

of the Blue Ridge Mountains (see Fig. 14b).  At 2200 UTC, the solitary wave was located 

just  to  the  west  of  the  Washington,  DC  metropolitan  area  (see  Fig.  14c).    This  solitary 

wave is a feature of major interest in this study due to its possible role in triggering deep 

convection during the afternoon of 24 September.  The solitary wave most likely released 

potential  instability  through  rapid  vertical  lifting.    The  strong  potential  instability  and 

vertical  wind  shear  in  place  over  central  Maryland  and  Virginia  resulted  in  the 

favorability of this deep convection to evolve into supercellular activity.     

22

Chapter 5.  Summary and Conclusions

The 24 September 2001 College Park, Maryland, tornado was remarkable because 

of its long track that passed within close range of two Doppler radars and because of its 

associated  features  that  were  identifiable  on  a  number  of  spatial  and  temporal  scales  in 

satellite, radar and radiosonde observational data as well as numerical model predictions.  

The tornado featured many similarities to previous significant tornado events that resulted 

in widespread damage in urban areas, e.g., the 3 May 1999 Oklahoma City tornado.

GOES imagery on 24 September revealed many critical elements of the tornadic 

event; (a) an upper-level negative-tilt shortwave trough over the Ohio Valley; (b) a wide 

belt  of  deep,  moist  convection  ahead  of  the  trough  over  the  eastern  United  States;  (c) 

widespread  cirrus  over  the  mid-Atlantic  states  associated  with  the  jet  stream  and 

transverse  banding  in  the  cirrus  indicating  the  presence  of  a  wind  speed  maximum;  (d) 

breaks in the cirrus over central Maryland revealing the presence of widespread cumulus 

congestus; (e) cumulus lines indicative of low-level southerly flow; (f) overshooting tops 

associated with the supercell, indicative of intense, deep convection, and the subsequent 

collapse  of  the  storm  top;  and  (g)  the  elongated  shape  of  the  supercell  due  to  shearing.  

Strong  CVA,  low-level  WAA,  and  vertical  wind  shear  could  all  be  inferred  from  the 

satellite  imagery.    Also  apparent  in  satellite  imagery  was  strong  instability  and  positive 

buoyancy  that  was  present  over  central  Maryland  to  “feed”  deep  convection.    Satellite 

imagery animation was utilized to observe the supercell on the storm scale as well as to 

monitor its evolution as it tracked into a convectively unstable environment.  A striking 

observation  in  the  imagery  was  the  intensification  of  the  supercell  as  it  moved  into  a 

progressively  unstable  environment  and  then  the  collapse  of  the  storm  top  at  the 

23

approximate times that the supercell produced a tornado.

In  a  similar  manner  to  research  pertaining  to  the  3  May  1999  Oklahoma  City 

tornado,  operational  WSR-88D  and  TDWR  signatures  in  reflectivity  and  velocity  were 

shown  to  have  utility  in  detecting  and  monitoring  the  College  Park  tornado.   The  radar 

data revealed (a) a well-defined hook echo; (b) a high reflectivity knob within the hook 

echo; (c) the evolution of the parent storm cell from a supercell structure to a bow echo; 

(d)  a  tornado  cyclone  signature  (TCS)  in  the  velocity  data;  (e)  a  large  TCS  velocity 

difference (> 40 m s-1) at the approximate time of tornado touch-down; and (f) collapse of 

the bounded weak echo region (BWER) at the time of tornado development.  In this case, 

the high-reflectivity knob of the hook echo was used to infer the presence of a damaging 

tornado (Burgess et al. 2002).  Similar to the observations in the Oklahoma City tornado, 

the  24  September  velocity  signatures  demonstrated  a  relationship  to  the  strength  of  the 

flow surrounding the tornado.  The TCS was effective in indicating the tornado location 

as  well  as  relative  tornado  strength.    Finally,  the  evolution  of  the  parent  supercell  to  a 

bow  echo  signature  was  inferred  as  an  indicator  of  the  possible  development  of  a 

downburst at the end of the tornado’s lifetime.

The  MM5  forecast,  initialized  at  1200 UTC 24  September  2001, captured many 

observed  key  factors  on  the  synoptic  scale  and  mesoscale  during  the  development  of 

severe convection and the College Park tornado. The forecast also identified an important 

feature, a  solitary wave associated with  a density  current-cold front that demonstrated a 

role in the triggering of deep convection during the afternoon of 24 September.  Thus, in 

an  operational  sense,  MM5  data  was  found  to  be  effective  in  identifying  favorable 

conditions for severe convection, especially the development of tornadic supercell storms, 

24

several hours before the College Park tornado event.  

In conclusion, the coordinated use of numerical model data, satellite imagery, and 

radar data at multiple spatial scales should have provided the operational forecaster with 

the  means  to  accurately  predict  the  outbreak  of  severe  convection  as  well  as  the 

development of the tornado that tracked through College Park during the afternoon of 24 

September  2001.    Numerical  model  guidance  provided  a  long-term  outlook  of  the 

conditions favorable for the development of severe convection several hours prior to the 

tornado  event  while  regional  satellite  imagery  proved  to  be  effective  in  indicating  the 

existence of these conditions one to three hours prior to tornado touch-down in College 

Park.    MM5  data  and  satellite  imagery  identified  a  combination of  forcing  mechanisms 

that resulted in the development of the supercell that produced the College Park tornado.  

Finally,  radar  imagery  proved  to  be  an  effective  tool  in  monitoring  the  structural 

evolution of the supercell as well as the tornado that tracked through College Park. 

25

REFERENCES

Bikos,  D.,  J.  Weaver,  and  B.  Motta,  2002:    A  satellite  perspective  of  the  3  May  1999 

Great Plains tornado outbreak within Oklahoma.  Wea. Forecasting, 17, 635-646. 

Bluestein,  H.B.,  1993:    Synoptic-Dynamic  Meteorology  in  Midlatitudes,  Volume  II, 

Observations  and  Theory  of  Weather  Systems.    Oxford  University  Press,  Inc., 

Burgess, D.W., M.A. Magsig, J. Wurman, D. C. Dowell and Y. Richardson, 2002:  Radar 

observations  of the 3 May 1999 Oklahoma City tornado.  Wea. Forecasting, 17, 

New York, 594pp.

456-471.   

Chaston, P. R., 1995:  Weather Maps.  Chaston Scientific, Inc., Kearney, MO, 167pp.

Conway,  E.D., 1997:  An Introduction to Satellite Image Interpretation.  Johns Hopkins 

University Press, Baltimore, 242pp.

Foster,  M.P.,  A.R.  Moller,  J.K.  Jordan  and  K.  C.  Crawford,  2000:    Evolution  of  the 

surface  meteorological  fields  on  May  3,  1999.    Preprints,  20th  Conf.  On  Severe 

Local Storms, Orlando, FL, Amer. Meteor. Soc., 13-16.

Fujita,  T.T.,  1978:  Manual  of  downburst  identification  for  project  NIMROD.  SMRP 

Research Paper 156, University of Chicago, 104 pp.

Hess, S.L., 1959: Introduction to Theoretical Meteorology. Krieger Publishing Company, 

Malabar, FL, 362 pp.

Karyampudi, V. M., S.E. Koch, C. Chen, and J.W. Rottman, 1995:  The influence of the 

Rocky  Mountains  on  the  13-14  April  1986  severe  weather  outbreak.    Part  II: 

Evolution of a prefrontal bore and its role in triggering a squall line.  Mon. Wea. 

Rev., 123, 1423-1446.

26

Klimowski,  B.A.,  R.  Przybylinski,  G.  Schmocker,  and  M.R.  Hjelmfelt,  2000:  

Observations of the formation and early evolution of bow echoes.  Preprints, 20th 

Conf. On Severe Local Storms, Orlando, FL, Amer. Meteor. Soc., 44-47.

Lemon, L. R., D. W. Burgess, and L. D. Hennington, 1982: A tornado extending to great 

heights  as  revealed  by  Doppler  radar.  Preprints,  12th  Conf.  on  Severe  Local 

Storms, San Antonio, TX, Amer. Meteor. Soc., 430–432.

Lin, Y.,  and  R.C.  Goff, 1988:   A study of a mesoscale  solitary  wave in the atmosphere 

originating near a region of deep convection.  J. Atmos. Sci., 45, 194-205.

McGinley, J., 1986:  Nowcasting Mesoscale Phenomena.  In Mesoscale Meteorology and 

Forecasting. P.S. Ray (Ed.), American Meteorological Society, Boston, 657-688. 

Przybylinski, R.W., and W.J. Gery, 1983: The reliability of the bow echo as an important 

severe  weather  signature.  Preprints,  13th  Conf.  on  Severe  Local  Storms,  Tulsa, 

Rinehart,  R.E.,  1997:    Radar  for  Meteorologists.    Rinehart  Publications,  Grand  Forks, 

OK, Amer. Meteor. Soc., 270-273.

ND, 428pp.

Roebber,  P.J.,  D.M.  Schultz,  and  R.  Romero,  2002:    Synoptic  regulation  of  the  3  May 

1999 tornado outbreak.  Wea. Forecasting, 17, 399-429.   

Rotunno,  R.,  1986:    Tornadoes  and  Tornadogenesis.    In  Mesoscale  Meteorology  and 

Forecasting. P.S. Ray (Ed.), American Meteorological Society, Boston, 414-436.   

Weber,  E.M.,  and  S.  Wilderotter,  1993:    Satellite  Interpretation.    In  Satellite  Imagery 

Interpretation  for  Forecasters,  P.S.  Parke  (Ed.),  National  Weather  Association, 

Washington, DC, 2-D-1-8.

Weisman,  M.L.,  and  J.B.  Klemp,  1982:    The  dependence  of  numerically  simulated 

27

convective  storms  on  vertical  wind  shear  and  buoyancy.    Mon.  Wea.  Rev.,  110, 

Weisman, M.L., and J. B. Klemp, 1984:  The structure and classification of numerically 

simulated  convective  storms  in  directionally  varying  wind  shears.    Mon.  Wea. 

504-520.

Rev., 112, 2479-2498.  

Weisman, M.L. and J.B. Klemp, 1986: Characteristics of Isolated Convective Storms. In 

Mesoscale  Meteorology 

and  Forecasting.  P.S.  Ray 

(Ed.),  American 

Meteorological Society, Boston, 331-358.

Weiss, S.J., and D.J. Stensrud, 2000:  Mesoscale model ensemble forecasts of the 3 May 

1999 tornado outbreak.  Preprints, 20th Conf. On Severe Local Storms, Orlando, 

FL, Amer. Meteor. Soc., 17-20.

28

