A 3D Finite Element evaluation of the exophthalmia reduction 

Vincent Luboz1, Annaig Pedrono2, Frank Boutault3, Pascal Swider2, Yohan Payan1 
1. Laboratoire TIMC-GMCAO, UMR CNRS 5525, Faculté de Médecine Domaine de la Merci, 38706 La Tronche, France               
2. INSERM, Biomécanique, CHU Purpan, BP 3103, 31026 Toulouse Cedex 3, France                                                                        3. 
CHU Purpan, 31026 Toulouse Cedex 3, France

to  disthyroidy.  Disthyroidy 

Introduction 
The  exophthalmia 
is  a  pathology  characterised  by  an 
excessive  forward  protrusion  of  the  ocular  globe  outside  the 
orbit  (Figure  1  (a))  (see  [1]  for  the  anatomy  of  the orbit). Its 
consequences  are 
functional  as  well  as  aesthetical. 
Exophthalmia can be due to a trauma, a tumour, an infection, 
or  can  be  associated 
is 
characterised by a dysfunction of the thyroid that involves an 
increase of the soft tissues volume (muscles and fat). Once the 
endocrinal  situation  is  stabilized,  surgery  may  be  needed.  A 
classical  surgical  technique  consists  in  decompressing  the 
orbit  [2]  [3]  by  opening  the  walls,  and  pushing  the  ocular 
globe  in  order  to  evacuate  some  of  the  fat  tissues  inside  the 
sinuses (Figure 1 (b)). This gesture is very delicate and could 
be assisted in a computer-aided framework. From this point of 
view,  two  aspects  could  be  addressed.  First,  a  computer-
guided system could help the surgeon in localizing the tip of 
the  surgical  tool  inside  the  orbit.  Second,  a  computer-based 
modelling  environment  could  assist  the  surgeon  in  the 
planning  definition:  where  opening  the  orbit  walls  and  to 
which  extend?  These  questions  are  directly  related  to  the 
surgical objective that is expressed in term of suited backward 
displacement  of  the  ocular  globe.  This  paper  addresses  the 
second  point,  by  proposing  a  biomechanical  3D  Finite 
Element (FE) model of the orbit, including the fat tissues and 
the  walls.  First  qualitative  simulations  of  walls  opening  are 

provided and compared with observed phenomena. 
Figure 1: (a) at the left; three degrees of exophthalmia for the 
right eye (from top to bottom, the protrusion becomes more 
and more severe). (b) At the right; decompression in the 
sinuses of the right eye, the fat tissues will be evacuated inside 
those new cavities. 

Finite Element modelling of the orbital decompression 
In  order  to  build  a  Finite  Element  model  of  the  intra-orbital 
soft  tissues,  tomodensitometry  (TDM)  images  of  the  orbital 
cavity  are  first  segmented  to  extract  the  bone  limits,  the 
muscles  and  the  ocular  nerve  contours.  The  segmentation 
process is done manually since the bone limit of the orbit and 
the  muscles  do  not  appear  clearly  on  CT  exams.  The 
procedure  used  is  based  on  splines  defined  by  few  control 
points (never more than ten points). On each CT slice; a spline 
is  created 
the  contour  of  the  orbit.  This 
segmentation  extracts  fifteen  to  twenty  five  splines  (one  for 
each  slice  containing  the  orbit)  for  the  orbital  cavity.  The 
same process is applied to the muscles and the nerve leading 
to  sets  of  splines  representing  those  structures.  From  these 

to  segment 

extractions,  the  structures  of  the  muscles,  the  nerve  and  the 
orbit can be extrapolated from the splines. A first quantitative 
evaluation of the soft and fat tissues volume can therefore be 
measured and provided to the surgeon. 
Besides the volume evaluation of the intra orbital soft tissues, 
the  surgery  planning  has  been  studied  by  the  way  of  a  3D 
Finite  Element  mesh.  Since  the  decompression  act  is  a 
relatively  rare  surgery,  the  orbit  has  not  been  modelled  by  a 
FE  mesh  previously.  Nevertheless,  the ocular globe has been 
studied using a FE model [4]. Our FE orbital cavity model has 
been  manually  meshed  with  hexahedrons  and  wedges  to 
accurately fit the splines obtained after the segmentation step. 
The  mesh  obtained  is  complex  since  it  has  to  respect  the 
topography of the orbit, that is to say it contains above 3000 
elements (Figure 2). 

Figure 2: result of the manually meshing step of the orbit, 
based on the set of segmented splines. All of the Finite 
Elements are hexahedrons or wedges. The hole is located at 
the bottom of the mesh, above the maxillary sinus. 

By  modelling  those  intra  orbital  soft  tissues  with  a  poro-
elastic  FE  material  (with  the  MARC  Finite  Element 
software),  a  simulation  of  the  globe  backward  displacement 
was computed. In order to simulate a wall opening, a hole was 
made  inside  the  orbital  cavity,  approximately  above  the 
maxillary  sinus.  As  a  consequence  of  a  backward  pressure 
applied  to  the  globe,  fat  tissues  displacements  through  this 
hole  are  thus  provided  by  the  FE  simulation.  The  elastic  and 
the fluid properties simulate the behaviour of the intra orbital 
tissues.  This  allows  a  quantitative  evaluation  of  the  link 
between the backward movement of the globe and the size and 
location of the wall opening. In this study, the FE model was 
supposed  to  be  composed  by  an  only  isotropic  material 
modelling the fat tissues. The Young modulus and the Poisson 
ratio were respectively set to 20kPa and to 0.45 (according to 
Fung  studies  on  human  soft  tissues  properties  [5])  and  the 
permeability  parameter  was  supposed 
to 
100mm4/N.s.  
For instance, only one form of hole has been studied. It has a 
surface  of  2.3cm²  (Figure  3).  The  displacement  induced 
through  this  hole  and  the  behaviour  of  its  elements  were 
interesting. That is to say, by applying a displacement of 3mm 
to the ocular globe, the induced effort applied to the globe was 
evaluated  to  15N  and  the  elements  of  the  hole  moved  of 
4.1mm  (for  the  maximum  displacement).  Those  results  seem 

to  be  equal 

to  be  realistic  but  need  to  be  confirmed  by  future  clinical 
measurements. 

Figure 3: behaviour of the orbit mesh. Under a displacement 
of 3mm, the elements of the hole move of 4.1mm while the 
elements near the ocular globe move backward. 

Though those results are encouraging for the prediction of the 
position  of  the  hole  and  its  size,  the  time  required  for  a  FE 
simulation  with  our  model  does  not  fulfil  the  needs  of  the 
surgeon.  Indeed,  on  a  PC  equipped  with  a  1GHz  processor  
and 1Go of memory, the process lasts nearly 5 hours which is 
far  from  the  real-time  model  needed  for  a  computer  assisted 
surgery. 
To  deal  with  this  constraint,  a  simple  analytic  model  of  the 

orbit was used. This model was reduced to a sphere lying on a 
cone (see Figure 4 for the dimension).  
Figure 4: the analytical model of the orbit and its dimensions. 

With  this  analytical  model,  the  exophthalmia  reduction 
volume ∆V can be computed immediately with the equation : 
=∆ π
V
3

xh
2

hx
2

()
2

r
h

−

+

3

3

x

)

(

 

 

3

To verify whether this analytical model can be applied instead 
of  the  FE  model  for  the  computation  of  the  volume,  the  two 
models  have  been  compared  for  given  displacements  of  the 
globe (Figure 5).  

2,5

3

2

1

1,5

0,5

)
3
m
c
(
 
d
e
s
s
e
r
p
m
o
c
e
d
 
e
m
u
o
v
 
t
a
F

l

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Globe displacement (mm)

FE model

analytical model

Figure 5: volume computed for a given displacement by the 
FE model (in blue) and by the analytical model (in red). 

It is interesting to note that both curves have the same shape 
and moreover, from 0 to 4mm, both curves are nearly linear. 
This  is  noticeable  since  a  backward  displacement  during  the 
surgery  should  be  in  this  interval.  Consequently,  the  volume 
of fat tissues affected by the decompression can be computed 
quickly by this analytical model. 
Though  this  analytical  model  is  efficient  for  the  volume 
estimation  during  the  planning;  the  FE  model  remained 
necessary for the surgeon since it can help to evaluate the size 
and  the  location  of  the  hole  for  the  exophthalmia  reduction. 
Therefore, the two models are currently used for the planning 
and  future  experiments on a large number of patients will be 
necessary to tell if one of the two can be leaved or not. 

Conclusion 
This paper has presented a first evaluation of the feasibility of 
Finite Element modelling of the orbital decompression, in the 
context  of  exophthalmia.  First  simulations  were  carried  out 
with  data  extracted  from  a  patient  TDM  exam.  Results  seem 
to qualitatively validate the feasibility of the simulations, with 
a  Finite  Element  analysis  that  converges  and  provides  a 
backward  movement  of  the  ocular  globe  associated  with 
displacements  of  the  fat  tissues  through  the  sinuses.  This  FE 
model  can  helped  a  surgeon  for  the  planning  of  the 
exophthalmia  reduction,  and  especially  for  the  position  and 
the size of the decompression hole. To get an estimation of the 
fat  tissues  volume  affected  by  the  surgery,  the  analytical 
model  seems  to  provide  quicker  results  for  an  equivalent 
efficiency. 
Future  works  will  focus  1)  on  rheological  analyses  of  the 
human  soft  tissues  to  get  better  FE  properties  and  2)  on  the 
evaluation of the FE model on other patients. This study will 
allow  to  evaluate  the  behaviour  of  the  model  in  spite  of  the 
differences between each patient and thus will determine if the 
complex  FE  mesh  of  the  orbit  could  be  assimilate  to  a  FE 
meshed  cone  (similar  to  the  analytical  model)  or  not.  If  it  is 
not possible, the meshing step complexity could be simplified 
by adapting a reference orbit mesh to each patient orbit [6]. 

References 
[1] MAUS M., 1994. Basic anatomy of the orbit. Albert, DM, 
Jakobiec, FA, eds. Principles and Practice of Ophthalmology: 
Clinical  Practice.  Philadelphia:  W.B.  Saunders,  vol.  3,  pp. 
1871-1880. 
[2]  Wilson  W.B.,  Manke  W.F.,  1991.  Orbital  decompression 
in  Graves’  disease.  The  predictability  of  reduction  of 
proptosis. Arch. Ophthalmol., vol. 109, pp. 343-345. 
[3] Stanley R.J., McCaffrey T.V., Offord K.P., DeSanto L.W., 
1989.  Superior  and 
transantral  orbital  decompression 
procedures.  Effects  on  increased  intraorbital  pressure  and 
orbital  dynamics.  Arch.  Otolaryngol.  Head  Neck  Surg.,  vol. 
115, pp. 369-373. 
[4]  Sagar  M.A.,  Bullivant  D.,  Mallinson  G.D.,  Hunter  P.J., 
Hunter  I.W.,  1994.  A  virtual  environment  and  model  of  the 
eye for surgical simulation. Supercomputing '94 Special Issue 
vol. 2, Numb. 7. 
[5] Fung, Y.C., 1993. Biomechanics: Mechanical Properties of 
Living Tissues. New York: Springer-Verlag 
[6]  Couteau  B.,  Payan  Y.,  Lavallée  S.,  2000.  The  mesh-
matching  algorithm:  an  automatic  3D  mesh  generator  for 
finite  element  structures.  Journal  of  Biomechanics,  vol.  33, 
pp. 1005-1009. 

 

