 
A Note on Aryabhata’s Principle of Relativity 
 
Abhishek Parakh 

Abstract: This paper presents the principle of relativity of motion as described in   
Aryabhata’s text Aryabhatiya.  This principle is likely to have been instrumental in 
the framing of Aryabhata’s theory that the earth rotated on its axis and, therefore, it 
has played a very important role in the history of astronomy. 

1  Introduction 
 
It is not generally known that the first clear description of relativity was provided by 
Aryabhata [1], the great Indian astronomer, who was born in 476 CE. In this note, we 
present the relevant section from Gola-pada (Astronomical Section) in his book 
Aryabhatiya, which proves that Aryabhata was fully aware of the relativity of motion. 
 
Aryabhata, occupies an important place in the history of mathematics and astronomy. He 
took the earth to rotate on its axis and he gave planet periods with respect to the sun. For 
some recent papers on Aryabhata’s work, see [2-7], and for books, see [8-10]. In [3], 
Aryabhata’s ideas related to the size of the planetary system are discussed, and in [4], the 
origin of his planetary parameters is discussed. Thurston, in his essay [9], summarizes: 
“Not only did Aryabhata believe that the earth rotates, but there are glimmerings in his 
system (and other similar Indian systems) of a possible underlying theory in which the 
earth (and the planets) orbits the sun, rather than the sun orbiting the earth.” 
 
In Gola-pada, Aryabhata presents 50 shlokas (stanzas) that deal with the motion of the 
sun, moon and the planets. His text also describes the motion of the celestial sphere as 
seen by those on the equator and by those on the north and south poles; and gives rules 
relating to the various problems of spherical astronomy. It also deals with the calculation 
and graphical representation of the eclipses and the visibility of the planets. 
 
This article discusses his principle of relativity, and we argue that it must have helped 
him to reach the conclusion that the earth rotated on its axis.  

2  Relativity in Aryabhatiya 
 
The following shloka 9 (stanza 9), from Gola-pada (Astronomical Section) of 
Aryabhatiya, presents his principle of relativity in a cryptic form: 

अनुलोमगितन(cid:7302)स्थ: पश्यत्यचलं िवलोमगं य(cid:7367)त्  । 

अचलािन भािन त(cid:7367)त् समपश्िचमगािन लङ् कायाम्   ।। ९ ।। 

 

 

1

 
Translation [1]: Just as a man in a boat moving sees the stationary objects (on either 
side of the river) as moving backward, just so are the stationary starts seen by people at 
Lanka (reference co-ordinate on the equator), as moving exactly towards the west. 
 
The above statement shows that Aryabhata was aware of the problem associated with 
absolute velocity. He was aware that motion of an object is only with respect to a frame 
of reference. Here, Aryabhata has used the boat as one frame of reference and objects on 
bank of the river as other frame of reference; these are the uniformly moving and 
stationery frames. Having illustrated his principle using a terrestrial example, he applies it 
freely to celestial objects, stating that stars are stationary and we are moving. This 
application of a terrestrial idea to the stars is very significant conceptually, since it means 
that the same laws should apply everywhere. 
 
 
Shloka 10 (stanza 10): 

उदयास्तमयिनिम(cid:7275)ं िनत्यं पर्वहेर्ग् वायुना िक्षप्त:  । 

लङ् कासमपश्िचमगो भयञ्जर: सगर्हो भर्मित  ।। १० ।। 

 
Translation [1]: (It so appears as if) the entire structure of the asterisms together with 
the planets were moving exactly towards the west of Lanka, being constantly driven by 
the provector wind, to cause their rising and setting. 
 
The above stanza implies that Aryabhata was perfectly aware that experiments dealing 
with observations in a different frame of reference with respect to one on which the 
observer is situated will provide exactly similar results. This conclusion is drawn because 
as seen in the previous stanza he had described stars as stationary objects while in the 
present one he says stars appear to move due to the “provector wind.” This also means 
that he saw mechanism in terms of a provector wind as a kind of an artifact. 
 

3  Antecedents 
 
For the antecedents to Aryabhata’s principle of relativity one must go to the earlier 
sources on Vedic astronomy [11-15]. That his work was grounded in measurements is 
established by Billard [16], who shows that his parameters are true for Pataliputra (Patna) 
of about 510 C.E. when the book appears to have been written.  
 
The Aitareya Brahmana (3.44) says: “The Sun never really sets or rises.” Another very 
early text, the Shatapatha Brahmana (8.7.3.10) states: “The sun strings these worlds - the 
earth, the planets, the atmosphere - to itself on a thread.” Both these imply that the matter 
of representation of motion with respect to earth as well as sun was part of the 
astronomical tradition. 

 

2

 
We conclude that there was a very ancient tradition related to considering the sun as the 
centre of the solar system in India. Although some naïve ideas of relativity must have 
been at the basis of this tradition, a clear expression of this thinking is to be found for the 
first time in India in the work of Aryabhata.  
 
It is possible that this relativity principle led the authors of the medieval Vishnu Purana 
(2.8) to assert: “The sun is stationed for all time, in the middle of the day. [...] Of the sun, 
which is always in one and the same place, there is neither setting nor rising.” [14,17]. 
 

4  Galileo’s Relativity 
 
It is worthwhile to compare Aryabhata’s relativity principle to that of Galileo (1564-
1642), who explained his principle of relativity by stating that one cannot use any 
mechanical experiment to determine absolute constant uniform velocity. 
 
Galileo presented the main idea behind his principle in the Dialogue Concerning the Two 
Chief World Systems (1632). In this work, Salvatius describes two scenarios concerning 
ship's cabin. In both, two friends are in the cabin, along with butterflies and other small 
flying animals, fish swimming in a bowl, a bottle from which drops of water fall into 
another container, and a ball. The cabin is below deck, so neither person can see outside.  
 
In the first scenario, the ship is at rest; in the second, the ship is traveling at a constant 
velocity. In both, the animals and the fish move about, and the two friends go about 
various activities, and there is no way they can tell a difference.  The motion of the ship 
has no effect on the activities in the cabin. This is the central idea behind Galileo’s 
principle of relativity.  
 
It is striking that the examples put forward by Aryabhata and Galileo are fundamentally 
identical. In each case there are two scenarios: one with a frame in motion and the other 
with the frame at rest. In each case, effectively, the local observations remain unaffected 
by the motion of the frame. 
 

5  Conclusions 
 
Aryabhata’s principle of relativity appears to have played a central role in the 
development of astronomical models in India and, therefore, it is of great interest to the 
historian of astronomy. 
 
References 
 
1.  K.S. Shukla and K.V. Sarma, Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata. Indian National Science 

Academy, 1976. 

 

3

2.  B. Datta and A.N. Singh, History of Hindu Mathematics, A Source Book, Parts 1 and 

2, (single volume). Asia Publishing House, Bombay, 1962.  

3.  S. Kak, “Early theories on the distance to the sun.” Indian Journal of History of 

Science, vol. 33, 1998, pp. 93-100. arXiv: physics/9804021.  

4.  S. Kak, “On Aryabhata’s planetary constants.” Annals Bhandarkar Oriental Research 

Institute, vol. 84, pp. 127-133, 2003. arXiv: physics/0110029 

5.  T.R.N. Rao and C.-H. Yang, Aryabhata remainder theorem: relevance to crypto-

algorithms, Circuits, Systems, and Signal Processing, 25: 1-15, 2006. 

6.  S. Vuppala, The Aryabhata algorithm using least absolute remainders, 2006. arXiv: 

7.  A. Parakh,  Aryabhata's root extraction methods, 2006. arXiv: math/0608793  
8.  S. Balachandra Rao, Indian Mathematics and Astronomy. Jnana Deep Publications, 

cs.CR/0604012  

Bangalore, 1994. 

9.  H. Thurston, Early Astronomy. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1994 
10. G. Swarup, A.K. Bag, and K.S. Shukla (eds), History of Oriental Astronomy. 

Cambridge University Press, 1987. 

11. S. Kak, “Greek and Indian cosmology: review of early history.” In The Golden Chain. 

G.C. Pande (ed.). CSC, New Delhi, 2005; arXiv: physics/0303001. 

12. S. Kak, “Babylonian and Indian astronomy: early connections.” In The Golden Chain. 

G.C. Pande (ed.). CSC, New Delhi, 2005; arXiv: physics/0301078. 

13. S. Kak, “Yajnavalkya and the origins of Puranic cosmology.” Adyar Library Bulletin, 

vol 65, pp. 145-156, 2001; arXiv: physics/0101012.  

14. S. Kak, “Birth and early development of Indian astronomy.” In Astronomy Across 
Cultures: The History of Non-Western Astronomy,Helaine Selin (editor), Kluwer 
Academic, Boston, 2000, pp. 303-340. arXiv: physics/0101063. 

15. S. Kak, “The speed of light and Puranic cosmology.” arXiv: physics/9804020 
16. Roger Billard, L’astronomie Indienne. Paris: Publications de l’ecole francaise 

d’extreme-orient, 1971. 

17. S. Kak, Indian Physics: Outline of Early History. arXiv: physics/0310001  

 

 

 

4

