Experimental Study of the Acoustic Field
Generated by a 50 MeV Electron Beam in Water

V. B. Bychkov1, V. S. Demidov2, E. V. Demidova2, A. N. Ermakov3, O. D. Ershova3,
B. S. Ishkhanov3, V. P. Maslyany1, A. Yu. Sokolov2, N. A. Khaldeeva2

1. All-Russian Scientific Research Institute of Physical-Technical and Radiotechnical Measurements,
Mendeleevo, Moskovskaya obl., Russian Federation
2. Alikhanov Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics, Moscow, Russian Federation
3. Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation

At  the  MSU  SINP  electron  accelerator,  a  space-time  dependence  of  the  acoustic  pressure 
generated in water by an electron beam of 50 MeV energy was obtained.  Measurements were 
carried out in 100 points located along the line parallel to the beam axis at the distance of 6.5 cm 
from  the  axis.    At  a two-dimensional  diagram  (distance-time) two  signal  tracks  were  observed 
from two sound sources: a cylindrical acoustic antenna generated by the electron beam, and an 
area of the beam entrance cap which divides the water medium from the air.

Introduction

The  effect  of  acoustic  field  origination 
due  to  the  passage  of  ionizing  particles 
through  matter  is  interesting  in  connection 
with the idea to use this effect for measuring 
the  spectra  of  ultra-high  energy  neutrinos  in 
natural  water  basins.  Obtaining  precise  ex-
perimental  data  in  this  field  will  help  to  an-
swer  the  questions such  as  what  are  the 
mechanisms of ultra-high energy cosmic rays 
generation  and  what astrophysical  objects
could be their sources, and will also enable to 
check  the  validity  of  different  cosmological 
models  of  the  origin  of  the  Universe.  At  the 
moment  a  number  of  large  underwater  neu-
trino  detectors  are  developed  within  interna-
tional collaborations. In most of them the de-
tection of Cherenkov light from charged par-
ticles  produced  by  neutrino  interactions  in 
water  is  used  as  a  primary  method.  In  some 
experiments  (ANTARES,  NEMO,  NT-200, 
etc.)  a  complementary  method  based  on  the 
registration  of  the  acoustic  radiation  gener-
ated  due  to  the  passage  of  charged  particles 
through  matter  is  also  developed.  It  is  well-
known  that  neutrino  interaction  with  matter 
results  in  the  production  of  charged  leptons 
(electrons and muons), which then initiate the 
development  of  hadron-electromagnetic  cas-

the  monography  [2], 

cades.  Dimensions  of  these  cascades  reach 
several  meters  in  length  and  tens  of  meters 
across. According to Askarian [1] hypothesis, 
confirmed by experimental  data systematized 
in 
the  passage  of 
charged particles  through  matter is  accompa-
nied  by  mechanical  oscillations  of  the  me-
dium, a spectrum of which in prospective ex-
perimental  conditions  lies  within 1-200  kHz 
frequency  band.  It  is  assumed  that  by  re-
cording  the  acoustic  pulse  from  the  hadron-
electromagnetic  shower  and  measuring  its 
acoustic pressure it is possible to estimate the 
energy  of  the  neutrino  as  a  shower  source. 
Moreover,  the  determination  of  the  shower 
development direction and its spatial position 
yields the direction of the primary neutrino.

At  the  stage  of  planning  the  experiments 
it  is  significant  to  obtain  expected  response 
values of the  detection  equipment.  In the  ex-
perimental  investigation  of  the  phenomena 
acoustic  signals  from  cascade  showers  are 
simulated by signals generated in small-sized 
tanks due to absorption of low-energy particle 
beams  in  water.  The  experiments  are  carried 
out  at  the  accelerators  with  available intensi-
ties  high  enough  to  approach  the  energy 
deposition  values  expected  in  neutrino  ex-
periments. 

1

Properties  of  the  acoustic  signals  have 
been  mainly  studied  with  proton  beams  [3 -
6].  Few  experiments  were  conducted  with 
electrons  more  than  20  years  ago  [2, 7].  In 
these experiments five signals were registered 
at  the  distances  from  3  to  18  cm  from  the 
beam axis.   

In  the  present  work  a  space-time  de-
pendence  of  the  acoustic  field,  the  source  of 
which  is  a  50  MeV  electron  beam,  is  meas-
ured and its structure is analyzed.  According 
to  the  common  notions  of  acoustic  signal 
generation  mechanisms,  electron-photon  cas-
cades produced by  electrons  traversing  water 
medium  form  an  acoustic  antenna  of  quasi-
cylindrical  shape  with  alternating  diameter. 
The  aim  of  the  experiment  was  the  registra-
tion  of  acoustic  signals  radiated  by  the  an-
tenna  in  a  number  of  points  at  the  distances 
comparable  to  the  length  of  the  antenna  and 
significantly  exceeding  its  transverse  dimen-
sions.

Experimental equipment

The  experiment  was  conducted  at  the 
MSU  SINP  pulse 
race-track  microtron 
RTM70.  The  energy  of  electrons  in  the  ex-
periment was 50 MeV, beam spill time – 8 μs, 
pulse  frequency  –  10 Hz.  The  beam  cross-
section shape was quasi-elliptical (with verti-
cal dimensions of about 5 mm and horizontal 
dimensions of about 2.5 mm). The beam cur-
rent was controlled via a beam current trans-
former  sensor  and  had  an  average  value  of 
2 mA, which corresponds to an average inten-

sity of  about  1011  particles  per  beam  spill.  A
total  energy  deposition  per  spill  was  of  the 
order of 5·1018 eV.

the 

with 

dimensions 

As a target, in  which the investigated ul-
trasonic field was generated, a tank filled with 
distilled  water was used.  The tank was  made 
of  acrylic  plastic  and  was  reinforced  and 
sealed  at  side  joints.  It  had  a  parallelepiped 
shape 
of 
50.8 x 52.3 x 94.5 cm.  The  experimental  set 
up with all dimensions needed for data analy-
sis is shown in fig. 1. The level of water in the 
tank  was  390 mm,  its  average  temperature 
was  equal  to  20.5 °С.  A  possible  local  tem-
perature  increase  due  to  the  beam  passage 
was not controlled. The tank dimensions were 
large  enough  to  distinguish  in  process  of  the 
analysis  between  a  direct  signal  from  the 
beam  and  signals  reflected  from  the  walls. 
The electron beam was injected into the cen-
ter of the measurement volume through a dur-
alumin  tube  of  59 mm  diameter,  460 mm 
length and 1.5 mm wall thickness, which was 
inserted  in  a  lateral  face  of  the  tank  and  was 
closed with a teflon cap of 2 mm thickness. 

The measurements were performed using 
a broadband (up to 160 kHz) highly sensitive 
(> 1 mV/Pa)  measuring  hydrophone,  which 
was  designed  by  VNIIFTRI  specialists  for 
radiation  acoustic  measurements.  A  piezo-
electric  ceramic  with  tangential  polarization 
was utilized as a sensor. 

Fig. 1. Experimental set up.

2

A schematic diagram of the experimental 
set up is presented in fig. 2. The hydrophone 
was  connected  through  its  own  preamplifier 
and also two amplifiers giving the amplifica-
tion of 50 and 10 dB in  the band of 20 Hz –
200 kHz and 10 –100 kHz respectively.

The  hydrophone  was  moved  along the  track 
using  a  special  electromechanical  remote-
control  scanner  designed  by  V.I. Albul [5]. 
The  scanner  step  was  equal  to 4.45 mm.  A
starting  point  Z  coordinate  coincided  with 
the origin of the acoustic antenna. 

Results and discussion

In fig. 3 a fragment of a signal from the 
hydrophone recorded at the distance of 8 cm 
from the scanning start point is shown with a 
dash line. The time sweep from the moment 
of the sync pulse arrival is represented by the 
abscissa axis, the voltage value in Volts – by 
the ordinate axis. The beginning and the end 
time  of  the  beam  spill  (4–12 μs)  is  marked 
by arrows. The  acoustic  signal  generated by 
the  beam  is  located  within  a  time  interval 
from 34 to 85 μs, and it has a bipolar shape. 
At  the  time  t = 18 μs  an  electromagnetic 
noise pulse related with the operation  of the 
accelerator  is  observed.  Its  amplitude  ex-
ceeds the amplitude of the studied signal by 
several  times  and  impedes  the  analysis  pos-
sibility  at  short  times  (< 36 μs)  and,  conse-
quently, at short distances between the sound 
source and the detector.

Fig 3. Signal from the hydrophone at Z = 8 cm from 
the origin of the acoustic antenna and X0 = 6,5 cm 
from its axis. A dotted line shows the initial signal, a 
solid line – the signal after subtracting the noise pulse. 
Arrows mark the beam spill time.

3

Fig 2. Schematic diagram of the experiment.

the 
The  data  was  read  out  using 
TEKTRONIX  TDS  3032  2-channel  oscillo-
scope operated by a personal  computer. The 
signal  observation  time  was  1 ms,  each 
measurement  contained  10000  readings  by 
0.1 μs  each.  The  oscilloscope  was  triggered 
by  a  synchronizing  pulse  from  a  generator 
controlling  the  accelerator  performance  and 
anticipated  the  time  of  the  beam  arrival  to 
the  target  by  approximately  4 μs.  A  signal 
from  the  beam  current  transformer  was  fed 
into  one  oscilloscope  channel,  the  signal 
from  the  hydrophone –  to  another.  Oscil-
lograms were recorded  to  the computer disk 
in a native oscilloscope file format.

The oscillograms of the  acoustic signals 
were  recorded  in  100  points  along  the 
straight  linear  track,  parallel  to  the  electron 
beam axis and located in the horizontal plane 
with the axis. The distance between the beam 
axis and the track was Х0 = 6.5 cm.

It  is  possible  to  significantly  reduce  the 
noise  pulse  influence  by  subtracting  it  from 
the  recorded  signal.  The  noise  pulse  was 
measured  while  the  accelerator  was  operat-
ing  in  the  absence  of  the  electron  beam. It 
determines the signal shape in a time interval 
18–36 μs. The subtraction result is presented 
in fig. 3 with a solid line. The figure implies 
that  the  noise  pulse  subtraction  procedure 
allows  to  suppress  the  spurious  signals  in-
fluence  by  at  least  7  times  at  the  times  less 
than 25 μs and to decrease the lower bound-
ary  of  the  studied  interval  until  2-5 μs  from 
the  signal  beginning,  which  is  important  for 
a  more  detailed  study  of  radiation  acoustic 
waves  generation  mechanisms.  Results  pre-
sented below were obtained using the above-
mentioned procedure.

Fig 4. Space-time structure of the acoustic field gen-
erated by an electron beam in water.

Time dependencies of ultrasonic pulses
recorded in 66 points along the measurement
track are presented in  fig. 4. The signals  are 
normalized to 1 mA beam current. The ordi-
nate axis represents distances along the track 
in  cm,  which  enable  to  determine  the  coor-
dinates of the measurement points inside the 
tank. 

Acoustic  signals  form  three paths  in  the 
(t-Z) plane, two of which (AB and DE) have 

the  beam  propagation  area  as  a  source, and 
the  third  (abe)  represents  the  reflections  of 
the  signals  produced  by  the  beam  from  the 
bottom  of the tank. The AB path formed by 
ridges  of  alternating  amplitude  corresponds 
to  a  first  half-wave  of  the  acoustic  signal 
(compression  half-wave)  from  the  nearest 
point  of  the  radiating  acoustic  antenna.  The 
path  is  almost  parallel  to  the  distance  axis, 
because  the  propagation  time  of  this  signal 
from  the  source  to  the  detector  is  the  same,
accurate  within  variation  of  electron-photon 
cascade transverse dimensions.

Signals  which  form  the  DE  path  begin 
with a rarefaction half-wave. Considering the 
arrival  time  of  these  signals,  the  shape 
(straight line) and the direction of the path, it 
can  be  concluded  that the  source  of  these 
signals is located in the area of the cap which 
divides the water medium from the air. Simi-
lar  signals  were  earlier  detected  in  experi-
ments  with  electron  [7]  and  proton  [6, 8] 
beams.  A  dotted  line  in  the  figure 4  is  a  re-
sult  of  approximation  of  the  points  cor-
responding to  the  beginning  of  acoustic  sig-
nals by a linear dependence

Ri = V ti + r,                        (1)

where  i  is  a  number  of the  track  point 
with  coordinate Zi , in  which the signal  was 
recorded (the Z coordinate zero is at the be-
ginning of the scanner track), ti – time of the 
hydrophone, 
signal 

arrival 

the 

to 

2
0

2
i





Z

X

R
–  distance  from  the  center 
i
of  the  cap  to  the  hydrophone.  The  approxi-
mation was carried out for the track segment 
from 13 to 37.5 cm. Numerical values of the 
speed of sound V and the distance r from the 
sound source at the starting point of the track 
were  determined  as  a 
result  of  ap-
proximation.

To  determine  the  signal  arrival  time  ti  
the  following  algorithm  was  used.  In  each 
point  i the  minimum  of  the  acoustic  signal 
was  determined.  The  interval  for  the  mini-
mum  search  was  in  the  zero-order  approxi-
mation  limited  by  a  time  interval  in  which 
the analyzed signal was the only. Lower and 

4

upper limits  of this  interval  are presented in 
fig. 4 by lines 1 and 2, respectively. In fig. 5 
a  fragment  of 
the  signal  recorded  at 
Z = 15.6 cm  is  presented;  the  found  mini-
mum is marked by an arrow denoted by tmin. 
Then, using the least  square technique  in  an 
interval  of    (tmin – 120 μs    <  t  <  tmin + 5 μs) 
parameters  of  an  approximating  Gaussian 
were determined. Its average tG and standard 
deviation σ were used to calculate the signal 
arrival time t0 = tG – 2 σ. It is shown in fig. 5 
by  an  upward  arrow.  Thus,  for  each  of  57 
points  the  times  t0i  and  distances  Ri  were 
known.  These  pairs  of  values  are  plotted  in 
fig. 6.  The  straight  line  is  a  result  of  ap-
proximation  of  points  by  the  linear  depend-
ence  (1).  The  determined  speed  of  sound 
value  at  this  track  appeared  to  be  equal  to
V = (1435 ± 12) m/sec.  This  value  can  be 
compared to the speed of sound value which 
was  measured  during  a  calibration  experi-
ment carried out in the same tank with a pie-
zoelectric radiator as a sound source and was 
determined  to  be  (1461 ± 15) m/sec.  The 
values agree within two standard deviations, 
and  small  discrepancies  might  be  taking 
place because of finite dimensions of the ra-
diator and the sound detector.

Fig 5. An illustration to the signal time arrival deter-
mination algorithm. A dotted line shows an approxi-
mation of a signal recorded at Z = 15.6 cm from the 
origin of the electron-photon cascade by a Gaussian.

Fig 6. Time dependence of the distance between the
sound detector and the center of the cap which divides
the water from the air. A straight line is a result of the 
approximation of experimental points.

As for the calculated value of coefficient 
r = (–2.50 ± 0.05) cm,  its  significant  devia-
tion from Х0 at t = 0 probably is the evidence 
of  not  identical  speed  of  sound  in  undis-
turbed  medium  (far  from  the  source)  and  in 
the  medium  where  signals  from  two  the 
sound sources overlap. One of the reasons of 
the  sound  speed  increase  near  the  electron 
beam  could  be  a  local  temperature  increase 
due to the beam influence. The change of the 
speed  of  sound  at  small  distances  from  the 
beam can be observed qualitatively in fig. 4, 
where  at  times  t > 90 μs  the  signals  follow 
the  approximation  line,  but  at  smaller  times 
deviate from it. 

Conclusions

As  a  result  of  the  experiment,  for  the 
first  time  a  detailed  space-time  dependence 
of  the  acoustic  field,  generated  in  water  by 
an  intensive  electron  beam,  was  obtained  at 
the  track  parallel  to  the  beam  axis.  The  ex-
perimental  method  prevented  the  influence 
of  reflected  signals  in  the  investigated  area, 
which  was  about  30  cm  and  exceeded  lon-
gitudinal dimensions of the acoustic antenna, 
generated  due  to  the  beam  propagation  in 

5

water,  by  approximately  3  times.  The  util-
ized  algorithm  of  data  processing  and  the 
way of presenting the results enabled to dis-
tinguish  confidently  signals  from  the  cylin-
drical acoustic antenna itself and the signals 
from  the  area  of  the  cap  through  which  the 
beam enters the tank. The analysis of the lat-
ter  signals  propagation  speed  implies  that 
there is a possible local increase of the speed 
of  sound  in  the  area  of  interference  of  the 
two discussed signals. The reason for that is 
supposed  to  be  studied  in  further  experi-
ments.

References

1.  Askariyan  G.A.  //  Atom.  Energiya  1957,  V.  3,  p. 
152.

2.  Lyamshev  L.M.  Radiation  acoustics.  -  M.:  Nauka. 
Fizmatlit, 1996.

3.   Sulak L., Armstrong  T., Baranger  H.  et  al.  // Nu-
clear  Instruments  and  Methods,  1979.  V.161,  №2,  P. 
203.

4.  Albul  V. I.,  Bychkov  V. B.  et  al.  //  Pribory  i 
Tekhnika Experimenta, 2001, №3, p. 50.

5.  Albul  V. I.,  Bychkov  V. B.,  Vasiliev  S. S.  et  al.  // 
PTE, 2004, №4, p. 94.

6.  Albul  V. I.,  Bychkov  V. B.,  Vasiliev  S. S. et al.  // 
PTE, 2004, №4, p. 89.

7. V.A. Balitskii,V.S. Gorodetskii,  L.M. Lyamshev 
et al.  //  Sov.Phys.Acoust,  1985.  Vol.31,  №5,  P.422-
423.

8.  Albul  V. I.,  Bychkov  V. B.,  Vasil’ev  S. S.  et al.  // 
Acoustical Physics, 2005, V.51, №1, pp. 33-37.

6

