 

   

Experimental study of photon beam polarimeter based on nuclear 
 e+ e- pair production  in an amorphous target 

F.Adamyan, A.Aganyants, H.Hakobyan, J.Manukyan, 
R.Oganezov, L.Sargsyan, A.Sirunyan*) and H.Vartapetian 
Yerevan Physics Institute, 2 Alikhanian Brothers str., EPD, 375036,Yerevan, Armenia 
R.Jones 
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA 

 
Abstract 
 
The  experimental  method  of  the  linearly  polarized  photons    polarimetry,  using 
incoherent e+ e- - pair production process has been  investigated on the beam of 
coherent bremsstrahlung (CB) photons in the energy  range  of 0.9 – 1.1 GeV at 
the Yerevan synchrotron.   
 
Introduction 
 
 Direct  methods  for  linearly  polarized  (CB)  photons  polarimetry  is  possible  to 
realize by measuring azimuthal asymmetry of   e+ e- - pairs photoproduction  in 
an oriental crystal [1], in an amorphous target [2] or  atomic electrons [3]. The 
precise CB polarimetry may also be realized by means of  calculational methods 
were based on the measured CB intensity spectrum  and shape analysis [4,5]. 
In  the  recent  article  [6],  description  of    CB  polarimeter  for  directly  measuring 
the  linear  polarization  a  photon  beam      is  presented,  exploiting  an  azimuthal 
dependence    of    incoherent    e+  e-    pair  photoproduction  on  a    nuclei  within  a 
narrow    ranges  in  both  of  polar  ∆θ  and    azimuthal  ∆φ  angles  [7].    The  Monte 
Carlo simulations have shown a feasibility of  polarimetry  precision in the level 
of  σp  =0.02    at  CB  energy  range  Eγ    =  0.9-1.1  GeV  if  symmetric  e+e-  pairs  are 
selected.  
 In  this  paper  we  are  presenting  and  discussing  the  results  of  polarimeter’s  
experimental  study,  which  has  been  recently  constructed  and  installed  in  a  γ-2 
beam line of YERPHI’s  electron synchrotron, also experimental results of the 
first measurements on CB photon beam with maximal energy Eγ= 2,55 GeV  are 
presented .  
 
1.Method of  polarization measurement 
                                   
The analyzing power or azimuthal asymmetry of incoherent e-e+ pairs 
production process is defined as: 

                                          

A

=

,                                                 (1) 

ΙΙ

σσ
−
⊥
σσ
+
⊥

ΙΙ

*)Corresponding author, Tel.: +3741 342747, E-mail: sirunian@mail.yerphi.am (A.Sirunyan)   

 

1

where  σ|| , σ⊥  are the differential  cross-sections for the azimuthal angle of  pair 
production plane  parallel , perpendicular to the plane of  photon polarization. 
For the cross-sections calculations, an analytical expressions of ref. [8] are used, 
where  the  degree  of  linear  polarization  is  described  in  the  terms  of  Stokes 
parameter ξ3. The values of ξ3= +1, -1 correspond to 100% of linear polarization 
(Pγ  =1)  both  for  the  polarization  orientation  perpendicular  and  parallel  to  the 
production plane.  
The  CB  photon  beam  linear  polarization  (Pγ  <  1)  is  related  to  a  measured 
asymmetry by 
                                        Pγ =  Aexp / AMC                                            (2) 
 
where  Aexp    is    the  experimental  asymmetry    and  AMC  is  the  Monte-Carlo 
simulation  result,  calculated  for  Pγ  =1.  The  simulation  includes  modeling  pair 
production  using  differential  cross-sections  with  atomic  form-factors  [6,9],  all 
experimental conditions and details of polarimeter PS-6.  An application of the 
expression  (2)  assumes  an  equality  of  CB’s  intensity  and  polarization  spectra. 
The  precision  of  Pγ  determination  depends  on  the  statistic  and  systematic 
uncertainties  in  the  values  of  Aexp      and  AMC,  so  the  full  simulation  is  really 
needed,  aimed  to  define  and  hold  under  control  all  sources  of  the  systematic 
uncertainties.           
 
2. Layout of the experimental setup 
 
The sketch of experimental setup arrangement in a γ-2 beam line is presented in 
Fig.1.    The  beam  of  linearly  polarized  photons  [10],  generated  by  2.55  GeV 
electrons on a diamond crystal (length 8 mm, width 2 mm thickness 0,072 mm) , 
is collimated and cleaned by the set of collimators K1, K2 and sweeping magnets 
SM1, SM2 to a angular divergence of the beam to a half-angle of  0.17 mr and  
passes through 10µm of thin Mylar converter (C1) located at the entrance of PS-
30  pair  spectrometer.  The  pair  spectrometer  allows  to  measure  a  CB  intensity 
spectrum  simultaneously  in  the  thirty  energies  points  with  energy  resolution 
δEγ/Eγ=0.02  [11].  An  integral  intensity  of  the  photon  beam  is  measured  by 
Wilson  quantameter  (Q).The  polarimeter  PS-6  includes  a  20  µm    thickness  
aluminum converter (C2),  vertical slit collimator (K3), which provides angular 
selection of the emitted e+ e-  pairs, and horizontally bending magnet equipped 
with  a  six  telescopes  of    the  scintillating  counters,  three  hodoscope  elements 
(N1÷N3) in each arm (Fig.2).The vertical slit, installed in the vacuum pipe, has 
been made of 6 cm thickness lead and has a 26 mm width, 80 mm height, while 
γ-beam profile has a 16x16 mm2. The telescopes are formed by the coincidence 
of three small forward counters and one big backward counter. The left and right 
telescopes  are  shifted  up  and  down  relative  to  a  median  plane  of  PS-6 
spectrometer, allowing to select the symmetric e+ e- pairs. The PS-6 hodoscopes 
are located 19.9 m downstream of the C2 converter and select polar angles range. 
The  full  beam  line  between  the  collimator  K2  and  the  exit  of  PS-6  is  vacuum 
pumped, allowing to decrease the multiple scattering influence. The hodoscopes 

 

2

peak

counters widths of N1÷N3 are chosen to be 2.5, 5.0 and 2.5 cm, that corresponds 
to  a  3  independent  energy  bins  with  energy  resolution  of  σE  =  12,  20  and  12 
MeV for symmetric combination of registered pairs at CB peak setting to 1000 
MeV.  The  vertical  movement  of  the  telescopes  is  performed  distantly  with 
precision of 0.1mm.  
 
3. Monte-Carlo simulations and polarimeter alignment  
 
The  detailed  presentation  of  Monte  Carlo  calculations  is  done  in  ref.  [6].  Here 
we  are  considering  and  discussing  an  influence  of  some  experimental 
uncertainties  to  the  polarimeter’s      analyzing  power.  The  precision  of  the 
polarimeter  geometry  in  a  sense    is    quite  important  ,  involving  in  particular  a 
precision in positioning of  the telescopes in the vertical (z)  and  horizontal (x,y)  
directions also alignment of the  vertical slit relative the photons’ beam. Above  
mentioned    uncertainties    may  become  a  source  of  the  systematic  errors  if  the 
geometry  of    Monte  Carlo  simulations  differs  from  the  actual  one.    In  this 
respect  a  number  of  calculations  has  been  done  to  define  an  expected 
dependences  and  elaborate  a  necessary  experimental  tests  for  the  geometry 
control.  
The  Fig.3  shows  dependence  of    the  analyzing  power  AMC,  calculated  for  
Cromer-Waber  form  factor  [6]  and  for  energy  of  the  peak  in  CB  photon 
spectrum Eγ
 = 1.0 GeV from the  vertical shift (∆z)  of  the central telescopes  
(N  2L  ,  N  2R)  relative  the  median  plane    with    and  without  the  vertical-slit 
installed.  The  experimental  study  of  AMC‘s  z  dependence  and  its  annulling 
within  the  limits  of  the  statistical  and  systematical  uncertainties  in  the  vicinity  
of z ≈ 0,  is an important test  of the polarimeter performance. As can be seen in 
the  Fig.  3,  the  most  optimal  value  for  z  selection  is  the  low  gradient  flat  zone 
around  z=10  mm.  An  uncertainty  in  the  z  setting  may  mainly  arise  due  to  the 
uncertainty of the median plane position at the location of telescopes.  
A  test  is  proposed  to  determine  the  position  of  the  median  plane.  At  the  fixed 
vertical  gap  between  the  up  and  down  telescopes,  the  z-scan  around  expected 
position of the median plane is performed (see Section 4).  Fig.4 shows a Monte-
Carlo calculation results obtained for configuration of PS-6 z=0.  
An  influence  of  x-coordinate  uncertainty  of  the  beam  position  in  the  median 
plane  has  been  investigated.  The  shift  of  the  telescopes  toward  the  x-direction 
leads  to  AMC  asymmetry  changes  as  it  is  shown  in  Fig.5  for  the  central 
telescopes (N2up x N2down).This graph is made for a case when N2up is fixed to the 
x=0 position, and N2down will shift to right on ∆x. 
For  the  experimental  check  of  PS-6  detectors  positioning  symmetry  around 
vertical  and  horizontal  axes  (z,  x)  is  necessary  to  measure  and  compare  the 
coincidence rates for the detectors configurations presented in Fig.6. The Monte 
Carlo calculations for these configurations gave a compatible results within the 
limits  of  statistical  uncertainties.  Symmetry  of  detectors 
together  with 
polarimeter`s  magnetic  field  needs  to  check  experimentally  at  these  two 
configurations (rotations around vertical and horizontal axes). 

 

3

An application of all the proposed tests allows to determine the actual geometry 
of  the  polarimeter  and  evaluate  an  expected  systematic  errors  in  the  values  of 
measured asymmetry. 
 
4. Results of the first meaurements 
 
The  measurements  have  been  carried  out  on  the  beam  of  linearly  polarized 
 =1000 MeV. 
photons with intensity of 108γ/s at the CB peak energy setting to Eγ
The  spectrum  in  the  peak  region  was  measured  and  monitored  each  3  minutes 
and  peak  position  controlled.  In  the  case  of  the  peak  energy  shift  above 
∆Eγ/Eγ=0.02  due  to  beam  instability,  the  data  taking  was  blocked  and  crystal 
angles  automatically  tuned  and  spectrum  re-measured  to  confirm  its  quality 
before restart. Fig.7 shows the typical measured CB spectra for the vertical and 
horizontal  beam  polarizations.  The  photons  polarization  was  calculated 
according  to  a  scheme  developed  in  ref.  [4,5]  and  for  the    central  energy  bin 
(Eγ=1000±20MeV) is equal to Pγ=0.53 ± 0.02.  
The energy calibration of PS-6 channels represents the strict test of the measured 
CB  shape  compatibility  with  one  measured  by  PS-30  pair  spectrometer.  Fig.8 
shows  the  normalized  each  to  other  spectra  in  the  peak  region  measured 
simultaneously by PS-30 (full curves) and PS-6 (points). As is seen from figure 
the spectra are quite similar, no notice able shift is observed in between.  
The data on the vertical z-scan at fixed ∆z = 0 are shown in Fig.4 together with  
Monte  Carlo  simulation  results.  As  can  be  seen  in  the  figure,  Monte  Carlo 
predictions satisfactorily describes the experimental data. From Monte Carlo z-
dependence Gaussian fit result for the mean value error obtained is app. 0.1 mm. 
These  two  tests  have  established  a  reachable  precision  of  the  geometrical 
arrangement of a PS – 6 detectors. 
As a test of the apparatus systematic uncertainties, coming in particular from the 
beam,  detectors  and  monitoring  system  instabilities,  the  measurements  of  CB 
spectra with disoriented crystal (amorphous spectrum) has been carried out and 
coincidence  rate  of  PS-6  telescopes  compared  with  the  average  of  the  rate, 
obtained  for  two  orthogonal  orientations  of  photons  polarization  at  CB  peak 
energy of 1000 MeV. The obtained difference of those rates, normalized to the 
number of photons, didn’t exceed 2-3 % (stat.), as it was expected.  
  Unfortunately  the  tight  time  schedule  of  accelerator’s  work  didn’t  allow  to 
fulfill the test on the vertical slit positioning, without which one may achieve a 
source  of  visible  change  in  analyzing  power  Aexp,  so  we    have  made    the  
preliminary  measurements  without  slit.  The  measurements  were  carried  out  at 
∆z=10mm,  the  half-height  of  the  gap  between  the  counters  above  the 
polarimeter PS-6 median plane and those below it, and at CB peak energy 1000 
MeV.  The  asymmetry  value  Aexp  =  0.098  ±  0.011(stat.)  was  obtained.  The 
systematic  error  in  this  value  comes  mainly  from  the  geometrical  adjustment 
uncertainty, that has been evaluated by means of Monte Carlo simulations. The 
conservative  evaluations  in  the  case  of  polarimeter  without  slit  for  the 

 

4

adjustment precision in the x,z plane:  σx  =  σz = 1mm   corresponds  to  the  Aexp  
uncertainty  on the level of app. 0.003. 
With  this  level  of  systematic  uncertainties  and  increased  statistics  one  may  
reach a polarization measurement precision in the level of  0.02- 0.03. 
Knowledge of AMC asymmetry and calculated photons polarization Pγ allow to 
determine  an  expected  asymmetry  using  an  expression  (2).  The  results  are 
shown in Fig.9 as a function of ∆z  together with the measured value of Aexp. As 
is  seen  from  figure,  the  values  of  expected  and  measured  asymmetries  are 
agreed well within the error bars. For comparison the results of two polarimetry 
methods , one direct and the other indirect on Fig.10 are presented the measured 
photon beam polarization at Eγ= 1000 ± 20 MeV together with calculated curve 
of  polarization  by  CBSA  method  [4].  As  may  be  seen  the  measured  value  of 
exp = 0.565 ± 0.06 (stat.) are agreed with calculated. 
polarization Pγ
   As it was mentioned in the beginning of the section 3 the measurements of the 
z-dependence  of  Aexp    asymmetry  and  its  comparison    to    a  Monte  Carlo 
predictions is an important test of the polarimeter performance as well as allows 
an extraction of  the atomic form factor over the polarimeter acceptance  range. 
Unfortunately  these  measurements  was  not  accomplished  by  the  reasons 
mentioned above. 
 
5. Conclusion 

 
Although  the  time  shortness  didn’t  allow  to  reach  a  planned  precision  of  CB 
polarimetry in the level of 0.02-0.03, an experimental method was reliably tested 
in  many  details  and  expected  feasibility  confirmed.  This  activity  will  be 
continued and we hope to carry out all necessary measurements with full set of 
the  tests,  particularly  on  the  correct  positioning  of  the  vertical  slit  which  shall 
noticeable increase the analyzing power of polarimeter by app. 0.25 . 
 
Acknowledgements  
 
Authors are indebted to the synchrotron staff and his leader Valery Nikogosyan  
for their efforts of  accelerator running, directorate of YERPHI for the support 
and  funding.  The  work  was  also  supported  by  CRDF  grant  AP2-2305-YE-02, 
that is acknowledged.  
 
 
Figure captions 
 
Fig.1. Layout of the experimental setup 
Fig.2. Sketch of the polarimeter PS-6 
Fig.3. The z-dependence of the AMC asymmetry with and without slit (solid and  
 dashed curves respectively), where z = (zup-zdown)/2 is the half-height of  
the            gap  in  z  between  the  up  and  down  counters.  The  energy  of  CB 
peak is set to Eγ= 1.0 GeV. 

 

5

Fig.4. The z-dependence of calculated and experimental yields of (N2upx N2down) 

coincidences at fixed vertical distance between up and down telescopes   

          z = 0. 
 Fig.5.The  x-dependence  of  AMC  asymmetry  for  the  central  telescopes  (N2upx 
N2down)  of  PS-6  at  fixed  z=10mm,  where  x  is  defined  as  a  shift  of  the 
central telescope relative to its symmetry configuration. 
Fig.6. Testing the axial symmetry of PS-6 telescopes’ configuration  
(a) an initial position of the telescopes (N2upx N2down) 
(b) the final configuration after successive rotations around vertical and 

horizontal axes  

Fig.7. An intensity spectra of  PS-30 pair spectrometer measured at CB peak 

energy setting to Eγ
orientations of the photon beam polarization.. 

peak= 1.0 GeV for both vertical and horisantal 

Fig.8.  An  intensity  spectra  in  a  CB  peak  region  (Eγ

peak=1.0  GeV)  measured 

simultaneously by PS-30 and  PS-6. 

Fig.9. An expected z-dependence of AMC calculated for the central energy bin of 
PS-6  for  the  photons  polarization  Pγ=0.53±0.02  An  experimental  result  
presented is measured at z setting to 10mm.  

Fig.10. The measured photon beam polarization at Eγ= 1000 ± 20 MeV together 

with calculated curve of polarization by CBSA method [4]. 

 
Reference 
 
[1] H. Uberall, Phys.Rev., v.103,4, (1956)1055,  
     H. Uberall, Phys.Rev., v.107,1, (1957 233  
[2] H. Olsen, L.C. Maximon, Phys.Rev. 114 (1959) 887, 
     G. Barbielini et al., Phys.Rev.Lett.,v.9 (1962) 396      
[3] L.C. Maximon, H.A. Gimm,  Phys.Rev. A 23 N1 (1981) 172 
      V.F.Boldyshev et al., Phys.Part .Nucl. 25 (1994) 292 
[4] S.Darbinyan et al.,NIM A 554 (2005)75    
[5]  H.Hakobyan et al., YERPHI-908(59)-86 (1986) 
      H.Hakobyan , G.Karapetyan, YERPHI-1138 (15)-89 (1989) 
[6] F.Adamyan et al., NIM A 546 (2005) 376 
[7] L.C. Maximon, H. Olsen, Phys.Rev. 126 (1962) 310 
[8] R. Avagyan et al. hep-ex/9908048 v.2 (1999) 
[9] J.H.Hubbell et al.,J.Phys.Chem.Ref.Data, v.4, No3 (1975) 471 
     J.H.Hubbell et al.,J.Phys.Chem.Ref.Data, v.8, No1 (1979) 69*  
[10] R. Avakyan et al. Izvestia Acad.Nauk Arm.SSR, Physics,v.10 (1975) 61 
[11] A. Avetisyan. et al., YERPHI-1325(20)-91 (1991) 
 
 
 
 
 

 

6

Fig.1  

 
 
 

 

                                                               Fig.2 
 

 

7

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Fig.3 

 

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Fig.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Fig.5 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

10

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

11

  

Fig.7 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 
 
                                                                               Fig.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

12

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
                                                                     Fig.9 

  

13

                                                       Fig.10 
 
 

 

 

14

