BIOMECHANICS APPLIED TO COMPUTER-AIDED DIAGNOSIS: 
EXAMPLES OF ORBITAL AND MAXILLOFACIAL SURGERIES 

 

 
 
Payan Yohan*, Luboz Vincent*, Chabanas Matthieu*, Swider Pascal**,  
Marecaux C.*** & Boutault F.*** 

 
 
* TIMC Laboratory, UMR CNRS 5525, University J. Fourier, 38706 La Tronche, France  
** Biomechanics Laboratory, EA 3697, Purpan University Hospital, 31059 Toulouse, France 
*** Plastic and Maxillofacial Department, Purpan Univ. Hospital, 31059 Toulouse, France 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUNNING TITLE: Orbital and Maxillofacial Computer Assisted Surgeries 
 
 
 
Corresponding authors: 
Payan Yohan 
Laboratoire TIMC/IMAG,  
CNRS UMR 5525,  
Institut d’Ingénierie de l’Information de Santé 
Pavillon Taillefer – Faculté de Médecine 
38706 La Tronche 
France 
 
Tel: +33 4 56 52 00 01 
 Fax: +33 4 56 52 00 55 
 e-mail: yohan.payan@imag.fr 
 

 
ABSTRACT 
 

This paper introduces the methodology proposed by our group to model the biological 
soft  tissues  deformations  and  to  couple  these  models  with  Computer-Assisted  Surgical 
(CAS) applications. After designing CAS protocols that mainly focused on bony structures, 
the Computer Aided Medical Imaging group of Laboratory TIMC (CNRS, France) now tries 
to  take  into  account  the  behaviour  of  soft  tissues  in  the  CAS  context.  For  this,  a 
methodology, originally published under the name of the Mesh-Matching method, has been 
proposed  to  elaborate  patient  specific  models.  Starting  from  an  elaborate  manually-built 
“generic” Finite Element (FE) model of a given anatomical structure, models adapted to the 
geometries  of  each  new  patient (“patient  specific” FE models) are automatically generated 
through a non-linear elastic registration algorithm. 

This  paper  presents  the  general  methodology  of  the  Mesh-Matching  method  and 
illustrates  this  process  with  two  clinical  applications,  namely  the  orbital  and  the 
maxillofacial computer-assisted surgeries.  

 

1. Introduction 

 
This  paper  aims  at  presenting  the  methodology  proposed  by  our  group  to  take  into 
account  the  behaviour  of  biological  soft  tissues  in  the  framework  of  Computer  Aided 
Surgery (CAS). The CAS project, originally developed at the TIMC laboratory of Grenoble 
(CNRS, France) in the 80’s, has proposed a lot of computer-aided clinical applications, most 
of 
focusing  onto  orthopaedics.  The  spin-off  company  Praxim-Medivision 
(http://www.praxim.fr/),  founded  in  1995  by  researchers  from  our  group,  is  now 
commercializing these orthopaedic products.  

them 

Surgeries of bony structures were the first addressed by our group and by our industrial 
partners because bones are “quite easy” to track during surgery. Assuming that we are able 
to  localize  part  of  the  structure  (by  fixing  on  it  “Rigid  Bodies”  tracked  in  3D  inside  the 
operating theatre), the complete geometry and position of the bone are known. It is therefore 
possible  to  assist  the  surgeon  by  providing  him  the  actual  position  of  the  bone  (see  for 
example the CAS navigation system for the correct placement of pedicle screws [1]). This is 
unfortunately not possible for most organs and soft tissues that are supposed to move and to 
deform during surgery. In order to face this problem, researchers have tried to add a priori 
knowledge  about  the  mechanical  and/or  physiological  behaviour  of  such  biological  soft 
tissues,  leading  to  CAS  applications  that  try  to  model  the  tissues  movements  and 
deformations. Our group chose to develop biomechanical continuous models to predict the 
soft tissues deformations. These models are based on the Finite Element (FE) Method that 
discretizes  the  partial  differential  equations  that  govern  the  Continuum  Mechanics.  This 
paper  aims  at  describing  our  methodology  for  soft  tissue  modelling  and  its  coupling  with 
CAS applications. The first part describes the complete methodology for building a patient-
specific FE model from medical imaging exams (CT, MRI and/or US). The second part of 
the  paper  illustrates  some  clinical  applications,  namely  the  orbital  and  maxillofacial 
computer-aided surgeries. 

 
 

 

 

2. Methodology for building patient-specific Finite Element models 

2.1. Patient-specific FE meshes 

Finite  Element  (FE)  analysis  is  a  widely  used  method  in  the  field  of biomechanics  and 
customized  meshes  are  of  great  interest  since  they  can  integrate  both  geometry  and 
mechanical  properties  of  the  patient.  However,  except  from  very  clear  and  normalized 
frameworks  [2-3]  or  from  the  use  of  automatic  un-structured  tetrahedral  mesh  generators 
(available in almost any commercial FE package [4]), building a structured patient-specific 
FE model remains complicated and time consuming. Indeed, the mesh has to be adapted to 
the  global  patient  geometry  but  usually  needs  to  take  into  account  some  specific  internal 
sub-structures, leading to topological changes (changes that allow, for the example of bones, 
to differentiate the cortical bone from the cancellous bone [5]). This organization of the FE 
mesh  makes  then  possible  to  differentiate  the  sub-structures  from  a  mechanical  point  of 
view, by assigning for example different Young modulus values to different elements inside 
the mesh [5]. 

The  time  consuming  manual  elaboration  of  such  patient-specific  FE  meshes  is 
unfortunately not always compatible with a clinical use. Moreover, specific exams such as 
thin  inter-slices  CT  or  MRI  are  needed  to  build  an  accurate  FE  mesh,  but  are  not  always 
available  and  used  for  each  patient.  To  face  these  limits,  our  group  proposed  the  Mesh-

Matching  (MM)  algorithm  [6].  The  idea  is  to  start  with  a  “generic  mesh”  of  a  given 
anatomical  structure.  This  mesh  is  accurately  designed,  with  a  strong  manual  interaction 
leading to geometries and mesh topologies that are adapted to the structure: differentiation 
between  sub-structures  (for  ex.  cortical  and  cancellous  bones),  associations  between 
organized (and labelled) elements and internal sub-structures such as muscles, dermis layers, 
etc… For a given anatomical structure, the researcher can spend hours or days designing this 
generic mesh. Once this work is done, the generic mesh is used in the clinical framework to 
automatically build patient-specific FE meshes. This is done through the following steps: 

1.  For  each  new  patient,  anatomical  data  (in  general  the  external  surface  of  the  patient 
anatomical  structure)  are  collected.  This  can  be  rough  data  (coming  from  US  exam  or 
from sparse CT/MRI exams) or fine data extracted through CT or MRI exams similar to 
those used to build the generic mesh. A set of 3D points located onto the external surface 
of the patient anatomical structure is therefore collected during this step. 

2.  An  elastic  registration  method,  originally  proposed  in  the  field  of  computer-assisted 
surgery [7], is used to match the extracted patient surface points with the nodes located 
on the external surface of the generic mesh. This matching aims at finding a volumetric 
transform T, which is a combination of global (rigid) and local (elastic) transforms. The 
idea  underlying  the  matching  algorithm  consists  (1)  in  aligning  the  two  datasets  (the 
rigid part of T) and (2) in finding local cubic B-Splines functions. The unknowns of the 
transform  are  all  the  B-Splines  parameters.  Those  parameters  are  obtained  through  an 
optimization  process  that  aims  at  minimizing  the  distance  between  the  two  surfaces, 
namely the points extracted from the patient data and the external nodes of the generic 
mesh. 

3.  The volumetric transform T is then applied to every node of the FE generic mesh, namely 
the nodes located on the external surface as well as the internal nodes that define the FE 
volume.  A  new  volumetric  mesh  is  thus  automatically  obtained  by  assembling  the 
transformed nodes into elements, with a topology similar to that of the generic FE mesh: 
same number of elements and same element types. 

4.  The regularity [8] of the patient 3D mesh is checked in order to see if any FE analysis can 
be  performed.  If  some  elements  of  the  mesh  are  detected  as  irregular,  a  global  mesh 
regularization technique is proposed [9]. 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1 shows the results provided by the MM algorithm for the automatic generation of an 
entire patient FE femora mesh [10]. This example illustrates the MM methodology and can 
be straightforwardly applied to the case of soft tissues. 

 

 
 

 

Figure 1: The Mesh-Matching algorithm applied to entire femora. (a) The external nodes of the generic 
mesh are matched onto patient surface points in order to compute a volumetric transform T.  
(b) T is then applied to all the generic nodes in order to generate the patient-specific FE mesh. 

 

2.2. Geometrical and mechanical hypothesis for FE analysis 

Once the patient specific mesh has been generated, hypotheses have to be made to model 
the soft tissues continuous mechanical behavior. Three different modeling hypotheses can be 
usually  made  to  model  soft  tissues  (see  [11]  for  a  review):  (1)  a  linear  elastic  model 
assuming small deformations, (2) a linear elastic model under large deformation hypothesis, 
and (3) a hyperelastic model.  
 

2.2.1 Equations of the continuum mechanics 

Any object point is represented by its Lagrangian material coordinates X = (X1, X2, X3) at 
the  undeformed  state  and  its  Eulerian  spatial  coordinates  x  =  (x1,  x2,  x3)  at  the  deformed 
state. The continuum mechanics introduces the deformation gradient tensor F, to relate the 
deformed and undeformed state (eq. 1), and the Lagrangian strain tensor E (eq. 2) that is a 
more  suitable  measure  of  deformation  since  it  reduces  to  the  zero  tensor  for  rigid-body 
motion. 

(cid:71)
XF
(

=

)

1

2

∂
x
1
∂
X
∂
x
∂
X
∂
x
∂
X

3

1

1











2

∂
x
1
∂
X
∂
x
∂
X
∂
x
∂
X

3

2

2

2

2

∂
x
1
∂
X
∂
x
∂
X
∂
x
∂
X

3

3

3

3











 

 

(1) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

=

E

T

(

IFF

)

−

T

U

∇∇+∇+

T
UU

U

)

 

(2) 

 

1
2

1
∇=
(
2

where I is the identity matrix and U = x – X is the displacement vector field. 
 

A second tensor, the Cauchy stress tensor T, is introduced in order to characterize and to 
model  internal  forces.  This  tensor  is  a  3x3  symmetric  tensor  that  must  satisfy,  for  a  static 
simulation framework, the quasi-static equilibrium (momentum conservation): 

 

div

+ fT

=

0

  

 

 

 

(3) 

where f are the applied volumetric forces. 
 

In  order  to  determine  the  changes  of  kinematic  variables  when  forces  are  applied  or  to 
determine the changes of stress when strain is induced, a third equation must be introduced, 
to link the strain tensor E and the stress tensor T. From a mathematical point of view, it can 
be described as: 
 
 

)Ef=T
(

         (4) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

where f is a function that can have different formulation according to modeling assumptions. 
 

2.2.2 Small deformation linear elastic hypothesis 

This  modeling  framework  is  the  most  simple  (and  therefore  limited)  but  the  most 

widespread among the literature. It is based on two assumptions. 

The first modeling assumption, called the small deformation hypothesis or the hypothesis 
of  linear  geometry,  assumes  that  the  deformations  of  the  material  are  “small”  (usually,  a 
threshold of 10% of deformation is given). As a consequence of this assumption, equation 
(2) can be reduced to its linear part, by neglecting the second order terms:  

 

  

 

 

 

 

    

 

     

E

1
∇=
(
2

T

U

∇+

U

)

 

 

(5) 

A second modeling assumption, known as the linear mechanical hypothesis, can be done 
by assuming a mechanical linearity between the stress and the strain tensor. Equation (4) can 
therefore be reduced to: 

 

E⋅= CT

 

   

          (6) 

where  C  is  a  fourth  order  tensor  (3x3x3x3)  named  the  elastic  tensor.  It  can  be  seen  that 
under  assumptions  of  homogeneity  and  isotropy,  this  tensor  is  characterized  by  only  two 
coefficients, namely the Young modulus E and the Poisson’s ratio ν. The Young modulus is 
a  kind  of  measure  of  the  material  stiffness  while  the  Poisson’s  ratio  is  correlated  to  the 
compressibility of the material.  

 

 

 

 

Thanks  to  the  modeling  assumptions  described  above,  the  equations  of  the  continuum 
mechanics can be reduced to matrix equations with direct solutions that can be numerically 
computed.  This  explains  why  the  small  deformation  linear  elastic  assumption  is  the  most 
commonly used among the literature. 
 

2.2.3 Large deformation linear elastic hypothesis 

This modeling framework is usually more adapted to biological soft tissues as it allows 
levels  of  deformations  that  undergo  10%.  The  idea  consists  in  still  assuming  a  linear 
mechanical hypothesis, but without neglecting the second order terms of equation (2). This 
modeling framework is commonly assumed to be more accurate than the small deformation 
linear  elastic  hypothesis  for  tissues  that  show  strong  deformations,  but  needs  larger 
computation times as the solution is obtained through an iterative optimization technique.  
 

2.2.4 Hyperelastic hypothesis 

This modeling framework can be even more adapted to biological soft tissue as it allows, 
in addition to the large deformation framework, a constitutive law (stress/strain relationship) 
that is non-linear. Indeed, most of the soft tissue show an “exponential-like” behavior for the 
constitutive  law  [12],  with  a  stiffening  of  the  tissue  when  the  deformations  increase.  The 
hypothesis of hyperelasticity tries to model this, by assuming that the stress T can be derived 
from the strain tensor E and from a stored strain energy function W: 

=T

∂
W
∂
E

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

 

The strain energy W is a function of multidimensional interactions described by the nine 
components of F.  It is very difficult to perform experiments to determine these interactions 
for any particular elastic material.  Therefore, various assumptions have been made to derive 
simplified  and  realistic  strain  energy  functions,  and  different  formulations  have  been 
elaborated, such as the ones of the Ogden [13], the Yeoh [14] or the Mooney-Rivlin [15]. 
 
 
2.2.5 Methodology for choosing the most appropriate hypothesis 

Our approach for choosing the most appropriate modeling hypothesis can be defined as 
“pragmatic”. The idea is first to test and quantitatively evaluate the most simple hypotheses, 
namely the linear geometrical and/or mechanical hypotheses (see [16] for a detail evaluation 
of different modeling assumptions in the context of computer-aided maxillo-facial surgery). 
If  it  appears  that  a  non-linear  model  is  needed,  an  iterative  method  has  been  proposed  to 
infer,  from  indentation  experiments  that  measure  in  vivo  or  in  vitro  force/displacement 
relationship,  the  hyperelastic  strain  energy  function  (and  therefore  the  constitutive  law)  of 
the  material.  This  method  is  based  on  a  Finite  Element  Analysis  of  the  indentation 
experiment.  An  optimization  process  is  used  to  determine  the  FE  constitutive  laws  that 
provide the non-linear force/displacements observed during the indentation experiments (see 
[17] for a complete description of the method). 

 

 

 

 
 

3. Orbital and maxillofacial computer-aided surgeries 

 

 

3.1 Exophtalmia 

  Exophtalmia is characterized by a forward displacement of the eye ball outside the orbit 
due  to  a  pathology  that  increases  the  volume  of  the  ocular  muscles  and/or  the  orbital  fat 
tissues [18]. The functional consequences are a too long cornea exposition or, in the worst 
case, a distension of the ocular nerve that can lead to a decrease of the visual acuity. One of 
the treatments for exophthalmia is surgery, with an osteotomy (i.e. a hole in the maxillary or 
ethmoid sinuses regions) of the orbital walls that aims at increasing the volume of the orbital 
cavity [19]. To improve the backward displacement of the eye ball, some surgeons push on 
it in order to evacuate more of the fat tissues in the sinuses.  

Up to now, the predictions of the consequences of an exophthalmia reduction were based 
on  clinical  observations  [20]  that  state  that  for  a  1  cm3  soft  tissues  decompression,  a 
backward  displacement  from  1  mm  to  1.5  mm  is  expected.  In  order  to  complete  this 
experimental clinical rule, our group has proposed to build a numerical model of the surgical 
gesture [21]. For this, a FE poro-elastic model of the orbital content (muscles+fat tissues) is 
used to predict the globe backward displacement assuming (1) a given size and position of 
the  osteotomy  and  (2)  a  given  pressure  exerted  by  the  surgeon  onto  the  globe.  The  MM 
methodology  proposed  by  our  group  has  been  used  here,  with  a  generic  FE  mesh  of  the 
orbital content (figure 2.a) adapted to different patients morphologies (figure 2.b).  

  

 

  

Figure  2:  Poroelastic  FE  generic  model  of  the  orbital  soft  tissues  (a)  adapted  to  different 

patient morphologies with the Mesh-Matching algorithm (b) 

 

For  a  given  location  of  the  osteotomy,  a  mean  rule  has  been  extrapolated  from  the 
numerical  simulations  provided  by  the  model  [22]:  equation  (8)  links  the  suited  globe 
backward displacement disp (mm) and the surface surf (cm2) of the osteotomy: 

disp = 1.1*ln(surf)+1.9 

 

 

(8) 

 

 

 
 
3.2 Orthognathic surgery 

Orthognathic  surgery  attempts  to  establish  normal  aesthetic  and  functional  anatomy  for 
patients  suffering  from  dentofacial  disharmony  [23].  In  this  way,  current  surgery  aims  at 
normalize  patients  dental  occlusion,  temporo  mandibular  joint  function  and  morphologic 

appearance  by  repositioning  maxillary  and  mandibular  skeletal  osteotomized  segments.  The 
clinical predictions of the aesthetic and the functional consequences of the bone repositioning 
planning remain very qualitative. While some surgeons still work on patient front and profile 
photography and try to cut these photographs to qualitatively predict the patient face aesthetics 
after surgery, others try to use the computer framework to numerically simulate the mechanical 
behaviour  of  the  facial  soft  tissues  in  response  to  the  modification  of  the  bone  position [24-
25]. Our group is working on this application since 2000, with a methodology that is still the 
same:  (1)  a  generic  FE  model  of  the  face  soft  tissue  is  built  and  (2)  used  to  automatically 
generate patient specific models (figure 3) that (3) predict the surgical outcome (figure 4). 

 

 

 

Figure  3:  FE  generic  model  of  the  face  soft  tissues  adapted  to  a 
patient morphology with the Mesh-Matching algorithm. 

 

 

Figure 3: Qualitative evaluation. The simulations (top) are visually compared with the 3D reconstruction of 

the post-operative patient skin surface (bottom). Emphasis is given to the perception of the model quality 
in the most relevant morphological areas in the face: cheeks bones, lips area, chin and mandible angles. 

 
The simulations provided by our face models were quantitatively evaluated with a patient 
for  whom  a  post-operative  CT  exam  was  provided  (see  [16]  for  a  complete  description  of 
this evaluation). For this case, we were able to measure the post-operative external surface of 

the patient face and to quantitatively compare this surface with the predictions provided by 
the  models.  Three  types  of  models  were  evaluated  for  this  study:  a  linear  elastic  model 
assuming small deformations, a linear elastic model under large deformation hypothesis, and 
a hyperelastic model. The surgical gesture consisted in a backward translation of 0.9 mm in 
the mandible axis and a slight rotation in the axial plane. The first interesting result was that 
the  simulations  obtained  with  all  models  were  quite  similar.  More  surprisingly,  the  results 
obtained with the hyperelastic model showed more important errors than the ones provided 
by  the  small  deformation  linear  elastic  model.  We  explained  this  by  the  fact  that  such 
hyperelastic  modelling  is  much  more  sensitive  to  critera  like  the  quality  of  the  mesh,  the 
boundary conditions and the rheological parameters. Such complicated models require more 
testing  before  being  used,  and  may  not  be  the  most  adapted  for  problems  with  relatively 
small deformations.  
 
4.  Conclusion 

 
This  paper  aimed  at  introducing  the  methodology  defined  by  our  group  to  model 
biological  soft  tissues  and  to  propose  computer-assisted  applications  that  integrate  these 
models.  A  special  focus  was  given  to  the  compatibility  of  this  approach  with  the  clinical 
framework.  Indeed,  models  need  to  be  easily  conformed  to  each  new  patient  morphology, 
which  is  taken  into  account  by  the  Mesh-Matching  algorithm  proposed  by  our  group.  A 
modelling approach, qualified as “pragmatic”, was also depicted. The idea is that we do not 
think it is necessary to use the most complex mechanical modelling framework if this does 
not  lead  to  an  improvement  in  the  accuracy  of  the  numerical  results  compared  with  post-
operative data. For this reason, we think a strong focus has to be done onto the validation of 
the  results  provided  by  the  model,  by  quantitatively  comparing  the  predictions  with  the 
surgical outcome. 

 

 
References 
 
 [1] Merloz P., Tonetti J., Eid A., Faure C., Lavallée S., Troccaz J., Sautot P., Hamadeh A.,  

Cinquin P. 1997, Computer assisted spine surgery. Clin Orthop, vol. 337, pp 86-96. 

[2]  Viceconti  M,  Davinelli  M,  Taddei  F,  Cappello  A.  2004,  Automatic  generation  of 
accurate subject-specific bone finite element models to be used in clinical studies. Journal 
of Biomechanics; 37(10):1597-605. 

[3] Bucki M., Gouet R. & Payan Y. Automatic finite elements mesh generation from planar 
contours  of  the  brain:  an  image  driven  'blobby'  approach.  Chapter  of  the  present  Issue: 
Biomechanics Applied to Computer Assisted Surgery, Y. Payan ed., Research Signpost. 

[4] Owen SJ: http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/sowen/softsurv.html 
[5]  Couteau,  B.,  Hobatho,  M.C.,  Darmana,  R.,  Brignola,  J.C.,  Arlaud,  J.Y.  1998,  Finite 
element  modelling  of  the  vibrational  behaviour  of  the  human  femur  using  CT-based 
individualized geometrical and material properties. Journal of Biomechanics 31, 383}386. 
[6] Couteau B., Payan Y., Lavallée S. 2000, The mesh matching algorithm: an automatic 3D 
mesh generator for finite element structures. Journal of Biomechanics. 33(8): 1005-1009. 
[7]  Szeliski  R.  and  Lavallée  S.  1996,  Matching  3-D  anatomical  surfaces  with  non-rigid 

deformations using octree-splines. Int. J. of Computer Vision, 18(2): 171-186. 

[8]  Touzot  G.,  Dahtt  G.,  1984,  Une  représentation  de  la  méthode  des  éléments  finis. 

Collection université de Compiègne. 

[9] Luboz V., Payan Y. & Couteau B. 2001, Automatic 3D Finite Element mesh generation: 
an  atlas  fitted  onto  patient  data.  Proceedings  of  the  Fifth  International  Symposium  on 
Computer Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering, BBE'2001, November, 
Roma. 

[10] Luboz V., Couteau B., Payan Y. 2001, 3D Finite element meshing of entire femora by 
using the mesh matching algorithm. In Proceedings of the Transactions of the 47th Annual 
Meeting  of  the  Orthopaedic  Research  Society,  p.  522.  Transactions  Editor,  B.  Stephen 
Trippel, Chicago, Illinois, USA. 

[11]  Bonet  J.  &  Wood  R.D.  1997,  Nonlinear  continuum  mechanics  for  finite  element 

analysis. Cambridge University Press. 

[12]  Fung,  Y.C.  1993,  Biomechanics:  Mechanical  Properties  of  Living  Tissues.  Springer, 

[13] Ogden R.W. 1972, Large deformation isotropic elasticity – on the correlation of theory 
and  experiment  for  incompressible  rebberlike  solids.    Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society 
London Series A, 326, 565-584. 

[14] Holzapfel G.A. 2001, Nonlinear Solid Mechanics: Wiley & Sons. p.455 , Chichester. 
[15] Mooney M. 1940,  A Theory of Large Elastic Deformation, Journal of Applied Physics, 

New York. 

11, 582-592. 

[16]  Chabanas  M.,  Payan  Y.,  Marécaux C., Swider P. & Boutault F. 2004, Comparison of 
linear  and  non-linear  soft  tissue  models  with  post-operative  CT  scan  in  maxillofacial 
surgery. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3078, pp. 19-27. 

[17]  Gerard  J.M.,  Ohayon  J.,  Luboz  V.,  Perrier  P.  &  Payan  Y.  2004,  Indentation  for 
estimating  the  human  tongue  soft  tissues  constitutive  law:  application  to  a  3D 
biomechanical model to study speech motor control and pathologies of the upper airways. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3078, pp. 77-83. 

[18]  Saraux  H.,  Biais  B.,  Rossazza  C.  1987,  Ophtalmologie,  Chap.  22  :  Pathologie  de 

l’orbite. Ed. Masson., 341-353. 

[19]  Wilson  W.B.,  Manke  W.F.  1991,  Orbital  decompression  in  Graves’  disease.  The 

predictability of reduction of proptosis. Arch. Ophthalmol., vol. 109, pp. 343-345. 

[20] Adenis J. P., Robert P. Y. 1994, Décompression orbitaire selon la technique d’Olivari. 

J. Fr. Ophtalmol., 17(1) : 686-691. 

[21] Luboz V., Pedrono A., Ambard D., Boutault F., Payan Y. & Swider P. 2004, Prediction 
of  tissue  decompression  in  orbital  surgery,  Clinical  Biomechanics,  vol.  19  (2),  pp.  202-
208. 

[22] Luboz V., Pedrono A., Ambard D., Boutault F., Swider P. & Payan Y. 2004, A finite 
element  study  of  the  influence  of  the  osteotomy  surface  on  the  backward  displacement 
during exophthalmia reduction. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3078, pp. 49-57. 
[23] Richter M., Goudot P., Laurent F/, jaquinet A. & Bidaut L. 1998, Chirurgie correctrice 
des  malformations  ou  dysmorphies  maxillomandibulaires  :  bases  chirurgicales.  In 
Encyclopédie médico-chirurgicale, Stomatologie. Elsevier, Paris. 22-066-E-10, 24 pages. 
[24] Zachow S., Weiser M., Hege H.C. and Deuflhard P. Soft tissue prediction in computer 
assisted  maxillofacial  surgery  planning:  A  quantitative  evaluation  of  histomechanical 
modeling  using  pre-  and  postoperative  CT-data.  Chapter  of 
the  present  Issue: 
Biomechanics Applied to Computer Assisted Surgery, Y. Payan ed., Research Signpost. 
[25] Vandewalle, P., Schutyser, F., Van Cleynenbreugel, J., Suetens, P. 2003, Modelling of 
facial  soft  tissue  growth  for  maxillofacial  surgery  planning  environments.  In:  Int. 
Symposium  on  Surgery  Simulation  and  Soft  Tissue  Modeling  -  IS4TM’2003.  Volume 
2673 of LNCS, Springer-Verlag, pp. 27–37. 

