Direct and absolute temperature mapping and heat 
transfer measurements in diode-end-pumped Yb:YAG  
 
Sébastien Chénais, Sébastien Forget, Frédéric Druon, François Balembois and Patrick 
Georges 
 
Laboratoire Charles Fabry de l’Institut d’Optique, Centre scientifique bât. 503, 91403 Orsay 
cedex, France. Tel : +331 6935 8792; fax : +331 6935 8807 ;  
 
 
Abstract  :  We  report  direct  and  absolute  temperature  measurements  in  a  diode-end-pumped 
Yb:YAG crystal, using a calibrated infrared camera, with a 60-µm spatial resolution. The heat 
transfer coefficient has been measured, for the first time to our knowledge, with four different 
types of thermal contact (H = 0.25, 0.28, 0.9 and 2.0 for bare contact, graphite layer, indium 
foil and heat sink grease respectively). The dynamics of thermal effects is also presented.  

PACS 42.55.Xi (Diode-pumped Lasers) 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
The achievement of high power laser systems with high beam quality is largely compromised 
by  thermal  effects  in  the  gain  medium,  which  are  responsible  for  thermal  lensing, 
depolarisation  losses,  and  ultimately  fracture  [1].  The  most  widespread  way  to  investigate 
thermal  effects  in  laser  crystals  is  to  use  thermo-optical  methods,  that  is  thermal  lensing  or 
depolarization  measurements.  However,  these  methods  only  yield  quantities  that  are 
proportional to thermal gradients inside the probed area and are related to some more or less 
known  thermo-optic  coefficients.  Similarly,  the  temperatures  that  are  obtained  by  finite 
element calculations are only relative temperature distributions, expressed with respect to the 
rod  surface  temperature.  The  latter  depends  on  the  boundary  conditions  and  is  then  very 
difficult to predict. Direct temperature mapping could consequently be a helpful measurement 
to  understand  pump-induced  thermal  effects.  Moreover,  it  is  well  known  that  one  of  the 
crucial  parameter  to  reduce  heating  effects  and  to  avoid  fracture  is  the  thermal  contact 
between the crystal and its surrounding mount. Consequently, the knowledge of quantitative 
information  as  the  heat  transfer  coefficient  is  very  important  for  high  power  laser 
development. 
The  aim  of  this  letter  is  to  present  experimental  absolute  temperature  maps  obtained  in  the 
well-known  Yb:YAG  [2]  crystal  in  end-pumping  configuration.  Our  setup  allows  spatially 
resolved  analysis  of  the  temperature  on  the  entrance  face  of  the  crystal,  where  temperature 
reaches  generally  its  maximum  value.  In  the  same  time,  the  temporal  evolution  of  the 
temperature can be observed for each point of the crystal surface.  We have also measured for 
the  first  time  to  our  knowledge  the  heat  transfer  coefficient  between  the  crystal  and  its 
surrounding for different types of often used thermal contacts. 
 
2. Experimental setup 
We present non-contact absolute measurements performed with an infrared imager working in 
the 8-12 µm spectral range. The experimental setup (figure 1) allows direct measurements of 
the  temperature  inside  the  laser  crystal  exactly  in  the  end-pumping  conditions.  The  crystal 
used here was a 2-mm long, 4x4 mm2 square cross section, 8 at. % Yb:YAG crystal. It was 
AR-coated on its faces (the lateral ones are polished). Its thermal conductivity, which is lower 

than that of an undoped YAG crystal, was measured to be 0.07 W.cm-1.K-1 (0.11 W.cm-1.K-1 
for  the  undoped  crystal).  The  pump  source  was  a  high  power  fiber-coupled  diode  array 
(HLU15F200-980  from  LIMO  GmbH)  emitting  13.5 W  at  968  nm.  The  fiber  had  a  core 
diameter of 200 μm and a numerical aperture of 0.22. The output face was imaged onto the 
crystal to a 270-µm-diameter spot via two doublets. The crystal absorbed 5.4 watts of pump 
power in this case. The high spatial resolution of the thermal imager was obtained thanks to a 
dichroic Zinc selenide plate, High Reflectivity (HR) coated for 960-1080 nm on one face (at 
45° angle of incidence), and also coated for High Transmission (HT) in the 8-12 µm spectral 
range  on  both  faces  (coating  from  Opticorp  Inc.).  An  aberration-free  germanium  objective 
(focal  length  50  mm,  N.A.  0.7)  was  appended  close  to  the  ZnSe  plate  to  create  the 
intermediate thermal image. The camera was an AGEMA 570 (Flir Systems Inc.) consisting 
of  240x320  microbolometers  working  at  room  temperature.  The  measured  noise  equivalent 
temperature difference (NETD) of the camera is 0.2 °C. The numerical aperture of the whole 
imaging system in the object medium being around 1, a theoretical spatial resolution of 10 µm 
could be achieved; however, the resolution is here limited to 60 µm by the size of the pixels. 
The  crystal  was  clamped  in  a  copper  block  by  its  four  side  faces.  In  addition,  a  frictionless 
copper finger and a set of known weights allowed to apply a given pressure on the top face of 
the crystal. The heat is evacuated from the copper block by a flow of circulating water. 
The key issue of infrared absolute temperature measurements is the correct calibration of the 
system.  Indeed,  neither  the  crystal  nor  the  copper  mount  has  an  infrared  luminance  which 
equals that of a blackbody at the same temperature. The signal V detected by one pixel for a 
portion of crystal (or copper mount) at temperature T is: 
 

(1) 

dLT
λd

BB is 

( )
TV

=

∫
SG
Δ
λ

r

⎡
( )
Tr
λ
⎢
⎢
⎣

opt

⎛
( )
⎜
T
ε
⎜
⎝

T
dL
BB
d
λ

+

L
t

+

L

r

 
d
λ

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

 
where  G  is  the  geometric  extent; 

( )λrS

is  the  spectral  sensitivity;  Tropt  is  the  whole 

transmission coefficient of the ZnSe plate, Germanium objective and camera optics; 

the spectral luminance of a blackbody at temperature T, ε(T) is the emissivity; Lr denotes the 
infrared  luminance  of  the  camera  itself  (and  its  close  surroundings)  which  is  reflected  back 
into  it  by  the  Germanium  objective  and  by  the  polished  surface  of  the  crystal;  Lt  is  the 
luminance transmitted through the crystal: it is zero in the 8-12 µm range since the crystal is 
highly opaque in this spectral region. Lr is nonzero and makes polished objects look brighter 
than blackbodies: if Lr is ignored it leads to overestimation of the temperature around room 
temperature. Inversely, the emissivity is less than one and makes objects radiate less than a 
blackbody.  Since  the  parameters  ε  and  Lr are  dramatically  dependant  on  the  surface  quality 
and flatness, all the visible parts of the heat sink were covered with lustreless black painting. 
Moreover,  the  evaluation  of  all  those  parameters  is  not  straightforward.  We  propose  to 
calibrate the whole system as follows: the crystal and the copper mount were heated together 
to a set of given temperatures using a thermoelectric element, and we then compare with the 
temperature  given  by  the  camera  to  apply  the  adequate  correction.  This  careful  calibration 
allows rigorous and absolute measurement of the temperature with a spatial resolution large 
enough to study with sufficient accuracy the thermal behaviour on the crystal’s entrance face. 
 
3. Results 
Figure  2  shows  the  temperature  map  obtained  when  the  crystal  is  clamped  by  its  four  edge 
faces by bare contact with copper without thermal joint (left part) and with heat sink grease 

 

(right part). In the first case, a clear gap is noticeable between the temperatures of the mount 
and  at  the  edge  of  the  crystal.  The  temperature  distribution  is  parabolic  inside  the  pumped 
region  and  then  experiences  a  logarithmic  decay  until  the  edge  of  the  crystal,  in  good 
agreement  with  the  theory  in  the  case  of  fiber-coupled  diode  pumping.  The  temperature 
difference at the centre of the crystal between the two types of thermal contact shows clearly 
the importance of the interface. 
We consequently studied more in details the heat contact. By analogy with convective transfer, 
the quality of the contact can be accounted by a heat transfer coefficient H (in W.cm-2.K-1), 
defined so that the heat flux through the surface is [3]: 
 
−

r
∇

K

T

=

−

 

(
TH
e

)m
T

c

(2)   

 
where  Kc  is  the  thermal  conductivity  of  the  crystal  (W.cm-1.K-1),  Te  the  temperature  (and  
r
 the temperature gradient) at the edge of the crystal and Tm the heat sink temperature. 
T∇

e

e

The  thermal  gradient  in  (2)  is  considered  normal  to  the  surface.  An  ideal  contact  (Te = Tm) 
corresponds to an infinite value of H.  
Our  system  provides  a  space-resolved  temperature  mapping  of  the  crystal,  with  a  spatial 
resolution which is far below the crystal size: it then allows the measurement of H, which was 
never measured in the case of end-pumping.  
By performing a linear fit of the temperature versus position on the points that are closer to 
the crystal edge, the heat flux can be determined: by applying relation (2), one can then infer 
the  value  of  H,  which  is  here  equal  to  0.25  W.cm-2.K-1  in  the  case  of  bare  contact.  We 
estimate  that  the  uncertainty  on  H  is  about  15%.  The  order  of  magnitude  obtained  is 
consistent with the values evoked by Carslaw [3] and Koechner [4]. A hot spot can be noticed 
in figure 2, which betrays the poor contact between the polished face of the crystal and the 
copper  surface.  The  heat  transfer  is  primarily  a  question  of  how  much  two  surfaces  are  in 
contact with  respect to each other, and we check experimentally that the temperature inside 
the  crystal  does  not  depend  on  the  applied  pressure  :  we  did  not  observe  any  noticable 
variation of the temperature when changing the applied pressure if there is no thermal joint 
between the crystal and the copper mount. However, the heat transfer is strongly dependant 
on how the copper surface is positioned with respect to the crystal surface on which it applies.  
We have then tested three different thermal joints inserted between the crystal and the copper: 
graphite layer, indium foil and heat sink grease (CT40-5 from Circuitworks). The results are 
summarized  in  table  1.  Graphite  layer  (≈  0.5  mm  thick)  changes  significantly  neither  the 
maximum temperature nor the heat transfer coefficient, but it was remarked that the contact 
was much more uniform than with bare contact: in particular no hot spot appeared any more 
and  the  contact  was  somewhat  independent  of  the  applied  pressure.  It  is  in  contrast  not  the 
case with indium foil. For this experiment the crystal was wrapped with a 1-mm thick indium 
foil.  Since  Indium  is  a  soft  material,  the  quality  of  the  contact  is  overly  dependant  on  the 
applied  pressure.  The  temperature  at  the  center  of  the  pumped  region  experiences  a  7°C 
decrease while the pressure increased from 1.5 kg/cm2 to 22 kg/cm2. Note that in this case the 
measured  H  (always  defined  by  (2)),  measured  across  the  surface  where  the  pressure  is 
applied  is  in  reality  an  “effective”  heat  coefficient  that  takes  into  account  the  transfer  from 
crystal to indium and then from indium to copper. The most dramatic change in heat transfer 
coefficient is obtained with heat sink grease (see table 1). The temperature gap drops down to 
1°C and H reaches 2 W.cm-2.K-1. The heat contact is here independent on the applied pressure. 
However  long  term  pollution  caused  by  the  grease  diffusion  inside  the  crystal  should  be 
considered in this latter case.   

The dynamics of the temperature installation was also studied, and the results are featured in 
figure 3. The temperature is shown versus time at the center of the pumped area (Tmax), at the 
edge  of  the  pumped  area  (Ta),  at  the  edge  of  the  crystal  (Te)  and  just  behind  the  gap  in  the 
mount  volume  (Tm).  The  difference  Tmax-Ta,  referred  as  the  thermal  gradient  inside  the 
pumped  area,  is  responsible  for  thermal  lensing  effects.  This  gradient  turns  out  to  establish 
very  quickly,  that  is  with  a  time  constant  far  below  100  milliseconds  (corresponding  to  the 
response time of the infrared camera). This behaviour has been confirmed by thermal lensing 
measurements  performed  with  a  Shack-Hartmann  wavefront  sensor  [5].  This  is  consistent 
with the fact that the thermal diffusion inside the pumped zone is, within a first approximation, 
governed by the time constant [6]  

τ

=

2
pw
κ

 

where  κ  is  the  thermal  diffusivity  and  wp  the  radius  of  the  pumped  area.  For  (8-
at.%) Yb:YAG,  τ1 = 2.6 ms. In contrast, the temperature at the center and at the edge of the 
rod have been fitted by a simple exponential growth, and a time constant of τ2 =  1.1 s was the 
obtained.  This  time  constant  is  a  function  of  both  crystal  size,  diffusivity,  and  cooling 
parameters [7]. 
 
4. Conclusion 
In  summary,  we  have  shown,  for  the  first  time  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  absolute 
temperature maps in a diode-end-pumped laser crystal (here Yb:YAG) with different types of 
thermal  contact,  with  a  60-µm  spatial  resolution,  using  an  infrared  camera  in  the  8-12  µm 
range. The method is very simple and versatile, and can be also used in the lasing conditions 
(same crystal, same pump). A careful calibration has been done, in order to take into account 
not only the finite emissivity of the crystal, but also the reflected luminance coming from the 
camera itself. A temporal analysis showed that the thermal gradient (responsible for thermal 
lensing  effects)  had  a  far  shorter  time  constant  than  the  temperature  field  itself,  the  latter 
being governed by a time constant in the order of 1 s. We also studied the influence of three 
thermal  joints  on  the  cooling.  With  respect  to  bare  contact,  graphite  layer  allows  gaining 
uniformity but indium foil allows reaching heat transfer coefficients that are very dependant 
on the applied pressure, whereas heat sink grease enables an improvement of the contact by a 
factor of 8, whatever the applied pressure. The method presented in this paper is a very simple 
way to study qualitatively and quantitatively the thermal contact and could be applied to every 
type of laser crystal and pumping geometry, including end-pumping.  
 
Acknowledgements:  The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge  Gérard  Roger  for  realizing  the 
mechanical parts and for his helpful advice. We also thank the Ecole Supérieure d’Optique for 
loaning us the infrared camera and the germanium objective.  
 
 
References : 
 

1.  W.A.  Clarkson :  “Thermal  effects  and  their  mitigation  in  end-pumped  solid-state 

lasers”, J. Phys. D : Appl. Phys. 34 pp. 2381-2395 (2001). 

2.  T.Y. Fan, “Heat generation in Nd:YAG and Yb:YAG”, IEEE J. Quant. Elec., Vol. 29, 

3.  H.S.  Carlslaw,  J.C.  Jaeger,  “Conduction  of  heat  in  solids”,  2nd  edition,  Clarendon 

No. 6, pp. 1457-1459 (1993).  

press, Oxford, 1986. 

4.  W. Koechner : Solid State laser engineering, 5th version, Springer, 1999. 

5.  S.  Chénais,  F.  Druon,  F.  Balembois,  G.  Lucas-Leclin,  Y.  Fichot,  P.  Georges,  R. 
Gaumé,  B.  Viana,  G.  P.  Aka,  D.  Vivien,  “Thermal  lensing  measurement  in  diode-
pumped Yb-doped GdCOB, YCOB, YSO, YAG and KGW” , Optical Material vol.22, 
p.129-137 (2003). 

6.  J.Gordon,  R.Leite,  R.Moore,  S.Porto,  J.Whinnery,  “Long-transient  effects  in  lasers 

with inserted liquid samples”, J. Appl. Phys. vol 36, no 1 pp.3-8 (1965). 

7.  U.Farrukh, A.Buoncristiani, C.Byvik, “An analysis of the temperature distribution in 
finite solid-state laser rods”, IEEE J. of Quant. Elect. Vol 34, no. 11, pp. 2253-2263 
(1988). 

Figure captions 
 
 
Table 1 : experimental results. Tmax is the temperature at the center of the pumped region ; Te 
is the temperature at the edge of the crystal (averaged on the 4 sides if not symmetrical), and 
Tm is the copper mount temperature near the crystal.  
 
Figure 1 : experimental setup. 

 

 
Figure 2 : temperature mapping of the crystal (front view) and lateral cut at y=0 for two 
different types of thermal contact (direct copper-crystal contact on the left, with grease on the 
right). 
 
 
Figure 3 : temporal evolution of the temperature at different position in the crystal : at the 
center (Tmax), at the edge of the pumped area (Ta), at the edge of the crystal (Te) and in the 
copper mount (Tm). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
Table 1 : experimental results. Tmax is the temperature at the center of the pumped region ; Te 
is the temperature at the edge of the crystal (averaged on the 4 sides if not symmetrical), and 
Tm is the copper mount temperature near the crystal.  
 

Contact 

H (W.cm-2.K-1) 

Tmax (°C) 

Te(°C) 

Te-Tm (°C) 

0.25 

0.28 

0.9 

Bare 

Graphite layer 
 
Indium foil 
(applied pressure : 
22 kg/cm2) 
Heat sink grease 

33.5 

30.5 

25.1 

10.7 

8.7 

4.9 

1.5 

2.0 

37.0 

21.6 

49.8 

46.5 

40.0 

 
 
 

Figure 1 : experimental setup 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 2 : temperature mapping of the crystal (front view) and lateral cut at y=0 for two 
different types of thermal contact (direct copper-crystal contact on the left, with grease on the 
right). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Tmax 

Ta 

Te 

Tm 

 
 
 
Figure 3 : temporal evolution of the temperature at different position in the crystal : at the 
center (Tmax), at the edge of the pumped area (Ta), at the edge of the crystal (Te) and in the 
copper mount (Tm). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

