Creating a universe from thermodynamic thought experiments II                            
                    - exploring a basis for structure and force.                                  
                                             
                                                    Akinbo Ojo 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Assuming  that  the  universe  is  a  system  obedient  to  known  thermodynamic 
laws  and  equations,  here  we  explore  whether  it  is  a  possibility  for  the 
universe  to  exist  and  evolve  without  any  cosmic  structure  or  force 
necessarily  emerging  within  it.  From  symmetry  considerations  and  the 
invariance of Boltzmann's constant during the experiment, we infer that it is 
an  inevitable  occurrence  that  structure  and  force  will  appear  during 
transformation of the created universe. 
 
Key  words:  Thermodynamics,  Cosmology,  Symmetry,  Cosmic  structure, 
Force, Boltzmann's constant. 
 
PACS Classification: 05.70.-a, 95.30.Tg, 11.30.-j, 12.10.-g 
 
Introduction 
 
In  an  earlier  experiment  [1],  we  created  an  increase  in  the  size  of  an 
infinitesimal  isolated  system  using  thermodynamic  tools  derived  from 
Clausius  and  Boltzmann's  descriptions  of  entropy  [2-6].  We  called  this 
system our universe and now explore whether as a theoretical speculation, it 
is at all a possibility for a universe to exist and increase in size without any 
structure or force necessarily evolving within it. Our main objective will be 
to find a qualitative rather than a quantitative basis for the existence of force 
and structure. The experiment will again make use of Clausius's description 
of entropy expressed by 
 
                    ∆E/T = ∆S                                                                                (1) 
 
and that of Boltzmann expressed by 
                              
                    S = k lnW                                                                                  (2) 

 

1

where S = entropy, E = energy, T = absolute temperature, k = Boltzmann's 
constant, ln stands for natural logarithm (i.e. loge, where e = 2.71828…) and 
W  represents the number of possible ways the constituents can be arranged 
among the compartment units of the system. 
 
To make the results of our experiment clear, we first do a brief but pertinent 
description of the objects of our search, force and structure, lest we see but 
miss them. In embarking on this search we also take a cursory look at what 
W means for our experimental endeavor. 
 
Even  though  W,  structure  and  force  can  be  described  in  various  ways,  the 
descriptions  we  employ  will  be  biased  towards  the  thermodynamic 
perspective  of  the  area  of  interest.  Let  us  commence  with  an  illustrative 
description of W. 
 
Consider  a  system  of  three  compartments  with  three  different  constituents, 
say  three  boxes  and  three  balls,  Fig.1.  Each  compartment  unit  is  made  as 
small as to be able to harbor only one constituent and no more. 
 
 
 
 
Fig.1. A system made up of three compartments and three constituents. 
 
In  this  sample  system,  if  we  exclude  the  mirror  images  for  simplicity,  the 
system can be arranged  in three possible  ways as shown below,  i.e.  W = 3 
and  entropy  S  is  proportional  to  the  natural  logarithm  of  that  number 
according to Eq.(2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.2. Illustrating W, the number of possible ways the system can be arranged. 
 

 

2

Note that in this example, moving the balls for arrangement gives the same 
number of possible ways of arranging the system as moving the boxes with 
their  contained  balls  and  so  in  calculating  the  value  of  W  it  makes  no 
difference  whether  we  regard  the  boxes  or  the  balls  as  the  constituents  or 
subjects of arrangement. If the boxes are so small that they cannot be further 
divided  to  contain  more  than  one  constituent,  then  for  all  the  practical 
purposes  of  calculating  W  the  boxes  can  be  taken  to  serve  both  as 
compartment units and as the constituents that can be arranged in the various 
possible ways.  Bearing this  in  mind  we sometimes  interchangeably  use the 
terms  constituent  and  compartment  unit  where  this  will  help  clarity  of 
expression. 
 
From  the  above,  if  it  becomes  mathematically  compelling  that  we  have  to 
reduce W in the system, then a constituent compartment or more will have to 
be excluded from further participating in the different possible arrangements 
in  the  system  leaving  available  other  constituent  compartments  before  this 
reduction can be physically realized. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3.  Illustrating  what  would  have  to  occur  if  the  number  of  ways  of  arranging  the 
system in Fig.1 has to be reduced from three to two. A constituent or compartment unit, 
e.g. the one with the crossed  ball will  have to be excluded  from  further  involvement  in 
the  different  arrangements  possible  in  the  system  in  order  for this  reduction  in  W  to  be 
possible. 
 
 
It  is  easy  to  visualize  from  this  diagrammatic  representation  that  the  more 
the number of compartment units and constituents available for arrangement, 
the higher W will be in the system. Therefore, if we must have an increase in 
W,  we  either  break  up  the  constituents  and  compartments  so  that  more 
constituents and compartment units become available and give us more ways 
of  arranging  the  system,  or  if  this  is  not  feasible  and  yet  it  is 
thermodynamically compelling that  W  has to be  increased, then the system 
must come up with more compartment units to add to the 3-unit system we 

 

3

the  emergence  of 

have,  so  that  such  mathematically  demanded  increase  in  the  number  of 
possible ways of arranging the system is physically realized. 
 
When  within  a  system  in  which  various  arrangement  possibilities  can  take 
place,  a  particular  group  of  constituents  become  excluded  from  these 
arrangement  possibilities,  we  may  envisage 
the 
phenomenon  of  structure.  Observationally,  such  phenomenon  will  be 
contrary  to  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  which  stipulates  that 
constituents  of  a  system  should  not  to  be  restricted  but  should  rather 
increasingly participate in all and more of the different ways the system can 
be arranged so that we  have a continuously  increasing  W.  For analogy, we 
consider a  glass of water of  given  volume, Fig.4.  At an  initial earlier time, 
the water molecules in Glass A are all fully participating and involved in the 
possible  arrangements  available  in  the  system.  From  the  volume  of  water 
and  the  number  of  molecules,  we  can  even  estimate  a  finite,  but 
astronomical  value  for  the  number  of  ways  the  system  can  be  arranged 
without  affecting  our  description  of  the  glass  of  water  as  a  macroscopic 
state. If we extract some energy from this glass of water, then even though 
the number of molecules contained therein is unchanged, Eq.(1) tells us that 
we have reduced the entropy and W must reduce. We see that if the amount 
of water remains the same, the only way a reduction in W can be effected is 
to exclude some of the water molecules from further participating in all the 
possible  arrangements  in  which  they  could  hitherto  partake.  Such  water 
molecules  that  are  so  excluded  appear  as  structural  forms  and  may  be 
visualized as ice-crystals in Glass B. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.4. When energy is extracted from glass A, W must reduce and some water molecules 
have  to  be  restricted  from  further  involvement  in  the  different  possible  arrangements 
available  to  the  system  to  make  this  possible.  Such  molecules  no  longer  available  for 
arrangement in all the possible ways can be visualized as ice crystals in glass B. 
 
The  above  scenario  is  reversible  so  that  if  we  add  energy  to  the  glass  of 
water  with  the  ice-crystals,  W  has  to  increase  in  obedience  to  Eq.(1).  To 

        Glass A   

        Glass B 

 

 

 

4

make this happen we need either more compartments in which arrangements 
can  take  place  or  more  constituents  that  can  be  available  to  give  more 
possible ways of arrangement, thus the water molecules contained in the ice 
structure must be yielded up for participation to give the additional possible 
arrangements  that  must  become  available  in  the  system  so  that  a  higher 
value  of  W  is  realized.  More  and  more  energy  can  be  added  till  even  the 
molecules  may  need  to  be  broken  up  into  even  more  fundamental 
constituents to satisfy any further demand for increases in W. With this brief 
analogy  to  illustrate  a  relationship  between  W  and  the  emergence  of 
structure, we next examine the concept of force. 
 
What  is  force?  We  seem  to  know  what  it  does  but  we  do  not  fully  know 
what it is and why it must do what it does. What does a universe need it for? 
At  the  beginning  when  we  were  experimentally  creating  the  universe  [1], 
there  was  no  force,  so  who  could  have  asked  for  it  since  the  presence  of 
force  is  known  to  exist  in  the  real  experiment?  Is  it  inevitable  for  it  to 
emerge  and  why?  The  subject  of  force,  a  major  preoccupation  of  Newton 
[7], would require a book of its own being a subject that can be viewed from 
many different and intriguing perspectives. 
 
We  know  for  instance  that  a  system  cannot  experience  any  force  unless  it 
exchanges momentum with another system according to Newton's laws and 
this exchange must be both equal and in opposite directions. A bullet cannot 
exit  a  gun,  unless  it  exchanges  momentum  with  the  gun,  similarly  a  car 
cannot move unless it exchanges momentum with the road. Force thus seems 
non-existent if a system has no other system to relate with and a body with 
inertia-mass  continues  in  its  state  of  rest  or  uniform  motion  in  a  straight 
line*  unless  it  exchanges  momentum  with  another  body  and  causes  that 
body's  deceleration  before  it  itself  can  simultaneously  accelerate  and 
experience  force.  However  this  experience  of  momentum  change  or 
acceleration is according to Einstein's equivalence principle not very reliable 
to experimentally discern the presence of force. This is because according to 
the principle, acceleration depends on the observer's frame of reference. That 
is, if you set out to detect the existence of force through acceleration whether  
 
 
 
*As  a  corollary  to  this  postulate  of  Newton,  the  state  of  rest  or  'natural'  motion  of  a 
massless body would then be random rather than uniform motion in a straight line since 
such  a  body  would  not  need  force  to  change  its  direction  from  a  straight  line,  such 
changes in direction being forceless.  

 

5

you  find  it  or  not  depends  on  the  frame  of  reference  from  which  you  are 
making  your  observation.  This  relative  nature  of  observed  force  is  well 
exemplified  by  the  weightlessness  experienced  by  astronauts  in  space. 
Galileo  too  famously  demonstrated  the  difficulty  of  using  acceleration  to 
know  the  magnitude  of  force  by  showing  that  falling  objects  subjected  to 
different  amount  of  force  can  still  experience  the  same  acceleration.  The 
moral is that acceleration is not totally reliable to experimentally discern the 
absence  or  presence  of  force.  We  need  more  reliable  markers,  which  may 
not depend on an observer's frame of reference.  
 
As a preliminary evaluation based on what we know of the  universe in  the 
real experiment, an atom's electron should be free to roam and be available 
for arrangement in the different possible ways like other particles present in 
a  compartment,  in  obedience  to  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics. 
However  if  the  electron  refuses  to  obey  this  law  and  instead  of  being 
arranged  in all the possible ways  within the space  of  the compartment  like 
other  particles,  it  is  seen  to  cling  to  another  particle,  force  labeled 
electromagnetic is inferred to be present. Similarly, a planet is composed of 
particles  which  we  would  expect  to  scatter  and  be  spread  out  randomly  to 
occupy  more and  more space as  W continually  increases as dictated by the 
second law. If the planet's particles refuse to obey this law and appear to be 
constrained from participating in all the different available arrangements of 
constituents  in  which  they  should  otherwise  be  taking  part,  force  labeled 
gravitational  is  used  to  explain  the  disobedience.  Using  our  gun  and  bullet 
for  analogy,  we  would  expect  the  molecules  of  the  bullet  to  intermingle, 
spread  and  mix  among  the  molecules  of  the  gun  and  if  there  is  space,  the 
molecules  of  the  gun  and  bullet  should  further  spread  out  into  the  room 
where they are kept  in obedience to  the second  law. If  however we do  not 
see  this,  intermolecular  forces  are  used  to  explain  the  absence  of  mixing 
between the molecules of the bullet and the gun while frictional force is used 
to explain why the bullet does not separate and slip out of the gun on its own 
to  roam  about  the  room.  In  Glass  B  of  Fig.4  as  another  example,  the 
presence  of  electrostatically  based  intermolecular  forces  called  hydrogen 
bonds  are  used  to  explain  the  stability  of  ice  and  how  the  restriction  of  its 
contained  water  molecules  from  participation  in  the  available  arrangement 
possibilities  in  the  glass  is  made  a  physical  reality.  Learning  from  the  real 
universe,  force  should  therefore  be  looked  out  for  in  situations  where  we 
encounter  disobediencies  of  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics.  In  such 
situations  W  would  either  be  static  or  reducing  and  this  would  manifest 
either  by  a  complete  refusal  to  be  arranged  in  more  of  the  compartment 

 

6

volume  or  spreading  out  in  an  ordered,  non-probabilistic  and  predictable 
way such that cannot be said to constitute an increase in W or disorder. 
 
Before proceeding with our experiment we examine another signal that can 
help us decipher the presence of force. This is from Gauge theory which is a 
theory based on symmetry and the idea that symmetrical transformations can 
be  performed  locally  and  globally.  Symmetry  is  said  to  exist  when  a 
measurable quantity remains invariant even when the system  is  undergoing 
change  and  transformation.  Exploitation  of  symmetry  has  been  rewarding 
for  physicists  in  explaining  natural  phenomena.  Historically,  the  energy 
conservation  laws  in  thermodynamics,  Einstein's  invariance  or  relativity 
theory,  Newton's  momentum  conservation  in  dynamics  and  Yang-Mills 
theory  in  particle  and  quantum  physics  have  all  found  symmetry  a  fertile 
ground  for  discovering  and  explaining  physical  theories  and  concepts. 
Physicists  have  learnt  to  identify  mathematically  defined  symmetrical 
relationships  and  to  ask  how  these  relationships  on  a  global  scale  relate  to 
the same relationship on a local scale during transformation. In other words, 
how does a global observance of symmetry, i.e. obedience to a symmetrical 
principle every time and everywhere relate with the local observance of the 
same symmetrical principle, i.e. obedience of symmetry at a given place and 
time?  How  does  the  local  system  "know"  whether  and  in  what  way  the 
global  system  is  obeying  the  symmetry  principle?  This  line  of  thought  is 
probably  original  to  Yang  and  the  answer  proposed  by  him  was  that  the 
medium  that  communicates  between  local  and  global  observance  of  an 
invariant  principle  was  "force".  Force  is  described  as  nature's  way  of 
expressing the global symmetry in local situations [8,9]. The global system 
need  only  observe  the  global  symmetry  but  the  local  system  is  subject  to 
both the  local and  global observance of symmetry. Where the symmetry  is 
observed  in  the  same  way  locally  and  globally  there  may  possibly  be  no 
need for force to exist. However where during transformation the local and 
global  systems  are  observing  the  same  symmetrical  principle  in  opposing 
ways, force would manifest locally as a witness to the conflict. Put in other 
words,  whenever  force  is  seen  locally  it  is  a  sign  that  the  global  system  is 
obeying  a  symmetrical  principle  in  a  way  different  from  how  the  local 
system is obeying it. 
 
As  a  familiar  example,  using  the  gun  and  bullet  system  again  for  analogy, 
we  can  identify  conservation  of  momentum  as  the  symmetrical  principle 
which  remains  invariant  during  transformation  and  is  obeyed  globally  and 
locally. Globally for a system at rest relative to the observer, momentum can 

 

7

to 

to 

the  second 

the  conflict.  Although 

be zero in the observational frame of reference. If during a transformation, a 
local  part  of  the  system,  e.g.  the  gun,  obeys  the  symmetrical  principle  in  a 
way different  from the  global zero  momentum way and  instead  has a  local 
non-zero  momentum  in  a  particular  direction,  e.g.  the  direction  of  recoil, 
force  would  manifest  as  a  witness 
this 
manifestation  occurs  as  well  in  the  gun,  we  commonly  describe  the 
manifestation of force in the bullet, which moves in the direction of fire with 
such velocity as to keep the symmetrical principle invariant. 
 
In summary, the  hallmarks we should be  on the  look out  for as a  basis  for  
detecting  the  existence  or  emergence  of  force  would  seem  to  include 
scenarios  where  we  encounter  disobedience 
law  of 
thermodynamics  and  whenever  there  is  disharmony  in  the  way  two 
interacting  systems  are  obeying  an  overriding  symmetrical  principle  which 
nevertheless  remains  locally  and  globally  invariant  no  matter  how  the 
systems  are  transforming.  Since  structure  and  force  seem  associated  with 
reduction  or  restraint  of  increase  in  W,  in  opposition  to  the  dictates  of  the 
second law of thermodynamics we may expect from the foregoing that some 
form of co-existence and intimate relationship could exist between the two. 
 
The Experiment 
 
Aims  and  Objectives:  (i)  To  investigate  whether  the  emergence  of  force 
and  structure 
thermodynamic 
transformation of a created universe. 
(ii)  To  investigate  whether  during  the  thermodynamic  transformation  of  a 
created  universe  it  is  inevitable  for  some  constituent  compartments  of  the 
system to become excluded from participating in the different arrangements 
available to the system and in which they would otherwise have participated, 
necessitating the emergence of structural forms. 
(iii)  To  investigate  whether  during  the  thermodynamic  evolution  of  the 
universe, a disharmony exists in the way an invariant symmetrical principle 
is  being  obeyed  by  the  global  and  local  system,  necessitating  a  need  for 
force to emerge. 
 
Apparatus: We employ a device capable of monitoring and measuring local 
and  global  changes  in  W  and  other  thermodynamic  parameters  based  on 
Clausius  and  Boltzmann's  descriptions  of  entropy  as  expressed  by  Eqs.  (1) 
and (2), both of which give                 
                     

inevitable  during 

is  necessary  or 

the 

 

8

                    ∆E/T = ∆S = k ∆ln W                                                               (3) 
 
From this, we get 
                  
                    ∆E/T∆lnW = k                                                                          (4) 
 
which tells us more clearly how W will be expected to change in response to 
changes in E in any transformation. This invariance in Boltzmann's constant 
notwithstanding how a system is changing hints very strongly of symmetry. 
A  positive  change  in  E  gives  an  increase  in  W,  the  number  of  ways  the 
constituents  of  that  system  can  be  arranged,  while  a  negative  change  and 
reduction  in  energy  results  in  a  reduction  of  the  number  of  ways  the 
constituents of the system can be arranged. The lower the temperature, T is 
at the  initial time, the  greater the impact any changes  in E will  have on  W. 
From  Eq.(4),  no  matter  how  E  and  W  change,  their  mathematical 
relationship and Boltzmann's constant is invariant.  
 
Method: We create a  universe experimentally [1] by wishing a  fluctuation 
in  the  energy  of  a  closed  system  of  zero  or  unit  compartment  and  at  an 
appropriately  low  temperature  thereby  forcing  a  significant  change  in  its 
entropy and an astronomical change in W. As can be recollected W increases 
either  if  there  is  an  increase  in  the  number  of  constituents  available  for 
arrangement  or  if  there  is  an  increase  in  the  number  of  compartment  units 
among  which  arrangement  can  take  place.  In  the  earlier  paper,  methods  of 
wishing a change in the energy of the closed system under experiment were 
suggested and include the uncertainty principle and quantum tunneling. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.5. Illustrating what could occur if at a very low or zero temperature a phenomenon or 
an intelligent Agent were to cause an energy fluctuation, ∆E in a closed system infinitely 
so  small  it  cannot  be  further  fragmented  into  more  compartments  and  yet  W  has  to 
increase in obedience to Eqs. (1) and (3). The thermodynamic behavior of a sample local 
system  (inset,  in  circle)  is  monitored  during  the  occurring  transformation  of  the  global 
system. 

 

9

Having set up our system, we use our device to monitor a particular sample 
local system of given volume, as the system evolves. 
 
Observation and experimental results: 
 
1.  When  energy  E  is  introduced  into  the  system,  since  the  initial 
compartment  unit  cannot  be  further  fragmented,  new  compartment  units 
must physically appear to fulfill the mathematical demand for W to increase 
and to avoid violations to Clausius' equation, Eq.(1). We observe an increase 
in the W of the system caused by an initial change in E and this is manifest 
by a  global proliferation of compartment  units among  which the demanded 
additional possible arrangements can take place. 
 
2. The introduced energy E is present in the system as a whole but when the 
system increases in size, the amount of energy in our sample local system of 
given volume gets progressively less. If Eqs.(1) and (3) are to be preserved 
locally, then W has to correspondingly reduce in the sample local system. 
 
3.  The  reduction  of  W  in  the  sample  local  volume  with  time  as  the  system 
evolves can only be  manifest  if some of the constituents  that  make  up  that 
volume are excluded from further participating in all the different available 
arrangements  possible  in  the  system.  This  satisfies  the  requirement  for 
emergence of structure, as structure must originate in a scenario where some 
constituent compartments can be arranged in all the different ways possible 
while  some  are  excluded  and  thermodynamically  restrained  from  similar 
arrangement in all the available ways. 
 
4. As W reduces further locally in response to the continuing local reductions 
in energy as the universe expands, the number of constituents in that volume 
that are excluded  from being arranged  in  all the available ways is  found to 
be increasing with time. 
 
5. From the thermodynamic scenario observed, it is found that a symmetrical 
relationship,  Eq.(4),  which  is  invariant  during  transformation  is  obeyed  in 
opposing  ways  by  the  interacting  local  and  global  systems.  During 
transformation there is a global tendency for W to increase while obeying the 
symmetrical  relationship  described  and  a  local  tendency  for  W  to  reduce 
while obeying the same symmetrical principle. The local reduction in W that 
is observed is discordant with the global increase of W dictated by Eqs. (1) 
and  (3),  which  we  also  know  as  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics.  The 

 

10

requirements  for  local  display  of  force  are  thus  satisfied  according  to  the 
earlier identified criteria that would signal its emergence. 
 
Discussion: 
 
As  the  system  is  transformed  and  the  need  for  the  first  constituents  to  be 
constrained  is  mandated  by  local  reduction  in  W,  the  initial  resulting 
structures  in  our  thought  experiment  will  be  expected  to  have  small 
constitutional  arrangements  since  the  local  reduction  in  energy  and  W  that 
necessitates  their  formation  is  still  relatively  small.  Such  structures  being 
constituted  during  comparatively  higher  local  energy  regimes  can  be 
expected  to be  more stable  to break  up by energetic processes than  latterly 
occurring ones, in the conventional parlance they can be said to have higher 
binding  energies.  We  may  therefore  expect  hierarchical  manifestations  of 
structure as the system is transformed, the smallest and most stable emerging 
before the larger and less stable to break up. 
 
In  the  real  experiment,  the  system  also  appears  to  have  evolved  from  a 
beginning  of  very  high  energy  density,  the  energy  density  reducing  as  the 
universe  expanded  subsequently  permitting  the  emergence  of  quarks, 
leptons, hadrons, atomic, molecular and planetary structure in that order with 
characteristics of size and stability similar to the structures evolving  in our 
thought experiment. 
 
In our thought experiment, change in E is the cause of the change in W and 
W  increases  till  the  expected  corresponding  value,  called  the  thermal 
equilibrium value is attained. Since this equilibrium value of W  may not be 
attained instantaneously and yet the value of k must remain constant as given 
by Eq.(4), the value of T must vary from the initial to maintain that constant 
value of k during the transformation. Thus T which was very low or of zero 
value at the beginning of the experiment must become temporarily high. As 
W  increases  to  its  equilibrium  value,  T  can  then  gradually  return  to  its 
original value. 
 
In the real experiment, even  in  models of  a universe starting  from  nothing, 
an  astronomically  high  temperature  is  described  at  or  soon  after  the 
beginning.  The  temperature  is  taken  to  have  been  dropping  with  time,  the 
system  now  having  cooled  to  2.7K,  the  current  temperature  of  the  cosmic 
microwave  background  radiation.  That  W  has  been  increasing  with  time  in 
the  real  universe  is  also  a  reality  described  by  the  second  law.  As  the 

 

11

in 

universe expands, the continuing reduction in local energy and temperature 
towards zero will as  given by the third  law of  thermodynamics,  i.e. S→ 0, 
when  T→ 0,  lead to reduction  in  local entropy, a scenario at  variance with 
the global increase of entropy. We find therefore that in the real universe, the 
thermodynamic  scenario  locally  differs  from  the  scenario  globally  and  we 
may  be entitled  to ask as Yang would  do  [8,9],  how the  global behavior  is 
communicated to the local system? 
 
We  earlier  identified  hallmarks  for  the  emergence  of  force.  These  are  the 
presence  of  a  symmetrical  principle  which  remains  invariant  during 
transformation; the obedience of the invariant principle in opposing ways by 
the global and local system and the occurrence of possible violations to the 
second law of thermodynamics. If these conditions are found to be present, 
the phenomenon described as force should be reasonably expected. Though 
all  forces  seem  to  share  these  hallmarks,  for  the  dynamical  forces  the 
invariant principle appears to be momentum conservation. On the other hand 
the  fundamental  forces 
the  real  experiment,  viz.  gravitational, 
electromagnetic  and  the  strong  force  all  seem  to  be  intimately  connected 
with  the  maintenance  of  structure  in  disobedience  to  the  dictates  of  the 
second  law  that  constituents  should  be  spread  and  arranged  in  increasingly 
more  possible  ways.  This  seeming  association  with  the  second  law  is 
suggestive 
could  be 
thermodynamic  in  nature.  From  the  results  of  our  thought  experiment,  the 
invariant symmetrical principle which seems applicable for the emergence of 
force  is  the  invariance  of  Boltzmann's  constant  and  appears  to  differ  from 
momentum conservation which applies to the dynamical forces. 
 
As energy further reduces locally with accompanying reduction in W, there 
will  be  a  need  for  further  constraint  to  the  possible  arrangements  of 
constituents  available  in  continuing  defiance  of  the  second  law  but  in 
obedience  to  the  symmetrical  principle.  To  make  this  mathematically 
demanded reduction in W a physical reality, the system must utilize either an 
existing property or possibly induce the emergence of new properties in the 
units  or  group  of  units  to  be  restrained  from  participation  in  the  various 
arrangement  possibilities,  so  as  to  distinguish  them  from  the  unconstrained 
constituents. For instance in Fig. 4, even though all water molecules contain 
hydrogen,  the  hydrogen  in  the  ones  to  be  constrained  are  endowed  with 
"sticky" new properties and they make use of this to effect the realization of 
the  mathematically  demanded  reduction  in  W.  This  they  do  by  forming 
hydrogen bonds with other water molecules destined for confinement as ice. 

symmetrical  principle 

applicable 

that 

the 

 

12

For  liquids  that  do  not  contain  hydrogen,  the  system  must  device  other 
physical means of effecting the constraint in W when demanded. Such other 
devices apart  from  hydrogen  bonds  may still be electrostatic  in  nature, e.g. 
the ionic bonds that exist in polar  molecules. For non-polar molecules, if it 
becomes  thermodynamically  imperative  that  some  molecules  have  to  be 
constrained,  polarity  is  known  to  be  inducible  in  hitherto  non-polar 
molecules  to  give  rise  to  other  types  of  electrostatically  based  restraints, 
such  as  Van  der  Waal's  forces,  covalent  and  metallic  bonds.  It  would 
therefore seem that properties possessed by constituents that distinguish and 
enable them to be constrained so that various structures can be formed must 
have  evolved  and  have  been  induced  as  thermodynamic  necessities.  In  our 
thought  experiment,  properties  that  describe  the  stronger  constraints  would 
evolve  before  weaker  ones  because  they  are  necessitated  in  earlier  higher 
energy  regimes.  The  strength  of  a  fundamental  force  based  on  those 
properties can then be  measurable by  how  much energy would be  required 
before  the  constrained  constituents  can  be  liberated  to  participate  in  the 
available  arrangement  possibilities.  Also  the  need  for  properties  that 
describe  constraints  of  increasingly  longer  reach  will  similarly  evolve  as 
energy  reduces  even  further  locally  with  accompanying  larger  reduction  in 
W  and  increase  in  the  number  of  constituent  compartments  that  need  to  be 
restrained  in  the  necessitated  larger  structures.  We  therefore  expect  that  in 
our thought experiment, the initially evolving fundamental forces would be 
effected  by  properties  that  make  them  stronger  and  shorter  in  reach  than 
latterly evolving ones. An important feature of the thought created universe 
would  therefore  be  that  such  properties  that  give  rise  and  are  used  to 
describe force are not fundamental or conserved but can similarly be lost or 
cancelled out if it becomes thermodynamically necessary. 
 
In  the  real  experiment  the  necessity  for  properties  such  as  "color",  charge 
and  mass  to  evolve  or  be  induced  in  those  constituents  to  be  constrained 
from  participation  in  the  various  available  arrangements  in  order  that 
structure  can  be  formed  with  the  correspondingly  described  strong, 
electromagnetic  and  gravitational  forces  respectively  would  likely  have 
become  necessitated  and  evolved  in  similar  order  as  in  our  thought 
experiment.  The  strong  force  being  stronger  and  having  less  reach  is  for 
example  likely  to  be  described  earlier  than  the  weaker  and  longer  reach 
forces. It is clear from what has been discussed that even if at any point in 
transformation, properties such as mass for gravitational force or charge for 
electromagnetic  force  become  unable  or  insufficient  to  provide  enough 
constraint and yet it becomes thermodynamically imperative for the system 

 

13

to further constrain constituents so that W is even further reduced locally as 
demanded  by  the  invariant  relation  in  Eq.(4),  some  other  means  or  type  of 
force  to  describe  that  mathematical  necessity  must  evolve.  Theoretically 
there  is  nothing  stopping  further  manifestations  of  such  restraints  and 
fundamental forces at different times as the system continues to expand with 
further reductions in local energy and even further need to reduce W locally. 
We risk the speculation that such a force associated with galactic structures 
can  evolve  like  others,  even  though  galactic  structure  and  stability  is 
currently explained gravitationally with missing mass and dark matter [10]. 
 
The weakness of acceleration-deceleration as a reliable marker for detecting 
force  has  been  mentioned  in  the  introduction.  Acknowledging  this  we  can 
with care apply the concept to our description of the fundamental forces. In 
doing this, we take some liberty to broaden the definition of acceleration and 
identify  it  with  the  local  or  global  direction  in  which  the  symmetrical 
principle  is  being  obeyed.  Using  the  gun  and  bullet  system  again  for 
analogy, we can identify acceleration of the bullet with one of the directions 
in  which  the  symmetrical  principle  is  obeyed  locally,  i.e.  the  direction  of 
fire, even though  it  is simultaneously decelerating to the opposite direction 
in which symmetry  is  locally obeyed, i.e. the direction of recoil. While  the 
direction  in  which  the  global  system  is  obeying  the  symmetrical  principle 
can be identified with the direction of rest relative to the observer, i.e. zero 
acceleration.  From  the  thermodynamic  perspective  and  the  invariant 
symmetrical  principle  found  applicable  to  the  fundamental  forces  in  our 
thought experiment, the directions in which the symmetrical principle can be 
obeyed  are  W  →  ∞,  in  obedience  to  the  second  law  in  which  increasingly 
many  possible  arrangements  become  available  globally  and  W  →  1,  in 
which  there  is  a  local  tendency  towards  only  one  possible  arrangement  as 
compelled  by  the  continuing  local  reduction  of  energy  due  to  the  further 
universal expansion taking place. 
 
It  should  be  recalled  and  noted  that  the  physical  way  the  increase  in  W  is 
made manifest is by global proliferation of constituent compartments so that 
more  possible  arrangements  can  take  place.  This  has  implication  for  our 
local  system  under  experimental  observation  since  we  keep  the  volume 
fixed.  We  thus  have  to  accept  that  what  is  constant  is  the  volume  under 
observation and not necessarily all the constituent compartments comprising 
that  volume,  especially  those  constituent  compartments  that  are  not 
thermodynamically 
the  different 
arrangements  available.  The  implication  is  that  the  effect  of  the  global 

from  participating 

restricted 

in 

 

14

tendency for W to increase is physically felt locally as well, including within 
the  volume  under  experimental  observation.  Using  the  more  general 
description  for  acceleration-deceleration  above,  we  may  reasonably  expect 
to  see  the  two  tendencies  at  play  locally,  i.e.  acceleration  towards  W  →  ∞ 
which holds globally and acceleration towards W → 1, which holds locally. 
In the same way as we simultaneously describe acceleration-deceleration in 
the directions of fire and recoil with the gun and bullet, acceleration towards 
W → 1 represents deceleration to W → ∞ and acceleration towards W → ∞ 
is  deceleration  to  W  →  1.  For  a  system  in  equilibrium  between  the  two 
tendencies, we may expect the acceleration and deceleration to each way of 
obeying the symmetrical principle to occur in turns and this being the case, 
oscillatory  phenomena  may  be  observable.  Such  observed  phenomena 
showing  resistance  to  collapse  into  a  single  arrangement,  i.e.  W  →  1,  as 
dictated by the local thermodynamic necessity would enable the local system 
"know"  that  the  global  system  is  obeying  the  symmetrical  principle  in  a 
different way. 
 
As a kind of simplified summary, wear a thinking cap like Yang's and in the 
manner of thought experimentalists like Galileo and Einstein shut yourself in 
a  cabin  in  the  early  universe  (like  the  local  system  in  Fig.5)  equipping 
yourself  with  a  device  capable  of  monitoring  thermodynamic  parameters, 
then  make  your  observations  as  the  universe  expands.  What  can  be  seen? 
Energy  falls  locally,  temperature  drops  and  there  is  cooling.  As  a  result, 
entropy  and  disorder  also  drop  locally  and  some  ordering  and  structural 
forms  are  compelled  to  emerge  and  condense  out  of  the  amorphous 
environment.  All  these  are  not  strange  and  are  in  keeping  with  known 
thermodynamic  laws  and  behavior.  How  then  can  the  observer  "know" 
whether the global system is behaving in a similar thermodynamic way? The 
answer as Yang tells us depends on the observation of force. If he does not 
see  force,  then  he  would  "know"  that  the  local  and  global  thermodynamic 
behaviors  are  the  same.  If  he  does  see  force,  he  would  "know"  that  the 
global  thermodynamic  behavior  differs  from  the  local.  How  then  will  this 
force, if seen be expected to look like? The answer Yang may again give us 
is that since force is a product of two opposing behaviors, there are bound to 
be  some  phenomena  showing  equilibrium  between  the  two  opposite 
thermodynamic  behaviors.  When  we  see  such  phenomena,  we  would  be 
compelled  to  wonder  what  prevents  collapse  into  a  single  possible  way  of 
arrangement  in  obedience  to  the  local  way  of  keeping  the  symmetrical 
principle,  since  W  →1,  when  energy  and  temperature  continue  reducing 
towards  zero  locally  as  the  universe  continues  expanding?  On  the  other 

 

15

hand,  when  we  see  these  same  phenomena,  we  would  at  the  same  time  be 
puzzled and compelled to ask what prevents arrangement in all the possible 
ways  increasingly  made  available  to  the  system  in  obedience  to  the  global 
way of keeping the symmetrical principle with W → ∞, which we also know 
as  the  second  law?  Our  thought  experiment  tells  us  that  this  is  what  force 
would look like. 
 
In the real universe, although quantum theory proposes the use of stationary 
electron waves as a useful solution to the dilemma of atomic orbital stability, 
there is still some remaining wonder how exactly such stationary waves are 
formed to keep the electron from collapsing into a single frame of reference 
with  the  nucleus.  Newton  on  the  other  hand  could  find  no  satisfactory 
explanation  to  prevent  his  clockwork  orbits  from  spiraling  inwards  and 
collapsing under the local influence of the centripetal gravitational force. A 
centrifugal acceleration was required  for stability, to oppose the centripetal 
acceleration.  The  questions  raised  in  our  thought  created  universe  can 
therefore also be asked in the real one. What keeps the earth from collapsing 
into  a  single  frame  of  reference  with  the  sun?  What  keeps  quarks  from 
collapsing into a single possible arrangement rather than forming a tiny ball 
and orbiting around each other? On the other hand, we are also compelled to 
ask what keeps the electron from dancing away and being arranged in all the 
different  possible  arrangements  available?  What  prevents  the  earth  and  its 
constituent  particles  from  being  arranged  in  all  the  available  ways  in  the 
system?  These  questions,  particularly  the  aspect  why  the  global  tendency 
towards  being  arranged  in  all  the  possible  ways  available  is  not  obeyed  is 
explained with the use of force. The other aspect why the local tendency and 
collapse  into  a  single  frame  of  reference  is  not  obeyed  has  been  more 
difficult  to  explain  and  various  ad-hoc  mechanisms,  such  as  stationary 
electron waves, exclusion principles, etc have been employed. 
 
From  our  thought  experiment,  we  may  propose  that  orbits  in  the  real 
universe are phenomena manifesting a balance between the local and global 
thermodynamic  tendencies.  But  for  the  local  tendency,  constituents  will  be 
arranged  in all the possible ways available  in the system and we could  not 
know the phenomenon of force or structure. Conversely, without the global 
tendency  for  arrangement  in  more  of  the  different  possible  ways  existing 
alongside  a  local  tendency  towards  arrangement  in  only  one  possible  way, 
we would not know force as well. An electron in the hydrogen atom would 
travel  the  0.05  nanometre  radius  and  collapse  into  the  nucleus  in  ~  10-16 
seconds  under  the  local  tendency  towards  W  →  1  alone,  while  the  earth-

 

16

the  nucleus  makes 

moon system with an acceleration of 0.0027 ms-2 towards each other and ~ 
109  metres  apart  would  collapse  into  a  single  frame  of  reference  within  6 
days  under  the  influence  of  the  local  tendency  alone.  That  such  events  are 
forestalled  suggests  the  influence  of  a  global  tendency  in  local  affairs. 
Globally the increase in W manifests as an expanding universe, while locally 
it manifests as a resistance to orbital collapse.  
 
Parts  or  constituents  of  a  system  possessing  a  thermodynamic  tendency 
towards W → 1 while obeying the invariance of Boltzmann's constant can be 
dynamically seen to be tending towards being in the same frame of motion 
and having only one possible arrangement out of the many possible frames 
of  reference  and  arrangements.  As  has  been  highlighted,  this  tendency 
towards  being  in  the  same  frame  of  reference  is  contrary  to  the  dictates  of 
the  second  law  and  invariably  some  type  of  force  is  necessarily  described. 
For  example,  the  electron  that  tends  towards  being  in  the  same  frame  of 
the  description  of 
reference  and  motion  as 
electromagnetism  necessary  and  in  the  same  way,  the  earth-based  observer 
who tends to be in the same frame of motion as the earth makes gravitational 
force  necessary  to  explain  the  occurrence.  In  subsequent  contemplated 
papers,  we  intend  to  explore  this  as  a  thermodynamic  basis  for  explaining 
experimental  observations  based  on  frames  of  reference,  particularly 
concerning  phenomena  such  as  local  Lorentz  invariance  because  of  the 
importance such phenomena have assumed in our physics. 
 
This paper  is  not  much concerned with the goal of a  unification theory  for 
the  fundamental  forces,  which  however  remains  a  topical  area  of  much 
speculation and study. Nevertheless it is worthy to note that before progress 
can  be  made  towards  unification,  we  must  first  know  what  fundamentally 
force  is  and  represents  before  we  further  examine  the  different  types,  their 
peculiarities  and  whether  one  can  be  convertible  to  another.  There  will 
additionally be the need to examine and resolve how force originated in the 
real creation experiment, that is, do the forces of nature blend retrospectively 
into a putative primal force at the beginning, i.e. does a single existing force 
at  the  beginning  branch  out  into  the  observed  forces  now  seen  as  the 
universe  evolved  or  was  there  even  no  force  at  all  at  a  beginning  from 
nothing,  the  variously  described  forces  emerging  in  obedience  to  some 
mathematical or physical principle as the universe evolved? 
 
In  our  thought  experiment,  there  seemed  to  be  no  primal  force  at  the 
beginning  but  an  invariant  symmetrical  principle,  with  structure  and  the 

 

17

various  associated  forces  seeming  to  emerge  as  thermodynamic  necessities 
as  the  universe  evolved.  If  unification  must  be  pursued,  then  all  the 
fundamental  forces  can,  in  spite  of  their  individual  peculiarities,  be  jointly 
described as different ways in which the constituents of a system are denied 
their participation  in the  increasing  number of possible arrangements  made 
available by the second law of thermodynamics because of a need to obey an 
overriding  symmetrical  principle  in  the  form  of  invariance  of  Boltzmann's 
constant. This overweening symmetrical principle based on thermodynamics 
seems to unite and give all the fundamental forces a common reason to exist. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
The universe is assumed to have had a perfectly symmetrical origin. Support 
for  this  belief  of  maximal  order  or  infinitely  low  disorder  at  the  beginning 
can  be  found  in  General  relativity,  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  and 
various  cosmological  theories  particularly  those  that  speculate  a  beginning 
from  nothing.  However,  this  cherished  belief  gives  rise  to  the  problem  of 
consistently  explaining  how  structure  could  then  be  coaxed  out  of  such  a 
smooth  and  homogenous  beginning.  In  order  to  provide  a  basis  for  the 
evolution  of  structure  that  is  now  visualized  in  reality,  this  cherished 
scenario has had to be modified on an ad-hoc basis and it has been suggested 
that  for cosmic structure to  have evolved, inhomogeneities  must  have  been 
built  right  into  the  beginning  without  which  the  universe  would  have 
evolved  homogenously  without  the  appearance  of  structure.  The  essential 
logic  is  that  for  there  to  be  structure  today,  e.g.  in  form  of  galaxies,  the 
structure must have been there from the beginning on a small scale. The two 
mechanisms  usually  proposed  are  that  either  inhomogeineities  must  have 
been  present  and  built  into  the  big  bang  singularity  as  part  of  the  initial 
conditions  and  it  is  these  that  represent  the  'seeds'  that  have  now  evolved 
into  galaxies  [10,11]  or  that  quantum  fluctuations  occurring  during  a 
possible  inflationary  epoch  represent  the  inhomogeinities  that  have  arisen 
from the initially homogenous beginning to give rise to cosmic structure [10-
13]. The defacto presence of cosmic structure thus seems to necessitate the 
infinitely 
jettisoning  of 
homogenous  and  of  perfect  symmetry.  Aside  this  is  the  further  puzzle  that 
even  if  inhomogeinities  were  built  into  the  beginning,  fine-tuning  of  the 
universe's expansion would still be  required without which structure would 
not form [11]. This is because structure formation is regarded primarily as a 
gravitational process rather than a thermodynamic one and the process could 

idea  that  the  beginning  was 

the  cherished 

 

18

be overwhelmed by a very rapid expansion or aborted by a slower expansion 
rate. 
 
From the results of our thought experiment, we see that based on symmetry 
considerations and the thermodynamic principles at play, the appearance and 
evolution of force and structure can qualitatively be described and would be 
inevitable  during  the  universe's  transformation  even  if  we  still  retain  our 
cherished  belief  that  the  universe  had  a  perfectly  symmetrical  and 
homogenous beginning. 
 
The  universe  created  from  our  thought  experiment  seems  to  substantially 
share many characteristics with the real universe and it would be tempting to 
state  that  indeed  the  same  physical  processes  apply  in  both,  especially  as 
both are governed by the same thermodynamic laws, equations and physical 
principles.  
 
 
References 
 
1. Ojo, A., Creating a universe from thermodynamic thought experiments I, 
arxiv:physics/0607017. 
 
2. Perrot, P., A to Z of Thermodynamics. Oxford University Press, London, 
1998 
 
3. Fermi, E., Thermodynamics, Prentice-Hall, Englewood-Cliffs, 1937 
 
4.  Callen,  H.B.,  Thermodynamics  and  an  Introduction  to  Thermostatistics, 
Wiley, New York, 1985 
 
5. Clausius, R., Uber verschiedene fur die Anwendung bequeme Formen der 
Hauptgleichungen der mechanischen Warmetheorie. Annalen der Physik und 
Chemie, 125:353–400, 1865. 
 
6. Boltzmann, L., Weitere Studien uber das Warmegleichgewicht unter Gas-
Molekulen.  Sitzungsbericht  der  Akadamie  der  Wissenschaften,  Wien, 
66:275-370, 1872. 
 
7. Newton, I., Principia, 1687  
 

 

19

8. Yang, C.N., Elementary Particles, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 
New Jersey, 1961 
 
9. Ferris, T., Coming of Age in the Milky Way, William Morrow, New York, 
1988. 
 
10. Rees, M.J., The emergence of structure in the universe: galaxy formation 
and  dark  matter.  In  300  Years  of  Gravitation,  Eds.  Hawking,  S.W.  and 
Israel, W., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987. 
 
11. Rees, M.J., Just Six Numbers, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London, 1999. 
 
12.    Blau,  S.K.  and  Guth,  A.H.,  Inflationary  cosmology.  In  300  Years  of 
Gravitation,  Eds.  Hawking,  S.W.  and  Israel,  W.,  Cambridge  University 
Press, Cambridge, 1987. 
 
13.  Linde,  A.,  Inflation  and  quantum  cosmology.  In  300  Years  of 
Gravitation,  Eds.  Hawking,  S.W.  and  Israel,  W.,  Cambridge  University 
Press, Cambridge, 1987. 

 

20

