Focusing of Light by a Nano-Hole Array♣

Fu Min Huang1, Yifang Chen2, F. Javier Garcia de Abajo3 and Nikolay Zheludev1 

 
1EPSRC Nanophotonics Portfolio Centre, School of Physics and Astronomy, 
University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK 

2Central Microstructure facility, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, Oxon, 
OX11 OQX, UK 

3 Instituto de Optica, CSIC, Serrano 121, 28006 Madrid, Spain 

Abstract: We demonstrate a conceptually new mechanism for sub-wavelength 

focusing at optical frequencies based upon the use of nano-hole quasi-periodic 

arrays  in  metal  screens.  Using  coherent  illumination  at  660  nm  and  scanning 

near-field  optical  microscopy,  ~290  nm  “hot  spots”,  were  observed  at  a 

distance of ~12.5 μm from the array. Even smaller hot-spots of about 200 nm 

in waist were observed closer to the plane of the array.  

The spatial resolution when imaging or patterning small objects with light 

is  limited  by  diffraction  to  about  half  the  wavelength.  This  is  of  primary 

importance in microelectronics and imaging as it translates directly into the size 

of  the  features  that  can  be  manufactured  on  a  microchip  or  resolved  by  a 

microscope.  Nano-holes  and  arrays  of  nano-holes  in  metal  screens  show  a 

number  of  intriguing  optical  properties,  most  notably  the  extraordinarily  high 

transmission  of  regular1  and  quasi-periodic2  hole  arrays  and  unusual 

polarization-sensitive  effects.3,4  Here  we  show  for  the  first  time  that  a  quasi-

crystal array of nano-holes in a metal screen can “focus” light at distances up to 

several tens of wavelengths from the screen. It produces bright foci of energy 

concentration,  harvesting  energy  from  a  large  number  of  holes  in  the  array. 

The  foci  are  sparsely  distributed  in  the  “focal  plane”.  Using  coherent  laser 

illumination  at  a  wavelength  of  660  nm  and  scanning  near-field  optical 

                                                 

♣ Presented as post-deadline paper at the Frontiers in optics Conference 2006,Rochester, New York, USA 
October 8-12, 2006 

1

 

microscopy (SNOM), “hot spots” with a FWHM of ~290 nm, which are separated 

from  neighbouring  foci  by  more  than  5  μm,  were  observed  at  a  distance  of 

~12.5  μm  from  the  array.  Even  smaller  hot-spots  with  a  FWHM  of  ~200  nm 

were observed closer to the plane of the array.  

The  light  focusing  effect  was  observed  with  a  quasi-crystal  array  of 

approximate  10-fold  symmetry  containing  about  14,000  holes  of  200  nm 

diameter. The overall diameter of the array was ~0.2 mm. The array comprised 

a  Penrose-like  pattern  manufactured  in  accordance  with  the  algorithm 

described  in  reference  [5].  It  was  manufactured  by  electron  beam  lithography 

in  a  100  nm  aluminium  film  deposited  on  a  silica  substrate  (see  Fig.  1i).  The 

high  level  of  positional  accuracy  achieved  in  the  manufacturing  of  the  holes 

may  be  judged  from  a  comparison  of  the far-field  diffraction  pattern  produced 

by  the  array  and  the  reciprocal  lattice,  calculated  from  the  prescribed 

coordinates  of  the  holes.  Allowing  for  expected  axial  distortion  and  scaling 

these  should  be  congruent  mappings  of  each  other,  and  indeed  they  are 

(compare Fig. 1ii and Fig. 1iii). 

 

To  map  the  field  distributions  created  by  the  array  we  used  a  scanning 

near-field  optical  microscope  (Omicron  TwinSNOM  R/T)  operating 

in 

transmission mode, with light collected through a metal-coated tapered fiber tip 

with  an  aperture  of  about  120  nm.    As  optical  sources  we  used  either  diode 

lasers  operating  at  660  nm  and  635  nm  or  a  continuum  fiber  laser  and  a 

selection  of  40  nm  bandpass  filters.  Fig.  2  shows  characteristic  field  maps 

measured  at  different  heights  h  above  the  plane  of  the  array  for  two  different 

wavelengths  λ,  thus  illustrating  the  variety  of  “photonic  carpet”  patterns 

generated  by  the  quasi-crystal  structure.  In  most  cases,  the  carpets  show 

elements  of  approximate  5-fold  or  10-fold  symmetry.  In  the  immediate 

proximity  of  the  sample  (scans  i  and  vi),  the  optical  field  concentrates  at  the 

holes.  Further  away  from  the  array,  the  pattern  changes  dramatically  and 

blurry,  defocused  patterns  (iii,  iv,  viii,  x)  alternate  with  well-defined 

arrangements  of  hot-spots  (ii,  v,  vii,  ix)  that  appear  at  specific,  irregular 

heights.  At  some  heights  and  wavelengths  bright  foci,  separated  by  a  few 

 

2

microns  from  the  neighbouring  spots,  are  seen  (scans  v  and  ix).  The  patterns 

depend  not  only  on  the  wavelength  and  height,  but  also  on  the  distance 

between the focus of the illuminating lens and the quasi-crystal structure.  

Fig.  3  shows  a  detailed  scan  of  the  foci  at  two  characteristic  distances, 

with the array illuminated at a wavelength of 660 nm. At a distance of about 5 

μm  from  the  array,  a  relatively  dense  pattern  of  hot-spots  is  seen.  Here  the 

bright  foci  are  elliptical  with  a  FWHM  of  ~375  nm  along  the  polarization 

direction of the incident light and ~235 nm in the perpendicular direction. After 

deconvolution  to  account  for  the  aperture  size  of  the  SNOM  probe,  the  actual 

size of the hot-spots is estimated to be about 360 × 200 nm (0.54λ × 0.30λ). A 

much  clearer  pattern  of  well-isolated  hot-spots  is  seen  at  a  distance  of  about 

12.5 μm from the array. Here the scanned cross-sectional dimensions are 420 

× 320 nm, and after deconvolution the spot size obtained is about 400 × 290 

nm  (0.60λ×0.44λ).  Thus,  the  structure  produces  bright  foci  of  energy 

concentration by harvesting energy from a large number of holes. For example, 

in Fig. 2v the density of the brightest hot-spots (arranged in pentagons), which 

receive  the  majority  of  the  energy,  is  some  40  times  lower  than  that  of  the 

holes in the array. 

This  new  phenomenon  of  “lensing”  by  the  nano-hole  array  results  from 

the partial reconstruction of the array’s field in the diffraction zone, in a manner 

analogous to the classical Talbot effect6 observed with periodic gratings, where 

diffraction leads to the reconstruction of the grating’s field at periodic distances 

from  the  grating.  In  the  Talbot  effect  a  grating  with  period  a  images  itself  at 
multiples  of  the  Talbot  distance  hT  =  a2/λ  when  illuminated  with  a  coherent 

plane  wave.  In  the  paraxial  approximation,  an  infinitely  long  grating  will  be 

perfectly  reconstructed  at  the  Talbot  distance.  Montgomery7  has  shown  that  a 

wide range of patterns can image themselves, with linear periodic grating being 

only  one  example.  A  pattern  will  show  full  reconstruction  at  a  distance  h  if  its 

spatial  frequencies  are  discrete  and  located  in  the  reciprocal  plane  at  rings  of 

radii  ρm

2  =  1/λ2  –  (m/h)2,  where  m  is  an  integer  such  that  0≤m≤h/λ.  For 

instance,  circular  or  linear  diffraction  gratings  are  self-imaging  objects  whose 

3

 

 

 

spectra  in  the  reciprocal  lattice  are  sets  of  equidistant  rings  or  dots, 

respectively.  The  spectrum  of  the  quasiperiodic  array  lies  somewhere  between 

the  dotted  spectrum  of  a  linear  grating  and  the  rings  of  a  circular  grating. 

However,  as  the  frequencies  of  the  quasi-periodic  array  are  located  on  circles 

(as  shown  in  Fig.  1ii)  the  Montgomery  condition  is  fulfilled  for  all  spectral 

maxima, but not necessary simultaneously. Therefore the self-imaging distance 

h will be different for different rings of maxima on the reciprocal lattice, and for 

different wavelengths λ. Moreover, when a regular grating is illuminated with a 

divergent  beam,  the  reconstructed  image  is  magnified,  so  the  reconstructed 

field  does  not  necessarily  have  the  same  period  as  the  original  grating. 

Similarly,  when  partial  reconstruction  of  the  quasi-periodic  array  takes  place, 

the  pattern  of  reconstructed  hot-spots  has  the  appearance  of  a  scaled  partial 

image of the array. Thus, reconstruction of a quasi-periodic array of holes is a 

complex process which may be envisaged as a superposition of a large number 

of  partial  reconstructions  happening  at  different  heights  at  the  array.  With 

varying height h, one will see a continuous evolution of partially reconstructed 

images of the array. What is important however, is that at some distances and 

wavelengths well defined sparsely distributed foci are seen.  

To  illustrate  this  process  of  quasi-periodic  grating  reconstruction,  we  have 

calculated  the  field  intensity  maps  created  by  coherently  oscillating  dipoles 

oriented along the vector of the incident polarization x and located at the holes 

of  the  array  with  coordinates  Rj.  The  dipoles  are  assumed  to  be  oscillating 

coherently  as  they  are  excited  by  a  plane  wave.  In  this  case,  the  field  on  the 

other side of the array may be written as    

                                         

                                     

E = ∑
 ˆ
x
k
                                           

2

[
+∇∂
x

]
 

ik

Rr
−

e
Rr
−

j

j

j

                                                

where r is coordinate of the observation point and k=2π/λ. The results of these 

calculations are in a very good qualitative agreement with the experiment and 

revival  that  there  are  certain  distances  at  which  a  pattern  of  focal  Moreover, 

there  are  wavelengths  and  distances  for  which  some  of  the  bright  spots  have 

sub-wavelength diameters. For instance Fig.4 shows the formation of a hot spot 

4

 

 

 

of  220  nm  in  cross-section  at  the  distance  of  12μm  from  the  sample.  It  is 

isolated in a 20μm×20μm region. 

 

In conclusion, the focusing of coherent light by a quasi-crystal array of holes 

has  been  observed  at  distances  ranging  from  a  few  microns  to  a  few  tens  of 

microns  from  the  plane  of  the  array.  With  focused  hot-spots  of  such  high 

localization  and  brightness,  imaging  with  subwavelength  resolution  can  be 

achieved  by  scanning  the  object  under  investigation  across  the  focal  spot. 

Similarly, a single hot-spot appropriately isolated by a mask may be used as a 

“light pen” in high resolution photo-lithography.  

Acknowledgements.  This  work  was  supported  by  the  EPSRC  and  the 

Metamorphose NoE. We thank Nikitas Papasimakis & Alexander Schwaneke for 

taking far-field diffraction patterns of the array and Kevin Macdonald for help in 

preparing the manuscript.  

References 

(1)  Ebbesen, T. W.; Lezec, H. J.; Ghaemi, H. F.; Thio, T; Wolff, P. A. Nature 
2004, 391, 667-669. 

(2)  Schwanecke,  A.  S.;  Papasimakis,  N.;  Fedotov,  V.  A.;  Huang,  F.  M.;  Chen, 
Y.;  García  de  Abajo,  F.  J.;  Zheludev  N.  I.  Nanophotonics  Topical  Meeting, 
Uncasville,  CT,  USA,  24  -  28  Apr  2006.  Garcia  de  Abajo,  F.  J.;  Chen,  Y.; 
Fedotov,  V.  A.;  Papasimakis,  N.;  Schwanecke,  A.  S.;  Zheludev  N.  I.  Photonic 
Metamaterials:  From  Random  to  Periodic,  Grand  Island,  The  Bahamas,  5  -  8 
Jun 2006. 

(3)  Krasavin,  A.  V.;  Schwanecke,  A.  S.;  Reichelt,  M.;  Stroucken,  T.;  Koch,  S. 
W.; Wright, E. M.; Zheludev, N. I. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2005, 86, 201105-201107. 

(4)  Elliott,  J.;  Smolyaninov,  I.  I.;  Zheludev,  N.  I;  Zayats,  A.  V.  Phys.  Rev.  B 
2004, 70, 233403-233406. 

(5) Lord, E. A.; Ramakrishnan, K; Ranganathan, S. Bull. Mater. Sci. 2000, 23, 
119-123. 

(6) Patorski, K. Progress in Optics 1989, 27, 3-108. 

(7) Montgomery, W. D. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 1967, 57, 772-778. 

5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i 

ii 

iii 

Figure 1. The quasi-crystal sample and its reciprocal lattice. (i) An SEM image 
of  a  fragment  (20  ×  20  μm)  of  the  quasi-crystal  array  of  holes;  (ii)  the 
reciprocal  lattice  of  the  quasi-crystal  array  wherein  spot  diameter  is 
proportional  to  the  magnitude  of  the  spectral  component.  The  minimum 
distance between two neighbouring holes d = 1.2 μm. Red dashed circles show 
several “partial” Montgomery rings. (iii) far-field diffraction pattern of the quasi-
crystal array, obtained with white light illumination.  

6

h  =  0.3 

h = 19 μm

h = 22 μm 

h = 26 μm

h  =  10 
μm

i 

ii 

iii

vi 

vii 

viii

iv

ix

10 μm

v

x

Figure  2.  Field  maps  at  different  heights  h  above  the  quasi-crystal  array  of 
holes.  The  images  were  obtained  by  SNOM  using  illumination  wavelengths  of 
500  nm  (upper  row)  and  635  nm  (lower  row).  Note  the  highly  isolated  hot-
spots observed at h = 26 μm for the 500 nm excitation wavelength and at h = 
22 μm for the 635 nm excitation wavelength. 

 

 

m
 
n
 
0
0
5
 
 
=
 
λ

 

 

 
m
n
 
 
5
3
6
 
=
 
λ

 

 

 

 

 

7

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure  3.  Subwavelength  hot-spots  formed  at  different  heights  above  the  quasi-crystal  array.  The 
illumination source is a diode laser with a wavelength of 660 nm. (i) field map at a height h = 5 μm 
above  the  array;  (ii),  (iii)  fine  scan  image  of  the  hot-spot  indicated  in  map  (i)  and  corresponding 
profiles  of  the  focus  along  directions  parallel  (blue  dots)  and  perpendicular  (red  dots)  to  the 
polarization of the incident light; (iv) field map at a height h = 12.5 μm above the array; (v), (vi) fine 
scan  image  of  the  hot-spot  indicated  in  map  (iv)  and  corresponding  profiles  of  the  focus  along 
directions parallel (blue dots) and perpendicular (red dots) to the polarization of the incident light.  

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Theoretical calculations: subwavelength hot-spots formed at a height 
of  12μm  from  the  sample  above  the  quasi-crystal  array  for  a  plane  wave 
excitation at a wavelength of 635 nm. 
 

Zoom 

 

9

