 

 
 

 
 
 
PHYSICAL MEANING AND EXPERIMENTAL CHECK  
OF A VARIATIONAL PRINCIPLE FOR MACRO-TO-MICRO TRANSITION 
 
 

M. ARMINJON & D. IMBAULT  
Laboratoire "Sols, Solides, Structures", Institut de Mécanique de Grenoble 

       B.P. 53, 38041 Grenoble cedex 9, France. 

 
 
 
 
1. Introduction and Summary 
 
The  macroscopic  behavior  of  a  heterogeneous  medium,  and  the  microscopic  fields  as 
well  (e.g.  strain  and  stress),  do  not  depend  merely  on  the  volume  distribution  of  the 
microscopic  inhomogeneity,  but  also  on  the  geometrical  distribution.  It  is  often 
admitted that, in the ideal situation where the micro-geometrical information would be 
completely  known,  then  the  macroscopic  behavior  should  be  determined  uniquely. 
According to the results of Kröner (1986), this is true for linear behavior (thus e.g. for 
linear elasticity). 
In  this  paper,  it  will  be  argued  that,  for  strongly  non-linear  behaviors  such  as 
 
those exhibited by inelastically deformed polycrystals, a fully deterministic position can 
hardly  be  maintained.  The  general  reasons  are  the  lack  of  information  on  the  relevant 
boundary  conditions,  and  the  tendency  of  non-linear  dynamical  systems  to  have  a 
"horizon of predictibility", beyond which the predictions depend too sensitively on the 
precise  initial  and  boundary  conditions.  Thus,  one  may  expect  that  the  micro-fields 
should possess some "stochastic" features. This justifies a peculiarity of the variational 
micro-macro model proposed by Arminjon (1991a), and which may appear as a lack − 
namely  that,  in  this  model,  the  data  of  the  microscopic  behavior  plus  the  overall 
stimulus  has  to  be  supplemented  by  a  "heterogeneity  parameter".  In  this  model,  the 
macro-to-micro  transition  depends  on  the  validity  of  a  "principle  of  minimal 
heterogeneity" (PMH). It will be proved that the PMH has a very close relation to the 
maximum  entropy  principle  proposed  by  Jaynes  (1957),  and  which  is  now  central  in 
statistical  physics.  Moreover,  two  new  models,  based  on  the  maximum  entropy 
principle, will be proposed. Lastly, the PMH will be checked by comparing a predicted 
deformation  texture  with  the  experimental  one:  the  obtained  agreement  compares 
favourably with the agreement obtained by using the self-consistent model proposed by 
Molinari et al. (1987) 
 
 
2. The Problem of the Boundary Conditions in Micro-Macro Models 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Let us envisage a situation (a structure submitted to some boundary conditions, possibly 
also  to  volume  forces)  where  the  use  of  a  constitutive  law  derived  from  a 
homogenization  model  makes  sense,  thus  a  situation  leading  to  slowly  varying 
macroscopic fields of strain and stress (perhaps also temperature, etc.) in the structure. 
It  is  also  assumed  that  the  structure  is  made  of  a  macroscopically  homogeneous 
material.  We  thus  may  consider  that  representative  volume  elements  (RVE  's)  can  be 
defined, which, as usual, are large as compared with the typical size of the microscopic 
inhomogeneity,  but  small  with  respect  to  the  structure  itself,  and  that  the  stress  and 
strain  fields  are  macroscopically  homogeneous  at  the  scale  of  RVE  's:  it  is  precisely 
with the relationship between the volume averages of the stress and the strain within an 
RVE that a homogenization model should provide us. Now in this relevant situation, the 
exact boundary conditions applied to any given RVE are furnished by the neighbouring 
ones  (Hill,  1984),  hence  are  unknown.  Yet  it  is  these  conditions  that  should  be  the 
correct ones for the micro-macro transition! Roughly speaking, one can describe them 
as  a  kind  of  random  fluctuation  around  conditions  corresponding  to  uniform  fields 
[more precise statements can be found in Hill (1984); cf. also Arminjon (1991b)]. We 
thus can state that the exact boundary conditions that are relevant to the micro-macro 
transition  are  inherently  unknown  and  non-unique  (since  many  equivalent  macro-
elements might be considered in a macro-homogeneous situation). Moreover, for non-
linear  behavior,  one  may  a  priori  expect  that  the  solution  of the problem, at least the 
macro-to-micro transition i.e. the determination of the microscopic fields from the data 
of the overall strain or stress tensor, may depend sensitively on the boundary conditions 
that are imposed. As to the "micro-to-macro" step i.e. the determination of the overall 
constitutive  relation  by  averaging  the  microscopic  fields,  an  implicit  postulate  in  any 
homogenization  model  states  that,  precisely:  For  any  given  value  of  the  macroscopic 
stimulus  S [some average of  the microscopic  one s(x), e.g. the volume average or  the 
ensemble average], the average R of the response micro-field r(x) does not depend on 
the  details  of  the  micro-field  s(x)  and  thus  does  not  depend  on  the  precise  boundary 
conditions  imposed  to  the  field  s(x).  (This  should  be  true  in  so  far  as  the  boundary 
conditions  are  compatible  with  a  macro-homogeneous  situation.)  It  seems  that  few 
rigorous results have been proved with regard to the justification of this postulate. For a 
linear  elastic  material,  the  boundary  conditions  corresponding  to  uniform  stress  or  to 
uniform strain lead indeed to the same homogenized relation between the macro-stress 
T and the macro-strain E: this has been proved by Suquet (1982) for a periodic material 
and by Sab (1992) for an ergodic-random one. 
In  the  case  of  non-linear  behavior,  however,  the  importance  of  the  boundary 
 
conditions was shown in a demonstrative way for a periodic material by Turgeman and 
Pastor (1987). They considered a structure made of a periodic stratified composite, each 
stratum being a perfectly plastic Mises material. For several boundary conditions, they 
compared  the  limit  loads  of  this  structure,  as  calculated  by  two  methods:  in  the  first 
method,  the  limit  load  of  the  "real"  (heterogeneous)  structure  was  calculated.  In  the 
second  method,  they  calculated  the  limit  load  of  the  structure,  when  filled  with  a 

 

 

 

 
 

indeed 

concentrates, 

homogeneous  material  whose  behavior  is  that  given  by  the  periodic  homogenization 
(Suquet,  1982)  for  the  stratified  composite.  For  stress-governed  boundary  conditions 
(compression or shear), the failure of the stratified structure occurred with macroscopic 
strain localization, which was not the case for the structure filled with the homogenized 
material. Moreover, the two loads differed grossly, even for large structures containing 
an increasing number of unit cells. "Macroscopic localization" means in this particular 
case  that  the  velocity  field  was  discontinuous  along  some  slip  planes  traversing  a 
significant part of the structure, but not the whole structure. (In contrast, for kinematical 
boundary  conditions,  the  slip  planes  were  rather  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the 
structure,  and  the  two  loads  were  equal.)  Thus,  for  the  stress-governed  boundary 
conditions,  the  structure  underwent  localized  strain  at  the  macroscale,  grossly 
inconsistent with periodic fields, and in fact with any homogenization procedure. 
 
However, strain localization at the microscopic scale, e.g. a microscopic pattern 
of  shear  bands,  is  not  incompatible  with  a  "homogenizable"  situation,  provided  the 
pattern  is  distributed  in  a  macroscopically  homogeneous  way.  In  fact,  one  may  state 
that,  e.g.  for  metals,  at  the  microscale  plastic  deformation  is  always  a  localized  one 
(Krato-chvíl,  1988).  The  plastic 
first  within 
strain 
crystallographically oriented slip lines, then within dense dislocation walls delineating 
cell blocks, still later within microscopic shear bands (Bay et al., 1992; Leffers, 1993). 
(Eventually, also the macroscopic strain field becomes localized, from which stage one 
should  not  use  a  homogenization  model  any  more.)  During  this  process,  an  "ordered" 
pattern of intensely deformed bands is formed, though it is "random" in the details, and 
this  pattern  depends  on  the  overall  strain  mode.  It  evolves  by  a  continuous 
fragmentation  into  smaller  microstructural  units.  Also  for  rocks,  concretes  and 
reinforced  concretes,  it  may  be  said  that  the  field  of  microscopic  plastic  strain  is 
essentially a localized one, because in such materials the plastic strain is a combination 
of the plastic strain of crystalline constituents (for which similar processes as in metals 
are likely to operate), of slips at interfaces, and of microcracks. The same argument may 
be developed for composites. 
This  micro-localized  nature  of  plastic  deformation  seems  to  imply  that  it  is 
 
governed  to  a  significant  extent  by  microscopic  instability  processes  typical  of  non-
linear dynamical systems, as suggested for metals by Walgraef and Aifantis (1985) and 
by  Kratochvíl  (1988),  and  this  means  a  significant  sensitivity  to  the  initial  as  well  as 
boundary  conditions1.  Occasionally,  a  strong  dependence  of  the  microstructure  on  the 
                                                 
1  A  plastic  deformation  is  an  evolution  problem  with  boundary  and  initial  data.  This  may  indeed  be 
regarded as an initial value problem for a dynamical system, in the following way. The set of the degrees 
of freedom, Z(t), should be the data of the current field of displacement, u(x0, t) for all x0 in a reference 
configuration  Ω0 (lagrangian  description),  plus  the  current  field  of  "state"  X  (the  state  is  the  set  of  the 
internal  and/or  geometrical  variables  that  make  the  microscopic  constitutive  law  depend  on  the  local 
position). Thus, Z(t) is the mapping: x0 → [u(x0, t), X(x0, t)] defined on Ω0. The time derivative dZ/dt is 
hence the data of the current fields of velocity, v(x0, t), and of evolution rate of the state, (dX/dt)(x0, t). 
So dZ/dt is determined by the current value Z(t), plus the current boundary data for velocity that play the 
rôle of an external forcing, and one indeed has a "dynamical system" dZ/dt = f(Z(t), t), though it is not 
given  in  explicit  form.  In  the  modern  theory  of  non-linear  dynamical  systems  and  chaos,  a  dynamical 

 

 

 

 
 

 

boundary  conditions  is  indeed  experimentally  observed  (Leffers,  1993).  Thus,  also  in 
"homogenizable"  situations,  the  influence  of  the  boundary  conditions  imposed  in  the 
micro-macro  model  cannot  be  neglected.  In  other  words,  one  cannot  just  impose 
uniform or periodic conditions at the boundary of an RVE and admit a priori that the 
microscopic  fields  will  be  correctly  representative  for  those  in  an  RVE  in  a 
macrohomogeneous zone of a real deformed structure subjected to some real tractions: 
in  view  of  the  non-linearity,  the  microfields  are  likely  to  depend  significantly  on  the 
imposed  boundary  conditions.  It  is  even  possible  that  the  homogenized  constitutive 
relation might  itself depend on the former ones. In  summary, the boundary conditions 
that would be exactly relevant to a deterministic micro-macro transition are unknown, 
even  undetermined,  and  yet  one  cannot  consider  that  the  solution  of  the  problem  (at 
least  the  microscopic  fields  and  the  microstructure  evolving  as  a  function  of  these, 
perhaps  even  also  the  overall  behavior)  does  not  depend  on  the  precise  boundary 
conditions.  
 
 
3. Inhomogeneous Variational Model and Principle of Minimal Heterogeneity 
 
In the inhomogeneous variational model (IVM), the micro-macro transition depends on 
the volume  distribution of the states (of the different constituents) and on the average 
inhomogenity r0 of the actual local stimulus field (e.g. the average difference between 
the  overall  strain  and  the  strains  in  the  different  constituents).  Clearly,  this  parameter 
depends on the pattern of microscopic strain localization and represents an information 
which  is  consistent  with  the  foregoing  analysis  of  the  reasons  that  make  the  need  for 
additional information. Let us recall the key points in the IVM (Arminjon, 1991a) : 
 
Instead of  the true  micro-fields [e.g. strain-rate d(x) and stress t(x)] depending 
on the spatial position x, "constant-state averaged" local fields are considered (the local 
state  X  determines  the  local  behavior,  see  note  1).  If  only  a  finite  number  of  different 
states,  X1,  ...,  Xn  are  present  (which  may  always  be  assumed  as  an  approximation  as 
good  as  one  wishes),  the  constituents  Ω1,  ...,  Ωn  may  be  defined  as  the  zones  with 
constant X, with volume fractions fk  (f1 + ...+ fn = 1). Note that a such zone Ωk will in 
general  involve  many  separated  domains,  e.g.  grains  with  the  same  orientation.  The 
unknown  of  the  macro-to-micro  transition  is  then  the  distribution  (Dk)  k  =  1,  ...,  n  of  the 
average strain-rates in the constituents, for a given value of the macroscopic strain-rate 
D. The IVM applies to any behavior which derives from a convex potential u, thus u1, 
...,  un  in  Ω1,  ...,Ωn.  It  consists  in  searching  the  following  minimum  of  the  average 
potential  with  two  constraints,  depending  on  the  given  D  and  on  the  heterogeneity 
parameter r: 

                                                                                                                                               
system  is  nothing  else  than  a  differential  system,  independently  of  whether  acceleration  terms  are 
neglected  or  not.  Thus,  even  a  quasi-static  deformation  process  leads,  as  we  have  just  explained,  to  a 
dynamical system − a non-linear one for a non-linear constitutive equation. 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Ur (D) ≡ Min [f1 u1(D*1) + ... + fn un(D* 

n

)] under constraints D*

= D and h ≤ r.   (1) 

 

 

Here D* ≡ f1 D*1

  

+...+ fn D*n is the macro-average of the distribution (D*k) k = 1, ..., n, and 

h = h((D*k)) ≡ [f 1 ||D*1

-D*|| p + ... + f n ||D*n - D*|| p]1/p 

 

    (2) 

 

is the definition of the average heterogeneity [with p = 1 for rate-independent plasticity, 
Arminjon et al. (1995)]. Depending on r, the minimum problem (1) makes a continuous 
transition from Voigt's model (r = 0) to Reuss' model [r ≥ R for some value R = R(D)]; 
for any D, there exists a generically unique value r0 (D) such that Ur0(D) = U(D), the 
exact  value  of  the  macro-potential  (Arminjon,  1991a).  For  the  micro-to-macro 
transition,  the  mere  problem  is  to  find  r0.  One  postulates  a  simple  dependence  r0  =  r0 
(D),  e.g.  r0  =      a  ||D||,  and  one  "adjusts"  a  from  one  mechanical  test  (Arminjon  et  al., 
1994).  
For  the  macro-to-micro  transition,  one  has  to  assume  that  the  distribution 
 
solution of the minimum problem (1), (Dsol 
k)  [for the relevant value, r0 = r0 (D), of the 
heterogeneity parameter], is the actual distribution (Dk). This is equivalent to assuming 
that  r0  is  precisely  the  heterogeneity  of  the  actual  distribution  (Dk),  and  in  turn  it 
amounts  (Arminjon  et  al.,  1994)  to  assuming  the  following  principle  of  minimal 
heterogeneity (PMH) for the actual distribution: 
 
that lead to the correct value U(D) of the average potential, i.e., that are such that 
  

Among  distributions  (D*k)  that  have  the  relevant  macro-average,  D*  =  D,  and 

〈u〉 ≡ f1 u1(D*1) +...+ fn un (D*n) = f1 u1(D1) +...+ fn un (Dn) ≡ U(D),  

(3) 
 

the actual distribution (Dk) has the least heterogeneity h. 
The  PMH  allows  successful  predictions  of  deformation  textures  for  steels  (Ar-
 
minjon  &  Imbault,  1996),  but  it  cannot  be  derived  from  deterministic  mechanics. 
Instead,  we  shall  establish  below  a  link  between  the  PMH  and  the  maximum  entropy 
principle. 
 
 
4. The Principle of Maximum Statistical Entropy (MAXENT) in Statistical Physics 
 
The MAXENT principle (Jaynes, 1957) gives the link between information theory and 
statistical  mechanics.  Information  theory  leads  unambiguously  to  the  following 
expression, called statistical entropy, for the "amount of uncertainty" represented by a 
probability distribution (pi)i = 1, ..., M  on a finite set E = {x1, ..., xM}: 
 

S = − K Σi  pi Log pi,              

 

(4) 

 
with  K  an  arbitrary  positive  constant.  Consider  the  situation  where  only  some 
expectation values 

 〈φq〉 ≡ Σi  pi φq(xi) = aq 

(q = 1, ...,Q),   

    (5) 

 

 

 

 
 

 
are  known  (with  φq  known  functions,  Q  <  M,  in  practice  Q  <<  M).  This  does  not 
determine the distribution (pi). The MAXENT principle selects the distribution (pi) that 
maximizes S with the Q constraints (5). It amounts to selecting the broadest probability 
distribution compatible with the available information (Jaynes 1957). I.e., the "unbiased 
choice". As shown by Jaynes (1957), this principle is the only necessary tool to derive 
all  the  laws  of  statistical  physics  such  as  Boltzmann's  distribution,  etc.  [see  Balian 
(1991) for a detailed proof of the latter assertion]. According to this view, the "physics" 
in statistical physics may be reduced to the mere enumeration of the different possible 
micro-states. 
 
But,  even  before  one  may  enumerate  the different micro-states, the application 
of  the  MAXENT  procedure  needs  to  set  the  relevant  physical  problem  in  some 
probabilistic  framework.  In  statistical  physics,  the  probabilities  appear  because 
statistical  ensembles  of  "macroscopically  identical,  but  microscopically  different 
systems" are considered: pi is the probability that a "randomly selected" system is in the 
global  micro-state  (i).  A  global  micro-state  is  the  data  of  the  micro-states  of  all 
elementary constituents (e.g. particles) − an elementary micro-state being e.g. the set of 
the quantum numbers of a particle (in quantum statistical mechanics) or its position and 
velocity (in classical SM). A macro-state is then a very formal object: it is the data of a 
probability distribution (pi) on the space E of the global micro-states (Balian, 1991) (we 
assume here that E is discrete, for simplicity). However, this distribution, i.e. the macro-
state, is defined only in an incomplete way, by the macroscopic (statistical) constraints 
(5),  which  correspond  to  assigning  given  average  values  to  macroscopic  parameters 
such  as  pressure  and  density  (the  average  being  over  a  statistical  ensemble).  In  this 
context,  the  macro-state  is  a  priori  an  undefined  concept:  the  MAXENT  principle  is 
merely the choice of a particular distribution (pi) (the unbiased one i.e. the broadest) in 
order that the macro-state be defined from the data of the macroscopic parameters. The 
impressing success of this par-ticular choice, and indeed of statistical mechanics, is then 
explained  by  the  fact  that  the  relevant  huge  numbers  lead,  "for  the  macroscopic 
quantities  actually  measured,  to  enor-mously  sharp  peaks",  so  that  the  particular 
distribution does not really matter, all other reasonable choices giving very nearly the 
same macroscopic predictions (Jaynes, 1957). 
 
 
5. A Formulation of the MAXENT Principle for Heterogeneous Continua 
 
We  shall  adopt  a  different  framework  (the  "realism"),  according  to  which  the  global 
micro-state  of  any  given  system  is  well-defined  at  any  given  time  (and,  of  course, 
evolves with time). For us, the index i refers to an elementary micro-state, and pi (resp. 
li)  is  simply  the  fraction  (resp.  the  number)  of  the  elementary  constituents  that  are 
currently in that micro-state (i), thus 

pi = li /N 

            

 

 

 

(6) 
 

 

 

 
 

if N is the (very large) number of elementary constituents. In mechanics and physics of 
heterogeneous media, a system will be an RVE in a statistically homogeneous medium, 
e.g.  a  polycrystal.  The  constituents  Ωk  (k  =  1,  ...,  n)  were  defined  in  Sect.  3.  Each  of 
them is subdivided into a large number Nk of elementary constituents. All of these have 
the same volume, independent of the constituent (k). The volume fractions fk ≡ Nk /N are 
known. The micro-state of an elementary constituent will be defined as the joined data 
(s,  X)  with  s  the  volume  average  of  the  "stimulus"  (i.e.,  primary)  micro-field  in  the 
elementary constituent and X the state of the  corresponding constituent (Note 1). The 
geometry of the subdivision in elementary constituents is quite arbitrary, but it plays no 
rôle. To fix the ideas, X will be the crystal orientation R and s will be the strain-rate d, 
in  a  plastically  deformed  polycrystal.  We  assume  that,  for  a  given  value  of  the 
macroscopic stimulus D, d may take on m different values D j, centered at D. Thus 
 

R∈{R1, ..., Rn},   d∈{D1, ..., D m},       (D1 + ... + D m)/m = D. 

(7) 
This assumption, if interpreted physically, would mean that the strain-rate should take 
"quantized"  values!  It  is  merely  a  convenient  discretization,  which  may  be  refined  at 
will (by increasing m). Note that the index i of the micro-state becomes a double one, (j, 
k the number of elementary crystals with micro-state (D j, Rk). We have 
k).  
the constraint: 
m
j
∑ =
l
k
1
j
=

       (k = 1, ..., n), 

k /N,           (8) 

Let li = l j

m
∑
1
j
=

  or   

k ≡ l j

   p j

N

=

p

f

 

k

k

k

j

 
because any elementary crystal of a given orientation Rk must have some strain-rate D j. 
This expresses the fact that the volume fractions of the orientations, fk, are known, and it 
implies the normalization of the discrete probability law (pj
k). The average strain-rate in 
the orientation Rk is  

Dk = (l 1

k D 1 + ... + l m

k D m)/Nk = (p1

k D 1 + ... + pm

k D m)/fk.          (9) 

 
Hence,  the  "D*  =  D"  condition  (that  the  macroscopic  average  of  the  strain-rate  is  the 
given D, Sect. 3) is written as 

p j

k

j

D

D=

. 

∑
j k
,

 

 

 

(10) 

 
The  last  constraint  to  be  imposed  on  the  probability  distribution  (p  j 
average potential per unit volume is assigned to have the actual macroscopic value:  
 

k)  is  that  also  the 

〈u〉 ≡ 

∑
k

f u
k

k

(

D

k

)

≡

f u
k

k

∑
k

⎛
⎜
⎝

∑
j

⎞
⎟
⎠

j

p

k

j

D

/

f

k

 = U(D). 

 

(11) 

 
This  constraint  may  be  surprising  at  first:  when  the  macroscopic  stimulus  (here  D)  is 
known,  the  macro-potential  should  be  known.  But  this  assumes  that  the  macroscopic 

 

 

 

 
 

In summary, the MAXENT principle determines the distribution (p j 

constitutive  law  is  determined,  and  it  cannot  be  true  as  long  as  we  only  know  the 
volume  fractions  of  the  constituents.  Thus,  Eq.  (11),  i.e.  the  data  of  the  average 
potential,  is  the  minimum  information  we  must  add  in  order  to  determine  the 
macroscopic behavior − and this is now indeed determined in favourable ("statistically 
homogeneous") situations, because then the average potential is indeed a potential for 
the macro-law (see Arminjon (1991a) and references therein). However, the MAXENT 
principle may be applied with Eqs. (8)2 and (10) as the only constraints: although this 
leads to the somewhat unphysical conclusion that the macro-law depends merely on the 
volume  fractions  of  the  constituents,  it  may  be  a  useful  approximation  for  weakly 
heterogeneous  media.  This  simple  model  [MAXENT  with  constraints  (8)2  and  (10)] 
describes a "maximally disordered" medium, in the sense that it will lead to the highest 
possible value for S. This reminds of self-consistent models, which, in the case of linear 
behavior,  are  likely  to  describe  "perfectly  disordered"  media,  the  notion  of  perfect 
disorder referring to the geometrical distribution of the material inhomogeneity (Kröner, 
1978).  In  the  new  "simple  model",  however,  the  measure  of  disorder  is  the  statistical 
entropy  of  the  strain-rate  distribution  (more  generally,  the  statistical  entropy  of  the 
distribution of the "stimulus" field among elementary constituents). 
k) as the one 
 
that maximizes the statistical entropy S = − Σj, k  p j 
k  under constraints (8)2, (10) 
and  (11)  ["general  model",  that  may  describe  any  "degree  of  order"],  or  under 
constraints  (8)2  and  (10)  ["simple  model",  describing  a  "maximally  disordered" 
material].  Once  we  know  (p  j 
k),  we  may  calculate  the  average  strain-rates  per 
orientation, Dk, Eq. (9). From these, we may calculate the current average rotation rates 
and  update  the  orientations  after  a  small  deformation  step,  i.e.,  we  may  calculate  the 
texture evolution in the same way as in Arminjon & Imbault (1996). It should be clear, 
however, that the two new models may be used also in much more general situations. In 
particular, the "simple model" does not even depend on the existence of a potential for 
the constitutive law. 
 
 
6. Minimum Heterogeneity versus Maximum Statistical Entropy 
 
Considering again, to fix the ideas and in preparation for the experimental comparison, 
a  plastically  deformed  polycrystal,  let  us  compare  two  models  that  determine  the 
distribu-tion of the average strain-rates Dk in the constituents (each of which is the non-
contiguous  zone  made  of  all  grains  with  a  given  crystal  orientation):  (i)  the  "general 
model" maximizes the statistical entropy S = − Σj, k  p j 
k with constraints (8)2, 
(10) and (11), and then obtains the Dk 's by Eq. (9); (ii) the inhomogeneous variational 
model  (IVM)  obtains  directly  the  Dk  's  by  solving  the  minimum  problem  (1).  As  we 
recalled  at  the  end  of  Sect.  3,  the  IVM  is  strictly  equivalent  to  minimizing  the 
heterogeneity (2) of the strain-rate distribution under constraints "D* = D" and (3), i.e.   
*)  satisfying  both 
"〈u〉  =  U  ".  The  "general  model"  is  based  on  distributions  (Dk

k Log p j 

k Log p j 

 

 

 

 
 

constraints "D* = D" and "〈u〉 = U ", since these constraints, expressed in terms of the p 
j 
k 's, are nothing else than the constraints (10) and (11), respectively.  

Thus, the "general model" maximizes the statistical entropy of the (p j 

 
k) distribu-
tion under the constraints "D* = D", " 〈u〉 = U " and the constraint (8)2, that the volume 
fractions of the different orientations are given (a constraint that is automatically taken 
into account in the IVM). In other words, the constraints of both models are the same, 
except for the fact that the unknown (p j 
k) of the "general model" is at a lower level than 
the  unknown  (Dk)  of  the  IVM.  Now,  maximizing  the  statistical  entropy  with  certain 
constraints  amounts  to  selecting  the  broadest  probability  distribution  compatible  with 
the constraints, i.e. the distribution closest to the uniform distribution (Jaynes, 1957). In 
the present case, the distribution (p j
k = fk for 
all k. Hence, the MAXENT principle selects, in average over k and accounting for the 
remaining  constraints,  i.e.,  "D*  =  D"  and  "  〈u〉  =  U  ",  the  (p  j
k)  distribution  closest 
possible to the distribution that is uniform at fixed k, i.e., p j
k = fk /m. But, reexpressing 
the heterogeneity h [Eq. (2)] with the help of Eq. (9), we get:  

k) must in particular satisfy (8)2, i.e. Σj  p j

p

h

≡

n
∑
1
k
=

f

k

D

k

−

D

p

=

m
n
∑∑
1
k
=
j
1
=

p

j

p

D

k

j

−

f

k

D

/

f

k

p

1
−

,   

(12) 

k = fk /m, this is simply zero! Thus, the (p j

k) distribution closest possible to the 
k  =  fk  /m  is  the  distribution  that  leads  to  the  minimum  value  of  the 

 
and for p j
distribution  p  j
heterogeneity h (of course, minimizing h is equivalent to minimizing h p with any fixed    
p  ≥  1).  We  have  thereby  proved  that  the  "general  model"  based  on  the  MAXENT 
principle  is  equivalent,  from  a  physical  (hence  approximate)  point  of  view,  to  the 
inhomogeneous variational model. In our opinion, this reinforces the physical basis of 
the latter. Whether the two models are exactly (mathematically) equivalent, i.e. whether 
both predict exactly the same distribution (Dk), is an open question. However, the exact 
equivalence could be true only for a specific value of the number p. 
 
 
7. Experimental Check of the IVM: the Cold-Rolling Texture of Low-Carbon Steel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.  Standard skeleton lines of the 75% 
cold-rolling  texture  of  a  low  carbon  steel, 
as measured (exp), or calculated either with 
the  VPSC  model  or  with 
in-
homogeneous  variational  model  (a  =  0.25: 
ivm r = 0.25). X-axes: angle in degrees.   Y-
axes:  orientation  density.  Truncation  order 
lmax  =  22,  Gauss  angle  φ  0  =  8°.  We  are 
grateful to F. Wagner and J.J. Fundenberger 
(LETAM,  Université  de  Metz)  who  made 
the measurement and the VPSC calculation. 

the 

 

 

 

 
 

The  prediction  of  the  crystallographic  texture  of  low-C  steels  after  cold-rolling  is  a 
severe  test  for  polycrystal  models,  as  it  has been discussed  in  some detail in previous 
works  (see  Arminjon  &  Imbault,  1996,  and  references  therein).  On  Fig.  1  here,  we 
compare  for  the  first  time  the  prediction  of  the  viscoplastic  self-consistent  (VPSC) 
model, proposed by Molinari et al. (1987), to that of the IVM. The general figure of the 
texture  being  very  well  predicted  by  both  models,  the  precise  comparison  is  based  on 
the "skeleton lines", the (standard) definition of which may be found e.g. in Arminjon & 
Imbault  (1996),  and  that  contain  the  main  preferred  orientations.  Both  models 
overestimate  the  sharpness  of  the  texture.  The  IVM  predicts  more  efficiently  the 
position  of  the  peak  orientations,  and  the  ratios  between  the  values  of  the  orientation 
density on these peak orientations, than does the VPSC model. This will be detailed in 
future work.  
 
 

 
Arminjon,  M.  (1991a)  Limit  distributions  of  the  states  and  homogenization  in  random  media.  Acta 

References 

Mechanica 88, 27-59. 

43, 191-214. 

Arminjon, M. (1991b) Macro-homogeneous strain fields with arbitrary local inhomogeneity. Arch. Mech. 

Arminjon, M., Bottero, A., Guessab, B. and Turgeman, S. (1995) Comments on a variational model for 
random composites and the integration of microstructural data. In R. Pyrz (edr.), Proc. IUTAM Symp. 
Microstructure-Property Interactions in Composite Materials. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 1-14. 

Arminjon,  M.,  Chambard,  T.  and  Turgeman,  S.  (1994)  Variational  micro-macro  transition,  with 

application to reinforced mortars. Int. J. Solids Structures 31, 683-704. 

Arminjon, M. and Imbault, D. (1996) Variational micro-macro model and deformation textures predicted 

for steels. Textures and Microstructures 26-27 (the Hsun Hu memory volume), 191-220. 
Balian, R. (1991) From Microphysics to Macrophysics. Springer, Berlin - New York - Heidelberg. 
Bay, B., Hansen, N., Hughes, D. A. and Kuhlmann-Wilsdorf, D. (1992) Evolution of f.c.c. deformation 

structures in polyslip. Acta Metall. Mater. 40, 205-219. 

Hill, R. (1984) On macroscopic effects of heterogeneity in elastoplastic media at finite strain. Math. Proc. 

Camb. Phil. Soc. 95, 481-494. 

Jaynes, E. T. (1957) Information theory and statistical mechanics. Phys. Rev. 106, 620-630. 
Kratochvíl,  J.  (1988)  Plastic  properties  and  internal  stability  of  deformed  metals.  Czech.  J.  Phys.  B38, 

Kröner, E. (1978)  Self-consistent scheme and graded disorder in polycrystal elasticity. J. Phys. F: Metal 

421-424. 

Phys. 8, 2261-2267. 

Kröner, E. (1986) Statistical modelling. In J. Gittus and J. Zarka (eds.), Modelling Small Deformations of 

Polycrystals, Elsevier, London- New York, pp. 229-291. 

Leffers, T. (1993) Microstructures, textures and deformation patterns at large strains. In C. Teodosiu, J. 
L.  Raphanel  and  F.  Sidoroff  (eds.),  Large  Plastic  Deformations,  Fundamental  Aspects  and 
Applications to Metal Forming. Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 73-86. 

Molinari,  A.,  Canova,  G.R.,  and  Ahzi,  S.  (1987)  A  self-consistent  approach  of  the  large  deformation 

polycrystal viscoplasticity. Acta Metall. 35, 2983-2994. 

Sab, K. (1992) On the homogenization and the simulation of random materials. Eur. J. Mech. A/Solids 

11, 585-607. 

Suquet, P. (1982) Plasticité et Homogénéisation. Thèse de Doctorat d'Etat, Université Paris 6. 

 

 

 

 
 

Turgeman,  S.  and  Pastor,  J.  (1987)  Comparaison  des  charges  limites  d'une  structure  hétérogène  et 

homogénéisée. J. Méc. Th. Appl. 6, 121-143. 

Walgraef, D. and Aifantis, E. C. (1985) On the formation and stability of dislocations patterns- I, II and 

III. Int. J. Engng. Sci. 23, 1351-1358, 1359-1364 and 1365-1372. 

 

 

