Bull. Spec. Astrophys. Obs., 60, 2006 

 
The SETI Paradox 

 

Alexander Zaitsev 

Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics,  

Vedensky Square 1, Fryazino, 141120 Russia 

 

 

Abstract:  Two  opposing  tendencies  paradoxically  coexist  in  terrestrial  consciousness  –  the 

insistent quest for intelligent signals from other civilizations and the persistent aversion to any 

attempts to transmit such signals from Earth toward probable fellow intelligent beings. If typi-

cal  for  our  entire  Universe,  such  manifestations  of  intelligence  would  make  the  search  for 

other civilizations totally meaningless. 

Key words: SETI – interstellar messages – Great Silence 

1. Introduction 

formulate various hypotheses, like, for ex-

Searching  the  Internet  for  the  word 

ample, Arthur C. Clarke, who said: “…it is 

combination  “SETI  Paradox”  yields  two 

almost  evident  that  biological  intelligence 

separate and interrelated groups of results – 

is a low form of intelligence. We are at the 

SETI  and  Fermi  Paradox.  Here,  we  focus 

early stage of the evolution of intelligence, 

on the “SETI Paradox” – on this incompre-

but at the late stage of the evolution of life. 

hensible  hope  of  finding  extraterrestrial 

True intelligence is unlikely to be living.” 

intelligence  while  keeping  almost  abso-

The  planetary  consciousness  of  the 

lutely silent.  However,  nothing but  natural 

Earth  may  well  be  unique  and  so  may  be 

objects  can  be  found  in  a  Universe  where 

the  planetary  consciousness  of  each  extra-

there  are  only  “searchers”  and  no  “send-

terrestrial  civilization.  And  all  planetary 

ers”. 

consciousnesses  in  their  global,  mature 

Of the three components of the classi-

manifestations – both internal and external 

cal 

triad  “Universe,  Life,  Mind” 

that 

–  may  well  be  dismally  monotonous,  and 

Shklovskii (1962) introduced into scientific 

this  very  fact  may  explain  the  Great  Si-

and  public  use,  we  can  now  say  nothing 

lence – because a passive/receive-only atti-

definite about mind and its possible variety 

tude  toward  the  Cosmos  is  perhaps  every-

or, on the contrary, sameness. We can only 

body’s,  and  not  just  our,  feature  –  every-

body tries to receive and nobody is willing 

Indeed,  why  should  we  transmit  a 

to give… 

message to Others? It is more or less clear 

We  suggest  introducing  –  in  addition 

why we should search for the messages of 

to  such  common  terms  as  ETI  =  Extrater-

Others.  But  why  transmit?  What  for?  In-

restrial Intelligence and SETI = Search for 

deed, Shvartsman pointed out that this will 

ETI  –  a  new  term,  METI  =  Messaging  to 

give us no new knowledge. We must try to 

ETI, which we use to designate the funda-

understand  “…for  the  sake  of  what  these 

mentally  new  type  of  human  activities  – 

transmissions  are  to  be  made…”  –  either 

transmission  of  messages  to  hypothetical 

by us or by ETIs… 

fellow  intelligent  beings.  Some  may  argue 

 

that SETI is also a new type of activity. Of 

2. Universality of consciousness? 

course, it is a new one, but not fundamen-

How  universal  is  consciousness?  So 

tally new – mankind has always been look-

far  we  have  been  lacking  relevant  experi-

ing  into  the  sky  in  the  hope  of  finding 

mental  data.  Only  a  single  measurement  – 

something there. And as for transmitting to 

terrestrial realization of consciousness – is 

probable ETI and doing this purposefully – 

available. The aim of SETI is to try to find 

this type of activity is now only at its first 

out  whether  consciousness  is  universal  or 

stages  (Zaitsev,  Chafer,  Braastad,  2005) 

not.  A  full  description  of  the  Universe  as 

and  it  is  by  no  means  clear  whether  it  has 

discussed by Linde (2003) – 

any future at all… 

“Is it possible that consciousness, like 

Shvartsman writes in his already clas-

space-time, has its own intrinsic degrees of 

sic paper, “Search for Extraterrestrial Civi-

freedom and that neglecting these will lead 

lization – A Problem of Astrophysics or of 

to a description of the universe that is fun-

the Entire Culture?” (1986): 

damentally incomplete?” – 

”…we  do  not  know  for  the  sake  of 

is so far impossible to achieve – we do 

what transmissions are to be made…” 

not know how to fit consciousness into the 

and 

description of the Universe – as something 

“…science  is an activity  aimed at ac-

unique, or as a universal phenomenon. 

quiring  new  knowledge  about  the  world. 

And it is not inconceivable that no one 

However,  the  interstellar  messages  are  by 

in  the  entire  Universe  knows  this  –  the 

no  means  meant  to  obtain  new  knowledge 

Universe  is  silent  and  even  if  there  are 

by  those  who  transmit  them  (message  and 

other  lone  centers  of  consciousness  some-

reply  are  typically  several  thousand  years 

where  else  (Grinspoon  2003),  THEIR 

apart).” 

physicists should face the  same problem – 

how  to  fit  consciousness  into  the  descrip-

ter understand the true nature of being (as-

tion  of  the  Universe  –  as  a  singular  or  a 

suming,  of  course,  that  the  Universe  is  in-

universal  phenomenon.  In  this  sense,  the 

habited),  and,  in  the  process,  change  the 

task of METI is to try to answer the ques-

very nature of being, i.e., into a state where 

tion  whether  consciousness  is  universal  – 

the existence  of  extraterrestrial life is con-

and  this  answer  is  to  be  meant  for  OTH-

firmed. 

ERS… 

 

 

 

Similarly,  the  Participatory  Anthropic 

3. The Drake equation with the 

Principle 

(PAP) 

formulated  by  John 

METI coefficient 

Wheeler  in  1983  –  “Observers  are  neces-

The  classic  Drake  equation  is  the 

sary to bring the Universe into being” – is 

product  of  seven  parameters  that  estimate 

incomplete  in  the  sense  that  the  Universe 

the number of potentially detectable extra-

that we now observe is a Silent Universe, a 

terrestrial civilizations in our Galaxy: 

Universe  of  observers,  whereas  true  par-

ticipation in the scene of the Universe can-

N = R* × fp × ne × fl × fi × fc × L, 

not be limited to mere contemplation. 

One  can  speak  about  true  “participa-

where  N  =  the  number  of  potentially  de-

tion”  when  this  “participation”  becomes 

tectable  civilizations  in  the  Milky  Way 

OBSERVABLE  by  a  distant  observer. 

Galaxy; R* = the rate of formation of stars 

Wheeler’s  Participatory  Anthropic  Princi-

in  the  Galaxy;  fp  =  the  fraction  of  those 

ple  should  therefore  be  supplemented  by 

stars with planetary systems; ne = the num-

the following statement: 

ber  of  planets  per  solar  system  that  are 

“Senders  are  necessary  to  bring  con-

suitable  for  life;  fl  =  the  fraction  of  those 

sciousness into the Universe”. 

planets where life actually appears; fi = the 

So, the participation of senders would 

fraction of life sites where intelligence de-

transform  the  observer’s  consciousness  of 

velops; fc = the fraction of communicative 

the Universe into a consciousness that rec-

planets  (those  on  which  electromagnetic 

ognizes  a  Universe  that  is  inhabited  by  at 

communications technology develops); L = 

least  two,  separate  intelligences  (e.g.,  two 

the “lifetime” over which such civilizations 

civilizations).  In  turn,  this  transformation 

transmit detectable signals into space. 

of  the  observer’s  consciousness  would  it-

This equation takes into account many 

self  represent  a  contribution  to  existence. 

factors,  but  not  all.  Namely,  it  leaves  out 

In  other  words,  from  an  ontological  per-

the  fraction  of  emitting  “intelligent  plan-

spective, senders would help observers bet-

ets,” i.e., planets that are, like our Earth, in 

the  communicative  phase  of  their  exis-

stellar message should be approved by the 

tence,  and  at  the  same  time  “bring”  con-

United  Nations  General  Assembly.  Some 

sciousness  into  the  Universe  by  purpose-

researches  operate  with  concepts  of 

fully  transmitting  intelligent  signals  to  the 

“peaceful  civilization”  and  “aggressive 

outside world. Estimation of this fraction is 

civilization”  and  suggest  that  we  should 

by no means just a question of idle curios-

reply only to signals coming from a peace-

ity given the attitude of our planetary con-

ful civilization – an attitude that would ul-

sciousness toward such “bringing.” 

timately  result  in  the  total  refusal  to  emit 

Here  we  are  speaking  about  METI-

any  signal  at  all.  The  reason:  a  message 

phobia.  It  appeared  immediately  after  the 

from a peaceful extraterrestrial civilization 

first  interstellar  radio  message  had  been 

to  which  we  are  allowed  to  answer  is  im-

sent from Arecibo on November 16, 1974. 

possible  to  distinguish  from  a  message 

Nobel Laureate Martin Ryle then published 

from  an  aggressive,  but  self-coding  civili-

a  protest  where  he  warned:  “…any  crea-

zation, to which we should not reply. And 

tures  out  there  may  be  malevolent  or  hun-

given  that  we  will  be  hardly  able  to  de-

gry…”  and  called  for  an  international  ban 

velop  an  undoubted  criterion  to  judge  the 

to be imposed on any attempts to establish 

altruism  of  the  extraterrestrial  civilization 

Contact  and  transmit  messages  from  the 

that  would  satisfy  all  those  who  fear  the 

Earth to hypothetical ETIs. 

possible  negative  consequences  of  com-

The  International  Academy  of  Astro-

municating, it would also be impossible to 

nautics  (IAA)  then  adopted  a  Declaration 

not only initiate, but even reply to interstel-

(1989)  calling  for  the  restriction  of  such 

lar  messages.  Our  civilization  would  be 

activities. Thus, paragraph 8 of this Decla-

doomed to eternal silence. 

ration  states:  “No  response  to  a  signal  or 

Unlike  the  English-language  press, 

other  evidence  of  extraterrestrial  intelli-

which  has  been  discussing  METI-phobia 

gence  should  be  sent  until  appropriate  in-

continuously,  articles  on  this  subject  ap-

ternational  consultations  have  taken  place. 

pear  rarely  in  the  Russian  media.  One  of 

The procedures for such consultations will 

the  most  recent  international  campaigns 

be the subject of a separate agreement, dec-

involves  a  series  of  articles  posted  on  the 

laration or arrangement.” 

site  of  the  SETI  League  and  the  adoption 

Six  years  later,  the  SETI  Permanent 

of the so-called “San Marino Scale” at the 

Study Group of the IAA presented a Draft 

conference  “We  and  SETI”  held  in  San 

Declaration (1995), which envisages that a 

Marino in 2005. This scale, like the Richter 

decision on whether or not to send an inter-

scale  for  earthquakes,  is  meant  to  rank  in-

terstellar radio messages to ETI by the de-

being  located  far  apart,  may  interact  only 

gree  of  risk.  However,  the  Richter  scale 

by  transmitting  and  receiving  electromag-

assesses real earthquakes that have already 

netic  signals.  And  moreover,  to  be  de-

happened,  whereas  the  San  Marino  scale 

tected,  we  must  emit  targeted  and  guided 

assesses  hypothetical,  far-fetched  conse-

messages toward the chosen celestial body. 

quences. In this context, of particular inter-

However, we must take METI-phobia 

est  is  the  opinion  of  such  fears  and  bans 

of extraterrestrial civilizations into account 

expressed  by  Paul  Shuch, 

the  SETI 

because  of  the  current  realities  in  Earth’s 

League's  Executive  Director:  In  1998  he 

civilization.  To  this  end,  the  Drake  equa-

gave  the  following  answer  to  our  Internet 

tion  should  supplemented  by  the  METI-

poll, which we conducted during the period 

coefficient fm (Zaitsev 2005): 

leading  up  to  the  Cosmic  Call  1999  inter-

stellar radio transmission: “I am not an ad-

N = R* × fp × ne × fl × fi × fc × fm × L, 

herent of such isolationist (read paranoid) 

 

 

philosophy”. 

where  fm  –  the  fraction  of  communicative 

Our  understanding  of  this  problem 

civilizations 

(METI-civilizations), 

i.e., 

stems from certain “double standards” (not 

civilizations  with  clearly  nonparanoidal 

in  the  common,  negative  meaning  of  this 

planetary  consciousness,  which 

indeed 

word combination): People fear that Some-

produce  planned  and  targeted  interstellar 

thing superpowerful and aggressive – such 

messages.  As  mentioned  above,  to  be  in  a 

as  the  evil  empires  found  in  such  modern, 

communicative phase and emit METI mes-

mythological/science  fiction  tales  as  the 

sages  is  not  the  same  thing.  For  example, 

“Star  Wars”  serials  –  are  either  already 

we,  although  being  in  a  communicative 

aware  of  us,  or  will  inevitably  become 

phase,  are  not  a  communicative  civiliza-

aware  of  us.    In  this  view,  there  is  no  es-

tion:  We  do  not  practice  such  activities  as 

cape from this fate. They will find us, first 

the  purposeful  and  regular  transmission  of 

and foremost, by radio emission of dozens 

interstellar messages. 

of  military  radars  of  USA  and  Russia, 

We  may  try  to  estimate  the  METI-

which are at the core of the national missile 

coefficient  fm  for  the  only  known,  terres-

attack  warning  systems,  which  have  been 

trial civilization. As we pointed out above, 

operating  continuously  24  hours  a  day 

our  civilization  is  indeed  in  the  communi-

since the early 1970s (Morozov 2005). We 

cative  phase  and  it  indeed  conducts  SETI 

must  press  forward  Contact  with  all  con-

activities.  However,  our  METI/SETI  ratio 

ceivable  civilizations  like  our  own,  which 

is  less  then  one  percent:  these  data  follow 

from the review of Jill Tarter published in 

one-way – our addressees receive our mes-

the  recently  released  “SETI-2020”  collec-

sages,  and  we,  in  turn,  detect  those  who 

tion  of  papers  (Tarter  2003).  It  lists  100 

have chosen us as their addressees. This is 

various  SETI  programs  starting  from  the 

how  the  Universe  at  a  certain  stage  of  its 

first  OZMA  project  to  our  time.  The  total 

development  appears  for  observers  as  in-

time of search is several years, whereas the 

habitable.  Otherwise,  centers  of  intelli-

total  transmission  time  is  only  37  hours 

gence are doomed to remain lonely, unob-

(Zaitsev  2006).  This  characterizes  the  atti-

served civilizations. 

tude of researches. However, we must also 

And in conclusion, let us return to the 

take  into  account  the  METI-phobia  inher-

beginning  and  give  the  classic  quotation 

ent  to  the  planetary  consciousness  as  a 

from  the  paper  by  Cocconi  and  Morrison 

whole.  And  therefore  if  we  assess  the  fm 

(1959): “The probability of success is diffi-

coefficient based on the only known civili-

cult to estimate, but if we never search the 

zation (and we are hardly peculiar if we are 

chance of success is zero”. 

not alone), we find that it tends to zero and, 

The  above  argument  is,  of  course, 

consequently,  the  same  should  be  true  for 

true.  However,  accidental  detection  as  a 

the number of potentially detectable extra-

result of routine astronomical observations 

terrestrial  civilizations.  Hence,  the  SETI 

is also possible. However, this may happen 

Paradox:  “Searching  is  meaningless  if  no 

only  if  there  exist  extraterrestrial  civiliza-

one feels the need to transmit…” 

tions  that  actually  send  interstellar  mes-

In  other  words:  “SETI  makes  sense 

sages.  Therefore, in this context the above 

only  in  a  Universe  with  such  properties 

argument  may  be  somewhat  reformulated: 

that  it  develops  Intelligence  that  realizes 

“The  probability  of  success  is  difficult  to 

the need not only to conduct searches, but 

estimate,  but 

if  nobody 

transmits 

the 

also to transmit intelligent signals to other 

chance of success is zero in principle”. 

hypothetical sites of self-consciousness”. 

And  we  can  formulate  the  following 

It  would  become  possible  to  establish 

thesis 

implied  by 

the  SETI  Paradox: 

Contact  if  one  of  the  distinguishing  fea-

“Solely  that  who  is  overcoming  the  Great 

tures of Intelligence in our Universe is the 

Silence  deserves  to  hear  the  voice  of  the 

missionary  need  to  carry  to  Aliens  the 

Universe”. 

Good  News  that  they  are  not  alone  in 

 

space. Given such enormous distances and, 

----- 

consequently, 

long  signal  propagation 

I am grateful to Richard Braastad for 

time,  communications  should  be  mostly 

his valuable comments on the manuscript. 

References 

Cocconi G. and Morrison P., 1959. Searching for Interstellar Communications.  Nature, 

184, No 4690, 844, http://www.coseti.org/morris_0.htm 

Declaration of Principles Concerning Activities Following the Detection of Extraterres-

trial Intelligence, 1989, http://www.setileague.org/iaaseti/protdet.htm 

Draft Declaration of Principles Concerning Sending Communications with Extraterres-

trial Intelligence), 1995, http://www.setileague.org/iaaseti/reply.htm 

Grinspoon D., 2003, “Lonely Planets”, ECCO, Harper Collins Publichers. 

Linde A, 2003. Inflation, Quantum Cosmology and the Anthropic Principle, 

http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211048. 

Morozov V. G., 2000. “The All-Seeng Eye of Russia”, Nezavisimoe Voennoe Obozrenie, 

No 13 (186), 14.04.2000 (in Russian), http://nvo.ng.ru/wars/2000-04-14/4_sprn.html 

Participatory Anthropic Principle (PAP), 

http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/rossuk/c-anthro.htm  

Shklovskii, I. S., 1962. Vselennaia, Zhizn, Razum (Universe, Life, Mind). Moscow: 

Nauka (in Russian). 

Russian) 

Shvartsman V. F., 1986. Proceedings of Tallinn SETI Symposium, Moscow: Nauka (in 

Tarter J., 2003, “SETI 2020: A Roadmap for the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence”, 

eds.: Ekers R. D., Billingham J., Cullers D. K., Schefer L. K., Zajdel T. T., SETI Press. 

Zaitsev A., Charles M. Chafer, and Richard Braastad, 2005. Making a Case for METI. 

Search Lites, v. 11, No 2, Spring 2005, p. 15,  

http://www.setileague.org/editor/meti.htm 

http://www.cplire.ru/html/ra&sr/irm/Making_a_Case_for_METI.html 

http://lnfm1.sai.msu.ru/SETI/koi/articles/DrakeEquation.htm 

Zaitsev A. L., 2005. The Drake Equation: Adding a METI Factor. SearchLites, vol. 11, 

No 2 – Spring 2005, 5, http://www.cplire.ru/html/ra&sr/irm/Drake_equation.html 

Zaitsev A. L., 2006. Messaging to Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence, 

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0610031 

