                                                                     Hydro-thermal flow in a rough fracture 
EC  Contract SES6-CT-2003-502706

 

PARTICIPANT ORGANIZATION  NAME: CNRS

Synthetic  2nd year report

Related with Work Package…………

HYDRO-THERMAL FLOW IN A ROUGH FRACTURE 
A. Neuville, R. Toussaint, J. Schmittbuhl
*Institut de Physique du Globe de Strasbourg, CNRS-UMR7516, 5 rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex
e-mail: Jean.Schmittbuhl@eost.u-strasbg.fr

ABSTRACT

Heat exchange during laminar flow is studied at the fracture 
scale   on   the   basis   of   the   Stokes   equation.   We   used   a 
synthetic aperture model (a self-affine model) that has been 
shown to be a realistic geometrical description of the fracture 
morphology.   We   developed   a   numerical   modelling   using   a 
finite   difference   scheme   of   the   hydrodynamic   flow   and   its 
coupling with an advection/conduction description of the fluid 
heat. As a first step, temperature within the surrounding rock 
is   supposed   to   be   constant.   Influence   of   the   fracture 
roughness on the heat flux through the wall, is estimated and 
a thermalization length is shown to emerge. Implications for 
the Soultz-sous-Forêts geothermal project are discussed.

INTRODUCTION

The modelling of the fluid transport in low permeable crustal 
rocks is of central importance for many applications (Neuman, 
2005).   Among   them   is   the   monitoring   of   the   geothermal 
circulation   in   the   project   of   Soulz-sous-Forêts,   France 
(Bachler et al, 2003). The transit time of the water into the 
main fractures between injection and extraction wells has to 
be carefully estimated in order to provide precise estimates of 
the   experiment   duration.   Water   flux   controls   both   the   heat 
transfer to the fluid and the cooling of the massif (Murphy, 
1979; Glover et al, 1998; Tournier et al, 2000). As shown from 
previous studies (Benderitter and Elsass, 1995; Tournier et al, 
2000) only a few important fractures are controlling the fluid 
exchange between wells. Accordingly the study of the flow 
within a single fracture appears of central interest. It is also 
important   for   large   scale   numerical   simulations   of   the 
convective   circulation   in   the   massif   (Fontaine   et   al,   2001; 
Zhao et al, 2003). Up to now, only very simple models for 
fractures,   like   the   parallel   plates   model,   have   been 
considered, ignoring the impact of the fracture morphology on 
the fracture transmitivity (Tournier et al, 2000).

In this study, we are interested in the influence of a realistic 
geometry   of   the   fracture   on   its   hydro-thermal   response. 
Several   studies   have   addressed   the   permeability   of   rough 
fractures (Brown, 1987; Plouraboué et al, 1995; Hakami and 
Larsson,   1996;   Adler   and   Thovert,   1999;   Méheust   and 
Schmittbuhl,   2000,   2001,   2003).   Our   goal   is   to   show   that 
realistic   fracture   morphology   can   be   introduced   as   a 
perturbation of the parallel plate model and   have a strong 
influence on the heat transport properties even in the limit of 
laminar flow.

MODEL DESCRIPTION

Aperture model

A   self-affine   surface   is   a   possible   geometrical   model   for 
roughness   topographies   of   fractures   as   shown   in   several 
previous studies (Brown and Scholz, 1985; Schmittbuhl et al, 
1993; Schmittbuhl et al, 1995, Bouchaud, 1997). Self-affinity 
is a scaling invariance property that reads as: x ® x, y ® y, 
z  ®  z where    is a scaling factor and    is the roughness 
exponent.   As   can   be   seen     the   scaling   transformation   is 
supposed to be isotropic within the mean plane (x,y) since the 
scaling factors are the same along x and y axes. The scaling
factor, () is not the same along the mean plane (x,y) and the 
out   of   plane   direction  z,  ().   For   the   latter   direction,   the 
roughness   exponent    describes   how   anisotropic   is   the 
property. Figure 1 shows an example of a synthetic self-affine 
aperture field a(x,y). In this case, the aperture defined as the 
volume   between   two   facing   fracture   surfaces,   is   also   self-
affine (Méheust and Schmittbuhl, 2003). 

Figure 1: Sample of a synthetic self-affine aperture field a(x,y) (in  
mm): red corresponds to largest apertures and blue to quasi-closed 
areas. The rms of the aperture field is 0.46mm.

Fluid flow model

To study the viscous flow in a rough fracture, we developed a
numerical  simulation based on the Stokes  equation  for low 
Reynolds number (Méheust and Schmittbuhl, 2001; 2003):

∇ P=v

where  P  is the fluid pressure,    the fluid viscosity and  v  the 
Eulerian fluid velocity.

                                                                     Hydro-thermal flow in a rough fracture 
In   the   limit   of   small   aperture   variations   ( ∥ ∇ a∥≪1 )   ,   the 
lubrication approximation might hold and the local flux per unit 
length is then related to the local pressure gradient:

u=−

a 3
12 

∇ P

This   leads   to   the   Reynolds   equation   which   is   a   two 
dimensional approximation of the local flux within the fracture 
aperture:

∇ . a3 ∇ P =0
We  used   a  finite  difference   scheme  to  solve  the   Reynolds 
equation with a conjugated gradient method. Precision was 
set to 10-15. Figure 2 shows the result of the computation for 
the aperture field shown in Fig. 1 when the fluid is injected 
from the left side. Upper and lower boundary are closed. The 
fracture is supposed to be horizontal.

 

 
For the fluid flow modelling we based our approach on the 
lubrication   approximation   which   relies   on   an   averaging 
procedure over the thickness of  the  aperture. Similarly, we 
propose a “thermal lubrication” approximation which is based 
on   the   average   of   the   temperature     over   the   fracture 
thickness, weighted by the local fluid velocity:

T  x , y =

∫a v  x , y , z T  x , y , z dz
∫h v  x , y , z dz

We  also  introduce   the   Nusselt   number   Nu=− j w /q ref which 
compares, when no convection holds, two estimates of the 
conductive flux: the local flux at the boundary of the fracture 

and     the   mesoscopic   flux   at   the   fracture 

j w=− ∂ T

∂ z  z=a / 2

thickness scale  qref =

T w− T
a

.

Finally, assuming that the horizontal conduction is negligible 
when compared to the vertical conduction and that the vertical 
convection is limited,  the local average temperature  T  x , y 
is obtained from the following equation:

a v . ∇ T 2

Nu T −T w=0


a

We   discretized   this   equation   using   a   first   order   finite 
difference   scheme   and   solved   it   using   also   a   conjugated 
gradient method. Fig. 3 shows the fluid temperature field for 
the   fracture   aperture   described   in   Fig.   1   and   in   horizontal 
position. The cold fluid is injected from the left side within the 
fracture which is assumed to be embedded in hot rock at a 
homogeneous temperature. 

Figure  2: Map of the normalized local flux for the aperture field  
shown in Fig. 1. Red areas correspond to maximum fluxes and blue 
regions to immobile zones.  

It is of important to note the strong channelling of the flow 
which is induced by the fracture roughness. Despite isotropic 
aperture fluctuations along the mean fracture plane, as shown 
in Fig. 1, most of the flow occurs in a significant sub-part of 
the fracture. This localization of the flow stems from the long 
range   correlations   included   in   the   aperture   fluctuations.   A 
direct   consequence   is   the   clear   separation   between 
hydraulically   active   and   inactive   zones   with   a   non-direct 
mapping between aperture magnitude and local flux. In other 
terms,  at a mesoscopic scale,   mechanical  and hydraulical 
apertures might strongly differ even if the average aperture is 
well defined and constant over the whole fracture. 

Heat flow model

We   include   heat   flow   in   our   modelling   to   describe   the 
temperature field within the fracture when the fluid is injected 
at a different temperature from the surrounding rock. T0 is the 
temperature of the fluid at the inlet of the fracture and Tw  is 
that of the rock. As a first step in our modelling, we assume 
the   temperature   of   the   rock   to   be   homogeneous.   We  also 
consider a stationary condition.

Conduction describes the heat flow between two regions of 
different temperature and fulfills the Fourier law:   q=− ∇ T
that   relates   linearly   the   heat   flux  q  and   the   temperature 
gradient   by   the   mean   of   the   thermal   conductivity  l. 
Convection is due to fluid motion and it is described by the 
estimate of the advected heat. From the energy conservation 
law (Landau and Lifchitz, 1994),   conduction effects balance 
convective effects and the local temperature within the fluid 
fulfills:

where v is the fluid velocity and c the thermal diffusivity.

 T =v . ∇ T

Figure 3: Map of the normalized temperature within 
the fracture shown in Fig. 1. The surrounding rock is 
hotter than the injected fluid. Low temperature zones 
are in blue and hot zones in red. 

The   channelling   effect   of   the   temperature   field   is   very 
significant and directly related to the channelling of the fluid 
flow   (for   a   convection   dominated   regime).   Accordingly   the 
temperature is far from homogeneous in the fracture though 
its aperture is constant on average. It therefore emphasizes 
the importance of aperture fluctuations on the heat exchange 
between the cold fluid and the hot rock.

Influence of the fracture roughness can be monitored from the 
comparison   with   the   parallel   plate   case   with   the   same 
average   aperture,
 i.e.  same   mechanical   aperture.   The 
temperature profile along the fluid flow direction (x direction) 
can   be   analytically   computed   in   the   case   of   parallel   plate 
boundary conditions. It reads as:

T −T w=T 0−T wexp −x /l ref  where  l ref =

Pe
Nu

.

                                                                     Hydro-thermal flow in a rough fracture 

 

v a
2

The   Peclet   number   is   defined   as:   Pe=

.   Therefore   a 

characteristic length exists in the problem:   l ref . It describes 
the   typical   length   scale   for   the   fluid   to   be   in   thermal 
equilibrium  with  the  surrounding   rock.  Accordingly  this  is  a 
thermalization  length. Figure 4 shows the temperature profile 
for the parallel plate model and its comparison with profiles for 
rough fractures. It is of interest to note that rough fractures still 
show   a   similar   trend   but   the   thermalization   length   is 
significantly larger (smaller increase of the temperature within 
the fracture).   In other words, cold fluid migrates further into 
the fracture in the rough case compared to the parallel plate 
case owing to the channeling effect. 

Benderitter, Y., Elsass, P., (1995). Structural control of deep 
fluid   circulation   at   the   soultz   hdr   site,   france:   a   review. 
Geotherm. Sci. Technol. 4 (4), 227-237.

Bouchaud, E., (1997). Scaling properties of cracks. J. Phys.: 
Cond. Matter 9, 4319-4344.

Brown, S.R., (1987). Fluid flow through rock joints: the effect 
of surface roughness. J. Geophys. Res. 92, 1337-1347.

Brown, S.R., Scholz, C.H., (1985). Broad bandwidth study of 
the topography of natural rock surfaces. J. Geophys. Res. 90, 
12575-12582.

Fontaine,   F.,   Rabinowicz,   M.,   Boulègue,   J.,   (2001). 
Permeability changes due to mineral diagenesis in fractured 
crust: implications for hydrothermal circulation at mid-ocean 
ridges. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 184, 407-425.

Glover, P.W.J., Matsuki, K., Hikima, R., Hayashi, K., (1998). 
Fluid flow in synthetic rough fractures and application to the 
hachimantai geomthermal hot rock test site. J. Geophys. Res. 
103 (B5), 9621-9635.

Hakami, E., Larsson, E., (1996). Aperture mearurements and 
flow experiemnts on a single fracture. Int. J. Rock Mech. Min. 
Sci. & Geomech. Abstr. 33 (4), 395-404.

L. Landau E. Lifchitz, (1994). Physique théorique mécanique 
des fluides, 3rd ed.

Méheust, Y., Schmittbuhl, J., (2000). Flow enhancement of a 
rough fracture. Geophys. Res. Lett. 27, 2989-2992.

Méheust,   Y.,   Schmittbuhl,   J.,   (2001).   Geometrical 
heterogeneities   and   permeability   anisotropy   of   rough 
fractures. J. Geophys. Res. 106 (B2), 2089-2102.

Méheust, Y., Schmittbuhl, J., (2003). Scale effects related to 
flow in rough fractures. PAGEOPH 160 (5-6), 1023-1050.

Murphy, H., (1979). Convective instabilites in vertical fractures 
and faults. J. Geophys. Res. 84 (B11), 6121-6130.

Neuman,   S.,   2005.   Trends,   prospects   and   challenges   in 
quantifying   flow   and   transport   through   fractured   rocks. 
Hydrogeol. J. 13, 124-147.

Plouraboué, F., Kurowski, P., Hulin, J., Roux, S., Schmittbuhl, 
J., (1995). Aperture of rough crack. Phys. Rev. E 51, 1675.

Schmittbuhl,   J.,   Gentier,   S.,   Roux,   S.,   (1993).   Field 
measurements of the roughness of fault surfaces.  Geophys. 
Res. Lett. 20, 639-641.

Tournier, C., Genthon, P., Rabinowicz, M., (2000). The onset 
of natural convection in vertical fault planes: consequences 
for the thermal regime in cristalline basements and for heat 
recovery experiments. Geophys. J. Int. 140, 500-508.

Zhao, C., Hobbs, B., Mühlhaus, H., Ord, A., Lin, G., (2003). 
Convective   instability   of   3-d   fluid   saturated   geological   fault 
zones heated from below, Geophys. J. Int. 155, 213-220.

Figure 4: Temperature profiles (T(x)) for the parallel  
plate   case   (exponential   curve   in   black)   and   two 
different synthetic fractures (blue and red curves).

At  large scales, numerical  oscillations emerge which stems 
from a  too loose  spatial  discretization  of  the  thermalization 
length scale.

CONCLUSIONS

We propose a numerical model to estimate the heat exchange 
at the fracture scale between a cold fluid and hot surrounding 
rock.   The   numerical   model   is   based   on   a   lubrication 
approximation   for   the   fluid   flow   and   a   “thermalization 
lubrication”   approximation   for   the   temperature   evolution. 
Gravity   is   neglected   since   we   are   dealing   with   horizontal 
fractures   but   could   be   included   from   a   redefinition   of   the 
pressure to include hydrostatic contributions.

Our model shows that fracture roughness is responsible for 
channelling   effects.   Fluid   flow   is   dominant   in   a   significant 
subpart   of   the   fracture   where   head   advection   is  important. 
Accordingly,  temperature   distribution  is  strongly  affected  by 
small fluctuations of the fracture aperture.

On-going   work   addresses   implications   for   the   Soultz-sous-
Forêts HDR project where large sub-horizontal fractures are 
controlling the fluid transfer from the injection well (GPK3) and 
the extraction wells (GPK2 and GPK4). For this purpose we 
link our fracture model to a large scale dipolar model of the 
fluid flow. 

REFERENCES

Adler,   P.,   Thovert,   J.,   (1999).   Fractures   and   Fracture 
Networks. Kluwer academic publishers, The Netherlands.

Bachler, D., Kohl, T., Rybach, L., (2003). Impact of graben-
parallel faults on hydrothermal convection - rhine graben case 
study. Phys. Chem. Earth 28, 431-441.

