Response-table-based virtual responding method and instrument and their 
applications in scanning probe microscopes 
 

Jihui Wang, Qingyou Lu, Xuefeng Cui, Bing Wang 
Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China 
(USTC), Hefei, Anhui 230026, People’s Republic of China 
 
We  describe  a  virtual  response  method  and  device.  It  consists  of  an  analog-to-digital  converter,  a 
digital-to-analog converter, and a computer and utilizes a searchable response table (RT) pre-stored in 
the computer to respond to electronic signals. The RT is constructed by measuring the input-output 
relationship of a real response machine followed by sorting it per input data. To respond, incoming 
signal  is  converted  to  digital  data  whose  position  in  the  RT  is  then  located.  The  response  signal  is 
determined  by  localized  numerical  calculation  around  that  position.  This  method  has  many 
advantages: cheap, fast, universal, stable with less noises and errors. 

 

 

In modern industrial control and scientific research, it 
is  often  necessary  to  respond  to  certain  electronic  signals. 
This  can  be  done  by  using  either  a  specially  designed 
circuitry  or  a  digital  response  system  with  numeric 
computations.  When  the  response  task  is  complicated,  the 
corresponding  circuitry  and  numeric  computations  are 
prone  to  be  complex  too.  For  instance,  scanning  probe 
microscopes  (SPM)  can  be  realized  by  either  complex 
circuits1-4, or complex calculations5-7 in its digital version. 

In  this  article,  we  describe  a  virtual  response  method 
and  device  based  on  a  response  table  (RT).  It  gets  rid  of 
complex circuits as well as heavy calculations. Its structure 
is  simple  and  easy  to  build.  We  will  also  show  that  its 
response  speed  is  high  and  its  performances  in  stability, 
noise, errors and occurrence of malfunction are excellent (in 
many  circumstances,  better  than  its  circuitry  counterpart). 
Also, it is cheaper to make and does not require re-build if 
change  to  completely  different  response.  It  is  of  general 
purpose. 

 
Fig.1  A  schematic  drawing  of  response  table  based  virtual  responding 

system 
 

Figure 1 illustrates the basic idea of our response table 
based virtual responding system. The signal to be responded 
is amplified by a preamp if necessary. It is then converted to 
numeric  data  by  an  analog-to-digital  converter  (ADC), 
which is sent to a computer. There is a response table stored 
in  the  computer,  which  consists  of  two  columns:  an 
input-signal  column  and  its  corresponding  output-signal 
column.  The  response  table  is  sorted  by  the  input-signal 
column  in  ascending  or  descending  order.  Upon  receiving 
the  digitalized  input  signal  to  be  responded,  the  computer 
searches  this  number  in  the  input-signal  column  of  the 
response table to locate the smallest interval containing that 
number. Next, the computer extrapolates the corresponding 

1

numeric output signal (numeric responding signal) from the 
found  interval  and  its  corresponding  output-signal  column. 
For  better  accuracy,  we  can  include  more  data  for 
extrapolation by choosing a larger interval that contains the 
above found smallest interval.   

The  algorithm  for  extrapolation  can  be  interpolation 
methods,  curve  fitting  methods，or  iteration  methods.  The 
resulting value can be converted to an analog signal as the 
output signal (final responding signal) by a digital-to-analog 
converter (DAC). 

The  key  is  how  to  make  the  response  table.  First,  we 
need  to  find  a  real  and  well-performed  response  machine 
(which can be called a golden machine). We then statically 
measure  its  output  signal  for  each  given  input.  Or  we  can 
dynamically  measure  this  response  table  when  it  is  in  real 
time operation. It is better to make more measurements with 
finer  intervals  in  regions  that  need  to  be  responded  more 
frequently. This can improve the accuracy and efficiency. A 
series  of  input-output  data  are  attained.  Following  that, 
some data processing can be made, for example, sorting by 
the  input  signal,  deleting  fliers,  false  data,  averaging  to 
smoothen  the  measured  response  relationship,  localized 
data fitting by segments, or carrying out spectral analysis to 
get  rid  of  noise/interference  spectrum  (which  may  be 
introduced by the power supply or the electric oscillation in 
the control circuit, etc). After these processes, a reasonably   
good response table is obtained. 

As an example of applications of the proposed virtual 
response  machine,  we  can  use  it  to  build  a  scanning 
tunneling  microscope8  (STM).  STM  has  been  improved 
during  the  past  25  years  since  it  was  invented.  It  can  map 
out  a  surface  topography  of  a  sample  using  the  tunneling 
current  between  the  probe  and  the  biased  sample.  To 
stabilize  the  scanning,  a  feedback  control  unit  is  often 
needed 
tunneling  current  constant.  The 
tunneling  current  detected  by  the  probe  is  amplified  by  a 
preamplifier  and  is  then  sent  to  the  feedback  control  unit. 
When  the  tunneling  current  is  changing  during  scanning, 
the  feedback  control  circuits  respond  to  this  change  by 
outputting  a  voltage  signal  to  the  Z-piezo,  which  in  turn 
manipulates  tip-sample  distance  to  keep  tunneling  current 
constant.       

to  keep 

the 

Nowadays,  there  are  many  companies  and  research 
institutes  that  offer  various  designs  of  feedback  control 
circuits for STMs. Many of them are analog circuitries and 
very  complex.  Some  are  digitized  STM  employing 
complicated  computation  algorithms.  We  can  apply  the 
proposed  virtual  control  system  in  scanning  tunneling 

microscopes and simulate its effect. 

We used  an  OMICRON UHV-LT-STM  as our golden 
machine. We used sine wave electronic signals generated by 
Tektronix  AFG3000  as  the  input  signals  to  measure  its 
response  table.  Sine  waves  of  5Hz  to  80Hz  with  30mV 
amplitude and 100mV DC bias were sent into the feedback 
control system’s input and its output signals were measured 
at the same time in AC mode. 

Fig.2  The  relationship  between  the  gain  (output  to  input  ratio)  and  the 
frequency of the input signal 
 

Figure  2  illustrates  the  relationship  between  the  input 
signal’s frequency and the gain (output to input ratio). The 
bandwidth is less than 20Hz. 

We attained the response table of the feedback control 
system at a frequency of 20Hz. The input and output signals 
are both given in Fig. 3. The response has a delay of 9.5ms. 
After  excluding  the  delay  effect,  the  relationship  between 
each  input  signal  and  its  corresponding  output  signal  is 
obtained  and  illustrated  in  Fig.  4.  After  sorting  by  input 
signal,  a  response  table  was  built  (called  RT1).  Then, 
localized  data  averaging  was  carried  out,  and  a  smoother 
response table (called RT2) was built (see Fig. 5). 

 

Fig.3 Comparison of input signal and output signal attained at a frequency 

of 20Hz 

 

 

Fig.5  An  illustration  of  the  response  table  (RT2)  after  the  localized  data 

averaging carried out on RT1 in Fig. 4. 
 
        We wrote a program to simulate the responding effects 
using  these  two  tables.  As  seen  in  Fig.  3,  the  feedback 
control  system  is  very  noisy.  RT1  was  obtained  directly 
from  the  real  feedback  control  system  without  any  noise 
disposals. It was used here to represent the performance of 
the  real  feedback  system.  RT2  was  built  after  a  noise 
treatment on RT1. It stands for our virtual response system.   
The  program  accepts  a  series  of  testing  numbers  as 
input  signals  and  searches  (using  bisearch)  them  in  the 
input-signal  column  of  the  response  table  to  locate  the 
smallest  interval  containing  each  input  signal.  Next,  the 
program  performs  a  numeric  calculation  in  the  found 
interval  using  linear  interpolation  method.  Assume  the 
testing value is k, and the smallest interval is [inj, inj+1] and 
its  counterpart  in  the  output-signal  column  is  [outj,  outj+1], 
the program uses the follow equation to generate the output 
signal to respond: 

Outsignal

=

out

j

×

in
(

j

1
+

−

k

)

+

out

×

(

k in
−

)

j

j

1
+

 

in

j

1
+

−

in

j

        We  used  a  sine  wave  as  the  testing  signal.  The  sine 
wave was produced through the equation below: 
b

a
with a∈[0,5π] and a increasing at a step of 0.00025, where 
30 is a normalization factor to make the testing values span 
the whole response table. 

sin

30

×

=

 

Figure 6 is the comparison of responding effects using 
the RT1 and RT2 respectively on the testing sine wave. The 
second curve corresponds to the output signal produced by 
RT2, which is very closer to the first curve (the input testing 
sine  wave)  and  better  than  the  third  curve  (produced  by 
RT1).  The  second  curve  is  also  less  noisy  than  the  third. 
These mean that the responding effect using a smoothened 
response table is better than a real feedback control unit. 

 

 

Fig.4  A  plot  of  the  directly  measured  response  table  after  excluding  the 

 

delay (RT1) 

 

Fig.6  Comparison  of  responding  effects  using  RT1  and  RT2  respectively 

 

on the testing sine wave. 

2

As  the  second  test,  we  used  a  gray  scale  map  to 
simulate  STM  images.  We  produced  a  series  of  STM  z 
values with the equation below:   

z

x

=

(sin

×
where, x∈[0, 3π]，  y∈[0, 3π], and x, y stand for a sample 
plane  (fast  and  slow  scan  directions),  both  increasing  at 
steps of 0.04.       

y
sin ) 28

×

, 

We  then  added  noise  signals  to  this  STM  image. 
Random  numbers  as  noise  signals  were  between  -2  and  2 
generated using Schrage method and were added to each z 
value as about 7% noise. We used the gray scale to express 
the  z  value:  the  smaller  the  z  value,  the  brighter  the  color 
(Fig. 7a). 
 

a 

 

b

  c

 

Fig.7 a. The testing gray scale map as input signal (sample signal).    b. The 

response map produced by RT2.    c. The response map produced by RT1. 
 

Figure  7b  presents  the  simulation  result  using  RT2  to 
respond to the testing image in Fig. 7a. Fig.7c exhibits the 
resulting  image  of  simulation  by  applying  RT1  as  the 
response table on the same testing image. Fig. 7b is closer 
(less  noisy)  to  the  testing  image  than  Fig.  7c.  It  shows 
higher  contrast  than  Fig.  7c  too.  These  also  mean  that  the 
responding  effect  using  an  improved  response  table  (i.e. 
RT2) is better than the raw feedback control unit (RT1). 

The real feedback control unit used in this experiment 
costs  $100k,  whereas  our  virtual  response  machine  costs 
less  than  $10k.  And  when  a  virtual  response  machine  is 
built,  it  can  be  easily  volume-produced  because  the 
response table can be copied easily. 

The  feedback  control  units  of  all  other  SPMs  are 
similar to that of STM. The main difference among SPMs is 
the  different  local  interactions  they  sense,  which  will 
eventually  be  converted  into  voltage  signals  as  the  input 
signals  of  their  feedback  control  units.  Hence,  different 
SPMs  can  share  the  same  feedback  control  unit  and  the 
proposed virtual response machine is applicable in all types 
of SPMs. 

In this virtual response system, the performance of the 
computer,  ADC,  DAC,  the  efficiency  of  the  program,  and 
the size of the response table, all contribute to its response 
speed and quality. 

The  performance  indices  of  ADC  mainly  include 
resolution,  conversion  rate,  voltage  range  and  working 
temperature,  etc.  Resolution  limits  the  accuracy  of  a 

 

3

measurement,  and  is  determined  by  the  number  of  bits.  A 
20-bit  ADC  divides  the  voltage  range  of  the  input  signal 
into 1,048,576 discrete levels. With a voltage range of 10 V, 
the  20-bit  ADC  can  resolve  voltage  difference  as  small  as 
9.5μV.  This  is  a  fairly  high  resolution.  There  are  plenty 
kinds of ADC from 8 bits to 24 bits in market that can meet 
different  needs.  Conversion  rate  limits  the  response  speed. 
It  can  achieve  1  GSPS  in  current  technology.  So,  using 
ADC can reduce response time greatly in comparison with 
complex  response  circuits.  The  impacts  of  voltage  range 
and  working  temperature  can  be  reduced  by  using  a 
preamplifier and a temperature controller. 

A DAC has similar performance indices as an ADC. It 
can  even  achieve  a  higher  conversion  rate  in  the  existing 
technology, doing no harm to the response time. 

The  impacts  of  computer  speed,  program  efficiency 
and the size of response table were also studied. We tested 
the  performance  of  our  program  in  a  computer  with  Intel 
CPU 2.13 GHz and memory 504MB. The quantity of input 
signals  for  testing  was  104,  and  the  size  of  the  response 
table  was  from  104  to  106 rows.  The  relationship  between 
the  response  time  and  the  size  of  response  table  was  well 
fitted  by  a  logarithm  function  due  to  bisearch  method. 
When the size of response table hits 106, the total response 
time  for  104  input  signals  was  46ms.  Each  response  only 
needs 4.6μs, which is equivalent to a bandwidth better than 
200 KHz. The response speed can be adjusted to fit the need 
of stability9 conveniently by setting a delay in the response 
program. 

In 

summary, 

In  addition,  our  proposed  virtual  response  machine  is 
typically  less  influenced  by  environment  than  a  specially 
designed response circuitry. So, it can work more stably and 
consistently.  This  device  is  implemented  by  very  few 
independent  parts,  therefore  it  is  very  easy  to  debug 
provided that the virtual response machine fails to function. 
a 
response-table-based  virtual  responding  system  with  many 
superiorities  especially:  1)  it  is  essentially  a  type  of 
“hardware  copy”,  which  may  impact  hardware  industry  as 
greatly  as  software  copy  does  on  software  industry;  2)  the 
“replica” could even be better (performance-wise) than the 
original;  and  3)  it  is  more  universal  as  it  can  be  used  in 
different applications without the necessity of changing the 
whole system.   

demonstrated 

have 

we 

We  have  filed  a  patent  application  in  China  for  this 
technology with application number being 200610085238.4. 
This work was supported by the 985 project of China. 
 
1Raúl  C.  Munoz,  Paolo  Villagra,  Germán  Kremer,  Luis  Moraga  and 
Guillermo Vidal, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 69, 3259 (1998) 
2Sang-il Park and C.F. Quate, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 58, 2010 (1987)   
3E.  I.  Altman,  D.  P.  DiLella,  J.  Ibe,  K.  Lee,  and  R.  J.  Colton,  Rev.  Sci. 
Instrum. 64, 1239 (1993) 
4C. Y. Nakakura, V. M. Phanse, G. Zheng, G. Bannon, E. I. Altman and K. P. 
Lee, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 69, 3251 (1998) 
5B. A. Morgan and G. W. Stupian, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 62, 3112 (1991) 
6R. Piner and R. Reifenberger, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 60, 3123 (1989) 
7C. L. Degen, U. Meier, Q. Lin, A. Hunkeler, and B. H. Meier, Rev. Sci. 
Instrum. 77, 043707 (2006)   
8G.Binnig and H.Rohrer, Helv. Phys. Acta. 55, 726 
9Sang-il Park and C.F. Quate, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 58, 2004 (1987)   

