4EG08 
 

1

Multi-Channel SQUID System for MEG and 
Ultra-Low-Field MRI 

Vadim S. Zotev, Andrei N. Matlachov, Petr L. Volegov, Henrik  J. Sandin, Michelle A. Espy, John C. 
Mosher, Algis V. Urbaitis, Shaun G. Newman and Robert H. Kraus, Jr. 

  

 

 

Abstract—A seven-channel system capable of performing both 
magnetoencephalography  (MEG)  and  ultra-low-field  magnetic 
resonance imaging (ULF MRI) is described. The system consists 
of seven second-order SQUID gradiometers with 37 mm diameter 
and 60 mm baseline, having magnetic field resolution of 1.2 - 2.8 
fT/√Hz. It also includes four sets of coils for 2-D Fourier imaging 
with  pre-polarization.  The  system’s  MEG  performance  was 
demonstrated by measurements of auditory evoked response. The 
system  was  also  used  to  obtain  a  multi-channel  2-D  image  of  a 
whole  human  hand  at  the  measurement  field  of  46  microtesla 
with 3 by 3 mm resolution. 
 

Index Terms— biomagnetism, MEG, ULF MRI, SQUID. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

M 

agnetoencephalography  (MEG)  has  been  extensively 
used  for  real-time  non-invasive  studies  of  human  brain 
function  [1].  Its  clinical  application,  however,  has  been 
impeded  by  the  need  to  superpose  the  MEG-localized 
neuronal activity with anatomical information obtained using a 
separate  high-field  magnetic  resonance 
imaging  (MRI). 
Acquiring functional (MEG) and anatomical (MRI) data with 
two separate instruments leads to significant (typically ~5 mm 
or more) co-registration errors [2]. 

Magnetic resonance imaging at ultra-low fields (ULF MRI) 
is  a  promising  new  method  for  structural  imaging  at 
measurement  fields  in  the  microtesla  range  [3]-[6].  In  this 
method,  nuclear  spin  population  is  pre-polarized  [7]  by  a 
relatively  strong  (up  to  0.1  T)  magnetic  field,  and  spin 
precession is detected at an ultra-low (~100 µT) measurement 
field after the pre-polarizing field is removed [3]-[6]. The ULF 
MRI  signals  are  measured  by  superconducting  quantum 
interference  device  (SQUID)  sensors  [8],  that  can  reliably 
operate at ultra-low fields. 

Because the MEG array of SQUID sensors can be used for 
detection of ULF MRI, the two techniques are compatible and 

Manuscript received August 28, 2006. Development of the instrumentation 
was  supported  by  U.S.  Department  of  Energy,  Office  of  Biological  and 
Environmental  Research,  and  by  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory.  The 
reported  study  was  conducted  in  compliance  with  the  regulations  of  the  Los 
Alamos  National  Laboratory  Institutional  Review  Board  for  research  on 
human subjects and informed consent was obtained. 

All  the  authors  are  with  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory,  Group  of 
Applied  Modern  Physics  P-21,  MS  D454,  Los  Alamos,  NM  87545,  USA 
(corresponding author V. S. Zotev, phone: 505-665-8460; fax: 505-665-4507; 
e-mail: vzotev@lanl.gov). 

can  be  combined  in  a  single instrument  [6].  Moreover,  it has 
been  demonstrated  that  MEG  signals  and  ultra-low-field 
nuclear magnetic resonance signals from the human brain can 
be acquired simultaneously by the same SQUID [9]. Thus, the 
combination  of  MEG  and  ULF  MRI  will  allow  simultaneous 
functional  and  anatomical  imaging  of  the  human  brain.  This 
will enhance neuroimaging by reducing or eliminating sources 
of  error  associated  with  co-registration.  Moreover,  because 
ULF  MRI  is  free  from  distortions  caused  by  susceptibility 
variations, anatomical images obtained at ultra-low fields can 
be  used  to  correct  image  distortions  in  high-field  MRI.  In 
addition,  the  use  of  large  MEG-style  SQUID  sensor  arrays 
will  allow  faster  imaging  based  on  multi-sensor  parallel 
imaging techniques.  

In  this  paper,  we  describe  a  seven-channel  SQUID  system 
designed  for  acquiring  both  MEG  and  ULF  MRI  data.  We 
demonstrate the system’s MEG efficiency and present results 
of multi-channel ULF MRI of a human hand.   

II.  INSTRUMENTATION 

A.  Measurement system 
The  system  we  have  built  for  measurements  of  MEG  and 
ULF  MRI  signals  consists  of  seven  axial  second-order 
gradiometers with SQUID sensors (Fig. 1). The gradiometers 
have  37  mm  diameter  and  60  mm  baseline.  They  are  hand-
wound  on  G-10  fiberglass  formers  using  0.127  mm  niobium 
wire.  The  gradiometers  are  positioned  in  parallel  (one  in  the 
middle  and  six  others  surrounding  it  in  a  circle  as  shown  in 
Fig. 1, right) with 45 mm separations between coil centers.  

      

 

Fig. 1. Seven second-order gradiometers with SQUID sensors (left), and their 
positions inside the system (right). 

  
Each  SQUID  sensor  is  equipped  with  a  cryoswitch  [10]. 
The cryoswitch, included in the superconducting input circuit 

4EG08 
 

between  the  SQUID  and  the  gradiometer,  becomes  resistive 
(50  ohm)  when  control  current  is  run  through  its  heater.  The 
cryoswitch  is  activated  during  the  pre-polarization  in  ULF 
MRI  experiments,  protecting  the  SQUID  from  transients 
caused by fast switching of the strong pre-polarizing field. The 
typical  switching  time  is  5  µs.  Both  the  SQUID  and  the 
cryoswitch are mounted inside a lead shield 12 cm above the 
gradiometer.  The  seven  channels  are  installed  inside  a 
fiberglass liquid He dewar [11]. The system is operated inside 
a magnetically shielded room, and all equipment in the room 
is connected to the outside electronics via fiber optic cables.  

Noise spectra of the seven channels are exhibited in Fig. 2. 
The magnetic field noise spectral density is ~1.2 fT/√Hz at 1 
kHz  for  Channel  1,  and  2.5-2.8  fT/√Hz  at  1  kHz  for  the 
surrounding  channels  due  to  the  dewar  noise.  The  noise 
spectra  remain  essentially  flat  down  to  ~3  Hz.  These  data 
suggest that the system is well suited for MEG measurements. 

2

 
     
Fig. 3. Schematic of the coil system for 2-D ULF MRI measurements. 

C.  Imaging procedure 
The imaging procedure used in our ULF MRI experiments 
is  illustrated  in  Fig.  4.  It  includes  the  pre-polarization  stage, 
followed by the conventional 2-D gradient-echo sequence.  

 

Fig.  2.  Magnetic  field  noise  spectral  densities  for  the  seven  channels.  The 
noise is lowest for Channel 1, and highest for Channel 2. 

B.  Coil system 
The  coil  system  for  2-D  ULF  MRI  experiments,  depicted 
schematically in Fig. 3, consists of four sets of coils. A pair of 
round  120  cm  Helmholtz  coils  provides 
the  ultra-low 
measurement field Bm along the Z axis. The field strength is 61 
µT at 1 A. The longitudinal gradient Gz=dBz/dz is created by 
two 80 cm square Maxwell coils. A specially designed set of 
eight rectangular coils on two parallel 48 cm x 96 cm frames 
transverse  gradient 
with  100  cm  spacing  provides 
Gx=dBz/dx.  The  magnitudes  of  Gz  and  Gx  gradients  are  120 
µT/m and 80 µT/m at 1 A, respectively.  

the 

to 

is  perpendicular 

The  pre-polarizing  field  Bp 

the 
measurement  field  Bm.  It  is  created  by  a  pair  of  thick  round 
coils  (25  cm  outside  diameter,  5  cm  thickness),  positioned 
around  the  dewar  in  a  quasi-Helmholtz  fashion  with  23  cm 
spacing.  This configuration allows pre-polarization of  a  large 
volume  while  minimizing  response  of  the  shielded  room  to 
strong Bp pulses. This response is due to eddy currents in the 
room’s aluminum plates, and has the characteristic time scale 
of  up  to  100  ms.  The  Bp  coils  are  made  using  litz  wire.  The 
strength of the pre-polarizing field is 10 mT at 12 A.  

      

 

Fig. 4. Gradient-echo imaging sequence in 2-D ULF MRI experiments.  
  

In the case of the human hand imaging, described in Section 
III.B, the following parameters were used. The hand was pre-
polarized  at  field  Bp  =  10  mT  for  0.5  s.  The  pre-polarizing 
field was then removed non-adiabatically (in 0.5 ms), and spin 
precession took place at a much lower measurement field Bm ~ 
46  µT,  with  the  Larmor  frequency  of  ~1950  Hz.  The 
precession  was  encoded  during  time  tg  =  40  ms  by  two 
gradients with limiting values of ±94 µT/m (±40 Hz/cm). The 

3

            

 
Fig. 6. The human subject’s hand as positioned during imaging. 
  

The composite image of the hand is shown in Fig. 7. It was 
obtained  as  a  square  root  of  the  sum  of  squares  of  images 
acquired  by  the  seven  individual  channels.  Each  individual 
image was a result of 2-D Fourier transform of the spin-echo 
signals measured for all selected values of the phase-encoding 
gradient.  Because  the  pre-polarizing  field  Bp  was  relatively 
low (10 mT), each measurement was repeated 200 times, and 
the  results  were  averaged.  The  total  acquisition  time  for  the 
image in Fig. 7 was about 2 hours.                    

4EG08 
 

gradient  coils  were  disconnected  during  the  pre-polarization, 
and  re-connected  5  ms  after  the  removal  of  Bp  to  avoid 
transients. This was done by means of optically isolated solid-
state  relays.  The  phase-encoding  gradient  Gz  was  changed  in 
4.9  µT/m  (2.1  Hz/cm)  steps.  Reversal  of  the  frequency-
encoding  gradient  Gx  created  a  spin-echo  signal  that  was 
measured  for  tacq  =  80  ms.  The  cryoswitch  and  the  SQUID 
electronics  reset  function,  activated  prior 
the  pre-
polarization, were turned off 3 ms and 5 ms after the gradient 
reversal, respectively. The described sequence provided 3 mm 
x 3 mm imaging resolution. 

to 

III.  RESULTS 

A.  MEG measurements 
In  order  to  test  efficiency  of  the  seven-channel  system  in 
detection  of  MEG  signals,  we  carried  out  measurements  of 
auditory  evoked  magnetic  field  (auditory  MEG).  A  train  of 
clicks  was  used  as  auditory  stimulus.  The  individual  clicks 
were 1.2 ms long, and followed with 14 ms intervals. Duration 
of the click train was 100 ms with 50 ms pre-stimulus interval 
between  the  start  of  data  acquisition  and  the  stimulus  onset.  
The  subject’s  head  was  positioned  under  the  dewar  so  that 
Channels 1, 3, and 6 were above the Sylvian fissure. 

Results  of  the  auditory  MEG  experiment  are  exhibited  in 
Fig.  5.  They  show  peaks  at  40,  100,  and  200  ms  after  the 
stimulus  onset,  characteristic  of  the  auditory  MEG  [1].  The 
opposite  signs  of  the  signals  from  Channels  1,  2,  3,  4  and 
Channels 5, 6, 7 are consistent with the expected orientation of 
the  equivalent  current  dipole  perpendicular  to  the  Sylvian 
fissure [1]. These results show that the seven-channel system 
can be successfully used for MEG measurements. 

  

Fig. 5. Auditory MEG signals, measured by the seven channels.  

 

B.  Human hand imaging 
The  described  seven-channel  system  has  been  developed 
with the ultimate goal of imaging parts of the human brain. To 
evaluate  the  system’s  current  ULF  MRI  performance,  we 
obtained  a  2-D  image  of  a  human  hand.  The  hand’s  position 
during the experiment is shown in Fig. 6. The mean relaxation 
time  T1  for  the  hand  was  measured  to  be  ~120  ms.  Imaging 
was performed as described in Section II.C. 

 
Fig.  7.  Image  of  the  human  hand  obtained  as  a  combination  of  images  from 
the seven individual channels. 
  

Fig.  7  reveals  some  anatomical  details  of  the  hand  such  as 
the joints, represented by the dark elongated spots. The thumb, 
however, is barely visible, because the system’s channels were 
placed above the other four fingers.  

To improve the image, we applied the parallel imaging with 
localized  sensitivities  (PILS)  technique  [12].  Information 
about  the  channels’  sensitivities  was  obtained  by  imaging  a 
large  (23  cm  diameter)  uniform  phantom  with  the  relaxation 
time  T1  ~  120  ms.  The  imaging procedure  was  similar  to  the 

4EG08 
 

one described in Section II.C, but with 1 cm resolution along 
the  phase-encoding  direction.  The  combined  sensitivity  map 
after interpolation is shown in Fig. 8.                               

 
Fig. 8. Combined sensitivity map of the seven-channel system. 
 

 

The sensitivity-corrected image is displayed in Fig. 9. It has 
more uniform intensity distribution and provides more details 
than the original image.  

Fig. 9. Sensitivity-corrected image obtained using the PILS technique. 

 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

In  this  paper,  we  described  the  new  seven-channel  system 
capable  of  performing  both  MEG  and  ULF  MRI.  We  also 
reported  the  first  implementation  of  multi-channel  ULF  MRI 
and presented the multi-channel image of the human hand.  

The  first  results  of  the  in  vivo  ULF  MRI  were  published 
recently  by  Mößle  et  al.  [5].  These  authors  used  a  single-
channel  SQUID  system  for  3-D  ULF  MRI  [4]  to  acquire 
images of human forearm and fingers [5]. The object width in 
their experiments was 40-60 mm. Our results, presented in this 

4

paper, show that the use of multiple channels allows imaging 
of  larger  objects:  the  human  hand  in  our  experiments  was 
~140  mm  in  size.  We  can  also  conclude  that  strong  pre-
polarizing  field  Bp  is  essential  for fast  ULF  MRI, because  an 
increase  in  signal-to-noise  ratio  reduces  an  amount  of  time 
required  for  averaging.  The  images  reported  by  Mößle  et  al. 
were  acquired  with  pre-polarizing  fields  of  40-100  mT  in  6 
minutes  [5].  In  our  experiments  with  the  pre-polarizing  field 
of 10 mT, the acquisition time was nearly 2 hours. A stronger 
Bp field should reduce this time to an acceptable level.  

The  2-D  image  of  the  hand,  reported  in  this  paper, 
demonstrates  that  our  system  can  be  successfully  used  for 
ULF MR imaging of large parts of the human body. Our next 
goal is to obtain 3-D images of parts of the human brain and 
use that spatial information to map MEG-localized sources of 
brain activity. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

Technical development of the instrumentation used for this 
work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Office 
of  Biological  and  Environmental  Research,  and  by  internal 
research funding from Los Alamos National Laboratory.  

REFERENCES 

[1]  M.  Hämäläinen,  R.  Hari,  R.  J.  Ilmoniemi,  J.  Knuutila,  and  O.  V. 
Lounasmaa,  “Magnetoencephalography  –  theory,  instrumentation,  and 
applications  to  noninvasive  studies  of  the  working  human  brain,”  Rev. 
Mod. Phys., vol. 65, pp. 413-497, 1993. 

[2]  P.  Adjamian  et  al.,  “Co-registration  of  magnetoencephalography  with 
magnetic  resonance  imaging  using  bite-bar  fiducials  and  surface-
matching,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 115, pp. 691-698, 2004. 

[3]  R.  McDermott,  S.-K.  Lee,  B.  ten  Haken,  A.  H.  Trabesinger,  A.  Pines, 
and  J.  Clarke,  “Microtesla  MRI  with  a  superconducting  quantum 
interference  device,”  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.,  vol.  101,  pp.  7857-7861, 
2004. 

[4]  R. McDermott et  al., “SQUID-detected  magnetic  resonance imaging in 
microtesla magnetic fields,” J. Low Temp. Phys., vol. 135, pp. 793-821, 
2004. 

[5]  M. Mößle et al., “SQUID-detected in vivo MRI at  microtesla  magnetic 
fields,” IEEE Trans. Appl. Superconduct., vol. 15, pp. 757-760, 2005. 
J.  Clarke,  R.  McDermott,  A.  Pines,  and  A.  H.  Trabesinger,  “SQUID 
detected NMR and MRI at ultralow fields,” U.S. Patent 6,885,192. 
[7]  A.  Macovski  and  S.  Conolly,  “Novel  approaches  to  low  cost  MRI,” 

[6] 

Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 30, pp. 221-230, 1993. 

[8]  Ya.  S.  Greenberg,  “Application  of 

superconducting  quantum 
interference  devices  to  nuclear  magnetic  resonance,”  Rev.  Mod.  Phys., 
vol. 70, pp. 175-222, 1998. 

[9]  P.  Volegov,  A.  N.  Matlachov,  M.  A.  Espy,  J.  S.  George,  and  R.  H. 
Kraus,  Jr.,  “Simultaneous  magnetoencephalography  and  SQUID 
detected nuclear MR in microtesla magnetic fields,” Magn. Reson. Med., 
vol. 52, pp. 467-470, 2004. 

[10]  SQUID  sensor  Model  CE2  blue  and  cryoswitch  Model  SW1  from 

Supracon AG, Jena, Germany (www.supracon.com). 

[11]  Dewar  Model  LH-14.5-NTE  from  Cryoton  Co.  Ltd.,  Moscow,  Russia 

(www.cryoton.webzone.ru). 

[12]  M. A. Griswold, P. M. Jacob, M. Nittka, J. W. Goldfarb, and A. Haase, 
“Partially  parallel  imaging  with  localized  sensitivities  (PILS),”  Magn. 
Reson. Med., vol. 44, pp. 602-609, 2000. 

