arXiv.org 

Call for revision of editorial policies 

 
Comment on "Long-period astronomical forcing of mammal 
turnover" by van Dam et al., Nature 443:687-691 
 
 
Mensur Omerbashich 
 
Physics Department, Faculty of Science, University of Sarajevo, Zmaja od Bosne 33, Sarajevo, Bosnia 
Phone +387-63-817-925, Fax +387-33-649-359, E-mail: momerbasic@pmf.unsa.ba;  CC: omerbashich@yahoo.com 

 
 
Summary 

[1]  claimed 2.4–2.5  and  1.0  Myr  turnover  cycles  in  a Spanish  rodent  lineages  record.  However, 
the  record’s  variance-spectrum,  which  is  missing  in  [1],  shows  that  the  varying  reliability  and 
multiple  alterations  of  raw  (gapped;  unaltered)  data  by  [1]  unnaturally  boosted  the  2.5  and  1.0 
Myr  noise-cycles  to  the  99%  confidence  level,  while  failing  to  recognize  a  third  such  "99% 
significant" noise period, of 0.55 Myr at 5.3 var%.  Thus at least one claimed period (of 1.0 Myr) 
is  a  simple  modulation  of  a  relatively  stronger  noise  cycle  (of  0.55  Myr)  overlooked  by  [1].    All 
"99%  significant"  periods  reach  mere  5-6%  var  levels  which  can  be  hardly  distinguished  from 
noise:  those  periods’  fidelity  is  at  staggering  1-2  orders  of  magnitude  below  the  usual  signal-
noise  separation  marker  at  12.0.    Remarkably,  at  least  ten  noise-periods  got  boosted  to  95% 
confidence  level,  and  some  five  noise-periods  to  near  95%  confidence  level,  as  well.  Even  the 
zero padding of just 4% of data, as done by  [1], significantly suppresses (hence unreported) the 
strongest  99%  significant  period,  of  7.28  Myr  at  7.5  var%.    Therefore,  the  periods  claimed  are 
due  to  strong  noise  reflection  of  some  intermediary.    As  hand-waving  cyclic-cataclysm  claims 
start to frequent scientific journals, revision of editorial policies is called for on spectral analyses 
of  inherently  gapped  long  records,  and  of  records  composed  mostly  of  natural  data  of 
significantly inconsistent reliability. 

Keywords:  spectral analysis. 

 
 
 
Studies  claiming  that  cataclysmic  events 
are responsible for cyclic variations in long 
records of natural data appear occasionally 
in  scientific  journals.  Due  to  their  obvious 
sensationalism,  such  reports  are  almost 
certain  to  attract  broader  public  attention. 
However,  long  records  of  natural  data  in 
many  cases  are  inherently  gapped,  and 
since  they  are  also  long  the  information 
that  they  carry  are  burdened  with  various 
different 
influences 
intermediaries  that  played  a  role  in  the 
creation of the record. 
it 
Unfortunately, 

common 
analysis 
approach 
community  to  simply  proceed  to  edit  such 
records  in  order  to  make  them  fit  the 
(mostly 
analysis 
algorithms.  This  means  that  the  original 
raw  (gapped;  unaltered)  data  and  all  of 
data  distributions  present  generally  are 

a 
spectral 

Fourier) 

spectral 

many 

from 

the 

in 

is 

assumed  as  entirely  understood.  One 
assumption  follows  another,  and  it  soon 
becomes easily and erroneously believed by 
many  that  data  “preparation”  could  not 
affect 
significantly.  
Consequently,  records  end  up  heavily 
edited,  zero-padded,  with  values  invented, 
trends subtracted etc. 

data 

raw 

the 

One  such  recent  study  of  a  mammal 
record from central Spain [1] reported “new 
periods”  allegedly  so  close  to  certain 
astronomical  cycles 
that  a  claim  of 
cataclysmic causality was immediately laid.  
Yet  another  recent  study  claimed  to  have 
found a new period in a world fossil record 
[2],  which  was  unlike  any  other  known 
astronomical  cycle  but  still  those  authors 
too  made  a  catastrophic  causality  claim…  
In  the  latter  case  a  closer  inspection 
showed  that  the  cycles  claimed  by  [2]  were 
in  fact  byproduct  of  the  data  treatment 

 

 

1

arXiv.org 

cycles,  see  Fig.1  and  Table  1.  The  latter 
period  was  not  recognized  by  [1]  as  being 
significant,  although  this  period  leaves 
overall  a  stronger  noise  imprint  than  the 
1.0  Myr  period  does,  which  then  almost 
certainly  represents  a  mere  modulation  of 
the  overlooked  0.55  Myr  cycle.    All  three 
periods claimed to be 99% significant reach 
relatively  (compared  to  99%  confidence 
level  at  4.2%  var)  weak  5-6%  var  levels 
practically  indistinguishable  from  noise, 
while  their  fidelity  is  at  insignificant  1-2 
orders  of  magnitude  below  the  usual 
signal-noise separation marker at 12.0, see 
Table 1.  Data processing, as done in [1] also 
boosts at least ten spurious periods to 95% 
confidence level; see Fig.1.  In addition, the 
unresolved portion of the strongest peak is 
itself  seen  as 
reaching  almost  95% 
confidence  –  together  with  at  least  five 
other noise cycles – indicating that there is 
no  chance  that  even  the  strongest  claimed 
period  could  be  real.    The  primary  reason 
for  such  a  poor  performance  lies  in  the 
interplay  of 
reliabilities  of 
varying 
thousands of values that were used by [1] to 
make  FSA-fit,  i.e.,  equispaced  record  of 
220 averages. Another reason is in outright 
data  alterations  by  [1]  needed  to  satisfy 
operational  requirements  by 
the  FSA 
algorithm  used.  The  zero  padding  is  one 
such  alteration  commonly  performed  in 
Fourier  spectral  analyses,  where  inserting 
zeroes in place  of missing values in a  time 
series 
equispacing 
requirement.  But  when  all  nine  zero-
padded  instances  are  left  out  from  the 
Spanish  record,  a  forth  99%-significant 
period,  #0,  Fig.1,  emerges,  of  7.28  Myr  at 
7.5  var%.    Meaning,  just  9  out  of  220  (or 
4%  of)  invented  values  suppresses  the 
strongest  99%-significant  period!    Thus, 
the  Spanish  record,  as  a  whole,  is  hugely 
sensitive 
data 
even 
to 
manipulations. 

slightest 

satisfies 

the 

Hence,  the  claimed  99%  confidence 
level  is  mostly  meaningless  in  the  context 
of  total-information  quality,  in  this  case. 
Periods  reaching  99%  significance  indeed 
leave  strong  imprints  in  noise,  but  this  is 
insufficient  for  claiming  a  signal.  Hence, 
the  two  periods  claimed  (#1-2,  Fig.1)  are 
manifestly noise, of two different kinds: the 
longer  period,  #1,  represents  a  robust 
reflection  of  some  intermediary,  and  the 
shorter period, #2, is a mere modulation of 

applied  therein  [3].    I  show  here  that  the 
former  study  too  is  biased  in  the  same 
manner, except it  produces  a  result  that is 
(by  way  of  a  noise 
coincidentally 
known 
close 
intermediary) 
astronomical period.  The notion of wrong 
data  treatment  stands  since  both  of  those 
studies  claimed  cataclysmic  disappearance 
/ reappearance of genera / species, without 
seriously  addressing  the  characteristics  of 
the  spectral  analysis  technique  or 
its 
applicability to the data of interest. 

to 

a 

I  use  raw  data  as  the  key  criterion  for 
assessing  a  physical  claim’s  validity  [3].  
Then,  Fourier  spectral  analysis  (FSA)  is 
unsuitable for long gapped records  [4] such 
as  most  of  records  of  natural  data.    As  a 
result of varying but damaging approaches 
to  data 
treatment,  numerous  spectral 
studies  of  paleodata  range  wildly  in  their 
conclusions, often going from one extreme 
(“it’s  the  humans!”)  to  another  (“it’s 
Milankovitch!”). 

To  examine  how  data  treatment  as 
done by  [1] (averaging to create equispaced 
values, and alterations to make data fit the 
FSA equispacing requirement) affected the 
Spanish  record,  [1]  should  have  computed 
that  record’s  variance  spectrum;  just  like 
the variance is the most natural description 
of  noise  in  a  record  of  physical  data,  a 
tells  naturally  and 
variance  spectrum 
simultaneously  of  the  strength  of  cyclic 
signals' imprints in noise  [3]  [5] and thereby 
of  signal’s  reliability  too. 
  I  compute 
variance  spectrum  of  the  Spanish  record 
using 99%-confidence strict Gauss-Vaníček 
spectral  analysis  [5]  [6]  [7]  [8]  [9].  GVSA  can 
analyze raw data without alterations of the 
input  values  or  output  spectra,  where 
spectra can be given in var% [5] [6] or dB [9].  
This  method  has  been  used  over  the  past 
in  astronomy,  geophysics, 
thirty  years 
biology,  medicine, 
and 
economy 
is  a  spectral  analysis 
mathematics; 
method of choice for any science interested 
in long records of natural data [3].  GVSA is 
superior  to  FSA  for  such  records  [4],  and 
analogously for records consisted primarily 
of data of non-uniform reliability, too. 

it 

At  first  look,  the  variance  spectrum  of 
the  Spanish  rodent  lineages  record  that 
was  used  to  produce  Fig.3b  in  [1],  also 
seems  to  be  periodic  at  99%  confidence 
level, with 2.53 Myr at 6.8 var%, 0.97 Myr 
at  4.7  var%,  and  0.55  Myr  at  5.3  var% 

 

2

arXiv.org 

though 

its  relatively  stronger  half-period  #3.  
Therefore,  no  claim  in  [1]  can  be  true.  
Treating  data  as 
they  were 
uniformly  reliable,  as  well  as  performing 
multiple alterations of raw data, boosts the 
2.5  and  1.0  Myr  noise-cycles  to  99%,  but 
not  the  7.28  Myr  and  0.55  Myr  noise-
cycles,  which  is  unexpected  as  it  is  a 
completely arbitrary choice.  Note that the 
latter  period,  #3,  is  genuine  noise,  since, 

besides  having  the  lowest  fidelity  of  all 
“99% significant” periods, its fidelity is also 
at negligible 0.007.  Having the absolutely 
largest  fidelity,  the  period  #0  could  be  the 
most  real  one  of  all  four  99%  significant 
periods; however this statement should not 
be  taken  literally  either,  since  #0  too  was 
probably  caused  by  some  data  alterations 
the  zero  padding  which 
other 
suppressed it. 

than 

 
 

 
Figure 1.  Variance spectrum of the Spanish record after it was altered by  [1] (black), v. 
variance spectrum of the same record excluding zero-padded “values” (gray). Gray line 
shows the effect of zero padding on a long gapped record of natural data.  Frequencies 
in  cycles  per  1  Myr  (c.p.M).    Periods  #0-3  listed  in  Table  1.    Spectral  resolution  for 
plotting: 2000 spectral points. 

 

 
 
 
 
fidelity 
 
1.211 
0.146 
0.022 
0.007 
 
 
Table 1.  Values corresponding to three 99% significant periods, Fig.1. 
Spectral resolution for computations: 20 000 spectral points. 

spectral 
peak # 
0 
1 
2 
3 

mag 
[var%] 
7.50 
6.78 
4.73 
5.33 

period 
[Myr] 
7.28 
2.53 
0.97 
0.55 

mag 
[dB] 
-10.91 
-11.38 
-13.04 
-12.50 

 

3

 
Conclusion 
 
Experience  teaches  us  that  even  a  single 
catastrophic  event  claim,  when  promoted 
in  the  media,  could  result  in  havoc.  It 
seems  inevitable  that  researchers  could 
soon  start  making  “predictions”  out  of  the 
many  reports  alleging  some  “99%  certain” 
past  recurring  cataclysms.  As  the  hand-
waving  cyclic-cataclysm  reports  start  to 
frequent  scientific  journals,  revision  of 
editorial policies is called for in cases of the 
spectral  analyses  of  long  and  inherently 
gapped  records  of  natural  data,  or,  more 
generally, records that contain natural data 
most  of  which  have  significantly  varying 
reliability.    Such  revisions  could  entail 
approaches  presently  unthinkable  of  when 
refereeing  those  reports,  like  the  imposing 
of  mandatory  blind  test(s)  using  synthetic 
data,  or/and 
critical 
computations, or/and testing results (using 
independent  methods) 
spectrum 
distortion  due  to  data  manipulations,  and 
so  on.    Although  seemingly  elementary, 
such  measures  could  prevent  researchers 
from  missing  a  bigger  picture,  as  they  get 
technical. 

repetitions  of 

for 

 
 
References 
 
1.  van Dam, J.A., Aziz, H.A., Sierra, M.A.A., Hilgen, F.J., 
van  den  Hoek  Ostende,  L.W.,  Lourens,  L.J., 
Mein,  P.,  van  der  Meulen,  A.J.  &  Pelaez-
Campomanes,  P.  Long-period  astronomical 
forcing  of  mammal  turnover.  Nature  443,  687-
691 (2006). 

2. Rohde, R.A. & Muller, R.A. Cycles in Fossil Diversity. 

Nature 434, 208-210 (2005). 

3.  Omerbashich,  M.  Gauss-Vaníček  Spectral  Analysis  of 
the Sepkoski Compendium: No New Life Cycles. 
Computing in Science and Engineering 8, 26-30 
(2006). 

4.  Press,  W.H.,  Teukolsky,  S.A.,  Vetterling,  W.T., 
Flannery,  B.P.  Numerical  Recipes.  Cambridge 
University  Press,  Cambridge,  United  Kingdom 
(2003). 

arXiv.org 

Spectral analysis is at least as much art 
as it is science, requiring various choices to 
be made prior to punching the data into an 
algorithm.  Proper  choice  of  the  analysis 
technique (algorithm) must not be the first 
but  instead  the  last  of  those  choices  to  be 
made.  This  should  be  preceded  by 
considerations  such  as  selection  of  the 
criteria  for  data  treatment  approaches  to 
be  used.  (A  fundamental  such  criterion,  of 
raw  data,  was  applied  here.)  
using 
Hopefully, this could prevent blunders like 
[1]  from  ever  entering  into  press.    The 
primary  goal  of  scientific  analyses  of 
to 
series 
physical 
responsibly 
useful 
produce 
information  on  cyclic  natural  phenomena, 
so that science is not being undermined by 
the  ill  reputes  of  cyclic  failures.    This  call 
for action coincides in time with challenges 
faced  by  humankind 
full 
responsibility  (instead  of  accusing  nature 
and  divine  acts  alike)  for  harming  life  and 
environment on Earth. 

should  be 
publicly 

taking 

time 

in 

5.  Vaníček,  P.  Approximate  spectral  analysis  by  least-
squares  fit.  Astroph.  Space  Sci.  4,  387-391 
(1969). 

6. Vaníček, P. Further development and properties of the 
spectral  analysis  by  least-squares  fit.  Astroph. 
Space Sci. 12, 10-33 (1971). 

7. Steeves, R.R. A statistical test for significance of peaks 
in  the  least  squares  spectrum.  Collected  papers 
of  the  Geodetic  Survey,  Department  of  Energy, 
Mines  and  Resources,  Surveys  and  Mapping, 
Ottawa, Ontario Canada, 149-166 (1981). 
8.  Pagiatakis,  S.  Stochastic  significance  of  peaks  in  the 
least-squares  spectrum.  Journal  of  Geodesy  73, 
67-78 (1999). 

9.  Taylor,  J.  &  Hamilton,  S.  Some  Tests  of  the  Vaníček 
Method  of  Spectral  Analysis.  Astrophysics  and 
Space Science 17, 357–367 (1972). 

 
 
 
 

 

4

