A New Large Number Coincidence and the Maximum Number of Bits in the
Universe
Scott Funkhouser
Dept. of Physics, The Citadel, 171 Moultrie St., Charleston SC 29409

ABSTRACT

Seven apparently distinct, pure numbers of order near 10121 are generated from terms associated
with modern cosmology, the holographic conjecture and the computational capacity of the Universe.   This
new  large  number  coincidence  problem  is  then  resolved,  being  shown  to  result  from  the  physics  of  the
standard  cosmological  model.   However,  the  fact  that  the  coincidence  problem  among  pure  numbers  of
order  near  10121  occurs  only  in  this  already  special  epoch  presents  a  distinct  coincidence  problem.   That
separate  coincidence  problem  is  solved  by  scaling  the  cosmological  constant  to  the  sixth  power  of  the
nucleon mass.

I. Introduction

It has been demonstrated that Dirac, Eddington and others were essentially correct
to suggest that some physics was responsible for generating the suspiciously large gallery
of pure numbers of order near 1040 (Funkhouser 2006).  The coincidence problem among
the  large,  pure  numbers  was  found  to  be  a  result  of  the  physics  of  the  standard
cosmological  model.   However,  the  fact  that  the  Dirac-Eddington  large-number
coincidence occurs only in this same epoch in which the cosmic coincidence also occurs
represents a distinct coincidence problem that is not resolved through modern cosmology.
It was found that this separate coincidence problem would be explained if the vacuum
energy  density  associated  with  the  cosmological  constant,  Λ,  were  scaled  to  the
characteristic gravitational energy density of the nucleon.  That scaling law,

Λ ~

c 2
G

2
Gmn
4
ln
where mn and ln are respectively the mass and Compton wavelength of the nucleon, also
would relate several other large-number coincidence problems including the Eddington-
Weinberg relation (Funkhouser 2006).  (Note that in this paper the cosmological constant
has  the  unit  inverse  second-squared.)   Scaling  the  cosmological  constant  to  the  sixth
power of the nucleon mass (as in Eq. (1)) was originally proposed by Zel’dovich based
on  considerations  of  quantum  field  theory  (Zel’dovich  1967).  Mena  Marugan  and
Carneiro also proposed that scaling law based on possible holographic limitations to the
nucleon volume (Mena 2006).

(1)

€ 

With the discovery of the accelerating Universe and re-introduction of Einstein’s
cosmological constant a new mystery concerning large pure numbers was initiated.  The
vacuum energy density εΛ associated with the cosmological constant is nearly 122 orders
of magnitude smaller than the energy density εP associated with the Planck scale.   The
factor 10122 is particularly interesting because an ensemble of apparently distinct, pure
numbers  of  similar  order  may  be  found  among  the  terms  associated  with  modern
cosmology, the holographic conjecture and the computational capacity of the universe.

In this letter a new coincidence problem among pure numbers of order near 10121
is presented.  The new coincidence problem is resolved using physics from the standard
cosmological model.   However, the fact that the new coincidence problem is generated
only in this same epoch in which the cosmic coincidence and the Dirac-Eddington large-

€ 

€ 

number coincidence occur constitutes a distinct coincidence problem.  It is shown that the
proposed relationship in Eq. (1) would explain that coincidence.

II. The Pure Numbers of Order Near 10121

The first two large pure numbers of order near 10121 presented here are associated
with modern cosmology and involve the cosmological constant.  The ratio of the Planck
energy density to the apparent vacuum density may be expressed explicitly as
3mPc 2 /(4πlP
3)
3Λc 2 /(8πG)

≈ 1.7 ×10122 ,

(2)

≈

εP
εΛ

where mP and lP are the Planck mass and length, respectively, G is Newton’s gravitation
constant c is the speed of light in a vacuum.  This term is, by definition, proportional to
c 5 /(GhΛ) where h is the Planck constant.  That pure number is a fundamental term and
will be shown to represent the maximum number of bits ever available to our Universe.
The other pure numbers of similar order will be reduced to this term.

€ 

Wesson  has  introduced  a  microphysical  mass  scale  that  is  obtained  from  the
mW ≡ hΛ1/ 2c−2  is meant to represent the smallest natural
cosmological constant.  The mass 
mass quantum.  Mongan has shown that mW would be the mass associated with one bit of
information  in  a  holographic  Universe  (Mongan  2006).   The  mass  of  the  observable
Universe happens to be about 10120 times greater than the Wesson mass quantum:

€ 

≈ 1.6 ×10120.

M 0
mW
 is of order 10120, but this is because it also reduces to

(3)

Note that the term 
c 5 /(GhΛ).

(
GmW
  

2 /(hc)

)−1

€ 

The next two large numbers presented are taken from analyses of the information
content of the observable Universe.  According to the holographic conjecture the number
N0 of bits of information currently allowed in the observable Universe is one fourth of the
2   of  the  sphere  whose  radius  is  the  cosmic  particle  horizon  R0,
surface  area 
measured in Planck units.  That pure number is given by

A0 = 4πR0

€ 

N 0 ≡

2
πR0
2 ≈ 2.0 ×10122.
lP

(4)

€ 

Note  that  the  similarity  between  Eq.  (2)  and  Eq.  (4)  in  itself  represents  an  interesting
coincidence.  It just so happens that the epoch in which the cosmic coincidence occurs is
also the epoch in which the number of available bits of information is of order near the
ratio of the Planck density to the vacuum density.  That coincidence will be explained in
the following paragraphs.

€ 

Mena Marugan and Carneiro have suggested that the holographic principle may
require that the number of characteristic nucleon volumes contained within the volume of
the observable Universe be of order near the total number of bits of information (Mena
2006).  In any case, the observable number of characteristic nuclear volumes is
3
 
 
 

≈ 9.3 ×10122

 
R0
 
ln
 

(5)

where ln is the Compton wavelength of the nucleon.

€ 

(6)

(7)

(8)

The  next  large  pure  number  of  interest  to  this  discussion  is  taken  from
considerations  of  the  computational  power  of  the  observable  Universe.   Lloyd  has
determined  that  the  total  number  of  computations  Nc  performed  by  the  observable
Universe is given by

where T0 is the age of the Universe (Lloyd 2002).  That Nc should be of similar order to
the number of bits of information in the Universe N0 in Eq. (4) is not obvious.

The final two large pure numbers of order near 10121 are

M 0c 2T0
h

N c =
  

≈ 8.7 ×10120 ,

2
GM 0
hc

R0M 0c
h

  

≈ 1.9 ×10119

≈ 1.4 ×10120.

€ 

and

€ 

The term in Eq. (7) is identical to the square of the ratio of the mass of the observable
Universe to the Planck mass.   In general, the square of the ratio of any mass M to the
Planck  mass  mP  is  identical  to  the  ratio  of  the  characteristic  gravitational  self-energy
(GM2/lM)  of  that  mass  to  its  rest  energy  Mc2  where  lM  is  the  Compton  wavelength
associated with the mass.  The term in Eq. (8) is the ratio of the cosmic particle horizon to
the Compton wavelength associated with the mass of the observable Universe.

€ 

Insomuch  as  the  large-number  coincidence  of  Dirac  and  Eddington  ever
constituted a problem, the terms in Eqs. (2) – (8) also constitute a coincidence problem.
The coincidence problem associated with the gallery of pure numbers of order near 10121
in Eqs. (2) – (8) is resolved in the following paragraph using a few physical scaling laws
from  the  standard  cosmological  model.   The  first  such  scaling  law  follows  from  the
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker-Lemaitre  equation  and  the  Raychaudhuri  equation
(Funkhouser 2006):

~ c 2

GM
R
where  M  is  the  observable  mass  of  the  Universe  at  any  time  in  a  matter-dominated
Universe and R is the particle horizon at that same time.  This relationship is still roughly
satisfied  in  this  era  since  vacuum-dominance  has  just  begun  in  this  age.   The  cosmic
coincidence between the mass-energy and vacuum energy densities may be expressed as
Gρ0 ~ Λ, where ρ0 is the current density of matter.  As a result of the cosmic coincidence
and Eq. (9) the following scaling law is satisfied in this era:

 (9)

€ 

Λ ~

c 2
2 .
R0

(10)

Another scaling law that is useful in resolving the new large-number coincidence
H0 ~ Λ ~ 1/T0

(11)
where H0 is the current value of the Hubble parameter.  Eq. (11) results from the FRLW
equations, the Raychaudhuri Equation and the fact that the energy density of the cosmos
is apparently vacuum-dominated (Funkhouser 2006).

€ 

Eqs. (9)-(11) resolve the new large-number coincidence problem as follows.  Eq.
(3) follows from Eq. (2), (9) and (10).  Eq. (4) follows from Eqs. (2) and (10), which is to
say  that  the  number  of  available  bits  in  the  Universe  is  of  order  near  the  maximum

€ 

€ 

number that the Universe could ever contain.  The maximum number of bits is achieved
as the horizon approaches the critical de Sitter horizon 
RΛ ~ c / Λ  and the number of
(RΛ /lP)2 ~ c 5 /(GhΛ).  Eq. (6) and Eq. (7) both follow from Eqs. (2), (9),
available bits is 
(10) and (11).   Eq. (8) follows from  Eqs. (2), (9) and (10).   The only pure number of
order near 10121 that has not been physically related to Eq. (2) is the term in Eq. (5).  All
that remains of the coincidence among pure numbers of order near 10121 is therefore
εP
εΛ

3
R0
3 ,
lP

(12)

€ 

€ 

~

which no longer constitutes a compelling coincidence problem.   This relationship does
have an important role in a separate coincidence problem that is detailed in the following
section.

€ 

II. The Triple Cosmic Coincidence Problem and the Cosmological Constant

There are now at least three apparently distinct coincidence problems among large
numbers  that  are  generated  only  in  this  epoch.   The  cosmic  coincidence,  the  Dirac-
Eddington large-number coincidence, and the new coincidence among pure numbers of
order near 10121 all occur only in this epoch.   It is reasonable to hypothesize that some
physical connection is behind the coincidence of three such coincidence problems.

It  was  shown  in  Ref.  (Funkhouser  2006)  that  the  large  number  coincidence  of
Dirac and Eddington would follow from the cosmic coincidence if Eq. (1) represented a
physical scaling.   Curiously, that same scaling law  explains why  the new  coincidence
problem among terms of order near 10121 is satisfied in the same epoch as those other two
coincidence problems.

If  Eq. (1) could be considered a scaling law then the term in Eq. (5) would be
physically linked to all of the other terms in Eqs. (2) – (8) since Eq. (5) follows from Eq.
(1)  and  Eq.  (10).   This  in  itself  is  not  important  since  the  coincidence  among  pure
numbers of order near 10121 was resolved without connecting Eq. (5) to the other terms.
However, if Eq. (5) were the result of physics then each of the Dirac-Eddington numbers
of order near 1040 would be physically related to each of the large pure numbers of order
near 10121.   This  would  happen  because  the  cube-root  of  the  term  in  Eq.  (5)  is  (R 0/ln),
which  is  one  of  the  pure  numbers  of  order  near  1040  that  follows  from  Eq.  (1)
(Funkhouser 2006).   So, if Eq. (1) were a physical scaling law then the coincidence of
pure numbers of order near 10121 would follow from the Dirac-Eddington large number
coincidence, which would follow from the cosmic coincidence, thus resolving the triple-
coincidence problem of large numbers.

References:
Funkhouser, S., Proc. Roy. Soc. A 462 (2076)
Lloyd, S., Phys Rev Lett 88 (2002) 237901
Mena Marugan, G. and Carneiro, S., Phys Rev D 65 (2002) 087303
Mongan,  T.,  Holography  and  non-locality  in  a  closed  vacuum-dominated  Universe,
accepted for publication in IJTP in 2006, gr-qc/0609128
Zeldovich, Ya.B., Pisma ZhETF 6 (1967) 883

