Acta Geodyn. Geomater., Vol.3, No.2 (142), 17-29, 2006 
  

SEISMOTECTONICS OF BOSNIA - OVERVIEW   

Mensur OMERBASHICH 1)* and Galiba SIJARIĆ 2) 

 

1) Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, 1 Cyclotron Rd., Berkeley 94720, CA, USA 

Ph. +1-510-486-6780, Fax: +1-510-486-4102, momerbashich@lbl.gov 
Now at: Dept of Physics, Faculty of Science, U of Sarajevo. Zmaja od Bosne 35, Sarajevo Bosnia. Phone +387-
33-250-483, Fax +387-33-649-359, momerbasic@pmf.unsa.ba; cc: omerbashich@yahoo.com. 

2) Faculty of Science, University of Sarajevo, Zmaja od Bosne 33/35, 71000 Sarajevo, Bosnia 

*Corresponding author‘s e-mail: momerbasic@pmf.unsa.ba; cc: omerbashich@yahoo.com 
 
(Received July 2005, accepted May 2006) 
 
ABSTRACT  
Bosnia’s seismotectonics seems to follow the Mediterranean marine regime. Earthquakes occur mostly in the outer Dinaric 
Alps (southern Bosnia), while the strongest earthquakes occur within the Sarajevo Fault system in southern and northwestern 
Bosnia.  In  addition  to  active  tectonics  being  strong,  crustal  earthquakes  occur  often  as  well.  Due  to  Bosnia’s  rich 
hydrogeology,  crustal  loading  such  as  by  snow  and  rain,  or  reservoir  inundation,  represents  the  most  important  secondary 
seismogenic  source  in  the  region.  Despite  its  exquisite  and  active  geomorphology  no  comprehensive  and  reliable 
geodynamical studies exist on the region. Seismic sensors coverage is extremely poor also. One centenary analogue, and a 
few recently installed digital seismometers are insufficient for a region that exhibits mild-to-high seismic activity. Significant 
investments  are  needed  in  order  for  GPS,  seismic  and  other  sensor-instrumented  networks  to  be  put  in  place  or  enhanced. 
Technical  personnel  needs  to  be  educated  to  enable  support  provide  for  studies  that  are  done  within  broader  scientific 
activities. Such efforts that presently seek to include Bosnia under their scope are ESF-COST Action 625, NATO Stability 
Pact DPPI program, and EUREF/CERGOP geophysics projects. 
 
KEYWORDS: Bosnia, tectonics, geodynamics, geophysics, geodesy, seismic hazard 

 

 

Ph. +387-33-250-485, Fax: +387-33-645-328 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GEOLOGY OF BOSNIA REGION 
 
By  Bosnia  region  (or  simply:  Bosnia)  we  mean 
 
that  part  of  the  Earth’s  upper  crust  that  encompasses 
 
the territory and aquatory bounded by the Sava River 
 
in the north, the Una River and the Krka River in the 
 
west,  the  Drina  River  and  the  Boka  Kotorska  Bay  in 
the  east,  and  the  Adriatic  Sea  to  the  international 
 
waters  in  the  south;  see  Figure  2.  We  select  the 
 
midstream  portion  of  the  Vrbas  River  as  our  case 
 
study  (term  used  loosely).  All  seismic  magnitudes 
 
used  in  this  work  are  local  seismic  magnitudes  ML, 
 
used in the Sarajevo observatory centennial record. 
Few  contemporary  and  comprehensive  geo-
 
physical  studies  exist  on  the  region,  e.g.,  by  Vidović 
 
(1974)  and  by  Papeš  (1988).  Hence  the  current 
 
knowledge  on  the  regional  geology  is  rather  sparse. 
 
Additionally,  due  to  geomorphologic  abundance  as 
 
well as widespread erosion and vegetation, as well as 
wind, snow, and other external influences that destroy 
 
the surface evidence, only limited reliable information 
 
on the Bosnia’s geology are available. 
 

 

igneous  and  metamorphic 

According  to  what  is  known  on  its  lithofacial 
development,  the  region  is  comprised  of  various 
sedimentary, 
rocks. 
According to some rough estimates, about 70% of this 
geologically  rich  region  belongs  to  the  Mesozoic, 
about 20% can be dated to the more recent Cainozoic, 
and  about  10%  to  the  earliest  Palaeozoic  eras  (Čičić, 
2002).  Powerful  volcanic  activity,  which  largely 
reshaped  the  upper  crust  and  ended  sedimentation, 
peaked  during  the  Palaeozoic-Carboniferous.  The 
oldest  sediments  in  the  region  are  the  Palaeozoic-
Silurian (ibid.). 

The Dinaric Alps, as a major geotectonic fraction 
of  the  Southern  Alps  makes  the  dominant  tectonic 
system in Bosnia. Oriented in the northwest–southeast 
direction, with Bosnia in its central part, this relatively 
young system laid beneath the Tethys Sea for the most 
part throughout geological time, until the beginning of 
the Alpine orogenic cycle that has been going on ever 
since  upper  Permian  –  some  250  million  years  ago 
(ibid.).  

18

M. Omerbashich and G. Sijarić 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1  Stress  Map of the  Mediterranean  (Reinecker  et  al.,  2003). Shown  are horizontal  stress directions  from 
 
different  data  acquisition  methods  as  part  of  the  World  stress  map.  Dotted  line  is  the  trace  of  African 
 
plate boundary. Note lack of data for Bosnia. 
 
 
 
 
Evidence  of  tectonic  activity  can  be  found 
 
throughout  the  region.  Thus  the  karst  of  the  region’s 
 
south  is  unique  for  its  large  number  of  closed  blind-
valley depressions. Blind valleys with flat and alluvial 
 
bottoms up to 60 km in diameter can be attributed to 
 
active faults as well as intense solution activity in the 
 
carbonate rock. The southwest Bosnia is characterized 
 
by  karst  (limestone  caves,  crevices,  and  sinkholes), 
 
with  small  depressions  containing  cultivable  soils. 
Two main passes in the Dinaric Alps lay in the south 
 
of  the  Bosnia  region:  the  Krka  River  canyon  and  the 
 
Neretva River valley. 
 
Bosnia  has  substantial  supply  of  a  range  of 
 
minerals,  such  as  iron,  bauxite,  and  coal,  as  well  as 
 
that 
rivers  of  significant  hydroelectric  potential, 
appear  however  in  a  geological  setup  with  numerous 
 
faulting  zones  posing  a  seismic  risk  due  to  reservoir 
 
inundations,  unknown  crustal  loading  effects,  and 
 
mining.  Mining  activities  in  the  region  had  started 
 
with  formation  of  first  human  settlements  during  the 
 
Neolithic  Period  –  between  7000  and  3500  BC.  Iron 
has  been  mined  since  7th  century  BC  for  export  to 
 
ancient  Greece.  Silver,  copper,  and  asphalt  were
 
mined  throughout  the  Illyrian  era  for  export  to  the 
 
Roman Empire, mostly for coin minting needs. 
 
 
SEISMOTECTONICS OF BOSNIA REGION 
 
The  northward  movement  of  the  African  plate, 
 
and its collision with Eurasia while sliding beneath the 
 

the  southern 
Bosnia,  i.e.,  in  the  outer  Dinaric  Alps,  see  Figure  2. 
Because  of  Bosnia’s  intense  hydrogeology,  crustal 
loading  due  to,  e.g.,  snow  and  rain  masses  (Saar  and 
Manga, 2003), and – to a lesser extent – due to large 
reservoirs (Toppozada and Morrison, 1982), provides 
the most pronounced secondary seismogenic source in 
the  region.  As  a  result  of  its  tectonics  and  secondary 
episodic 
seismogenic 
earthquakes  of  M5  and  above,  which  are  potentially 
threatening  to  human  life  and  habitats.  Earthquakes 
that 
toll  while  causing  vast  urban 
destruction have been recorded recently as well, such 
as the M6.4 Banja Luka event of 27 October 1969, see 
Figures  3  and  5,  preceded  by  a  M4  foreshock  of  26 
October 1969.  The strongest instrumentally recorded 
earthquake in Bosnia proper over the past one hundred 
years,  as  seen 
the  Sarajevo  seismological 
observatory  record,  was  an  M6.5  earthquake  of  1923 
near  a  southern  town  of  Tihaljina,  Figure  4.    Due  to 

European  continent,  is predominantly  influencing  the 
principal  horizontal  stress  directions  in  the  Bosnia 
region, see Figure 1. Thus the seismotectonics picture 
of the region is typical of the general marine regime of 
the  Mediterranean  belt.  This  belt  is  characterized  by 
stages of magmatism and volcanic activity as well as 
by  recycling  of  sedimentary  regions  due  to  collision 
and subduction. Rheological knowledge derived from 
terrestrial  and  space  methods  points  at  the  same 
conclusion. 

Earthquakes  occur  mostly 

sources,  Bosnia 

take  death 

sees 

in 

in 

 

 

 

SEISMOTECTONICS OF BOSNIA - OVERVIEW 

19

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  region’s  general  tectonics  regime,  we focus  on
 
deep (25 km or deeper) faults, as they account for the 
 
strongest seismicity in the region. 
 
Up  until  the  early  1960-ies  it  was  believed  that 
 
too 
the  Bosnian  geomorphology 
complex  a  system  to  lend  itself  for  any  regularity. 
 
Research  attempts  to  date  have  concentrated  mainly 
 
the  surface  evidence,  and  on 
on  summarizing 
 
interpretations  of  sparse  geophysical 
speculative 
 
observations. Thus the first such study – by Vidović in 
 
1974  –  had  produced  a  series  of  feature  maps  with 
rather daring ideas. Consequently, and probably in an 
 

is  geospatially 

 

Fig. 2  Map of obvious, masked, detected, and presupposed traces of main deep and regional 
fault  system:  Sarajevo  Fault  (F0F0),  Gradiška  Fault  (F1F1),  Bihać  Fault  (F2F2),  Livno 
Fault (F3F3), Jablanica Fault (F4F4), and Mostar Fault (F5F5) . Also shown are 30 other 
tectonic units (distinctive features) represented by different hatches. Map source: Papeš 
(1988).  We plotted on top the epicenter locations (gray triangles) of deep (20 km and 
below) regional earthquakes that occurred from 1st January 1901 through 31st December 
2003,  as  recorded  at  Sarajevo  seismological  observatory.    Note  the  original,  Papeš 
(1988), map showing 30 tectonic units. 

attempt  to  give  the  final  word  on  the  issue,  some 
speculative and overly simplistic maps were produced 
in  that  study.  One  such  attempt  was  the  Map  of 
seismogenic  zones  in  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina in 
Vidović  (1974,  p.118),  in  which  various  criteria  for 
establishing  geographically  the  seismogenic  potential 
were  lumped  together.  However,  that  attempt  did  not 
factor in such effects as the nature of crustal loading-
related stress redistributions, the rock porosity, etc. 

In  the  most  comprehensive  study  to  day  of  the 
Bosnia  region,  Papeš  (1988)  connected  all  the  pieces 
in  a 
of 

the  Western  Balkans  tectonics  puzzle, 

 

 

20

M. Omerbashich and G. Sijarić 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Fig. 6  Geospatial  distribution  of  region’s  M
2.7+  seismicity  (shallow  and  deep) 
L 
from  historical  1901-2003 
the  Sarajevo  Seismological 
record  at 
Observatory.  Cf.  plot  of  incomplete  data  provided  by  Ivan  Brlek  of 
Meteorological  Service  of  Federation BiH 
(Ivan  Brlek,  personal 
communication 2003). 

 

Fig. 7  Seismological 

observatories 

coverage.  Updated 

source: 

Reinecker et al. (2003). 

 

SEISMOTECTONICS OF BOSNIA - OVERVIEW 

21

Fig. 8  Southeastern Europe’s Hazard Map, in terms of peak ground acceleration (Reinecker et 

 

al., 2003). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comprehensive  and  sound  manner.  As  he  reported, 
 
based  on  geophysical  drilling,  electrical  mea-
 
surements,  geodetic  and  seismic  surveys,  recent  deep 
 
earthquakes  Figure  2,  and  observational  evidence, 
(ibid.),  he  was  able  to  identify  ten  complete  deep 
 
faults and total of thirty tectonic units. 
 
Four of ten main (longer than 10 km) deep faults 
 
were found as reaching 30-50 km down to the Moho 
 
discontinuity. Figure 2 shows the main deep faults in 
 
the  region.  The  longest  one,  the  Sarajevo  Fault  F0F0, 
 
reaches  the  Moho  at  35-40  km,  extending  over  300 
 
km  or  the  entire  length  of  Bosnia.  Other  two  long 
deep  faults  approximately  coincide  with  some  of  the 
 
identified  tectonic  units,  see  Figure  2.  The  second 
 
longest  deep  fault  is  the  Banja  Luka  Fault  down  to 
 
Moho  at  30-35  km,  beginning  under  the  (town  of) 
 
Prijedor  Basin  west  of  Banja  Luka  city,  and 
 
continuing in the west-east direction while coinciding 
with the traces of the Kladanj (KD) and Devetak (DE) 
 
tectonic  units.  These  units  encompass  such  surface 
 
thermal  manifestations  as  the  Olovo,  Kladanj,  and 
 
Višegrad spas. The Banja Luka Fault then finally exits 
 
underneath  the  Drina  River  on  to  Serbia.  The  third 
 
long deep fault is the Konjic Fault, reaching the Moho 
at  40-45  km,  originating  off  of  the  Sarajevo  Fault 
 
underneath the town of Jajce, and coinciding with the 
 
traces  of  the  Kupres  (KU),  Manjača  (MA),  Ljubuša 
 
(LJU),  and  Glamoč  (GL)  tectonic  units that  contain 
 
gaseous  water  wells,  and  finally  exiting  on  to 
 
Montenegro.  Main  transverse  deep  faults  are  the 
Gradiška  Fault  (F1F1),  the  Bihać  Fault  (F2F2),  the 
 
Livno Fault (F3F3), the Jablanica Fault (F4F4), and the 
 
Mostar  Fault  (F5F5),  Figure  2.  All  main transverse 
 
deep faults submerge under the Sarajevo Fault (Papeš, 
 
1988),  while  the  Livno  Fault  reaches  the  Moho;  the 
 
depth of the M4.7 earthquake of 23 May 1974 beneath 

the 
town  of  Livno  was  estimated  at  38  km. 
Obviously,  depth  estimates  in  Papeš’s  work  were 
largely severed by sparse seismometer coverage. 

There  are  indications  however  that  other  deep 
fault  systems  exist  in  the  region  besides  the  ones 
mentioned herein, and besides the known Sava River 
Fault  in  the north. For  instance,  the  M4.3  earthquake 
of 8 April 1989 near the town of Trebinje, 25 km east 
of Dubrovnik, was estimated at 39 km depth; as well 
as  other  deep  earthquakes  and  deep  sequences  in  the 
same  area,  see  Figure  2.  The  Bosnia’s  deepest 
recorded  event  was  the  M3.7  earthquake  of  26  May 
1997, underneath  the  town  of  Lištica  at  the  southern 
end of Mostar Fault, estimated at 47 km. The deepest 
earthquakes  that  occurred  over  the  past  century  were 
mostly  located  around  the  towns  of  Livno,  6  of  73, 
Bihać  4  of  8,  and  Bosansko  Grahovo,  4  of  22.  An 
interesting  sequence  occurred  near  the  town  of 
Bosansko  Grahovo  between  25  November  – 24 
December 1986, when four earthquakes of M5.9, 3.6, 
4.4, and 4.9 had stricken at depths of 21, 13, 15, and 
29  km,  respectively.  Strong  sequences  can  be  found 
the  Sarajevo  observatory  centennial 
throughout 
record.  Geospatial  distribution  of  region’s  M
2.7+ 
L
seismicity  from  this  historical  1901-2003  record  is 
shown on Figure 6. 

Centennial  deep  seismicity  as  plotted  on  Figure 
2,  suggests  that  faulting  systems  in  the  region  are 
comprised  mostly  of  mature  faults  of  substantial 
strength.  High  seismic  activity  along  the  transverse 
deep faults, in contrast to low-to-mild seismic activity 
along the major (longest) deep fault zone, indicate that 
the  Sarajevo  Fault  F0F0,  as  the  longest  deep  fault 
system  in  Bosnia,  as  well  as  the  F1F1  Gradiška  Fault 
Figures 3 and 5, as a branch of F0F0, could have a high 
strength and therefore episodes of M6 earthquakes or 

 

 

22

M. Omerbashich and G. Sijarić 

stronger  could  be  expected  in  their  locality.  (Note 
 
however  a  lack  of  information  on  very  strong 
 
earthquakes  in  the  recent  geological  past  of  up  to 
 
50,000 years ago.) 
 
The last century’s strongest, Tihaljina earthquake 
 
of  1923,  took  place  in  the  locality  of  the  intersection 
of  two  deep  faults,  some  50  km  southward  along  the 
 
extension  of  the  Livno  Fault  F1F1,  and  30  km 
 
southward  along  the  extension  of  the  Mostar  Fault 
 
F5F5,  see  Figure  4.    Recently,  as  it  is  generally 
 
expected  from  long  such  faults,  M6+  earthquakes 
 
occurred around the midsection of the Sarajevo Fault 
at the proximity of the Gradiška Fault – in 1888, 1935, 
 
1969, and 1981, between the cities of Banja Luka and 
 
Jajce. Thus it would appear that a strong earthquake of 
 
M6 or above is overdue all through the midsection of 
 
the Sarajevo Fault joint with the Gradiška Fault. 
 
Bosnia’s seismogenic sources may seem akin to 
those of other regions in the world. Comparing a fault 
 
system  in  one  area  of  the  world  to  a  fault  system  in 
 
another  part  of  the  world  can  enhance  knowledge  on 
 
either of the fault systems spatial-temporal evolution; 
 
see, e.g., Tondi and Cello (2003). The Sarajevo Fault 
 
traverses  the  entire  length  of  Bosnia.  It  is  generally 
recognized  that  long  faults  suffer  most  stress  around 
 
their midsections, while stress drops toward the fault’s 
 
ends.  As  mentioned  above,  this  also  seems  to  be  the 
 
case  with  the  Sarajevo  Fault  F0F0,  see  Figure  2. 
 
Furthermore,  southern  Bosnia  experiences  high 
 
seismic  activity  albeit  of  mild-to-high  intensity.  It  is 
frequent 
traditionally  viewed  as  helpful 
 
earthquakes  seemingly  aid  the  faulting  system  to 
 
release  a  portion  of  its  stress,  nevertheless  mostly  at 
 
fault’s  ends,  or  in  case  of  Bosnia  around  the  main 
 
fault’s  branches  Figure  2.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
 
central  part  of  the  Sarajevo  Fault  sees  strongest 
earthquakes not as frequently but apparently episodic. 
 
(Note that the Sarajevo Fault is not seen as a classical 
 
strike slip fault.) Finally, it can be stated that, relative 
 
to  the  general  seismicity  regime  of  Bosnia,  the 
 
Sarajevo Fault is the strongest and in terms of strong 
 
earthquake  occurrence  one  of  the  quietest  faults  in 
Bosnia. 
 
As  previously  reported  by  many  researchers, 
 
the 
new  reservoirs 
 
midsections  of  large  faults  can  cause  the  total  fault 
 
stress to exceed a normal strength of the fault. Leith et 
 
al.  (1981)  give  one  such  account  of  a  connection 
between  local  structure  and  regional  tectonics.  A 
 
newly proposed Vrbas River reservoir near the city of 
 
Banja  Luka  lays  central  to  the  Sarajevo  Fault.  The
 
proposed  lake  supposedly  should  encompass  the 
 
Grebenska  Cliff  (Grebenska  klisura)  in  the  length  of 
 
about 30 km, see Figure 3. It is possible that a nearby, 
recently built reservoir Bočac (pronounced: botch-utz) 
 
has  already  induced  an  unspecified  increase  in  the 
 
level of low-to-mild seismic activity in the same area 
 
all the way to some 50 km upstream the Vrbas River. 
 
The  proposed  accumulation  lake,  see  Figures 3 
 
and 5, would inundate the section of the Vrbas River 

impounded  across 

that  are 

that 

 

 

in the Grebenska Cliff between the town of Bočac and 
the city of Banja Luka, of about 30 km in length, and 
with  varying  water  mass  volume, 
i.e.,  varying 
recharge phase cycles of reservoir level. The proposed 
reservoir’s bedrock composition includes mostly karst 
(limestone  and  dolomite)  conglomerates  and  marl, 
with  sediments  in  the  midsection,  see  Figure  5.  This 
case  scenario  can  lead  to  the  reservoir-induced,  or 
porosity-related seismicity (Chen and Talwani, 1998). 
Moreover,  the  unknown  stress  redistribution 
effects,  combined  with  landslides  and  pore  pressure-
related and snowmelt-related deformities of the upper 
material,  are  likely  to  be  present  throughout  the 
region.  The  proposed  Vrbas  River  project  could  thus 
result  in  series  of  karst  or  even  tectonic  earthquakes 
along  the  F1F1,  Gradiška  Fault  alone,  which  already 
saw  episodes  of  M6+  earthquakes,  see  Figure  2. 
Besides,  we  saw  that  the  Gradiška  Fault  already 
belongs  to  the  earthquake-prone  midsection  of  the 
calmest  (and  presumably  strongest)  Sarajevo  Fault 
F0F0. 

In  addition  to  Bosnia’s  specific  tectonic  setup 
that includes rich hydrogeology, there is a significant 
level of mineral resources exploitation going on in the 
presence  of  karst  caves.  Such  excavation  in  Bosnia 
typically  goes  on  for  several  centuries  to  several 
millennia,  and  occurs  often  in  the  proximity  of 
reservoir-inundated  areas.  The  bauxite  ore  mines 
around  the  Grebenska  Cliff,  see  Figure  5,  pose  one 
such  risk.  This adds  to  the  hazard  from  secondary 
seismogenic sources in the region. 

Of 262 seismic stations in Southeastern Europe, 
see Figure 7, only 3 operate in Bosnia, of which two 
digital  but  not  continuous  stations  are  located  in  the 
cities of Banja Luka and Mostar since a few years ago, 
and  one  analogue  station  in  Sarajevo  since  1899. 
Figure  8  shows  a  current  seismic  hazard  map  of 
Southeastern  Europe 
terms  of  peak  ground 
acceleration  at  10%  probability  of  exceedance  in  50 
years  on  475-year  return  period  (Reinecker  et  al., 
2003).  It can be seen from Figure 8 that Bosnia – its 
southern  part  in  particular  – is  positioned  in  a  high 
seismic hazard zone. 

in 

 

GEODYNAMICS STUDIES OF BOSNIA REGION 

Available  studies  on  the  region’s  geodynamics 
are  very  sparse.  Previous  field  campaigns  seldom 
sought  to  determine  the  dynamics  of  the  region  as  a 
whole.  One  regional  study  by  Jovanović  (1967)  used 
centennial precise-leveling data to establish the recent 
crustal uplift in the region. Data from precise-leveling 
campaigns of 1931 vs. 1873, and 1961 vs. 1946, were 
used  in  ibid.    He  found  the  uplift  be  in  the  order  of 
some mm/yr; see Figure 9. This is in agreement with 
the  general  tectonics  tendency  in  the  region,  see 
Figure  1,  as  well  as  the  subsequent  study  by  Papeš 
(1988). 

Modern  geodynamical  studies  also  concur  with 
the above findings on crustal uplift. Mostly northwest-

SEISMOTECTONICS OF BOSNIA - OVERVIEW 

23

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
striking faults Figure 1 indicate horizontally that there 
 
is  a  fault  trend  coincidental  with  the  Dinaric  Alps. 
 
Unfortunately, modern geodynamical studies that used
GPS to detect potential horizontal movements such as 
 
the so-called lithospheric compression and expansion, 
 
have  failed  to  produce  regionally  meaningful  results, 
 
owing  to  low  spatial  density  of  GPS  stations  used  in 
 
those  studies. The  permanent  GPS  station  “SRJV”  in 
 
Sarajevo  is  the  region’s only  permanent  GPS  station. 
It  is  a  part  of  the  Central  European  GPS  Reference 
 
Network  (CEGRN).  Preliminary  results  of  ~5  mm/yr 
 
northern-to-northeasterly tendency, as per unpublished 
 
CEGRN vector-solutions using the SRJV half-decade 
 
long record, point at the above general conclusion on 
 
the  northern-to-northeasterly  trends  of  the  Dinaric 
Alps as a whole. 
 
The  Bosnian  only  permanent  station  “SRJV”  is 
 
situated  at  the  roof  of  the  Department  of  Geodesy  at 
 
the University of Sarajevo. The 5° elevation mask was 
 
selected. A PC station on uninterrupted power supply 
 
is part of the installation. The instrument is a Trimble 
SSI  4000  receiver  without  any  auxiliary  gauges, 
 
which are to be added. The station became operational 
 
on  11  June  1999  at  17:14  UT.  It  operates  nearly 
 
continuously,  with  nightly  FTP  uploads,  and  certain 
 
the 
interruptions.  “SRJV”  station  contributes 

to 

 

Fig. 9  Recent  crustal  uplift  velocities  in  mm/yr,  from  centennial 
precise-leveling 
increment:  30' 
records.  Horizontal  grid 
longitude.  Vertical  grid  increment:  20'  latitude.  (Jovanović, 
1967). 

solution.  Geotechnical 
European  weekly  GPS 
characteristics  of  the  underlying  bedrock  primarily 
include  clastic  and  marl  Miocene  Tertian  bedrock 
type, with some clay. In addition, the host building is 
situated  on  a  terrain  that  is  rather  sloped  in  the 
southward  direction,  and  lies  in  a  close  proximity  of 
former  extensive  depots  of  brick  material.  This  is  far 
from  a  perfect  choice  of  location  for  a  tectonic 
the  economic  considerations 
observation  station; 
however  were  detrimental  in  making  this  specific 
selection.    For  the  above  reasons  the  true  velocity 
could  be  greater  for  the  “SRJV”  station  than  pre-
liminary suggested. Use of GAMIT/GLOBK software 
is planned for future works. 

The  present  coverage  of  Bosnia  by  GPS 
campaigns 
is  somewhat  satisfactory.  The  state 
networks  seem  dense  enough  to  serve  as  a  basis  for 
fostering geodynamics investigations. This still needs 
further efforts so as to improve on the lack of spatial-
temporal  seismotectonics  information.  Forthcoming 
GPS densifications are to fill spatially the gaps in the 
present  GPS-stations  coverage,  at  some  of  the  most 
important  rheological/hazardous  features  such  as  the 
Livno  Fault,  the  ever  sinking  Tuzla  salt  mine  system 
(one  of  the  Europe’s  largest),  and  so  on.  The 
the  permanent  GPS 
upcoming  densifications  of 

 

 

24

M. Omerbashich and G. Sijarić 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

networks so as to include at least two such new GPS 
points should further enhance the resolution of vector-
solutions.  Moreover,  such  densifications  should 
enable  an  overall  hazard  assessment  in  view  of  the 
the  1901-present 
improved  spectral  analyses  of 
the  Sarajevo 
centennial  historical 
seismological  observatory.  This 
record  contains 
valuable information on local and regional seismicity, 
and it is one of the Europe’s oldest and most complete 
such instrumented archives. 

record 

from 

The  State  Geodetic  Surveys  of  Bosnia  have 
conducted  total  of  seven  GPS  campaigns,  with  36 
GPS-observed stations so far. These 36 stations were 
observed  primarily  as  an  aid  in  assessing  the  overall 
geospatial  sparseness  in  the region. Those  campaigns 
included  the  “CROREF  1996”  and  “BIHREF  1998”, 
both  under  the  auspices  of  the  European  Reference 
Frame  (EUREF)  project,  the  “Extended  SAGET 
1998”  within  the  European  Satellite  Geodynamical 
Traverses  project,  as  well  as  the  Consortium  for 
Central  European  GPS  Geodynamic  Reference 
Network (CEGRN)  “CEGRN 99”,  “CEGRN 01”  and 
“CEGRN  03”,  all  within 
the  CERGOP-Central 
Europe  Regional  Geodynamics  Project.  There  was 
also  one  regional  densification  campaign,  “BIHREF 
2000”. 

So  far,  Bosnian  GPS  campaigns  have  each 
included  five  static  24  h  sessions  at  15  s  sampling 
intervals,  under  a  15°  elevation  mask,  where  L1/L2 
wGP  antennae  were  used.  Data  were  processed  at 
BKG/IFAG  Frankfurt  using  Bernese  software  v.4.0. 
The  unpublished  CERGN  coordinates  standard 
accuracy is 2.0 mm NE, 6.5 mm in height. 

 

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

Since  geodynamics  of  the  Bosnia  region  is  not 
sufficiently  understood,  it  is  of  key  importance  to 
determine  the  strength  of  revealed  and  presupposed 
faulting  systems,  namely  the  Sarajevo  Fault,  in  order 
to  classify  creep  and  slip  faulting.  Prioritizing  and 
subsequently  creating new  regional  and  local  seismic 
hazard maps is called for, also. 

For  that  purpose,  geodynamical  GPS  studies  of 
friction force and normal stresses in fault systems are 
necessary. This would build on the current knowledge 
gained  from  3D  geodynamical  GPS  studies  that  are 
rapidly  becoming  substantial.  Structural  analyses  and 
morphology studies ought to be undertaken, also; see, 
e.g.,  Borre  et  al.  (2003).  The  rock  pore  pressure  and 
cohesion must be determined; see, e.g., Townend and 
Zoback (2000), as well as the role of bedrock structure 
on  the  distribution  of  elevated  pore  pressure  and 
induced  seismicity;  see,  e.g.,  Talwani 
reservoir 
(2000).  Fault  maturity  and  gauges  have 
to  be
recognized from such new geological field campaigns. 
This is particularly important given the fact that most 
of  the  Bosnia's  main  faults  do  branch  into  many 
transform  fractures  along  which  most  of  the  region’s 
seismicity  occurs,  see  Figures  2  and  6.  New 
campaigns  should  therefore  aim  at  identifying  the 

 

most  active  main  faults  and  fault  systems  in  the 
region.  Since  Bosnia 
is  a  marine  country,  we 
recommend using the mean sea level for the definition 
of  the  horizontal  reference  plane  in  determining  the 
faults’ characteristics. 

loading 

that  could  change 

Bosnia  has  numerous  deep  and  active,  hence 
seismogenic  faults.  New  studies  as  well  as  study 
revisions are needed to determine heat flow conditions 
beneath  Bosnia,  and  to  examine  earthquake  swarm 
processes  and  their  potential  for  reactivating  large 
inactive  main  faults,  particularly  in  the  northeast  and 
in the south. Such potential could be also expected for 
reservoir 
the  stress 
distribution within the region which probably has not 
experienced  catastrophic  M7.5+  earthquakes  over  the 
last  several  millennia.  To  complete  such  studies,  the 
depth of major faults, i.e., those capable of producing 
damaging  earthquakes,  should  be  re-established  from 
existing records, as well as from new field studies too. 
The  Tihaljina  M6.5  earthquake  of  1923  should  be 
reassessed;  see,  e.g.,  Cello  et  al.  (2003).    Spatial 
clustering tendencies as inferred from Figure 6 for the 
Banja  Luka  and  the  Livno  faults,  both  in  the 
midsection  of  the  Sarajevo  Fault  system,  should  be 
examined further; see, e.g., Bala et al. (2003).  

Since  only  geospatially  partial  historic  records, 
extending over a century or so, exist in the region, and 
given the fact that triggering mechanisms for reservoir 
loading  are  largely  unknown,  our  remarks  on  the 
Vrbas  Reservoir  ramifications  should  be  taken  with 
caution.  However,  even  if  the  geological  setup  were 
not as grave as it may appear in the case of the Vrbas 
Reservoir  project,  a  permanent  telemetric  network  of 
seismometers  with  at  least  5  to  10  sensor  stations  in 
the vicinity of the reservoir should be made available 
for  any  such  project.  Some  other  measures  that  are  a 
must 
the  adjusting  of 
inundation  phase  cycles  so  as  to  avoid  the  summer 
periods.  This  should  be  done  because  of 
the 
possibility  of  seasonal  groundwater/snow  recharge-
induced seismicity as the area receives huge amounts
of  precipitation/snow;  see,  e.g.,  Saar  and  Manga 
(2003).  The  duration  of  inundation  phase  cycles 
should be kept shorter rather than longer, since longer 
cycles  of  around  1  year  in  duration  tend  to  be 
correlated  with  the  occurrence  of  larger  and  deeper 
earthquakes, according to, e.g., Talwani (1997). 

that  project 

include 

in 

The  current  state  of  affairs  in  geodynamics 
studies  in  the  region  is  promising.  Auxiliary  GPS 
studies should aim at establishing denser GPS control 
is  well 
networks.  Other  geophysical 
overdue, such as new precise-leveling campaigns and 
new  gravity  surveys,  followed  by  seismic  refraction 
surveys,  electric  resistance  profiling,  laser  distance 
measurements  of  geodetic  baselines,  geomorphology 
studies, river terrace inclination surveys, gathering of 
relevant satellite data, and so on. 

fieldwork 

Initiatives  to  revive  geosciences  research  in 
the  NATO  Stability  Pact  DPPI 
the  European 

include 
in 

seismology, 

and 

Bosnia 
program 

SEISMOTECTONICS OF BOSNIA - OVERVIEW 

25

project 

through 

Commission  (EC)  /  European  Science  Foundation 
 
(ESF)  COST  Action  625  –  3D  monitoring  of  active 
 
tectonic  structures.  Initiatives  to  revive  geosciences 
 
teaching  in  Bosnia  include  EC  TEMPUS  projects. 
 
Ongoing  projects  to  foster  geosciences  research  in 
 
Bosnia  include  the  EUREF  (European  Reference 
Frame) project in geodesy, and the CERGOP (Central 
 
in 
Europe  Regional  Geodynamics) 
 
geodynamics.  Outcomes  of  to-date  activities  in  some 
 
geosciences  in  Bosnia  are  at  somewhat  satisfactory 
 
level,  e.g.,  with  a  rising  international  cooperation  in 
 
structural  geology,  GPS  geodesy,  as  well  as  in 
the 
protection  of  Bosnian  geoheritage 
 
European ProGEO initiative. These activities make for 
 
a solid foundation to build on. 
 
The  next  steps  should  follow  modern  trends  in 
 
equipment  and  methodology.  Substantial  lack  of 
 
equipment  as  well  as  of  qualified  personnel  had 
prevented  any  serious  attempts  in  seismology,  too. 
 
Dozens  of  new  seismic  sensor  stations  are  needed.
 
Due  to  lack  of  adequate  (in  the  past  decade  – any) 
 
material  support,  most  geological  studies  to  date, 
 
including  the  Papeš’s  work  shown  here,  represent  a 
 
the  region’s 
summary  of  sparse  knowledge  on 
geological  past.  Substantial  need  exists  for  speedy 
 
recovery  of  geosciences  in  Bosnia  in  general  –
 
primarily in data acquisition and analysis, as well as in 
 
the equipment and software. International cooperation 
 
should help enhance training, and instate exchange as 
 
the keyword. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
Authors  thank  Dr.  Luigi  Piccardi  of  Camerino 
 
U.,  Italy,  for  his  useful  suggestions  as  well  as  his 
 
enthusiasm in including Bosnia into current scientific 
 
activities  within  European  integrations.  Mr.  Ivan 
 
Brlek  of  Meteorological  Service  of  Federation  BiH 
provided Bosnia’s historical earthquake records/plots. 
 
This  work  was  enabled  in  part  by  Ministry of 
 
Education and Science of the Sarajevo Canton, COST 
 
Action  625,  as  well  as  Tempus  project  CD-JEP-
 
16145-2001.(cid:1)
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Bala,  A.,  Radulian,  M.  and  Popescu,  E.:  2003, 
 
Earthquakes  distribution 
focal 
 
mechanism in correlation with the active tectonic 
 
zones  of  Romania.  J.  of  Geodynamics  36,  129–
 
145. 
 
Borre,  K.,  Cacon,  S.,  Cello,  G.,  Kontny,  B.,  Kostak, 
B., Likke Andersen, H., Moratti, G., Piccardi, L., 
 
L.,  Stemberk,  J.,  Tondi,  E.  and  Vilimek,  V.: 
 
2003,  The  COST  project  in  Italy:  analysis  and 
 
monitoring of seismogenic faults in the Gargano 
 
and  Norcia  areas  (central-southern  Apennines, 
 
Italy).  J. of Geodynamics 36, 3–18. 
Cello,  G.,  Tondi,  E.,  Micarelli,  L.  and  Mattioni,  L.: 
 
2003, Active tectonics and earthquake sources in 
 
 

their 

and 

the  epicentral  are  of 
the  1857  Basilicata 
earthquake  (southern  Italy).    J.  of  Geodynamics 
36, 37–50. 

Chen,  L.  and  Talwani,  P.:  1998,  Reservoir-induced 
in  China.  Pure  Appl.Geophys. 

seismicity 
153,133–149. 

Čičić,  S.:  2002,    A  1:30,000  Geological  Map  of 
Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  –  Compilation.  (In 
Bosnian: Geološka karta Bosne i Hercegovine u 
razmjeri 1:30.000). Geology Institute, University 
of Sarajevo, Bosnia. 

Jovanović,  P.:  1967,  Map  of  recent  crustal  uplift 
velocities in Yugoslavia. (In Bosnian: Pregledna 
karta  brzina  savremenih  vertikalnih  pomjeranja 
Zemljine  kore  u  SFRJ.)  Kongres  geodetskih 
inženjera i tehničara Jugoslavije, Sarajevo. 
Leith,  W.,  Simpson,  D.W.  and  Alvarez  W.:  1981, 
Structure and permeability: Geologic controls on 
induced 
at  Nurek  Reservoir, 
Tajikistan, USSR. Geology 9, 440-444. 

seismicity 

Marinković,  R.  and  Ahac,  A.:  1975,  Base  geological 
map  of  Yugoslavia.  (In  Bosnian:  Osnovna 
geološka  karta  SFRJ.)  Institut  za  geologiju 
“Geoinženjering”, Sarajevo, Bosnia. 

Papeš,  J.:  1988,  Tectonic  Composition  of  the  Ter-
rritory of Bosnia and Hercegovina. (In Bosnian: 
Tektonska građa teritorije SR BiH.) Unpublished 
report for  Science  Fund of  Bosnia-Hercegovina, 
Geoinstitut Ilidža, Sarajevo, Bosnia. 

Reinecker,  J.,  Heidbach,  O.  and  Mueller,  B.  (Eds.): 
2003, The 2003 release of the World Stress Map 
(online  edition  at  www.world-stress-map.org).
NATO DPPI Program. 

Saar, M.O. and Manga, M.: 2003, Seismicity induced 
by seasonal ground water recharge at Mt. Hood, 
Oregon.    Earth  and  Planetary  Sci.  Letters  214, 
605-618. 

Talwani, P.: 1997, On the nature of reservoir-induced 

seismicity. Pure Appl. Geophys. 150, 473–492. 

Talwani, P.: 2000, Seismogenic properties of the crust 
inferred from recent studies of reservoir-induced
seismicity  – Application  to  Koyna.  Current 
Science: Spec. Sec. on Seismology 79, 9. 

Tondi,  E.  and  Cello,  G.:  2003,  Spatiotemporal 
evolution  of  the  Central  Apennines  fault  system 
(Italy). J. of Geodynamics 36, 113–128. 

Toppozada,  T.R.  and  Morrison,  P.W.:  1982, 
levels  at  Oroville, 
lake 

Earthquake  and 
California. California Geology, 35, 6. 

Townend,  J.  and  Zoback,  M.D.:  2000,  How  faulting 

keeps the crust strong. Geology 28-5, 399–402. 

Vidović,  M.D.  (Ed.):  1974,  Geological  Contributions 
for Investigation of the Seismicity of the Bosnia 
(In  Bosnian:  Geološki  prilozi  za 
Region. 
izučavanje 
i 
Hercegovine.)  Report  by  Seizmološki  zavod 
(Seismology Institute of) BiH Sarajevo. 

terena  Bosne 

seizmičnosti 

 

 

 

M. Omerbashich and G. Sijarić: SEISMOTECTONICS OF BOSNIA - OVERVIEW 
 

 

 

Fig. 3  Traces of the Gradiška Fault (F1F1) – left panel, and Livno Fault (F3F3) – right panel, as parts 

of the region's largest, Sarajevo Fault F0F0.  LANDSAT 2000 overlay. 

Fig. 4  Traces  of  the  Livno  Fault  (F3F3)  and  Mostar  Fault  (F5F5)  as  parts  of  the  region's  largest, 

Sarajevo Fault F0F0.  LANDSAT 2000 overlay. 

M. Omerbashich and G. Sijarić: SEISMOTECTONICS OF BOSNIA - OVERVIEW 

 

 

Fig. 5  Geological map of Grebenska Cliff (Marinković and Ahac, 1975). 
 

