Samuel Preston and E=mc2

Jean-Paul Auffray

07700 Saint-Martin d’Ardèche, France
(e-mail: jpauffray@yahoo.fr)

Abstract.  In  his  1875  determination  of  the  mass-energy  equivalence,  did  Samuel  Preston  actually 

consider ether to be “rarefied mass” and mass to be “concentrated ether”?  

Keywords: Preston, ether, mass, energy, E=mc2, Poincaré.

INTRODUCTION

In  a  recent  communication  diffused  on  arXiv  1,  I  briefly  alluded  to 
Samuel  Tolver  Preston’s  1875  reasoning  which  led  him  to  the  relation 
E=mc2 via  Le Sage’s  postulate  of  the  existence  in  space  of tenuous ether 
particles  moving  at  the  speed  of  light.  Dr  Kyriazi  of  the  University  of 
Pittsburgh  School  of  Medicine  has  raised  the  question  as  to  whether 
Preston’s  line  of  reasoning  actually  relies  on  the  assumption  that  ether  is 
“rarefied  mass”  and  mass  “concentrated  ether”,  as  I  suggested  in  my 
communication 2. The present communication addresses this question.

1. PRESTON’S 1875 POSTULATES

Samuel Preston’s  starting point is unambiguous. Rejecting  the  concept  of 
“potential energy”, which he considered to be as mythical as that of “action 
at  a  distance”,  Preston  asserted  that  energy  exists  only  in  the  form  of 
motion  –  in  modern  terms,  as  kinetic  energy  –  thus  recovering  Leibniz’s 
concept  of  a  vis  motrix  proportional  to  the  square  of  velocity.  Assuming 
purely  mechanical  processes  to  explain  the  workings  of  nature,  Preston 
then postulated, following Le Sage, the existence in space of ether particles 
moving at the speed of light and exerting a pressure against the molecules 
of  matter.  On  this  basis,  Preston  reached  the  conclusion  that  “the  above 
deduction, as to the high speed of the ether particles in their normal state, 
throws at once a light upon the existence of a vast store of energy in space 
of a very intense character”. This is the crux of the line of reasoning which 
led Preston to formulate a mass-energy relation 3.

2. ETHER, AS A STORE OF ENERGY 

Preston  envisioned  the  possibility  of  “interchange  of  motion  between  the 
ether and the molecules of matter under special conditions”. Speculating as 
to  what  these  “special  conditions”  might  be,  he  imagined  a  process  in 
which a given “molecule of matter” subdivides into an increasing number 
of  “parts”  or  “particles”,  each  particle  keeping  the  same  amount  of 
(kinetic)  energy  the  original  molecule  possessed.  This  can  occur  only  if 
each particle  thus generated  acquires  an increased  velocity to compensate 
for  its  diminished  mass.  Preston  noted  that,  “being  subdivided  among  a 
large  number  of  particles”,  the  total  energy  the  subdivided  molecule 
originally  held  becomes  ultimately  “vastly  greater”.  He  concluded:  “We 
might  imagine  this  process  to  go  on  progressively  until  at  length  the 
dimensions, mean distance, and speed of the ether particles themselves had 
been reached.”

This  statement  may  be  construed  to  signify  that,  in  Preston’s  view,  a 
molecule  of  matter  can  subdivide  into  a  large  number  of  ether-like 
particles, suggesting that ether is, indeed, some kind of “rarefied mass”.

The  relevance  of  this  interpretation  is  reinforced  when  one  considers 
how  Preston  dealt  with  the  following  statement:  “We  shall  now  consider 
more  particularly  the  energy  enclosed  by  the  ether.”  He  noted:  “This 
requires  …  first,  a  knowledge  of  the  quantity  of matter  in  the  form  of 
ether my emphasis contained in the unit volume of space (i. e. the density 
of the ether).”

Thus, in Preston’s view, matter appears to be some form of “condensed 

ether” 4.

Whether  or  not  these  interpretations  of  Preston’s  nineteenth  century 
language  are  fully  justified,  remains  to  be  ascertained.  It  remains  a  fact, 
however,  that  Samuel  Preston  based  his  search  of  an  “equivalence” 
between  mass  and  energy  on  considerations  involving  the  postulated 
existence  in  nature  of  “ether  particles”  possessing  a  large  amount  of 
(hidden)  quantity of  motion,  or,  equivalently, possessing  a  large  (hidden) 
quantity of (kinetic) energy. 

2

 3. PRESTON’S MASS-ENERGY RELATION

Using  ad  hoc  arguments,  Preston  estimated  the  pressure  ether  particles 
supposedly exert on matter molecules to be at least equal to “500 tons per 
square  inch”.  He established  his  mass-energy relation on  the basis of this 
estimate,  reaching  this  conclusion:  “A  quantity  of  matter  representing  a 
total  mass  of  only  one  grain,  and  possessing  the  normal  velocity  of  the 
ether  particles  (that  of  a  wave  of  light),  encloses  a  store  of  energy 
represented by upwards of one thousand millions of foot-tons.”

Does this statement correspond precisely to the equation E=mc2?
When  mass  is  measured  in  grains  5,  energy  in  foot-pounds,  and 
velocity  in  feet  per  second,  the  kinetic  energy  of  a  mass  of  one  grain 
travelling at the speed c is equal to c2 multiplied by 450 395.

One  foot-ton  equals  2240  foot-pounds.  A  kinetic  energy  of  “one 
thousand  millions  of  foot-tons”  corresponds  therefore  to  2,24x1012 foot-
pounds. 

The speed of light  is approximately equal to 9x108 feet per second. Its 
square is therefore approximately equal to 81x1016 feet per second squared. 
Divided  by  450 395,  this  gives  a  value  of  approximately  1,8x1012  foot-
pounds for the mass of one grain expressed in energy units. This value may 
be compared to the value of 2,24x1012 foot-pounds obtained above for the 
kinetic  energy.  Preston’s  estimate 
to  a  good 
approximation, to the formula E-mc2, an amazing result. 

thus  corresponds, 

Preston did not envision the possibility that matter could be “destroyed’ 
to release energy, as modern physicists do. This is clearly indicated in his 
remark that “the tremendous energy developed in explosives, which is the 
very energy  of the ether itself  my emphasis, is a direct indication of the 
ether pressure, which is the necessary accompaniment of this energy”. 

Preston  well  understood  the  tremendous  implications  of  his  ether 
theory: “A quantity of matter representing a mass of one grain endued with 
the  velocity  of  the  ether  particles  my  emphasis,  encloses  an  amount  of 
energy  which,  if  entirely  utilized  my  emphasis,  would  be  competent  to 
project  a weight  of one  hundred thousands  tons  to  a height of nearly two 
miles (1.9 miles).”

3

4. CONCLUSION

The suggestion that, in 1875, Samuel Preston (at least implicitly) held the 
view that ether is “rarefied mass” and mass “concentrated ether” appears to 
be  not  altogether  incorrect.  This  suggestion  is  only  marginally  relevant, 
however,  to  the  line  of  reasoning  which  led  Preston  to  estimate,  with  an 
amazing  foresight,  the  quantity  of  energy  “contained”  or  “enclosed”  in  a 
given  space  in  the  form  of  ether  particles  moving  at  high  speed.  I  am 
grateful  to  Dr  Kyriazi  for  having  called  my  attention  to  the  interesting 
questions  my  casual  original  remark concerning  Preston’s  contribution to 
the discovery of E=mc2 raises.

REFERENCES

1. J.-P. Auffray, Dual origin of E-mc2, arXiv doc. Gen-phys 0608289 (2006).
2. Harold Kyriazi, Dept. of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, private communication.
3. All quotes presented in this paper are taken from Samuel Tolver Preston’s book, The 
Physics of Aether (1875).
4) Preston estimated the density of air to be 5 264 800 times greater than that of ether.
5) One “grain” equals about 64.8 milligrams.

4

