 

 
 

Physics at the Transition between Bounded and Unbounded 
Trajectories 
 
Alasdair Macleod 
University of the Highlands and Islands 
Lews Castle College 
Stornoway 
Isle of Lewis 
UK 
Alasdair.Macleod@lews.uhi.ac.uk 

Abstract:- The electromagnetic interaction is characterised by discrete states for bound systems 
in contrast to continuous states for unbound systems. The difference merely arises because the 
characteristic  equations  do  not  exhibit  the  same  behaviour  for  negative  and  positive  energy 
parameter  values,  thus  the  apparent  distinction  between  bound  and  unbound  states  can  be 
considered  purely  descriptive and completely  superficial  – there  is no indication that  bounded 
and  unbounded  systems  are  subject  to  differing  physical  laws.  However,  the  remarkable 
suggestion  has  been  made  that  there  exists  a  behavioural  distinction  between  bound  and 
unbound states of systems under gravitational influence. This notion is critically evaluated here. 
At the  very  basic level, a severe  problem is found in defining a local  concept  of boundedness 
consistent  with  the  current  understanding  of  the  gravitational  interaction.  Nevertheless  it  is 
difficult to exclude the possibility that bound and unbound systems are dynamically distinct, a 
distinction that may be relevant to existing cosmological and astronomical anomalies. 

 
 
I Introduction 
 
Dynamic  systems  may  be  categorised  as  bound  or  unbound;  if  the  sum  of  the  kinetic  and 
binding  energies  is  less  than  zero,  interacting  entities  are  considered  bound;  and  if  greater 
than zero, unbound. The state of a system where the total is zero is a matter for debate. One 
can  interpret  the  terms  ‘bound’  and  ‘unbound’  either  as  an  indication  of  the  level  of 
constraint, or, equivalently, a description of the spatial extent of trajectories. 
 
In  this paper, we will consider whether it is probable that bound and unbound gravitational 
systems should be subject to fundamentally different forces. On the face of it, this is a strange 
proposal  quite  at  odds  with  the  current  understanding  of  gravitation  because  it  implies  a 
distinction  between  how  General  Relativity  (GR)  is  applied  locally  and  globally  -  such  a 
division  is  incompatible  with  GR.  After  all,  GR  is  currently  applied  effectively  to  systems 
ranging from orbiting global positioning satellites on the small scale to the prediction of the 
rate of expansion of the Universe on the grand scale. Also, the mathematical representation of 
the physical Universe is particularly effective and does not admit specific terms sensitive to 
boundedness,  hence,  in  dynamic  terms,  the  transition  between  bound  and  unbound  is 
predicted  to  be  uneventful  and  featureless.  Of  course  mathematical  representations  are 
associated with models and the requirement that models should be scale independent with no 
difference on the very small and very large scales is an a priori assumption that may not be 
justified. Indeed, because the property of ‘boundedness’ is absolute and non-transformable, it 
would  be  technically  possible  to  define  two  independently  consistent  variants  of  GR 
separately applicable to bound and unbound systems. The penalty would be the presence of 
discontinuities at the interface. Physically, this would mean anomalous observable effects at 
the transition between bounded and free trajectories, but it may be that these really do exist 
and map onto spacecraft trajectory irregularities that have already been recorded (specifically 
the Pioneer1 and Flyby2 anomalies).  
 

In  fact,  the  motivation  for  this  investigation  is  some  apparently  innocuous  but  in  fact 
extraordinary  statements  that  have  been  made  in  this  context,  particularly  concerning  the 
Pioneer Anomaly. For example 2, 3, 4 
 

‘The  Pioneer  anomaly  was  found  on  the  spacecraft  following  hyperbolic,  unbound 
escape  trajectories…  There  also  exist  anomalies  seen  in  hyperbolic  planetary  flybys. 
This all emphasizes how the transition from bound to escape orbits has never been well 
characterised.’,  

 
or 
 

‘It  may  be  that  the  modification  [the MOND  acceleration]  enters  the  Pioneers  motion, 
which corresponds to unbound, hyperbolic motions, and the motion of bound, and quasi-
circular trajectories in a different way.’,  
 
and   
 
 ‘..  the  unbound  hyperbolic  trajectory  would  have  an  additional  acceleration  of  size  of 
the Pioneer anomaly. This would be confirmed if the Pioneer anomaly turned on only at 
Saturn flyby for Pioneer 11 and only at Jupiter flyby for Pioneer 10.’. 

 
Whether or not intentionally, these statements seriously challenge established physical models 
and  suggest  a  failure  of  the  current  paradigm,  implying  the  need  for  a  significant  revision; 
though this presents difficult philosophical issues.  No existing ontology admits a distinction 
between bound and unbound systems and, in particular, it can be shown that such a concept is 
irreconcilable with a substantive interpretation of spacetime. 
 
However it would be negligent to dismiss the idea out of hand purely through philosophical 
considerations. Sources that are unbound with respect to the Earth-based observer have been 
extensively studied: the cosmic background radiation; distant supernovae; the Pioneer probes. 
In all cases, there are anomalous features that hint at the need for some modification to our 
world model. While the discrepancies are small in relative terms, this does not guarantee that 
the  associated  changes  in  the  model  needed  to  absorb  the  anomalies  are  minor.  There  have 
been many new proposals presented to explain away the anomalies, including the proposition 
that the form of the gravitational force changes over distance (the MOND proposal makes this 
suggestion,  for  one3).  In  fact  many  of  the  ideas  seriously  undermine  GR  and  have  a 
complexity  and  contrivance  that  are  aesthetically  unappealing.  Though  outlandish  and 
counter-intuitive, it is possibly less destructive to the existing knowledgebase to identify the 
anomalies  with  some  fundamental  behavioural  difference  exhibited  by  bound  and  unbound 
systems  and influencing the dynamics in the way hinted  at by the  authors of the quotations 
above.  
 
One possible behavioural factor is that retardation effects differ between bound and unbound 
systems,  but  this  attractive  proposal  does  not  stand  up  to  scrutiny:  Particles  do  not  act 
instantaneously  on  another  over  distance;  the  influence  is  subject  to  a  propagation  delay 
proportional  to  the  propagation  speed  of  the  mediating  quanta.  This  generally  gives  rise  to 
retardation  effects,  but  these  are  limited  because  the  equations  describing  the  force 
incorporate an extrapolation effect into the solution functions that determine the dynamics5. 
Charged  particles  appear  to  extrapolate  the  velocity  of  a  charged  source  and  respond 
accordingly, whilst masses subject to the gravitational force extrapolate both the velocity and 
acceleration  of  the  source.  Consequently,  charged  particles  must  be  accelerated  and 
gravitational  systems  must  be  subject  to  a  change  in  acceleration  before  retardation  effects 
appear. The procedure is of interest here because a bound charge is no longer subject to the 
classical dynamic equations and becomes inaccessible to the observer – the charge no longer 
continuously radiates although we can infer it is still subject to an internal acceleration. This 

curious  anomaly  is  quantum  in  origin.  Could  something  similar  exist  with  the  gravitational 
attraction though the quantum description is not yet known?  The answer is no – the Pioneer 
spacecraft are certainly unbound, but their trajectories do not show the characteristic signature 
of retardation effects in either distance or velocity1. In a sense, this is simply more evidence 
for the correctness of GR and how it is not apparently scale dependent. 
 
However, retardation is not the only possibility. In this paper we consider in some detail the 
alternative idea that the transition from a bound to an unbound trajectory is characterised by 
an entity joining into the Hubble flow.  
 
II Flyby Anomalies 
 
The  flyby  anomalies  are  small  but  unexpected  step  increases  in  velocity  experienced  by 
several spacecraft using the Earth for gravity assist manoeuvres.  The manoeuvre is basically 
a slingshot technique that rotates the spacecraft velocity vector with respect to the Earth, but 
results  in  a  nett  increase  (or  decrease)  in  velocity  (and  kinetic  energy)  with  respect  to  the 
barycentre once the orbital velocity of the Earth is factored in.  
 
The  anomalous  effect  is  variable  in  magnitude  and  is  not  present  in  all  Earth  gravitational 
assist  events  (EGAs).  The  results  of  a  number  of  events  is  summarised  in  Table  1.  The 
Gallileo  and  NEAR  events  are  discussed  in  detail  by  Antreasian  and  Guinn6  (AG),  and  the 
dynamics  of  all  the  encounters  listed  in  Table  1  are  presented  by  Anderson,  Campbell  and 
Nieto7 (ACN).  
 

Table 1 Flyby anomaly for the EGA events analysed by ACN7. v(cid:1) and vF are respectively the hyperbolic 
excess velocity and the velocity at perigee. Remarkably, the anomalous effect appears not to be correlated 
to  orbital  parameters  such  as  eccentricity  hence  these  figures  are  not  presented.  In  a  positive  assist,  the 
barycentric velocity increases, and decreases with a negative assist. 

  

Spacecraft  Type of Assist 
Galileo 
NEAR 
Cassini 
Rosetta 
Messenger 

Positive 
Negative 
Positive 
Positive 
Negative 

v(cid:1) (km s-1) 
8.949 
6.851 
16.01 
3.863 
4.056 

vF (km s-1) 
13.738 
12.739 
19.03 
10.517 
10.389 

(cid:2)v(cid:1) (mm s-1) 
3.92–0.08 
13.46–0.13 
~0 
1.82–0.05 
~0 

(cid:2)(cid:1) per kg (J kg-1)  
35.1–0.7 
92.2–0.9 
~0 
7.03–0.19 
~0 

 
The  hypothesis  that  the  anomaly  is  associated  with  the  transition  between  bounded  and 
unbounded  paths  can  be  tested  using  the  available  data.  On  the  face  of  it,  this  seems 
nonsensical  because  the  spacecraft  always  remain  bound  to  the  Solar  System  through  the 
encounters, and in the reference frame of the Earth they occupy hyperbolic unbounded orbits 
– there is no evidence of any sort of transition either from the point of view of the Sun or the 
Earth:  The  Solar  escape  velocity  along  the  Earth’s  orbital  path  is  42.1  km/s  and  the  orbital 
velocity of the Earth is 29.8 km/s (mean). Because of vector alignment issues and the Earth 
field,  ACN  show  the  spacecraft  never  make  up  the  difference.  However,  progress  can  be 
made if we relax the definition of boundedness from that described in the first paragraph of 
this paper and permit an arbitrary energy level to be associated with the transition point, more 
or  less  constant  for  a  particular  system  under  scrutiny  (we  will  see  later  that  there  may  be 
some justification for this because it is uncertain whether spacecraft share our apparently clear 
understanding of boundedness).  
 
Let S0 and S1 describe the bound and unbound states of the spacecraft respectively within the 
Solar System. Postulate the existence of an energy associated with these states (distinct from 
potential and kinetic energy) with E(S0) < E(S1). This can be considered analogous to a phase 
shift  in  matter  when  the  energy  difference  can  be  likened  to  latent  heat.  If  an  entity  moves 
from an unbound to bound state (S1(cid:1)S0), energy is  released to appear as  an addition to the 
normal kinetic energy. If an entity moves from a bound to unbound state (S0(cid:1)S1), the same 

quantity of energy is absorbed from the surroundings. An entity hopping between states from 
bound to unbound and back to bound (S0(cid:1)S1(cid:1)S0) may emerge with a nett energy gain if they 
are in the process of interacting with other bodies. These other bodies then share in the energy 
exchange.  
 
ACN have generated graphs showing how the total barycentric energy per unit mass changes 
about the point of closest approach. It is proposed here that the value –2.75–0.05 x 108 J kg-1 
should  be  identified  with  the  transition  between  S0  and  S1.  An  energy  per  unit  mass  that  is 
more negative represents, S0, the bound state. Energy per unit mass that is less negative than 
the transition value indicates, S1, the unbound state.  It is possible to determine the  states of 
each  of  the  spacecraft  through  the  EGAs  for  this  threshold  value  by  an  examination  of  the 
data in ACN (Fig. 1). 

1

e
t
a
t
S

0

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Hours from Closest Approach

Cassini

Messenger

Rosetta

Galileo

NEAR

 

Figure  1  The state of each of the spacecraft during the EGA events assuming  a barycentric total energy 
density of –2.75–0.05 x 108 J kg-1 represents the transition between S0 and S1. Although the transition is 
described as a step change, this is clearly unphysical. The transitions are likened to a mass M (with velocity 
vM)  dropped  onto  a  moving  conveyor  belt  (velocity  vc)  –  it  takes  the  frictional  force  time  to  bring  the 
relative speed of the mass and the belt to zero (using constant k to describe the frictional coefficient). The 
characteristic equation is  dvm/dt=k/m(vc-vM)  with solution vM=vc(1-e-kt/M).  The transitions  in  the  graph are 
modelled in this fashion using arbitrary parameter values. 

 
The  Cassini  and  Messenger  events  do  not  involve  a  change  of  state,  hence  there  is  no 
anomalous increase predicted. The NEAR event is a change from an unbound to a bound state 
with a gain  in free  energy  because E(S1) > E(S0). The Rosetta and  Galileo events involve  a 
transition from bound, briefly to unbound and then back to bound again. Energy is lost and 
then gained with a residual that is much smaller than the NEAR event.  
 
There  is  further  supporting  evidence  for  the  hypothesis  from  the  profile  of  the  Galileo  and 
NEAR range residuals presented by AG and  reproduced below  in Fig. 2. It is clear that the 
transitions are not truly instantaneous, but have a finite rise time. The Galileo event on the left 
shows  evidence at the transition region of a much higher initial rise then a quick  fall to the 
final value, exactly as expected if the spacecraft briefly entered the S1 state.  The pulse width 
is of the order of an hour just after closest approach (in agreement with Fig. 1).  The unusual 
diurnal  oscillation  in  the  NEAR  data  is  clear  evidence  of  a  change  of  physical  behaviour 
before and after the event (and this is the only one of the flybys where an overall state change 
occurs). However, as will be seen later, the oscillation is expected to be associated with the 
unbound state, not the bound state as appears to be shown by the residuals – but it may be that 
the inverted appearance of the signal is the result of an overzealous removal of the true effect 
before closest approach by over applying Earth-model corrections. 
 

 

 

Figure  2  Range  residuals  for  the  Galileo  (left)  and  NEAR  (right)  EGA  events  (from  AG,  with  a  minor 
clean-up to the scale and labelling to improve clarity). 

i

i

2

2

/

/

x

¶

t
x
¶F¶=¶

  
There seems to be qualitative evidence that the flyby anomalies are associated with either a 
real or apparent state change with respect to the Earth-based observer. We have suggested that 
the  states  are  associated  with  bounded  and  unbounded  trajectories.  In  that  case,  what  is  the 
significance  of  the  non-zero  value  of  the  transition  energy  level,  and  if  we  are  to  associate 
different physics with bound and unbound systems, how is the state of boundedness known to 
the entity itself so that it can dynamically respond in the appropriate way? 
 
III A Local Definition of Boundedness 
 
If  we  adopt  the  field  interpretation  of  Newtonian  gravity,  it  is,  in  principle  at  least, 
straightforward to determine whether or not a body is gravitationally bound. The gravitational 
acceleration  can be expressed in terms of  a potential F, where the dynamical response then 
takes the normal form 
. Because gravity is conservative,  the total binding 
energy at any position is easily calculated by the scalar addition of the potential with respect 
to all gravitating mass and this of course is incorporated into F, but it must be emphasised F 
is  not  an  observable;  only  the  gradient  is.  If  the  kinetic  energy  exceeds  the  potential,  the 
object is unbound. However, it is known the field model of gravitation is incorrect (because it 
is impossible to formulate a scalar, vector or tensor description for F that is invariant without 
recovering the equations of GR) but there are difficulties in translating the concept of binding 
energy  to  GR  where  gravitation  is  understood  to  be  the  response  of  an  object  to  the  local 
n.  The  curvature  represents  the 
spacetime  curvature  represented  by  the  Einstein  tensor  Gm
combined effect of all gravitating mass (including electromagnetic fields) as specified by the 
n.  The  binding  energy  is  certainly  coded  into  the  Einstein  tensor,  but 
stress-energy  tensor  Tm
cannot  be  extracted  from  the  spacetime  manifold  merely  by  measuring  the  local  curvature. 
For  instance,  there  are  locations  in  the  Solar  System  where  the  curvature  and  hence  the 
acceleration is zero because of the favourable opposition of gravitating bodies, but any object 
located there certainly cannot be considered free by the common definition. At the very least, 
it is necessary to reference against a flat Minkowski metric, and, in any case, it is difficult to 
understand  how  an  object  blindly  following  the  geodesic  path  through  spacetime  should  be 
expected to execute this calculation, or any calculation.  
 
An  alternative  approach  is  to  refer  to  the  spatial  extent  of  a  trajectory  as  the  test  for 
boundedness. If an object is on a path that permits an escape to infinity, it is unbounded. Of 
course, future events such as collisions affect the true state of boundedness by this definition, 
so  knowledge  of  the  future  would  be  required  (unless  the  Universe  happens  to  completely 
deterministic). This is of course completely acausal, introducing nonlocality and a completely 
unjustifiable set of new problems. 
 

The  situation  is  even  worse  when  we  admit  the  possibility  that  the  anomalous  increase  in 
velocity  is  relative  to  the  Earth  rather  than  an  absolute  (at  least  with  respect  to  the  Solar 
System). Certainly the spacecraft radial velocity is known to the observer, but there is no way 
a relative observer can know the depth of the potential well at the position where the observed 
spacecraft happen to be, hence it is truly unfeasible to determine boundedness from afar. In 
addition, if it really is a relative effect, it is necessary to make a distinction between unbound 
with respect to the Solar System or the Galaxy or even bound Galactic clusters, and adjust the 
dynamics accordingly – how many separately expanding spacetimes does this require? On the 
other hand if it is an absolute effect and not an observational anomaly involving the Earth or 
its dynamics then  all Solar  System  bodies are  subject to the strange  energy  threshold. Then 
any  body  that  is  more  than  3  AU  away  from  the  Sun  will  have  a  total  energy  above  the 
threshold and must be considered unbound.  
 
This  extreme  confusion  is  why  the  apparently  innocuous  statements  made  concerning  the 
Pioneer anomaly and quoted earlier are so difficult to incorporate into our current models – it 
is impossible to see how an object should know if it (or anything else) is bound, either in an 
absolute or relative sense.  One  would have to introduce  a new term into GR representing  a 
direct interaction with F. There is one dubious bonus though: Because it is so difficult to have 
a  local  definition  of  boundedness,  the  threshold  value  that  emerged  from  the  previous 
analysis,  –2.75–0.05  x  108  J  kg-1,  is  really  no  stranger  than  the  value  of  0  one  would 
intuitively expect – neither should be significant so both are equally unlikely. Regardless of 
whether  or  not  there  is  an  association  with  boundedness,  the  appearance  of  this  quantity, 
which  seems  to  unify  the  response  of  the  spacecraft  through  EGAs,  is  extremely  curious. 
What is the implication of this value? 
 
IV The Pioneer Anomaly 
 
Another puzzling question is the origin of the energy  difference  supposedly associated with 
the states S0 and S1? The NEAR event is the only one that is postulated to lead to a permanent 
change  of  state,  and  one  would  presume  the  increase  in  energy  registered  for  that  event  is 
characteristic of the true energy difference between the two states. The actual value (per unit 
mass)  of  92.2–0.9  J  kg-1  is  suggestive  of  an  association  with  the  Hubble  expansion,  and 
encourages the hypothesis that the transition from bound to unbound state is connected with a 
body joining the Hubble flow (leaving open for now the question about the threshold energy 
condition and whether the transition effect is absolute or relative). The analysis that follows is 
based  on  assumptions  we  will  come  back  to  critically  assess  later,  but  the  bare  argument 
proceeds roughly as follows. At the position of the Earth, the Hubble velocity of expansion 
with respect to the barycentre, vH, is rHo, where r is the distance to the Sun, 1 AU. We can 
construct many dimensionally valid expressions for an energy associated with the expansion 
that differs from, and is in addition to, the customary kinetic energy of the expansion velocity: 
The simplest form is mvHc which gives an energy per unit mass of 102–10 J kg-1, acceptably 
close to the actual value.  
 
This definition is tentative of course, but making the energy difference E(S1)-E(S0) a function 
of  position  is  not  without  consequences,  and  implies  further  unexpected  (to  our  theories  as 
they currently stand) effects if the theory is correct. The detection of these effects would then 
lend considerable support to the general correctness of the expression chosen for the energy 
difference  between  states.  The  main  problem  that  needs  addressing  is  that  the  definition  of 
energy as mrHoc permits a clear violation of energy conservation through the execution of any 
cycle like the one shown in Fig. 3. Limitless energy can seemingly be created out of nothing.  
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

Figure 3 Assuming Ho can be considered constant, and ignoring the work done against the gravity (which 
is always recovered)  the  cycle A(cid:1)B(cid:1)C(cid:1)D(cid:1)A shown  generates a quantity  of energy  per unit  mass of 
Hoc(r2-r1) on every circuit.  

It is easy to see that the fundamental cause of the energy violation is the change in recession 
velocity  accompanying  proper  (or  peculiar)  radial  motion.  A  balancing  force  taking  the 
general form Fi=−¶E/¶xi is needed, but will clearly be strictly radial because the energy has 
been defined purely a function of r (for the moment at least). Let an unbound body at position 
r from an observer at the origin move with peculiar velocity vP. By the previous definition, the 
body is subject to an acceleration of -1/m (cid:2)/(cid:2)r(mrc/To) rˆ which can be conveniently labelled 
ao.  Note  that  we  let  Ho  equal  1/To,  the  current  age  of  the  Universe.  Differentiating  and 
identifying  (cid:2)r/(cid:2)T  with  the  sum  of  the  recession  velocity  and  the  radial  component  of  the 
peculiar velocity, we get: 

a

o

-=

ˆ
r

. 

 

cH
o
2
Hr

v

P

(cid:3)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:2)

o
.r

(cid:6)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:5)

1

+

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

 
This acceleration is always directed towards the origin (except where the proper and recession 
velocities  are  about  the  same  magnitude)  and  actually  represents  a  deceleration  for  objects 
with peculiar velocity in the direction away from the origin, and ensures energy conservation 

is recovered: Referring back to Fig. 3, work is now done through section  BC  of the cycle that 
cancels  the  energy  formerly  gained.  If  we  run  the  cycle  in  reverse,  energy  is  now  gained 

moving along  CB  because of the acceleration in that direction, again conserving total energy. 
 
Equation  (1)  is  very  much  simplified  if  the  modulus  of  the  radial  motion  far  exceeds  the 
modulus of the recession velocity:  

ao

cH o-=

.ˆr

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

 
The acceleration magnitude is constant and is (cid:3) –6.95–0.55 x 10-10 m s-2 using the currently 
accepted  value  of  Ho  and  its  error  margin.  Unbound  objects  moving  away  from  the  Solar 
System  will  satisfy  this  velocity  condition  and  must  experience  a  deceleration  of  that 
magnitude if the original definition of the energy associated with a transition between bound 
and unbound stated is correct. Unfortunately there are few cases of objects leaving from the 
Solar System for which precision velocity and/or range data is available. The best examples 
are the Pioneer 10 and 11 probes that achieved escape velocity in 1973 and 1979 respectively. 
Path  information  from  1980  until  contact  was  lost  certainly  indicates  an  unmodeled 
deceleration  force  affecting  both  spacecraft.  An  extensive  analysis1  concluded  there  was  a 

constant  deceleration  affecting  both  craft  of  magnitude  8.74–1.33  x  10-10  m  s-2.  Whilst  it  is 
tempting to identify this with the deceleration predicted by equation (2), there is a significant 
discrepancy  –  the  error  bars  do  not  meet.  However,  there  is  an  indication  that  the  observed 
deceleration effect is not simply a constant; there are clear annual and diurnal overtones that 
may be related to the motion of the Earth relative to the barycentre, or are a residual effect of 
the  movement  of  the  observer  relative  to  the  spacecraft  in  excess  of  the  normal  Doppler 
corrections  which  are  routinely  applied.  It  may  be  that  equation  (2)  simply  predicts  the 
constant portion of the total deceleration and is therefore correct. The oscillatory effects need 
to be examined to validate this conclusion, but there are more fundamental issues that need to 
be considered first: We have assumed throughout the anomalous effects are always directed 
towards  the  centre  of  mass  of  the  system  in  which  the  observer  is  bound.  We  consider  the 
justification for this in the next section.  
 
One  point  to  note  is  that  there  is  something  distinctly  unphysical  about  equation  (1).  If  the 
proper motion of the observer is exactly opposite to the expansion velocity, the acceleration 
becomes infinite. For example, if the anomalous Pioneer acceleration were directed towards 
the Earth  rather than the barycentre (which  appears not to be the case),  a huge  acceleration 
spike  would  be  registered  about  a  month  after  the  sun  occults  the  spacecraft  (because  the 
velocity of the Earth with respect to the probes ranges from  –17 to +41 km s-1 over a period 
of  revolution  and  must  pass  through  the  discontinuity).  For  the  Pioneer  10  probe,  this  is 
around  the  middle  of  July  each  year.  The  presence  (or  absence)  of  this  spike  unfortunately 
cannot be used in an effort to find the true direction of the anomalous acceleration as the data 
is always noisy around that time because the signal is affected by passage through the Solar 
corona,  and  in  any  case,  the  signature  would  be  extremely  transient,  lasting  only  a  few 
seconds. However, the prediction of an infinity, no matter how transient, is an indication that 
the  chosen  energy  definition,  mrHoc,  is  not  completely  correctly  and  needs  to  be  refined  as 
more detailed data becomes available.   
 
We may conclude that there appears to be reasonable evidence supporting the hypothesis that 
a quantity of energy of the order of mvHc is  released  when a mass moves from an unbound 
state.  If  this  energy  really  exists,  what  is  it  and  where  does  it  come  from?  It  is  hard  to  do 
anything other than speculate, but it may be significant that as we look back in distance and 
time towards the origin of the Universe to the point where the recessional velocity reaches the 
speed  of  light,  the  spontaneous  creation  of  matter  into  a  bound  state  becomes  energetically 
favourable.  
 
V The Local Cosmological Expansion 
 
Associating  the  transition  from  a  bounded  to  unbounded  orbit  with  an  object  joining  the 
Hubble flow is counter to the commonly held view that the cosmological expansion does not 
proceed in the local galactic neighbourhood. But is there any real evidence for this common 
view? There are only theoretical arguments, the most significant possibly being that proposed 
by Cooperstock et al.8 in 1998.  It had formerly been argued that the expansion only occurred 
outside the galaxy9 but that implied the existence of a ‘switch-on’ point, and there was no real 
theoretical justification for such a transition, or any insight into the physics at the transition 
where  an  object  joined  the  Hubble  flow.  Cooperstock  et  al.  circumvented  the  problem  and 
established the current stance by claiming the expansion is universal, acting on all scales; but 
that the effect is undetectable in our immediate surroundings because of the restraint applied 
by the dominant forces overwhelms the miniscule motion of the expansion. This argument is 
now  widely  accepted,  not  least  because  it  clears  the  potentially  awkward  problem  of  a 
transition point. However, it is hard to agree with the argument presented to support the case 
 
The paper investigated the transition between the co-moving and observer frames. In general 
relativity,  cosmological  observations  are  presumed  to  be  made  from  a  local  inertial  frame 
(LIF),  an  idealised  non-rotating,  non-accelerating  frame  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Earth.  The 

dynamics  of  the  Universe  is  described  by  the  time-dependent  scale  factor  in  the  Friedman-
Robertson-Walker  metric  and  Cooperstock  et  al.  argue  that  the  LIF  is  an  instantaneous 
tangential approximation to the curved spacetime of GR. The assumption is made that the LIF 
is exempt from the expansion by its very nature. The basis of their argument is outlined in the 
following two excerpts: 
 

‘Although the cosmological expansion is described by the time dependent scale factor in 
the  FRW  metric,  and  we  believe  affects  lengths  at  all  scales,  the  curved  spacetime 
manifold can be locally approximated by its (flat) tangent space at every spacetime point 
p . … This frame is the one in which astronomical observations are carried out. Thus, the 
effect  of  the  cosmological  expansion  is  seen  to  be  negligible  locally  and  grows  in 
significance with distance, reaching full import on the cosmological scale.’ 

 
and 
 
‘It [the local inertial frame] is the locally inertial frame based on a geodesic observer and 
it continues to be locally inertial, following the observer in time.’. 

 
In  fact,  it  is  probable  this  approximation  and  indeed  the  entire  methodology  are  incorrect. 
Expressed  in  co-moving  coordinates,  the  local  reference  frame  is  clearly  subject  to  the 
expansion as well, whereupon no expansion can be perceived in the co-moving frame.  The 
argument  seems  to  require  the  LIF  be  described  in  coordinates  that  are  independent  of  the 
expansion. In this model there is only one manifold, and it is expanding. How are the constant 
coordinates  to  be  maintained?  In  effect,  the  approximation  procedure  adds  in  the  non-
expansion  of  the  local  reference  as  a  rather  subtle  assumption  from  the  outset  rather  than 
deriving it. The correct approach would be to operate entirely in co-moving coordinates and 
show that the LIF is contracting over time. This is completely equivalent to the local frame 
not being subject to the cosmological expansion. It is therefore concluded that Cooperstock et 
al. have not demonstrated the expansion operates within the Solar  System. In effect, a  non-
expanding reference frame that forces may use to detect the expansion does not exist; forces 
are  expressed  in  terms  of  the  position  coordinates  defined  in  expanding  spacetime  and  are 
therefore unaware of the expansion.   
 
By  denying  the  argument  of  Cooperstock  et  al.,  we  are  introducing  two  coexisting 
spacetimes, but both are not accessible at the same time. An object has access to one or other 
depending on its state of boundedness.  The movement between bound and unbound state is 
then a change in reference frame. The apparent distinction between bounded and unbounded 
systems that exists at the atomic level is now echoed in systems that are subject to gravitation. 
This  has  worrying  consequences  when  we  consider  that  spacetime  is  believed  to  be 
substantial  –  a  single  substantive  spacetime  cannot  exhibit  two  distinct  forms  at  the  same 
position  (as  this  interpretation  of  the  flyby  anomaly  requires).  As  we  will  see,  a  relational 
model of spacetime is also fraught with problems and appears unsatisfactory. 
 
The  question  of  whether  the  Hubble  expansion  absolute  or  relative  to  an  observer  is 
important. This can be addressed by considering the hypothetical situation represented in Fig. 
4.  
 
If bound entity G suddenly becomes unbound, for example through a collision, bodies A – F, 
observing  G,  cannot  each  subsequently  register  a  recession  velocity  proportional  to  their 
distance  from  G  and  in  the  direction  pointing  away  from  G  as  would  be  expected  if  the 
recession  were  relative.  This  would  lead  to  an  inconsistency  -  D  would  eventually  see  G 
colliding with B (or even stranger, passing through it), B would see G hitting D, and so on. 
The  expansion  cannot  therefore  be  a  strictly  relative  phenomenon  when  viewed  by  bound 
observers.  Looking  at  the  situation  from  the  privileged  viewpoint  of  external  unbound 
observers,  O  and  O¢  (expanding  with  respect  to  one  another),  G  will  appear  to  move  away 

from  P,  exiting  the  hexagon  by  passing  between  C  and  D.  For  consistency  then,  bound 
observers must conclude that the expansion taking place with respect to the special point P, 
the  point  where  the  composite  entity  is  linked  into  the  expanding  frame.  This  conclusion 
holds for any viable model of spacetime (even that proposed by Cooperstock et al.). 
 
 

 

 
Figure 4 Entities A – G are bound and are therefore not subject to the cosmological expansion. Unbound 
observers O and O¢ see the complete system moving away them with point P as the intersection of the lines 
of  motion. Assume G becomes instantaneously  unbound but does not  change  location  or proper velocity 
with  respect  to  O  and  O¢.  How  will  G  subsequently  move  (or  appear  to  move)  such  that  the  motion  is 
consistent for all bound and unbound observers?  

 
How  is  this  point  P  selected?  Since  motion  with respect  to  the  expansion  is  opposed  by  an 
acceleration ao, introduced to conserve energy, energy will only be conserved if the force is 
applied to the centre of mass (otherwise a torque is introduced). The line of the acceleration 
must  coincide  with  the  centre  of  mass  for  observers  O  and  O¢.  P  is  therefore  the  centre  of 
mass of the bound system. 
 
This  clarifies  our  understanding  of  the  expansion  considerably  and  happily  makes  the 
introduction  of  multiple  expanding  spacetimes  unnecessary.  We  have  all  but  exorcised  the 
spectre  of  differing  relative  expansions,  but  for  one  reasonable  enquiry:  It  is  believed  the 
Solar System is bound into the Milky Way galaxy; how then can the Pioneer spacecraft join 
the expansion? We do not expect an object bound into the galaxy to be able to do so. The only 
reasonable conclusion is that the Sun is not bound to the galaxy centre. This is possible  – we 
saw  earlier  the  threshold  binding  energy  is  not  necessarily  zero.  Is  there  any  evidence  to 
support this radical assertion? It is technically possible to determine whether the Solar System 
is bound to the galaxy from an examination of the  cosmic microwave background radiation 
(CMBR),  but  we  need  to  determine  if the  accuracy  of  the  data  currently  available  from the 
COBE and WMAP satellites is good enough to enable any conclusions to be drawn. 
 
The  cosmic  background  radiation  is  expanding  with  respect  to  the  centre  of  mass  of  the 
system  in  which  the  observer  is  bound.  This  may  be  the  Sun,  the  centre  of  the  Galaxy,  the 
centre of the Cluster, or even the centre of the Super Cluster. If this were not the case, isolated 
observers  within  the  same  bound  system  would  disagree  about  the  observations.  Let  us 
assume  the  centre  of  mass  of  the  system  in  which  the  WMAP  satellite  is  located  bears  the 
relationship to the satellite shown in Fig. 5, and further assume that the relative velocity of the 
observation satellite with respect to the centre of mass is zero. 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Figure  5  Define  the  direction  z  in  the  line  from  the  observer  O  to  the  centre  of  mass  at  the  origin.  The 
surface of last scatter is centred on the origin. 

 
The recession velocity can be treated as a proper velocity and the problem dealt with Special 
Relativistically‡.  Because  of  their  displacement  from  the  centre  of  the  expanding  shell,  the 
observer will register a small difference in the apparent radial velocity that varies with f. This 
will affect the redshift and therefore the measured blackbody temperature, but only to a very 
small extent because the reduction in radial redshift factor is partially compensated for by the 
transverse  redshift  that  now  appears:  Let  the  measured  temperature  be  T  and  the  source 
temperature To, the two temperatures being related by the expression T = To / (1+z) where z is 
the  redshift  factor  (believed  to  be  about  1100).  Calculating  D(1+z),  the  deviation  from  the 
value  at f  =  0,  slotting  this  into  the  relation  DT/T  =  -D(1+z)/(1+z)  and  applying  sensible 
approximations, the change in apparent temperature as a function of f is:  
 

T
D
T

@

v
c

g
+

1(

z

)

2

2

d

1

d

2

2

sin
2

f

.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

2/2d2

 
Recognising that v/c ~ 1 whereupon the Lorentz factor g ~ (1 + z)/2, the perturbation results in 
the  CMBR  being  relatively  colder  in  the  +z,  -z  directions  and  hotter  in  the  x-y  plane.  
2. Of course d2 is the distance 
Expressed  as  a wave, the amplitude of the variation is d1
travelled  by  the  CMBR  photons,  which  is  around  1.3  x  1026  m.  If  the  Sun  is  bound  to  the 
galaxy  centre,  d1 is  then  the  distance  to  the  centre  of the  galaxy,  at  least  2.5  x  1020  m.  The 
change in apparent temperature is seen to be completely insignificant.  
 
However,  if  the  Sun  is  bound  into  the  galaxy,  the  redshift  change  is  not  the  only  way  the 
microwave background is affected by a displacement of the observer from the centre of mass. 
The  Sun  is  at  least  26,000  light  years  away  from  the  centre  of  the  galaxy  and  one  should 
recognise the surface of last scattering (from where the microwave background originates) is 
not really a surface at all but possesses significant depth (possibly as much as Dz = 100).  This 
means  that  CMBR  photons  received  from  the  +z  direction  do  not  come  from  the  same 
expanding shell (with respect to the centre) as those in the -z direction. This follows from the 
time difference that exists between a displaced observer and the centre of the galaxy. A Solar 
System observer looking in the +z direction will see photons that left 26,000 years earlier in 

                                                 
‡ This may seem strange when the underlying metric is general relativistic, but bear in mind there is some 
precedence for this: Special Relativity is consistent with the lengthening of supernova light curves and is applied to 
explain the apparent superluminal motion of some distant objects. In any case, the spacetime through which the 
photons travel has a curvature of zero. 

the  galaxy  frame,  or  47  years  earlier  in  the  CMBR  frame  (applying  the  relativistic  time 
contraction  factor).  In  the  opposite  direction,  photons  are  received  from  the  surface  of  last 
scattering when the surface  is 47  years older. This is significant because the temperature of 
the  Universe  changes  over  time,  hence  observations  in  the  +z  and  –z  directions  are  not 
measuring the source at the same temperature. The detailed temperature development in the 
Universe  through  the  surface  of  last  scattering  is  discussed  by  Lachièze-Rey  and  Gunzig10, 
and  the  consensus  model  predicts  that  in  that  matter-dominated  phase  of  the  Universe,  the 
temperature follows the relation: 
1
3/2-(cid:181)
t

(4) 

To

 

,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
where  t  is  the  age  of  the  Universe  at  the  time.  This  also  follows  from  a  thermodynamic 
analysis  and  consideration  of  the  energy  lost  through  the  CMBR  photons.  The  change  in 
temperature over 47 years is found by differentiating relation (4), 
 

 

T
D
T

-=

2
3

t
D
t

.

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

 
Taking t as 400,000 years, this effect should introduce a dipole with the sky hotter by 214 mK 
in the direction of the galaxy and colder by the same amount away from the galaxy. This is 
shown in Fig. 6 where it is compared with the dipole associated with the proper motion with 
respect to the CMBR. The dipole associated with the displacement of a bound Solar System 
from the centre of the galaxy is about 15 times smaller and is not visually evident in the data, 
but this is not surprising given its smallness. If the dipole does exist, then there are two non-
aligned dipoles in the data and these should be removed separately - cleaning up the data by 
removing  a  single  dipole  only  will  result in the  appearance  of  spurious  residual  quadrupole 
and higher order harmonics aligned with the proper velocity dipole and the galactic plane. In 
fact  unexplained  quadrupole  and  octopole  components  have  been  found  (Fig.  7),  but  these 
seem to be related to the ecliptic rather than the galactic plane11.  
 
We can therefore conclude there is no evidence in the CMBR data the Solar System is bound 
into the galaxy, thus we may state that it is entirely possible for the Pioneer probes to join the 
Hubble flow once the barycentric orbital trajectories becomes hyperbolic.  
 

Figure 6 A representation of the CMBR map showing the proper velocity dipole (+3.5 mK/-3.5 mK) and 
the  much smaller  dipole associated  with the displacement of  the  observation platform from  the  centre of 
mass (assuming the Sun is bound to the centre of the Milky Way galaxy)  

 

 

 

The  WMAP  satellite  is  located  at  the  L2  Lagrange  point  outside  Earth  orbit  and  is 
undoubtedly bound into the Solar System. The separation from the barycentre is too small for 
there  to  be  any  effect  on  CMBR  data  through  the  mechanisms  previously  shown  to  be 
relevant on the scale of the galaxy. This makes the alignment of the observed quadrupole and 
octopole  anomalies  with  the  ecliptic  puzzling  (Fig.  7).  Of  course,  we  have  up  to  now 
neglected  the  proper  velocity  of  the  observer  –  the  WMAP  satellite  has  a  barycentric 
transverse  velocity  of  around  30  km  s-1,  but  its  effect  is  routinely  removed  by  applying  a 
ru ˆ. correction (u is the proper velocity vector and r the direction of observation).    
 

 

 

 

 

Figure 7 An ecliptic coordinate representation of the CMBR quadrupole and octopole overlaid to show the 
unlikely  separation  of  hot  and  cold  spots  by  the  ecliptic  plane  (black  line).  There  is  weak  evidence  for 
galactic  alignment  and  stronger  evidence  for  an  alignment  with  the  perpendicular  plane  to  the  proper 
motion  dipole.  The  image  is  reproduced  from  http://www.phys.cwru.edu/projects/mpvectors/    (accessed 
20/10/2006). 

 
Lachièze-Rey  and  Gunzig10  calculate  this  correction  simply  by  applying  the  non-relativistic 
Doppler shift associated with a proper velocity. Treating the source velocity also as a proper 
velocity  gives  exactly  the  same  result  if  the  relative  velocity  is  found  by  using  the  Special 
Relativistic equation for the addition of velocities: Consider an observer source velocity boost 
u (= Du) away from the direction of observation, with a source recession velocity of v. The 
redshift change is  
 

z

)

=

1(
+D
u
D

¶
v
¶

(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:4)(cid:4)
(cid:4)
g
(cid:5)
(cid:5)

1

+

v
c

(cid:3)
(cid:1)
(cid:2)

(cid:3)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:2)

v
¶
u
¶

, 

 

v

v
=¶+

 
and 
After differentiation and some trivial algebra, equation (6) simplifies to  
 

2cuv
/

u
¶+

¶+

1/()

v

)

(

,  the  equation  for  the  relativistic  addition  of  velocities. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

              (6) 

 

(7) 

1(
)
z
+D
)
1(
z
+

=

u
D
c

.   

 

 

  
This of course is the same as the non-relativistic correction for a proper velocity v << c. The 
transverse Doppler effect is not significant in this case, and there is no propagation time lag 
associated with a velocity change on the part of the observer (this is not entirely obvious, but 
can  be  demonstrated  by  requiring  a  continuity  of  interaction  through  an  observer 
acceleration12) hence observations in all directions are with respect to the same emission time. 
Although the correction applied for the proper velocity appears to be completely correct, we 
must conclude that still exists an unknown effect has not been accounted for and results in the 
association with the residuals and the ecliptic plane. One possibility is that the unknown effect 
may  be  associated  with  the  motion  of  an  observer  with  respect  to  the  centre  of  mass  that 
appears as an additional redshift on unbound sources. There is possibly some support for this 

in the sinusoidal variation in the Doppler residuals recorded for the NEAR flyby and also the 
annual and diurnal oscillations on the Pioneer data.   
 
VI Discussion and Further Work 
 
Though the approach has been rather ad hoc, the possibility that the transition from a bound 
to an unbound orbit is associated with an entity joining the Hubble flow has some qualitative 
and  quantitative  support.  Nevertheless  the  concept  is  problematic  because  the  need  for  two 
distinct  spacetimes  is  irreconcilable  with  the  generally  accepted  substantive  model  of 
spacetime, and it is very difficult to understand how boundedness could be locally determined 
(a necessity in an alternative relationist interpretation of spacetime). A further problem is the 
infinity  occurring  in  the  energy  relationship  postulated  between  the  bound  and  unbound 
states.  
 
In  spite  of  the  problems  (which  are  largely  conceptual  and  one  should  bear  in  mind  that 
standard physics and cosmology has only been stringently tested over what is a very restricted 
local  domain  in  comparison  to  the  full  extent  of  the  Universe),  the  idea  is  worth  pursuing 
because  of  the  possibility  of  understanding  the  rather  surprising  link  between  the  CMBR 
quadrupole  and  octopole  components  and  the  ecliptic.  The  effect  of  the  velocity  and 
acceleration  of  the  observer  with  respect  to  the  bound  centre  of  mass  on  observed  photons 
from objects in the Hubble flow has not yet been explored, and might offer a simple way of 
resolving the anomaly without having to invoke improbable geometries and/or hidden matter. 
It  has  been  shown  that  in  the  basic  linear  expression  for  the  energy  relationship  between 
bound  and  unbound  states,  the  displacement  alone  does  not  have  a  significant  effect  on  the 
scale of the Solar System, but there is no obvious additional velocity or acceleration effects 
emerging from a Special Relativistically  consistent treatment.  It is therefore probable that  a 
more sophisticated formulation of the energy relationship is required§. There may be clues as 
to  how  this  should  be  developed  by  examining  the  annual  and  diurnal  periodicities  in  the 
Pioneer  Doppler  residuals  and  matching  these  to  the  velocity  and  acceleration  of  the  Earth, 
though it should be born in mind that the periodicities are interpreted by Anderson et al.1 as 
most  likely  a  systematic  associated  with  the  modelling  of  the  Earth’s  orientation  and  the 
accuracy of the planetary ephemeris.  However, the annual effect has a turning point exactly 
at opposition and this coincidence is suggestive of a real effect. Taking a heuristic approach, 
the annual oscillation could be associated either with the radial velocity (zero at opposition) 
or  the  radial  acceleration  (maximum  at  opposition)  –  all  other  possibilities  are  ruled  out 
through symmetry considerations. If the annual oscillation is an additional acceleration on the 
spacecraft, the association is with the radial velocity of the Earth; on the other hand, it may be 
an  additional  unmodelled  Doppler  shift  directly  associated  with  the  radial  acceleration. 
Accurate ranging data is needed differentiate. 
 
It may also be possible to determine the relationship from an analysis of the NEAR EGA (Fig. 
2), because both Doppler and range data are available and the positional relationship between 
the observer and the spacecraft is accurately known.  

                                                 
§ Or it may be a frequency change associated with a complex three-body effect (observer –centre of mass- source) 

References 
 

[1]  J.  D.  Anderson,  P.  A.  Laing,  E.  L.  Lau,  A.  S.  Liu,  M.  M.  Nieto  &  S.  G.  Turyshev, 
“Study  of  the  Anomalous  Acceleration  of  Pioneer  10  and  11”,  Phys.  Rev.  D.  65 
082004/1-50 (2002).      

[2]  M.  M.  Nieto  &  S.  G.  Turyshev,  “Finding  the  origin  of  the  Pioneer  anomaly”,  Class. 

Quantum Grav. 21 4005-4023 (2004). 

[3]  M. Milgrom, “MOND – Theoretical Aspects”, astro-ph/0207231 (2002). 
[4]  M. M. Nieto & J. D. Anderson, “Using Early Data to Illuminate the Pioneer Anomaly”, 

gr-qc/0507052 (2005). 

[5]  S. Carlip, “Aberration and the Speed of Gravity”, Phys. Lett. A 267 81(2000). 
[6]  P. G. Antreasian & J. R. Guinn, “Investigations into the Unexpected Delta-V Increases 
during  the  Earth  Gravity  Assists  of  Galileo  and  NEAR”,  Astrodynamics  Specialist 
Conference and Exhibition, Washington, AIAA 98-4287 (1998). 

[7]  J.  D.  Anderson,  J.  K.  Campbell  &  M.  M.  Nieto,  “The  Energy  Transfer  Process  in 

Planetary Flybys”, astro-ph/0608087 (2006).  

[8]  F.  I.  Cooperstock,  V.  Faraoni  &  D.  N.  Vollick,  “The  Influence  of  the  Cosmological 

Expansion on Local Systems”, A. Phy. .J.  503, 61-66 (1998). 

[9]  C. Misner, K. Thorne & J.A. Wheeler, Gravitation (Freeman, San Francisco, 1973). 
[10]  M. Lachièze-Rey & E Gunzig, The Cosmological Background Radiation, (Cambridge 

University Press, Cambridge 1999). 

[11]  D.J.  Schwarz,  G.D.  Starkman,  D.  Huterer,  &  C.J.  Copi,  "Is  the  low-l  Microwave 

Background Cosmic?", Phys. Rev. Lett., 93, 221301 (2004).  
[12]  A. Macleod, “The Causal Event Set”, physics/0405151 (2004). 

 

