 
 
 
 
 
 

Swift Highly Charged Ion Channelling 

Denis Dauvergne 

IPNL, Université de Lyon, Lyon, F-69003, France; Université Lyon 1 and 
IN2P3/CNRS, UMR 5822, 4 rue E. Fermi, F-69622 Villeurbanne Cedex, France.  

d.dauvergne@ipnl.in2p3.fr 

Abstract. We review recent experimental and theoretical progress made in the scope of swift 
highly  charged  ion  channelling  in  crystals.  The  usefulness  of  such  studies  is  their  ability  to 
yield impact parameter information on charge transfer processes, and also on some time related 
problems. We discuss the cooling and heating phenomena at MeV/u energies, results obtained 
with  decelerated  H-like  ion  beams  at  GSI  and  with  ions  having  an  excess  of  electrons  at 
GANIL, the superdensity effect along atomic strings and Resonant Coherent Excitation .   

1.  Ion Channelling – Interaction with a dense electron gas 
If  an  incident  parallel  ion  beam  has  an  orientation  close  to  a  major  crystallographic  direction  of  a 
crystal, then the ion flux is redistributed inside the target, below the surface: channelled ions undergo a 
series  of  correlated  collisions  at  small  angle  along  atomic  strings  or  planes  that  repel  them  at  large 
distances  from  the  target  atoms.  The  flux  distribution  of  channelled  positive  particles  is  then 
characterized by a depletion of small impact parameters, and by a flux peaking near the centre of the 
axial  or  planar  channels.  This  property  has  been  widely  used  over  the  last  40  years  to  probe  the 
structure  of  ordered  matter,  allowing  lattice  location of  impurities,  evidencing  the  nature  of  defects, 
providing information on surfaces and on strained epitaxial layers. It has also provided information on 
basic particle-matter interactions [1,2]. Here we mainly report on this latter aspect. 

2

)

2

+

=^

(
vp

r
( )rU

r
 at a position  r

A  useful  description  of  channelling  trajectories  is  obtained  within  the  continuum  potential 
 in the transverse plane is obtained by 
approximation. The continuum potential 
averaging the target atomic potential along the crystallographic direction. The transverse energy of an 
ion  of  charge  Q,  velocity  v,  momentum  p,  incident  with  an  angle  Y
  relative  to  the  axis  (plane) 
r
E
)(
rQU
is
The  value  of  the transverse  energy  is  given  by the incidence  conditions 
r
ir Y,
). Then one can consider that a channelled ion is trapped into a 2D- (axial channelling) or 1D- 
(
(planar channelling) potential if E^  is lower than a value close to the potential QU(r ), where r  is of the 
order of the thermal vibration extension of the crystal atoms around a string or a plane. This implies in 
particular  that  the  incidence  angle  Y
c [3].  If  one  neglects 
energy loss, multiple angular scattering on electrons and nuclei, and charge exchange (under certain 
conditions), E^   is conserved during the motion of a particle channelled inside a crystal. The transverse 
energy sets the accessible transverse space A(E^ ), in which the particle is confined. 

i  must  be  smaller  than  a  critical  value  Y

.

i

Thus,  well  channelled  ions  with  low  E^   explore  restricted  A(E^ )  and  interact  mainly  with  the 
loosely bound valence or conduction electrons. Their energy loss is reduced compared to unchannelled 
ions.  Also  the  charge  exchange  regime  is  strongly  influenced  by  the  specific  impact  parameter 

Y
 
 
 
 
 
 

distribution.  As  only  small  recoil  momentum  can  be  transferred  to  target  atoms  in  large  impact 
parameter  collisions,  processes  like  Mechanical  Electron  Capture  (MEC),  also  called  non-radiative 
capture)  and  Nuclear  Impact  Ionization  (NII)  are  suppressed  for  channelled  ions.  Thus  direct  ion-
electron interaction processes govern charge exchange, whereas they are often dominated during ion-
atom collisions in ordinary matter. Figure 1 illustrates various charge exchange processes observable 
in  crystal  channelling.  Ionization  occurs  via  target  electron  impact  (EII)  mostly  above  the  threshold 
Eion= (Mion /me)EB, where EB is the initial electron binding energy. Electron capture may occur either 
radiatively (REC) or resonantly, by means of Resonant Transfer and Excitation (RTE).  

-n
h

K

=

+
EE
e
K

 

REC

Ee 

L 

K 

Ee 

L 

Ee 

L 

K 

Ee 

L 

K 

Ee 

E* 

Radiative Electron 
Capture 
(K-REC) 

K 
Dielectronic 
Capture  
 (KLL-RTE) 

Electron Impact 
Ionization  
(EII-L) 

Trielectronic 
Capture  
 (KK- LLL RT2E) 

K 

0 
Atomic        Nuclear 
levels           levels 
Nuclear Excitation by Electron 
Capture  (K-NEEC) 

Figure 1: Schematic description, in the projectile frame, of charge exchange processes observable in 
highly charged ion channelling conditions. Ee represents the kinetic energy of a target electron. 

 
A review about charge exchange and electron excitation studies in aligned crystals by H.F. Krause 
and  S.  Datz  [4]  was  published  ten  years  ago;  Resonant  Coherent  Excitation  by  the  periodic  crystal 
electric  field  was  included.    In  the  present  review,  we  shall  focus  mainly  on  recent  progress  and 
results. In particular we will see in the following sections how local information (in the range 0.1-1 Å) 
can be extracted from charge exchange experiments, and how very short time scales (in the range of 
attoseconds to femtoseconds) may be involved in the evolution of excited states. 

Before closing these preliminaries, let us emphasize that one can consider an aligned crystal as a 
very thick electron target. For instance, a few-µm thick Si crystal provides a ~1020 e-/cm2 target, which 
makes channelling competitive with ion-electron collision experiments in storage rings or ion traps for 
investigating  specific  processes.  An  attempt  was  made  at  GANIL  to  observe  the  Resonant 
Trielectronic  Recombination  (RT2E,  see  Figure  1)  with  Kr34+  ions  [5].  An  upper  limit  of  the  cross 
section in the mbarn range has been obtained. The resonant Nuclear Excitation by Electron Capture 
(NEEC)  process  is  the  time  reverse  of  nuclear  internal  conversion  [6].  This  process  has  been 
reconsidered theoretically recently [7], and channelling could be the best method to measure it.  

2.  Breaking the reversibility rule at low energies 

Channelling and blocking are reversed processes, in the sense that they provide identical angular 
dips: a channelling dip corresponds to the extinction of close collisions with target atoms for a beam 
parallel  to  a  plane  or  an  axis,  and  a  blocking  dip  to  the  extinction  of  the  ion  flux  along  an  axial  or 
planar direction when ions are emitted isotropically from an atomic crystal site. 

The reversibility rule implies that for a uniform angular distribution of the incident beam, the exit 
angular  distribution  should  also  be  uniform,  due  to  an  exact  compensation  between  the  fractions  of 
channelled and blocked particles inside the target. A violation of this reversibility rule was reported in 
1999 by Assmann et al. [8], using ion energies in the MeV/u range.  

As  an  example  Figure  2  shows,  for  uniform  angular  distributions  of  the  incident  beam,  the 
evolution  with  energy  of  the  anisotropic  angular  distribution  of  Y  ions  emerging  from  a  Si  crystal. 
Clearly  an  enhancement  of  the  flux  is  observed  along  each  of  the  crystallographic  directions  at  the 
highest energy (cooling), whereas flux disappears progressively with decreasing energy, depending on 
the direction, and, at the lowest energy, flux depletion along all directions is observed (heating).  

 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure  2:  Flux  distributions  for  Y  ions  transmitted 
through  a  3.4  µm  thick  silicon  crystal,  for  various 
energies  at  emergence.  Left  part:  angular  distributions 
recorded  with  track  detectors.  The  central  spot  on  the 
angular  distribution  corresponds  to  the  <100>  axis  and 
the  lines  intersecting  the  spot  correspond  to  the  various 
planes intersecting the axis. Right part: circular averaged 
distributions  around  the  <100>  axis  relative  to  the 
average level for a uniform distribution (data taken from 
ref. [9]). 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
Then the German collaboration performed a series of systematic studies by varying the projectile 
species, their energies, and the target species, thicknesses and orientations. A detailed report on their 
observations was published [9]. The transition from cooling to heating was studied as a function of the 
projectile atomic number and velocity, for silicon and nickel crystal targets. Among the various results 
presented, let us mention a few particularly interesting features: 

- For projectiles with Z<22, only cooling is observed; 
- Only cooling is observed along the <110> direction of silicon, which presents the broadest inter-

atomic spacing in the transverse plane; 

-  for  higher  Z  targets  and  projectiles,  cooling  and  heating  processes  may  coexist  along  the  very 
same direction: for instance in the case of 40 MeV Ni ions, cooling is observed for the (100) plane of a 
Ni  crystal  at  low  transverse  energy,  whereas  heating  dominates  at  high  transverse  energy,  and  the 
overall effect is heating (see figure 9 of Ref. [9]).  
As  soon  as  they  published  their  first  observations,  the  authors  explained  most  of  the  cooling  and 
heating phenomenon by the impact parameter dependence of electron capture and loss probabilities by 
the  projectiles  [8,  10].  At  such  energies,  charge  exchange  cross  sections  are  very  large,  and  charge 
equilibrium  is  reached  rapidly  in  the  target,  at  which  the  capture  and  loss  rates  become  equal.  If 
electron capture and loss occur at different mean impact parameters rc and rl, then, after a cycle of N 
captures  and losses, the transverse  energy  of  the ions  travelling  inside  the crystal  is  changed  by  the 
amount
  to  first  order,  where  U  is  the  continuum  potential  defined  above.  A  more 
detailed  theoretical  description  must  account  for  the  complex  dependence  of  capture  and  loss 
probabilities  on  impact  parameter.  Grüner  et  al.  have  undertaken  n-body,  multi-collision  Classical 
Transport  Monte  Carlo  simulations  (nN-CTMC)  [9].  The  first  results  of  these  simulations  describe 
energy losses and charge state evolutions inside matter [11]. However, although this method is quite 
promising, a complete description of the cooling and heating features has not been obtained so far, due 
to  the  large  computation  power  required.  On  the  other  hand,  analytical  calculations  have  been 
developed.  For  instance,  C.  Toepffer  could  calculate  the  transition  energies  observed  in  silicon  by 
using scaling factors for capture and loss probabilities within the Born approximation [12]. 

( )
(
rUrUN
l
c

]
)

[

Still some questions remain open. The main one is that there are no quantitative estimates of the 
cooling  or  heating  strengths  as  a  function  of  transverse  energy,  neither  experimentally  nor 
theoretically.  Such  studies  would  help  for  possible  applications  (could  one  use  cooling  for  beam 
focusing?). The influence of cooling or heating on nuclear lifetime measurements by means of fission 

-
 
 
 
 
 
 

fragment blocking has to be evaluated. Finally, the link has to be made between the low energy case, 
where charge exchange takes place at large impact parameters with very large probabilities, and the 
higher energy case, with much smaller and more localized capture and loss probabilities, and where 
channelled ions can remain really frozen in their charge state. At one point, the influence of cooling at 
high energy will become negligible compared to the collisional heating (multiple scattering). However 
the upper energy limit for the influence of charge exchange is not yet known. 

3.  Channelling as a local probe for charge exchange in the 10-100 MeV/u range 
Now  we  discuss  ion  channelling  at  higher  energies, where  no  cooling  and  heating  phenomena  have 
been observed so far. In this high velocity regime (v >> v0) charge exchange processes involve deeply 
bound states of the projectile and/or the target, and thus precise information on their impact parameter 
dependence can be obtained.  

3.1.  Local Compton profile studies 
The  dominant  electron  capture  processes  for  well  channelled  ions  are  REC  and  RTE,  with  cross 
sections  of  the  order  of  the  kbarn  per  target  electron  for  highly  charged  ions  in  the  present  energy 
range. As noted previously, a thin crystal is a very dense electron target and, thus, these processes can 
be studied with very good statistics and used to characterize the electron gas sampled by channelled 
ions as a function of their transverse energy. Experiments can determine not only the electron density 
(via  the  capture  probability)  but  also  the  longitudinal  electron  momentum  distribution  (Compton 
profile). Andersen et al. observed the KLL-RTE resonance profile with Br33+ incident ions on a thin Si 
crystal  as  a  function  of  incident  energy,  and  for  various  selections  of  the  total  energy  lost  in  axial 
channelling [13]. The resonance width is associated with the electron Compton profile. They observed 
a  narrowing  of  the  resonance  profile  for  the  best-channelled  ions,  in  agreement  with  the  local  free 
electron gas approximation.  In the same way, Andriamonje et al. measured X-rays corresponding to 
K-REC for 60 MeV/u Kr36+ ions, both in axial and random orientations of a Si crystal [14]. Here also, 
the  REC  photon  energy  dispersion  was  dominated  by  the  electron  Compton  profile.  A  clear  impact 
parameter dependence of the Compton profile was deduced from the simulations fitting the data. 

3.2.  Charge exchange with decelerated highly charged ions 
In this section we describe experiments performed with decelerated H-like heavy ions extracted from 
the ESR storage ring at GSI [15]. Channelling is then a unique tool to study in detail the interaction of 
highly charged ions, far from their charge equilibrium, with solid targets. 

3.2.1.  Competition  between  MEC  and  REC.  For  20  MeV/u  U91+  ions  colliding  with  a  silicon  target 
MEC cross sections are in the Mbarn range, and more than two orders of magnitude larger than REC 
ones. Thus, for an amorphous target, such incident ions capture many electrons by MEC, and reach 
  for  the  last  occupied 
charge  equilibrium  rapidly  when  the  adiabaticity  parameter 
shell (in this expression vn is the velocity of a bound electron in the n-shell). In channelling conditions, 
REC  is  found  to  be  the  dominant  capture  process  for  well-channelled  ions,  whereas  it  is  prevented 
from  occurring  in  random  conditions,  due  to  the  rapid  filling  of  inner-shells  by  MEC  followed  by 
cascades  [16].  A  quantitative  analysis  and  simulations  provided  the  absolute  MEC  and  REC 
probabilities  as  a  function  of  impact  parameter  [17].  In  particular,  MEC  becomes  the  dominant 
recombination processes as ions approach atomic strings closer than 0.5 Å.  

1»

=

v

v

ion

h

n

n

3.2.2.  Electron gas polarization. 20 MeV/u U91+
  ions or 13 MeV/u Pb81+ ions channelled in crystals 
induce a strong perturbation of the electron gas. The collective response (wake effect) induces a shift 
of the continuum energy level, which can be observed by means of radiative electron capture resulting 
from  the  transition  from  the  continuum  to  a  bound  state  of  the  projectile.  REC  photon  energies  are 
shifted  consequently.  The  electron  gas  polarization  also  induces  an  increase  of  the  local  electron 
density. K- or L-REC by heavy ions are very local processes, in the sense that electrons are captured 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
)

V
e
(
 
 
)

-

K
C
E
R

(
 

E

into  very  small  radius  orbitals.  Thus  the  REC  probability  relative  to  the  value  in  a  non-perturbed 
electron gas should be enhanced by the local increase of the electron density. E. Testa et al. observed 
both effects [18]. As shown in Figure 3, the energy shift is in agreement with calculations using the 
linear  response  theory  [19],  and  also  with  previous  measurements  by  Tribedi  et  al.,  with  lighter 
projectiles [20]. As for the local electron density, an enhancement of about 50% relative to theoretical 
values for K-REC has been observed. It is much smaller than predicted by the same linear response 
model.  This  shows  that,  for  the  small  values  of  the  adiabaticity  parameter  achieved  in  these 
experiments,  the  density  fluctuations  are  distributed  over  quite  large  distances,  rather  than  strongly 
localized in the vicinity of the heavy ions.  

    U91+  
20 MeV/u 

p

2

Z

v
h0
p v

w

p

    Pb81+  
13 MeV/u 

Figure  3:  K-  and  L-REC  line  shift  due  to  the 
wake potential induced by channelled heavy ions 
in silicon <110>. The data for  z
 < 1.8 are from 
Tribedi  et  al. [20]. The  dashed line corresponds 
to  linear  response  theory  calculations  [19]  for  a 
free  electron  gas  of  density  0.2  e-/Å3 
wh
).  The  data  for  U91+  and  Pb81+ 
(

6.16=

eV
ions are from Testa et al. [18]. 

p

z  =Zpv0/v 

 
 
 

3.2.3.  Deceleration of H-like ions. As seen above, channelled ions with low transverse energy have a 
large probability to remain frozen in their incident charge state, even for decelerated H-like uranium 
ions  far  from  their  equilibrium  charge  state  in  solids.  Although  these  ions  experience  a  reduced 
electron  density  relative  to  random  conditions, their high  charge  state  may  lead  to  very  high-energy 
loss  rates,  mostly  due  to  distant  collisions  with  electrons.  By  extrapolating  measurements  for  20 
MeV/u U91+ ions, we show in Figure 4 that the energy loss of channelled frozen H-like ions may even 
exceed the energy loss of unchannelled ions that are only partially stripped of their electrons [2,16]. 
Since  well-channelled  ions  may  only  capture electrons  by  REC,  and  the  REC  cross sections are  not 
very large, one may transport and decelerate H-like ions inside relatively thick crystals. This has been 
confirmed  recently  by  our  collaboration  and  will  be  published  soon.  The  questions  following  these 
experiments are i/ what is the maximum deceleration achievable without dechannelling and electron 
capture and ii/ what is the lowest energy at which an H-like U ion can be transported inside a crystal? 
So far, these two limits have not been reached. Eventually, one should reach the situation of section 2, 
where even channelled ions undergo many charge exchanges. 

 

 

Figure  4:  Expected  evolution  of  the  energy  loss  for 
channelled  U91+  ions  in  the  <110>  axis  of  silicon.  The 
experimental  data  (circle:  most  probable  energy  loss  in 
channelling,  square:  loss  for  random  orientation)  are 
taken  from  ref.  [16].  The  random  energy  loss  curve 
corresponds to SRIM calculations [21]. The dashed curve 
corresponds 
the  best-
to 
channelled ions. 
 

loss  experienced  by 

the 

4.  Channelling as a time probe 

4.1.  Superdensity effect for high transverse energy ions 

-
D
 
 
 
 
 
 

In  this  section  we  consider  ions  that  have  a  transverse  energy  close  to  the  critical  value  in  axial 
channelling conditions instead of well-channelled ions. As long as these ions are not scattered at large 
angle during a single collision at very small impact parameter, they keep a channelling-like trajectory, 
i.e. parallel to the strings at the minimum distance of approach and they may spend a significant part 
of their time close to atomic strings. For incidence parallel to the axis, glancing collisions occur at the 
entrance of the crystal, and lead to the so-called surface peak in Rutherford scattering measurements.  

These  particular  trajectories  are  characterized  by  several time  scales  governing  the  interaction  of 

such ions with matter. These times are the following, for ions with 10 - 100 MeV/u kinetic energies: 

- 

- 

- 

The time Tcollis between two collisions on successive atoms, with the same impact parameter 
(within ~0.1 Å due to the thermal vibrations) has a fixed value in the range 3.10-18 and 10-17 s.  
The  length  over  which  the  trajectory  remains  tangent  to  an  atomic  string  is  of  the  order  of 
10 nm. This represents a time Tglancing in the 10-16 s range.  
After  being  repelled  by  a  string,  ions  will  reach  other  strings  after  variable  path  lengths  (in 
contrast with planar channelling, for which trajectories oscillate regularly). Moreover, the next 
string may be approached at a quite different minimum distance. However, let us consider that 
this time of flight Tfree in a medium free of target atomic cores is of the order of 10-15 s. 
Finally the time of flight inside a 1-10 µm thick crystal is in the 10-14-10-12 s range. 

- 
The consequence of such a time distribution of the close collision rate is a very particular evolution 
of the electronic configuration of highly charged ions inside the crystal. On the one hand, excitation-
ionization processes are favored close to the strings, since Tcoll and Tglancing are shorter than most of the 
excited lifetimes,  even  for highly  probable  transitions.  On  the  other  hand,  MEC  is  also  enhanced at 
close  impact  parameters  along  atomic  strings.  However,  for  highly  charged  ions  at  moderate 
velocities, MEC is likely to occur into excited states, and the probability for the projectile to lose such 
electrons during further collisions is high, since decay into deeply bound states may occur at times of 
the  order  of  Tfree  or  higher.  Once  the  ions  move  away  from  the  strings,  both  capture  and  ionization 
rates  decrease,  and  radiative  or  auto-ionizing  decay  of  the few  surviving  excited  electrons  may  take 
place, at least partially. Thus, during the full traversal of the target, the ratio of probabilities for overall 
ionization and effective capture into stable states is larger for ions with a high transverse energy than 
in  random  conditions,  when  the  time  between  close  collisions  is  more  uniformly  distributed.  This 
superdensity effect was described by A. L’Hoir et al. [22]. Experimental evidence was obtained with 
29 MeV/u Pb56+ ions incident on a thin silicon crystal. Near axial crystal orientation, a significant part 
of the charge state distribution, corresponding to the highest transverse energy ions, extends beyond 
the distribution for a random orientation toward higher charge states. This shows that thin crystals can 
be used to produce very highly stripped ions (in that case, up to He-like Pb ions). The authors of [22] 
described  also  how  H-like  incident  uranium  ions  decelerated  at  lower  energies  are  prevented  from 
dressing with electrons at high transverse energy. A last remark, concerning glancing collisions along 
atomic strings, is that the energy loss rate is locally enhanced due to close collisions with target core 
electrons. If one extrapolates the values measured with MeV protons [23], the energy deposited during 
times of the order of Tglancing may exceed 100 keV/nm for highly charged ions. Such values are above 
the  maximum  stopping  power  of  amorphous  matter  for  single  projectiles.  This  opens  interesting 
perspectives for the dynamics of damage induced by ions in matter. 

4.2.  Resonant Coherent Excitation 
Okorokov [24] predicted in 1965 that channelled particles should be sensitive to the periodicity of the 
r
charge distribution along crystallographic directions, i.e. to harmonics of the string potential, U( r
,z), 
the variation of which with z is now considered. The zero-order continuum potential is obtained after 
averaging over all the atoms of a string, as described in section 1. Higher order terms correspond to the 
r
maxima of the Fourier transform of U( r
,z). Resonant Coherent Excitation (RCE) can occur when an 
 of the projectile matches a harmonic of the collision frequency along an 
excitation frequency 
hE

, where v is the projectile velocity, d the interatomic spacing 

atomic string (1D-RCE):

hED

dvk

g=

D
 
 
 
 
 
 

along the string, g the Lorenz factor and k a positive integer. Thus RCE is the resonant absorption (or 
emission) of a momentum corresponding to the reciprocal lattice vector, 

p2=
k

d

h

h

. 

Gk

Under planar channelling conditions, one may adjust the excitation frequency by varying the angle 
q  relative to the atomic strings belonging to the plane [25]. For instance let us consider for simplicity 
that  the  plane  is  defined  by  two  perpendicular  axes,  with  inter-atomic  distances  d1  and  d2.  The  2D-
cos
RCE resonance condition becomes 

, (k, l positive integers). 

(
kv

hE

sin

+

=

d

d

)

g

q

q

l

1

2

1

2

3

l

g

q

q

)

d

d

=

+

+

sin

sin

cos

cos

cos

(
kv

, where k, l, m are positive integers. 

Very  recently  a  Japanese  collaboration  showed  the  possibility  of  performing  3D-RCE  [26],  by 
using  the  3-fold  periodicity  in  the  direct  space.  Channelling  is  no  longer  considered,  as  ions  cross 
planes of atoms periodically. By introducing a second angle F
 relative to the previous plane, and the 
third interatomic distance d3 in the perpendicular direction, the resonance condition becomes  
d

hE
m
A review of the pioneering RCE experiments appeared in ref. [4]. In these experiments, the authors 
observed  either  a  decrease  of  the  survival  fraction  of  frozen  non-fully  stripped  incident  ions,  or  an 
enhancement  of  K-X  rays,  corresponding  to  a  resonance  for  n=1  to  n=2  excitation.  The  ionization 
increase was due to the much larger ionization probability for n=2 states relative to that for n=1 states.  
Further  complementary  studies  have  been  performed  since  then.  Komaki  et  al.  have  extended  these 
measurements  in  planar  channelling  to  higher  Z  ions  at  higher  energies  [27].  They  recorded 
simultaneously the energy loss by using a thin crystal target as an active silicon detector, so that they 
could obtain detailed information on the Stark splitting of the (n=2)-state of Ar17+ ions as a function of 
the  impact  parameter  in  planar  channelling  conditions.  Actually,  the  static  transverse  electric  field 
sampled by an ion in the vicinity of an atomic plane (or row) is responsible for this Stark splitting. The 
stronger  the  electric  field,  the  stronger  the  splitting.  As  ions  of  different  transverse  energies  sample 
different accessible  transverse spaces, the resonance  shape  was  found  to  depend  on  the  energy  loss. 
This  collaboration  reported  also  on  the  enhancement  of  the  production  of  convoy  electrons  due  to 
RCE,  followed  by  electron  loss  to  the  continuum  [28]  and  on  the  resonant  excitation  of  optically 
forbidden transitions from 2s to 3s and 3d sublevels of Li-like ions [29]. By means of anisotropic X-
ray  angular  distributions,  Azuma  et  al.  recently  demonstrated  that  RCE  under  planar  channelling 
conditions populates aligned excited states [30]. The very recent discovery of 3D-RCE opens a new 
field for fundamental atomic physics [26]. In particular, the three components of the periodic electric 
field  can  be  used  to  excite  simultaneously  several  transitions,  as  in  pump-probe  laser  experiments. 
Without channelling conditions, the absence of the slowly varying static electric field, responsible for 
the Stark broadening of the resonances, may improve the spectroscopic accuracy of these experiments. 
In  future  experiments  devoted  to  precision  spectroscopy  of  highly  charged  ions,  the  ultimate 
physical  limitation  of  the  precision  of  RCE  may  come  from  the  crystal  itself,  through  experimental 
uncertainty in the crystal parameter (the interatomic distances di in the above formulae). 

To end this review on recent progress about RCE, let us mention a theoretical work by Balashov et 
al.  [31]  which  discusses the  possibility  of  using  RCE  in  a  crystal  to  populate  metastable  states  of  a 
projectile  efficiently.  Finally,  theoretical  descriptions  and  predictions  of  nuclear  RCE  have  been 
published [32], but this process has not been observed yet.  

5.  Conclusion 
As some questions and conclusions have already been given at the end of each section of this paper, 
let us give some perspectives on possible future studies with highly charged ions.  

Decelerated  H-like  ion  beams  offer  the  opportunity  to  elucidate  new  physics,  in  energy  and 
perturbation ranges that have not been completely explored. Interesting applications arise for atomic, 
surface  science  and  nuclear  physics.  This  should  be  part  of  the  FLAIR  program  at  the  future  FAIR 
facility (Darmstadt), where extracted H-like heavy ions below 10 MeV/u will be available. 

The  structured  sequences  of  collisions  along  strings  or  planes  for  ions  with  relatively  high 
transverse  energy,  as  well  as  the  pure  electron  gas  target  sampled  by  well  channelled  ions,  provide 
original  conditions  for  the  study  of  the  evolution  of  excited  states  inside  a  solid.  Moreover, 

D
F
F
F
D
 
 
 
 
 
 

channelling allows populating given electronic states (e.g. 2s-REC) selectively. This is a challenging 
method for the detailed study of collisional or Stark mixing of metastable excited states [31, 33, 34]. 

The recent discovery of 3D-RCE opens new perspectives for fundamental atomic physics. It may 
also  point  out  the  need  to  account  for  coherence  effects  in  determining  excitation  and  ionization 
probabilities in solids. Indeed, solid targets are ordered on a nanometre scale, so interferences could 
either enhance or decrease transition probabilities as compared to independent collisions. 

Improved  precision  atomic  spectroscopy  experiments  are  expected  by  increasing  the  beam 
energies,  which  is  part  of  the  SPARC  letter  of  intent  for  FAIR.  There,  the  very  high  energies 
achievable (~10 GeV/u for uranium ions) could also allow the study of nuclear RCE. 

C.  Cohen,  A.  L’Hoir,  J.-C.  Poizat  and  E.  Testa  are  greatly  acknowledged  for  their  help  in  the 

preparation of this manuscript. 

References 
[1]  Gemmell D S 1974 Rev. Mod. Phys. 46 129. 
[2]  Cohen C and Dauvergne D 2004 Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res. B 225 40. 
[3]  Lindhard J 1965 Mat. Fyz. Medd. Dan. Vid. Selsk. 34 n°14. 
[4]  Krause H F and Datz S 1996 Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 37 139. 
[5]  Chevallier M et al. 2000 Phys. Rev. A 61 0022724. 
[6]  Kimball J C, Bittle D and Cue N 1991 Phys. Lett. 152 367. 
[7] 
[8]  Assmann  W,  Huber  H,  Karamian  S  A,  Grüner  F,  Miesques  H  D,  Andersen  J  U,  Posselt  M, 

Palffy A et al. 2006 Phys. Rev A 73 012715. 

Schmidt B 1999 Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 1759. 
[9]  Grüner F et al. 2003 Phys. Rev. B 68 174104. 
[10]  Andersen J U et al. 2002, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res. B 193 188. 
[11]  Grüner F and Bell F 2006 Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res. B 245 15. 
[12]  Toepffer C 2006, Phys. Rev. A73 062901. 
[13]  Andersen J U et al. 1996, Phys. Rev. A54 624. 
[14]  Andriamonje S et al. 1996 Phys. Rev. A 54 1404. 
[15]  Prinz H T et al. 1997 Hyperfine Interactions 108 325. 
[16]  D. Dauvergne et al. 2003 Nuclear Instruments and Methods B 205 773. 
[17]  D. Dauvergne et al. to be published in Proceedings of ICPEAC 2005, IOP Publishing. 
[18]  Testa E et al. 2006 Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res. B 245 47 
[19]  Echenique P M, Ritchie R H and Brandt W 1979 Physical Review B 20 2567. 
[20]  Tribedi L C, Nanal V, Kurup M B, Prasad K C and Tandon P M 1995 Phys. Rev. A 51 1312. 
[21]  Ziegler J F, Biersack J P and Littmark U 1985 The Stopping and Range of Ions in Solids (New 

York: Pergamon Press). 

[22]  L'Hoir A et al. 2006 Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res. B 245 1.  
[23]  Vickridge I, L’Hoir A, Gylai J, Cohen C and Abel F 1990, Europhys. Lett. 13 635. 
[24]  Okorokov V V 1965 Yad. Fiz. 2 1009; 1965 Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 2 175. 
[25]  Datz S et al. 1980, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. 107 15. 
[26]  Azuma T et al., these proceedings. 
[27]  Komaki K et al. 1998 Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res. B 146 19. 
[28]  Azuma  T,  Takabayashi  Y,  Ito  T,  Komaki  K,  Yamazaki  Y,  Takada  E  and  Murakami  T  2003 

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res. B 212 397. 

[29]  Nakai Y et al. 2005 Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res. B 230 90. 
[30]  Azuma T et al., to be published in Phys. Rev. Lett. 
[31]  Balashov  V  V  and  Bodrenko  I  V  2006  Nucl.  Instr.  and  Meth.  Phys.  Res.  B  245 52.  See  also 

Balashov VV et al., these proceedings. 

[32]  Pivovarov  Yu  L,  Geissel  H,  Filimonov  Yu  M,  Krivosheev  O  E  and  Scheidenberger  C  1996 

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res. B 119 283. 

[33]  Lamour E, Gervais B, Rozet J P and Vernhet D 2006 Phys. Rev. A 73 042715. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

[34]  Andriamonje S et al. 1996 Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res. B 107 1. 

