 

A magnetic liquid deformable mirror for high 
stroke and low order axially symmetrical 
aberrations. 

Denis Brousseau, Ermanno F. Borra, Hubert-Jean Ruel and Jocelyn Parent  
Département de physique, génie physique et optique and Centre d’Optique Photonique et Laser (COPL), Université 
Laval, Québec, Québec, Canada G1K 7P4 
denis.brousseau.1@ulaval.ca, borra@phy.ulaval.ca, hubert.jean-ruel.1@ulaval.ca, jocelyn.parent.1@ulaval.ca 

Anna Ritcey 
Département de chimie and COPL, Université Laval, Québec, Québec, Canada, G1K 7P4 
anna.ritcey@chm.ulaval.ca 

to  deformable  solid  mirrors: 

Abstract: We present a new class of magnetically shaped deformable liquid 
mirrors  made  of  a  magnetic liquid  (ferrofluid).   Deformable  liquid  mirrors 
offer  advantages  with  respect 
large 
deformations, low costs and the possibility of very large mirrors with added 
aberration  control.  They  have  some  disadvantages  (e.g.  slower  response 
time).  We  made  and  tested  a  deformable  mirror,  producing  axially 
symmetrical  wavefront  aberrations  by  applying  electric  currents  to  5 
concentric coils made of copper wire wound on aluminum cylinders. Each 
of  these  coils  generates  a  magnetic  field  which  combines  to  deform  the 
surface of a ferrofluid to the desired shape. We have carried out laboratory 
tests on a 5 cm diameter prototype mirror and demonstrated defocus as well 
as Seidel and Zernike spherical aberrations having amplitudes up to 20 µm, 
which was the limiting measurable amplitude of our equipment. 
©2006 Optical Society of America  

OCIS  codes:  (010.1080)  Adaptive  optics;  (220.1000)  Aberration  compensation;  (220.4840) 
Optical testing 

 

 

References and Links 

(1990). 

(1977). 

6139 (1996). 

1.  R. K. Tyson, Principles of Adaptive Optics. (Academic, 1999). 
2.  M.A. Ealey and F. Washeba, “Continuous facesheet low voltage deformable mirror,” Opt. Eng. 29, 1191 

3.  E. Steinhaus and S.G. Lipson, “Bimorph piezoelectric flexible mirror,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 69, 478-481 (1979). 
4.  R.P. Grosso and M. Yellin, “Membrane mirror as an adaptive optical element,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 67, 399 

5.  L. Girard and E. F. Borra, “Optical tests of a 2.5-m diameter liquid mirror II: Behavior under external 

perturbations and scattered light measurements,” Appl. Opt. 36, 25, 6278-6288 (1997). 

6.  N.M. Ninane and C.A. Jamar, “Parabolic liquid mirrors in optical shop testing,” Appl. Opt. 35, 31, 6131-

7.  P. Hickson and M. K. Mulrooney, “University of British Columbia-NASA Multi-Narrowband Survey. I. 

Description and Photometric Properties of the Survey,” Astrophys. J. Suppl. 115, 35-42 (1997). 

8.  R. Cabanac and E.F. Borra, “A search for peculiar objects with the NASA Orbital Debris Observatory 3-m 

Liquid Mirror Telescope,” Astrophys.  J. 509, 309-323 (1998). 

9.  R. Sica, S. Sargoytchev, E.F.  Borra, L. Girard, S. Argall, C.T. Sarrow and S. Flatt. “Lidar measurements 
taken with a large aperture liquid mirror: 1.The Rayleigh-Scatter system,” Appl. Opt. 34, 30, 6925 (1995). 

10.  R.Wuerker, “Bistatic LMT Lidar Alignment,” Opt. Eng. 36, 1421-1424 (1997). 

11.  R.J. Sica and T. Russell, “Measurements of the Effects of Gravity Waves in the Middle Atmosphere Using 

Parametric Models of Density Fluctuations. Part I,” J. Atmos. Sci.  56, 1308-1329 (1999). 

12.  E. M. Vuelban, N. Bhattacharya and J. J. M. Braat, “Liquid deformable mirror for high-order wavefront 

correction,” Opt. Lett. 31, 11, 1717-1719 (2006). 
13.  R.E. Rosensweig, Ferrohydrodynamics. (Dover, 1997). 
14.  R. Ragazzoni and E. Marchetti, “A liquid adaptive mirror,” Astron. Astrophys. 283, L17-L19 (1994). 
15.  W.L.H. Shutter and L.A. Whitehead, “A wide sky coverage ferrofluid mercury telescope,” Astrophys. J. 424, 

L139-L141 (1994). 

16.  E.F. Borra, A.M. Ritcey, R. Bergamasco, P. Laird, J. Gingras, M. Dallaire, L. Da Silva and H. Yockell-

Lelievre “Nanoengineered Astronomical Optics,” Astron. Astrophys. 419, 777-782 (2004). 

17.  P. Laird, E. F. Borra, R. Bergamesco, J. Gingras, L. Truong and A. Ritcey, “Deformable mirrors based on 

magnetic liquids,” Proc. SPIE 5490, 1493-1501 (2004). 

18.  V. V. Kiryushin and A. V. Nazarenko, “Interaction of a magnetic liquid with a conductor containing current 

and a permanent magnet,” Fluid Dyn. 23, 2, 306-311 (1988). 

19.  M.D. Cowley and R.E. Rosensweig, “The interfacial stability of a ferromagnetic fluid,” J. Fluid Mech. 30, 

20.  E. F. Borra, D. Brousseau and A. Vincent, “Large magnetic liquid mirrors,” Astron. Astrophys. 446, 389-393 

671-688 (1967). 

(2006). 

21.  D. Yogev and S. Efrima, “Novel Silver Metal Liquid Like Films,” J. Phys. Chem. 92, 5754-5760 (1988). 
22.  K.C Gordon, J.J. McGarvey and K.P. Taylor, “Enhanced Raman Scattering from Metal Liquid Like Films 

Formed from Silver Sols,” J. Phys. Chem. 93, 6814-6817 (1989). 

23.  J.  Gingras, J-P. Déry, H. Yockell-Lelièvre, E. F.  Borra and A. M. Ritcey, “Colloids and Surfaces A: 

Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects,” accepted December 2005 

24.  E. F. Borra, A. M. Ritcey and E.  Artigau, “Floating Mirrors,” Astrophys. J. 516, L115-L118 (1999). 
25.  J. A. Nelder and R. Mead, “A Simplex Method for Function Minimization,” Comput. J. 7, 308 (1965). 
26.  W. H. Press, B. P.  Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky and W. T.  Vetterling, Numerical Recipes in FORTRAN: The 

Art of Scientific Computing (Cambridge University Press, 1989) Chap.10. 

27.  J. Porter et al., “Monochromatic aberrations of the human eye in a large population,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A. 18, 

28.  R.H. Freeman and J.E Pearson, “Deformable mirrors for all seasons and reasons,” Appl. Opt. 21, 4, 580-588 

1793-1803 (2001). 

(1982). 

29.  E.F. Borra, R. Content, L. Girard, S. Szapiel, L.M. Tremblay and E. Boily, “Liquid mirrors: Optical shop 

tests and contributions to the technology,” Astrophys. J. 393, 829-847 (1992). 

30.  O. Cugat, S. Basrour, C. Divoux, P.  Mounaix and G. Reyne, “Deformable magnetic mirror for adaptive 

optics: technological aspects,” Sens. Actuators A89, 1-9 (2001). 

1. Introduction 

Adaptive  optics  are  increasingly  used  for  optical  applications  [1].  Conventional  deformable 
mirrors  use  solid  thin  plates  or  membranes  [2,3,4].  They  are  expensive,  have  few  actuators, 
are typically limited to diameters of a few cm and strokes of a few microns, a major limitation 
for  some  applications  such  as  vision  science.  Liquid  mirrors  offer  an  interesting  alternative 
that  does  not  suffer  from  these  restrictions.  For  example,  they  can  have  smooth  deviations 
from flatness measuring several centimeters. 

 The  fabrication  of  liquid  optical  components  is  recent  but  such  elements  are  presently 
used  and  are  the  subject  of  intensive  research  and  development  work.  The  fundamental 
advantage  of  liquid  optics  comes  from  the  fact  that  the  surface  of  a  liquid  follows  an 
equipotential  surface  to  a  very  high  precision.  This  has  been  used  to  make  large  parabolic 
mirrors by rotating containers filled with mercury. Optical shop tests [5,6], have shown that 
rotating mercury mirrors have excellent optical qualities.  Liquid Mirror Telescopes (LMTs) 
have been built and used to obtain astronomical, space science and atmospheric sciences data 
[7-11]. The main advantage of those liquid mirrors resides in their low costs (about two orders 
of magnitude less than conventional parabolic glass mirrors). Liquid adaptive mirrors shaped 
by electrocapillary effects have also been discussed [12].  

In  this  article,  we  discuss  liquid  surfaces  shaped  by  magnetic  fields.  Mercury  is  poorly-
suited to make liquid magnetic mirrors since ferromagnetic mercury is unstable [13], and the 
high  density  of  mercury  necessitates  strong  magnetic  fields  and  thus  high  electric  currents 
[14,15].  These  difficulties  can  be  solved  by  using  a  ferrofluid  coated  with  a  metallic  layer 
[16].  Ferrofluidic  mirrors  that  use  arrays  of  actuators  have  been  previously  discussed  [17]. 
This technology has been substantially improved in our laboratory since that article and new 

 

 

results will be presented elsewhere. Although these ferrofluidic mirrors can have substantially 
larger strokes than solid or membrane mirrors, they cannot, in practice, give extremely large 
useful strokes because the footprint of the individual actuators would lead to surfaces having 
unacceptable granularity. This problem can be greatly reduced by generating a magnetic field 
with  simple  networks  of  wires.  In  this  article  we  present  numerical  simulations  and 
experimental  results  of  ferrofluidic  mirrors  shaped  by  a  simple  geometrical  arrangement  of 
concentric rings of current carrying wires. 

2. Ferrofluid mirror technology 

Ferrofluids are liquids that contain a suspension of colloidal ferromagnetic particles within a 
carrier  liquid.  In  the  presence  of  an  external  magnetic  field,  the  magnetic  particles  align 
themselves  with  the  field  and  the  bulk  of  the  liquid  becomes  magnetized.    Energy 
conservation considerations lead to a surface governed by magnetic, gravitational and surface 
tension forces. Stable ferrofluids having wide ranges of physical properties can be produced to 
suit each practical application needs. The amplitude of a deformation, generated by an applied 
magnetic field, on a ferrofluid surface, can be approximated by [18] 

      

h

=

1)

0 (
−
µ µ
r
2
g
ρ

(

µ
r

H

2
n

+

H

2
t

)

                                                 (1) 

Where ρ is the density of the ferrofluid and Hn, t are the normal and tangential components of 
the magnetic field intensity within the ferrofluid. The relative permeability µr is assumed to be 
independent of the  magnetic field since in most cases  it is extremely small compared to the 
saturation magnetization of the ferrofluid. From this and using the usual  magnetic boundary 
conditions, we derive the formula for the amplitude of a single peak in terms of the external 
applied field 

                                                 

h

=

                                                (2) 

1

−

(
µ
r
2
g
µµρ
0

) (

r

2
B
n

+

µ
r

2
B
t

)

The  amplitudes  of  the  surface  deformations  are  limited  by  the  Rosensweig  instability 
which occurs when the magnetic field exceeds a critical value, generating a series of spikes, 
visible to the naked eye [19].   This critical value depends on the physical parameters of the 
ferrofluid and the normal component of the magnetic field relative to the surface. For typical 
ferrofluids and the worse-case geometry (the field is entirely perpendicular to the surface), the 
Rosensweig instability occurs around 80 Gauss. Using Eq. (2) to obtain the maximum surface 
deformation  before  the  onset  of  the  instability,  we  get  an  amplitude  of  over  a  millimeter.  
However,  in  theory,  much  larger  deformations  (several  tenths  of  cm)  can  be  obtained  for 
fields that have components mostly parallel to the surface [20]. 

Ferrofluids  have  low  reflectivity  and  for  many  applications  must  be  coated  with  a 
reflective layer. This can be done with nanoengineered reflective liquids based on interfacial 
films of silver particles known as Metal Liquid-Like Films or MELLFs [21,22,23]. MELLFs 
combine the properties of metals and liquids, can be deformed and are therefore well adapted 
to applications in the field of liquid optics. The fabrication of a nanoengineered liquid mirror 
has been described elsewhere [24] .This technology is young and can certainly be improved.  
We are presently carrying out work to improve the properties of MELLF-coated liquids. We 
have also successfully coated other liquids with conventional vacuum-coating equipment.  

3. Numerical simulations and experimental results 

3.1 Numerical simulations 

The cylindrical symmetry of most optical components suggests that the magnetic field should 
be  produced  with  electric  currents  flowing  in  circular  coils.  We  thus  computed  numerically 
the magnetic field generated by a concentric array of circular coils using the Biot-Savart law 
and used Eq. (2) to estimate the parametric surface of the ferrofluid. 

 

An  equally  spaced  array  of  3  concentric  coils  was  our  first  guess  to  produce  axially 
symmetrical  aberrations  on  the  ferrofluid  surface.    To  find  optimal  currents,  we  carried  out 
Monte  Carlo  simulations  that  use  an  adapted  version  of  the  well-known  downhill  simplex 
method in multi-dimensions described in Numerical Recipes in C [25]. The downhill simplex 
method  is  due  to  Nelder  and  Mead  [26],  and  requires  only  function  evaluations,  not 
derivatives. It is not very efficient in terms of the number of function evaluations it requires, 
but the computational burden is small and it permits to get results fast. To minimize computer 
time,  we  assumed  that  each  coil  is  made  of  circular  loops  of  vanishingly  thin  wire.  The 
function we are optimizing is the standard deviation between the actual calculated surface and 
the desired one. The algorithm stops when the deviation reaches a user-set value. The starting 
points  are  randomly  generated  within  a  null  and  a  maximum  desired  current.  It  was  soon 
found that 3 coils were enough to give a defocus term with low residual but not for a primary 
spherical aberration. We thus increased the number of coils to 5 and were then able to get low 
residuals  on  both  terms.  Height  of  the  coils  relative  to  each  other  was  also  optimized.  A 
compromise between optimized vertical positions and design simplicity was finally chosen. 

Fig. 1. Schematic of the mirror. The outer coil has a diameter of 10 cm. 

 

3.2 Experiments 

We  carried  out  experiments  to  test  the  validity  of  our  simulations.  They  were  done  with  a 
mirror that uses 5 circular concentric coils with diameters ranging from 2 to 10 cm made of 
copper-wire windings. For each coil, we used 162 windings, except for the central one which 
has 108, of AWG 26 gauge copper wires laid over machined aluminum cylinders. The coils 
are easy to build and lend themselves to low cost mass production. Fig. 1 shows a schematic 
drawing  of  the  actual  mirror.  The  mirror  is  surrounded  by  a  cylindrical  magnetic  shielding 
enclosure (not shown in Fig. 1) to isolate it from surrounding magnetic fields (mainly from the 
Earth).  A  circular  hole  allows  the  beam  to  reach  the  surface  of  the  mirror.  To  avoid  the 
meniscus  contribution  to  the  final  surface  along  the  edges,  the  container  holding  the  liquid 
must be larger than the surface to be sampled by a few centimeters. The ferrofluid used was 
EFH1 from Ferrotec Corp. and has a density of 1.21 g/cm3, a magnetic permittivity of 2.7 and 
a viscosity of 6 cp. 

To test the surfaces, we used a general purpose Mach-Zehnder interferometer (GPI) from 
Zygo, as well as a Shack-Hartmann (SH) wavefront sensor from Imagine Optics. Ferrofluidic 
surfaces can have very large deformations, but because of limits set by the interference fringe 
spacing, we could only measure deformations of a few µm with the GPI. The Shack-Hartmann 
sensor can measure peak-to-valley deformations as large as 20 µm.                    

 

We  found  that  the  agreement  between  the  theoretical  aberration  terms  and  the  surfaces 
obtained experimentally by applying the computed currents to the coils was poor, with errors 
of  the  order  of  a  few  tens  of  percents.  We  suspect  that  the  problem  arises  from  the 
approximations  used  to  derive  Eq.  (1)  and  Eq.  (2).    Interaction  between  a  ferrofluid  and  a 
magnetic  field  is  very  complex  as  volume  and  surface  effects  play  a  major  role  in  the  final 
equilibrium state of the liquid. One cannot determine the exact surface of a ferrofluid without 
FEM  calculations,  which  is  not  desirable  in  a  closed  loop  AO  system.  We  thus  had  to 
manually  tweak  the  currents  to  improve  the  agreement.  With  the  corrected  currents  we 
obtained an excellent agreement with the corresponding aberrations as demonstrated in Fig. 2 
that  compares  theoretical  and  experimental  wavefronts  for  defocus  as  well  as  Zernike  and 
Seidel  spherical  aberrations.  The  opposite  sign  counterpart  of  each  of  these  terms  have  also 
been obtained. The histograms on the right show that the desired aberration term does indeed 
dominate. It must also be noted that the adjusted currents are probably not optimal and that a 
feedback loop algorithm should further improve the agreement. We found that the system is 
stable in time. The experimental wavefronts can be recreated by applying the same currents 
over  several  weeks.  We  also  found  that  the  amplitudes  of  the  wavefronts  were  scalable  by 
applying  a  power  scale  law  as  seen  in  Fig.  3.  Consequently,  it  appears  that  the  numerical 
simulations  give  a  useful  first  guess  to  the  currents  which  can  then  be  optimized.  The 
optimized currents can then be used and amplitudes scaled with an empirical law as the one in 
Fig.  3. 

Fig. 2. Theoretical wavefronts (left), measured wavefronts (center) and aberration coefficients 
histogram  (right).  The  Mach-Zehnder  interferometer  measurements  shown  are  for  the  best 
experimentally  achieved  combination  of  currents.  Illustrated  terms  are:  a)  defocus,  b)  Seidel 
spherical aberration and c) Zernike spherical aberration. 

3.3 Response time.  

The  frame  rate  of  the  GPI  is  too  slow  to  observe  the dynamics  of  liquid surfaces. We  were 
however  able  to  obtain  useful  data  with  triggered  imaging  with  the  SH  sensor.  To  have  a 

 

 

rough estimate of the response time, we did a simple experiment by applying a 1 ms voltage 
pulse to a circular coil and then followed the surface response with the SH sensor. We found 
that the surface deviation varies from zero to a maximum height of 10 µm in less than 50 ms 
before  falling  back.  This  measure  corresponds  to  the  worst  case  scenario  where  the  surface 
goes from rest to its maximum amplitude. In normal use of the mirror, only small variations 
around a bias surface are needed. Response time also depends on the physical properties of the 
ferrofluid such as viscosity, depth of the layer, and how the magnetic field is applied. We are 
presently  studying  response  times  in  detail  and  investigating  techniques  that  promise  to 
improve  them.  For  example,  numerical  simulations  and  simple  experiments  show  that 
overdriving techniques should give better response times. We overdrive by applying to a coil 
a  brief  but  very  intense  current.  The  results  of  ongoing  laboratory  investigations  will  be 
presented elsewhere when completed. It should also be possible to improve the response time 
by depositing a membrane on the surface of the mirror.   

Fig. 3. Amplitude of the defocus term as a function of the current multiple. Current multiple of 
1  corresponds  to  a)  in  Fig.  2.  Even  at  the  maximum  amplitude  of  the  defocus,  remaining 
aberration terms are well below 5% and decrease as current multiple increases. 

 

4. Discussion and conclusion   

We  have  carried  out  numerical  simulations  that  show  that  it  is  possible  to  generate  axially 
symmetrical wavefront aberrations by applying electric currents to a few coils made of copper 
wire  wound  on  aluminum  cylinders.  The  coils  generate  a  magnetic  field  that  deforms  the 
surface  of  a  ferrofluid  to  the  desired  shape.  We  have  carried  out  experiments  on  a  small 
prototype  mirror  and  demonstrated  defocus  as  well  as  Seidel  and  Zernike  spherical 
aberrations. 

The  currents  required  with  the  copper  windings  are  reasonable  (2  amperes  maximum)  if 
one only needs to generate deformations of the order of 20 microns, but become high if one 
wishes to shape optical elements, like adaptive primary or secondary mirrors, having peak-to-
valley deviations from flatness of the order of a mm or greater. In that case, one would have to 
add ferromagnetic material or more windings, to intensify the field generated by the wires or 
use superconducting cables as noted in [20]. Superconducting materials capable of working at 
liquid nitrogen temperatures are commercially available. Because superconductor research is 

 

driven by practical applications, we can expect major advances over the next few years and 
the availability of superconducting wires at increasingly higher temperatures. A recent note in 
Scientific American, issue of August 2006, states that tens of kilometers of superconducting 
cables working at liquid nitrogen temperatures will soon be commercially available. Quantum 
wires,  wires  spun  from  carbon  nanotubes,  offer  another  promising  technology  for  they 
conduct  much  better  then  copper  and  dissipate  very  little  electricity  as  heat.  They  are  the 
subject of considerable research efforts, driven by use in power grids. Unlike superconducting 
wires, there is no need to cool them. Thus, for applications using optical elements the size of 
our prototype and amplitudes of the order of 20 microns, power consumption and temperature 
problems  are  not  significant.  Active  cooling  may  be  necessary  for  amplitudes  significantly 
larger than 20 microns. For extremely larges amplitudes (greater than a millimeter), it may be 
necessary to use superconducting wires. As stated above, this issue is discussed in [20]. 

Liquid magnetic optics presents advantages and disadvantages with respect to solid optics. 
The main advantages are large stroke, low cost and scalability. This technology could lead to 
extreme  deformable  optics  capable  of  strokes  of  hundreds  of  µm  and  more.  Very  large 
deformable  mirrors  having  diameters  greater  than  a  meter  should  be  feasible.  In  a  recent 
article  [20], we  discuss  an  extreme  application  of  this  technology  to  shape  a  30  m  diameter 
mirror having deviations from flatness of the order of a meter. Magnetic fields could also be 
used to make ferrofluidic concave or convex mirrors having arbitrary shapes. For example, by 
applying a sufficiently high current, one could make a 5 cm diameter parabolic mirror (or a 
spherical  one)  and  then  add  an  additional  amount  of  spherical  aberration  as  needed  by  a 
particular optical design. The radius of curvature of the mirror and the amount of aberration 
could vary in time. This could be useful for a wide range of applications like optical testing 
and  vision  science.  It  is  well  know  that  the  human  eye  suffers  from  many  optical 
imperfections.  Ophthalmologists  look  into  the  eye  to  detect  and  diagnose  diseases  by 
examining the retina. The quality of the image they see is strongly dependant on the level of 
aberration in the eye. Previous studies in a large population [27], show that Zernike defocus 
accounts for 80% of the total variance of the wavefront aberration in the human eye and has 
also the largest amplitude. The amount of the higher-order aberrations generally declines with 
the order number, except for spherical aberration, which is larger in mean absolute rms value 
than any third order mode. Getting rid of these two axially symmetrical aberrations with liquid 
adaptive  optics  can  therefore  greatly  improve  the  image  we  get  from  the  retina  in  a  very 
simple  and  affordable  way.  Also,  imaging  of  the  retina  is  often  done  at  several  different 
wavelengths, and defocus is directly proportional to the wavelength. The optical setup needs 
to  be  modified  accordingly  and  this  can be  troublesome  and  time  consuming.  Being  able  to 
correct the defocus with a liquid deformable mirror would be of great benefit. 

There also are disadvantages. The response time seems to be significantly slower than the 
response of solid mirrors. A simple experiment indicates response times of the order of 50 ms. 
This  may  be  a  problem  for  some  applications  (e.g.  Astronomy)  but  not  for  others  (e.g. 
Ophthalmology) [28]. As mentioned in section 3.3, we are currently investigating techniques 
that  may  significantly  improve  response  time.  The  surface  of  a  liquid  is  also  sensitive  to 
vibrations.  Fortunately,  the  sensitivity  to  vibrations  decreases  significantly  when  a  layer  of 
liquid thinner than a millimeter is used [29]. A simple technique, illustrated by Fig. 13 in the 
paper from Borra et al. [29], allows having layer thicknesses less than the limit  imposed by 
surface  tensions.  Furthermore,  our  experiments  show  that  the  sensitivity  to  vibrations  is 
significantly reduced when a magnetic field is applied to the ferrofluid. Although care must be 
taken  to  protect  magnetic  liquid  mirrors  from  vibrations,  we  find  that  they  are  not  a  major 
issue.  We  use  a  thickness  of  about    two  millimeter  on  a  basic  optical  table  with  minimal 
damping, and find that the amplitude of disturbances induced by vibrations is less than 1/10 of 
a wave. 

 Prima facie, one would expect that a major limitation comes from the fact that the liquid 
surface must be horizontal and that it could not be tilted or used in space. However, this is not 
the case since the ferrofluids stick to magnets. As a quick experiment, we have put a MELLF-
coated ferrofluid on a permanent magnet and turned it upside down. We did not quantitatively 

 

measure the surface but it looked smooth to the unaided eye. There may thus be an intriguing 
application  of  these  mirrors  in  astronomical  telescopes  where  a  ferrofluidic  adaptive 
secondary mirror could consist of a permanent magnet to which one adds electric wires and 
coils  to  shape  the  wavefront.  Changing  the  inclination  of  such  a  mirror  would  induce  a 
changing  wedge  into  it.  However,  the  wedge  could  be  eliminated  with  an  array  of  current-
carrying wires or simply by mechanically tilting the primary mirror by an appropriate amount 
that cancels the wedge. 

We cannot simply sum scalar deformations from individual coils to obtain the wavefront 
generated  by  the  sum  of  each  coil.  This  is because  individual deformations  are  the  result  of 
summing  vector  fields  and  not  scalar  fields.  The  surface  obtained  with  several  coils  is  thus 
shaped by the sum of the magnetic vectors instead of the sum of surfaces generated from each 
winding.  We  have  recently  developed  an  efficient  algorithm  for  the  superposition  of  fields 
from a hexagonal structure of actuators of the type discussed in [30]. Hopefully, we will be 
able to adapt it to the superposition of fields from arrays of wires. 

Ferrofluid deformable mirrors are unidirectional; the coils can push but not pull. Pulling is 
done  by  a  combination  of  gravitational  forces  and  hydrodynamic  flow  generated  among 
working  coils.  To  achieve  the  push-pull  effect  required  for  normal  wavefront  control,  the 
mirror must be first biased by driving the coils to produce a piston term of about 50% of their 
maximum deflection; pulling is done by lowering the current in a given coil. Also, considering 
that the surfaces are formed by vectorial addition of the magnetic field components, one can 
use this to advantage by reversing the currents in some of the coils to give a wider range of 
possible surfaces. 

Finally, let us mention that we are presently working on complex liquid surfaces shaped 
by  conducting  wire  networks  of  arbitrary  shapes.  They  can  be  used  to  generate  wavefronts 
having non-cylindrical symmetries (e.g. coma and astigmatism). This opens the possibility of 
generating higher order wavefronts by adding the magnetic fields from differently shaped wire 
networks.  

Ferrofluidic  mirrors  shaped  with  wire  networks  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to  generate  the 
complex  shapes  feasible  with  mirrors  that  use  individual  actuators.  However,  their  stroke 
advantage  can  make  them  useful  for  applications  where  actuator-driven  mirrors  cannot 
compete.  For  example,  a  5  cm  diameter  F/1  mirror  having  a  spherical  surface  with  added 
aberrations  could  be  shaped  and  used  in  an  optical  system  to  correct  the  aberrations  of  the 
system. This could yield a  much simpler system than the complicated succession of mirrors 
and lenses that must often be used. The fact that this kind of mirror can dynamically change 
shape  could  also  be  used  to  advantage.  Another  example  of  application  is  their  use  as 
reference  wavefronts.  In  optical  shop  tests,  one  often  has  to  subtract  a  spherical  reference 
wavefront. For that purpose, the Zygo GPI uses costly auxiliary lenses. Reference wavefronts 
of different curvatures need different lenses having discrete radii. A single liquid deformable 
mirror  would  yield  an  infinite  number  of  surfaces  of  continuously  variable  curvatures.  For 
many  applications  this  mirror  would  not  need  a  reflective  coating  (e.g.  testing  mirrors  and 
lenses). 

The  bottom  line  is  that  ferrofluidic  mirrors  are  a  new  type  of  versatile  and  inexpensive 
optical elements that offer significant advantages over solid optics. Although the initial design 
is  very  crude,  it  is  able  to  give  low  order  aberration  terms  with  large  amplitudes  and  good 
surface quality at a very low cost. This very simplicity is one of the major advantages of this 
technology.  

Acknowledgments 

This  research  was  supported  by  the  Natural  Sciences  and  Engineering  Research  Council  of 
Canada.  
 

 

 

 

 

