FERMILAB-TM-2368-AD-E 
6 November 2006 

 
Using the Fermilab Proton Source for a Muon to Electron 
Conversion Experiment 
 
C. Ankenbrandt, D. Bogert, F. DeJongh, S.Geer, D. McGinnis, D. Neuffer,  
M. Popovic, E. Prebys 
 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, PO Box 500, Batavia, IL 60510 
 

 
Abstract 
 
  The Fermilab proton source is capable of providing 8 GeV protons for both the 
future  long-baseline  neutrino  program  (NuMI),  and  for  a  new  program  of  low 
energy  muon  experiments.  In  particular,  if  the  8  GeV  protons  are  rebunched  and 
then slowly extracted into an external beamline, the resulting proton beam would 
be suitable for a muon-to-electron conversion experiment designed to improve on 
the existing sensitivity by three orders of magnitude. We describe a scheme for the 
required  beam  manipulations.  The  scheme  uses  the  Accumulator  for  momentum 
stacking, and the Debuncher for bunching and slow extraction. This would permit 
simultaneous  operation  of  the  muon  program  with  the  future  NuMI  program, 
delivering  1020  protons  per  year  at  8  GeV  for  the  muon  program  at  the  cost  of  a 
modest (~10%) reduction in the protons available to the neutrino program. 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 

 
1.   
 
Searches  for  lepton  flavor  violation  in  rare  muon  processes  can  probe  new 
physics  at  mass  scales  comparable  to,  and  beyond,  the  scales  probed  at  high 
energy colliders [1]. A new generation of these experiments would complement 
the future LHC and ILC programs, and help elucidate the discoveries made at 
the  energy  frontier.    Rare  muon  experiments  require  a  high  intensity  muon 
source,  which  in  turn  requires  a  high  intensity  proton  source  to  produce  the 
pions that then decay into muons. We propose a scheme to develop the existing 
Fermilab  proton  source  so  that  it  can  produce  a  primary  proton  beam  suitable 
for a new generation of rare muon experiments. Specifically, the scheme would 

 

2

BEAM REQUIREMENTS 

produce  a  proton  beam  of  sufficient  intensity  and  appropriate  bunch  structure 
for a next-generation experiment searching for muon-to-electron conversion in 
the field of a nucleus (µ-N → e-N). This beam could be run in parallel with the 
future Fermilab neutrino program (SNuMI [2]), and would provide 1020 protons 
per year at 8 GeV for the muon program at the cost of a modest 10% reduction 
in the protons available for SNuMI. The resulting proton source would enable, 
with  4  years  of  running,  a  MECO-like  experiment  [3]  to  improve  the  present 
sensitivity to µ-N → e-N by three orders of magnitude. 
 
 
2. 
 
In a µ-N → e-N experiment, the negative muons come to rest in a target, and are 
captured  into  an  orbit  around a  target  nucleus.  They  can  then  either  decay,  be 
radiatively captured by the nucleus, or do something more exciting (e.g. convert 
to an electron). The radiative capture lifetime depends upon the target nucleus. 
For aluminum the capture time is τAl = 1.1 µs [3]. If the muon converts into an 
electron  before  it  decays  or  is  radiatively  captured,  it  will  produce  a  mono-
energetic electron recoiling against the nucleus. The experimental signature for 
µ-N → e-N is, therefore, a single unaccompanied electron with a characteristic 
energy which, for an Al target, is 105.1 MeV.  
 
In  a  MECO-like  µ-N  →  e-N  experiment,  after  a  muon  bunch  arrives  the 
experiment waits a few hundred nanoseconds before data taking. This allows all 
the beam particles and backgrounds not stopped in the target to exit the detector 
region.  Data  is  then  taken  until  the  next  beam  bunch  arrives.  The  experiment 
therefore requires a bunched beam with the following characteristics: 
 
i)  The  bunch  length  must  be  short  compared  to  the  capture  lifetime.  Data  can 
only be taken between bunches since the presence of incident energetic particles 
can  cause  backgrounds  in  the  detector.  If  the  bunch  is  long  compared  to  the 
muon  radiative  capture  lifetime,  most  of  the  stopped  muons  will  have 
disappeared  before  the  experiment  can  start  looking  for  µ-N  →  e-N. 
 
ii)  The bunch separation must be comparable to, or longer than, the radiative 
capture lifetime. We do not want the next bunch to arrive (which will stop data 
taking) while there are still a useful number of stopped muons surviving within 
the target. 
 
iii)    The  bunch  separation  must  not  be  very  long  compared  to  the  capture 

 

3

SNuMI PHASE 2 REPRISE 

lifetime. For a given number of incident muons, we would like to minimize the 
instantaneous  intensity,  and  hence  maximize  the  number  of  muon  bunches. 
Therefore, we would like the minimum bunch separation consistent with criteria 
(ii). 
 
iv)    Between  muon  bunches  there  must  be  no  incident  beam  particles.  The 
fraction of out-of-time beam particles (extinction factor) must be 10-9 or less for 
a  MECO-like  experiment  if  backgrounds  are  not  to  reduce  its  advertised 
sensitivity. 
 
 
3. 
 
Once the Tevatron Collider program is completed there are three storage rings 
that become available for other uses: (i) The Recycler, a 3319m circumference 
ring  in  the  MI  enclosure;  (ii)  The  Accumulator,  a  474m  circumference  ring 
currently  used  to  accumulate  antiprotons;  (iii)  The  Debuncher,  a  504m 
circumference  ring  that  shares  the  enclosure  with  the  Accumulator,  and  is 
currently used to collect and debunch antiprotons. In the future it is proposed to 
use the Recycler and the Accumulator to increase the number of 8 GeV protons 
that can be injected into the MI per MI cycle, and hence the number of protons 
available  for  the  MI  neutrino  program  NuMI.    This  upgrade  to  the  NuMI 
facility (SNuMI [4]) is expected to occur in two phases. We propose extending 
the  second  phase  (SNuMI  Phase  2)  to  include  additional  modifications  that 
would  support  a  muon  program  that  could  run  in  parallel  with  the  SNuMI 
program. 
 
3.1  SNuMI Phase 1:  The MI injection time is short compared to the time to 
ramp  up  and  ramp  down.    To  increase  the  number  of  protons  per  unit  time 
available  for  the  NuMI  program  requires  decreasing  the  ramping  time  (and 
hence  the  MI  cycle  time)  and/or  increasing  the  number  of  protons  that  can  be 
injected during the short injection time. At present the MI cycle is 22 Booster 
cycles long. Hence, only one out of 22 Booster batches is injected into the MI. 
In  SNuMI  phase  1,  the  Recycler  is  used  to  accumulate  the  Booster  protons 
while  the  MI  is  ramping;  12  Booster  batches  are  “boxcar”  stacked  in  the 
Recycler during the MI cycle, and then injected into the MI. Hence 12 out of 22 
Booster batches will be injected into the MI.  
 
3.2  SNuMI  Phase  2:    In  the  second  phase  of  the  SNuMI  upgrade,  the 
number of Booster protons injected into the MI per cycle is further increased by 
using the Accumulator to “momentum stack” three Booster batches before they 

 

are  transferred  into  the  Recycler.  This  is  repeated  6  times  per  MI  cycle,  the  6 
super-batches being boxcar stacked in the Recycler. Thus, 18 out of 22 Booster 
batches  will  be  injected  into  the  MI.  SNuMI  phase  2  will  require  two  new 
beamlines to be built (Fig. 3.1); AP-4 which will take the Booster protons to the 
Accumulator, and AP-5 which will take the protons in the Accumulator to the 
Recycler. AP-4 parallels the historic route of the original AP-4 abandoned and 
destroyed when the Booster to MI 8 GeV line was constructed in 1996.  AP-5 is 
a new line that takes extracted protons from under the AP-10 Building, around a 
100 degree arc, back into the 8 GeV line just upstream of the access hatch near 
817.   
 

AP-4 Line 

4

 

AP-5 Line 

 
Figure 3.1: Antiproton source (Debuncher and Accumulator) schematic showing the AP4 
(Booster to Accumulator) and AP5 (Accumulator to Recycler) lines to be built for SNuMI 
phase 2.  
 
 

 

5

SCHEME FOR A MUON PROGRAM 

4. 
 
A  µ-N  →  e-N  experiment  requires  a  bunch  structure  which  is  very  different 
from  the  bunch  structure  produced  by  the  Fermilab  Booster.    We  propose  to 
modify  the  SNuMI  Phase  2  scheme  to  permit  the  Fermilab  proton  source  to 
provide  beam  with  the  appropriate  bunch  structures  for  both  the  neutrino 
program  and  for  a  muon  program.  The  modified  scheme  would  use,  within  a 
single MI cycle, the Accumulator to momentum stack protons for the neutrino 
program  (18  Booster  batches)  and  then  for  the  muon  program  (4  Booster 
batches). The Debuncher would then be used, for the muon program protons, to 
form a single bunch within the ring with a bunch length much shorter than the 
ring circumference (which is 1.69 µs). The Accumulator would be connected to 
the  Debuncher  using  an  A-D  line  which  would  be  the  present  D-A  line, 
relocated  and  reversed.  The  injection  septum  would  be  located  at  downstream 
D50, and would use, relocated, the present extraction septum at upstream D10. 
The  bunched  beam  would  be  slowly  extracted  to  an  external  beamline, 
producing  a  train  of  bunches  with  bunch  lengths  short  (compared  to  1.69  µs) 
and bunch separations of 1.69 µs.  The estimated time required to rebunch the 
beam in the Debuncher is much shorter than the MI cycle time, and hence slow 
extraction can take place over almost the entire MI cycle. This will produce an 
ideal bunch structure for a MECO-like experiment. 
 
Table 4.1:  Debuncher Ring Parameters 
Symbol 
Parameter 
Circumference 
C=2πR 
P 
Beam Momentum 
Transition 
γt 
Betatron functions (max) 
βx, βy, η 
Tunes 
νx, νy 
Period 
C/βc 
 
To illustrate how the modified scheme works to provide beam for both neutrino 
and  muon  programs,  a  timing  diagram  is  shown  in  Fig.  4.1.  For  the 
representative example shown, the MI cycle is 22 Booster cycles (1.467s) long. 
Within  each  MI  cycle,  18  batches  are  used  for  the  neutrino  program,  and  4 
batches  are  used  for  the  muon  program.  The  first  3  batches  for  the  neutrino 
program are momentum stacked in the Accumulator, and then transferred to the 
Recycler.  This  is  repeated  6  times,  box-car  stacking  each  triple-batch  in  the 
recycler.  The  next  4  Booster  batches  are  then  momentum  stacked  in  the 
Accumulator,  and  transferred  to  the  Debuncher  for  the  muon  program. 
Allowing 0.1s for rebunching and beam cleanup in the Debuncher, the protons 

Value 
504m 
8.89 GeV/c 
7.52 
19.8, 17, 2.2m 
9.66, 9.76 
1690ns 

 

6

are  then  slowly  extracted  into  an  external  beamline  for  1.367s,  providing  a 
bunched beam for the muon program.  Assuming 4.6 × 1012 protons per Booster 
batch, this scheme provides 56  × 1012 protons/sec for the NuMI program, and 
12.5 × 1012 protons/sec for the muon program.   Note that, in the absence of a 
muon  program,  the  MI  cycle  time  could  be  reduced  to  1.33s,  yielding  18 
Booster  batches  per  1.33s  for  the  neutrino  program  =  62  ×  1012  protons/sec. 
Hence, the additional muon program would reduce the protons available for the 
neutrino program by only ~10%. 
 

 

    
 

   

Figure.  4.1:   Timing diagram showing machine usage during one MI cycle. 
 
 

5. 

REBUNCHING IN THE DEBUNCHER 

The  proton  beam  is  debunched  in  the  Accumulator  so  that  it  fills  the 
circumference  (474m  or  1600ns).  The  rf  manipulation  during  this  process 
also  decreases  the  energy  spread.  After  accumulation  of  4  Booster  batches 
the  full  emittance  is  estimated  to  be  84×0.38  =  32  eV-s,  which  implies  an 
energy  spread  of  20  MeV  (full  width)  in  the  fully  debunched  beam.    An 
extraction  gap  of  >45ns  is  introduced  into  the  circumference-filling  bunch 
(by a barrier bucket or harmonic rf) so that a fast kicker can be switched on, 
and  the  long  bunch  extracted  into  the  Debuncher.  The  Debuncher 
circumference  is  ~30m  greater  than the  Accumulator  circumference,  which 
increases the initial gap in the circulating beam to >145ns.   

7

 
The  µ-N  →  e-N  experiment  requires  that  the  beam  be  bunched  to  a  small 
fraction of the ring circumference. This means the rf must increase the initial 
gap  and  hence  compress  the  bunch  into  a  short  length.    We  have  chosen  a 
full-length of ∆τB<200ns as a goal in the bunching, which should meet the µ-
N → e-N experiment requirements.  The bunch must be held to that length 
throughout  the  extraction  cycle,  with  minimal  leakage  into  the  inter-bunch 
gap that could lead to mistimed extracted beam.   
 
5.1  Rf Bunching  
 
Scenarios for rf bunching in the Debuncher have been explored, initially by 
considering  only  the  longitudinal  motion  of  the  beam.    The  equations  of 
motion are: 
 

d
φ π
≅
2
dn

1
1
2
2
2
β γ γ γ
t

−





 ∆
E

2
mc


=

2
π
2
β γ

α
p

E
∆
2
mc

 

d E
∆
dn

=

eV

RF

( )
φ

  

where n is the number of turns, φ is the particle phase (longitudinal position) 
and ∆E is the particle energy offset from the reference energy. Vrf(φ) is the rf 
voltage, m is the proton mass, β=v/c and γ = (1-β2)-1/2 are the usual kinematic 
2  is  the  momentum  compaction  factor.    In  the 
factors,  and    αp  =  1/γ2  –  1/γt
Debuncher, γ=9.52 and γt=7.6, so αp =-0.006.  The small value of αp means 
the motion is nearly isochronous, which implies that the longitudinal motion 
is  relatively  slow.    That  means  that  only  a  small  amount  of  Vrf  will  be 
needed in the rebunching, but that bunching may be relatively slow.  

 

 

 

 

8

                         
 

  

                         
 
Figure  5.1:  1-D  simulation  of  bunch  compression.    A:  Longitudinal  distribution  after 
0.169s  of  barrier  bucket  compression.    B:  Longitudinal  distribution  after  further  h=4 
bunching (Emittance numbers on plots are rms emittances; full emittances are a factor of 
6π larger). 
 
5.2  Barrier Bucket rf. 

 

A simple model for bunching is based on the procedure used in the Recycler, 
which  uses  barrier  bucket  rf  waveforms  to  bunch  and  debunch  antiproton 
beams.   In an initial example we can grow a square wave potential at two 
ends  of  the  bunch  and  then  move  the  phases  of  that  square  wave  together 
until  the  two  ends  of  the  potential  meet.  In  the  present  example  we 
considered square waves of + and – 20 kV amplitude, with 40° phase widths 
(~180ns).  The bunching must be slow enough to avoid phase space dilution; 
in the initial example the compression occurs over 0.17s (~10000 turns). At 
that point a single harmonic  h=4  (2.38MHz) rf system is imposed at 25kV, 

 

9

with amplitude increased to 75kV over 0.03s. This rf is used to maintain the 
beam in a short bunch structure over the remainder of the 1.5s cycle  (~1.3s). 

The h=4 rf system was used since it is similar in voltage and frequency to an 
rf system that is currently used in the MI for Tevatron bunch coalescing (that 
rf will not be needed after 2010).  This system bunches the beam to an rms 
bunch length of ~40ns, with the entire beam held within a ~200ns full width.  
The  energy  full  width  of  the  beam  is  increased  to  ~±100MeV.    Our  initial 
simulation indicates that phase-space dilution is limited to < ~20%.  The 1-D 
simulation results of the model system are presented in Fig. 5.1.    

5.3  Multi-harmonic rf buncher 

The barrier bucket approach requires the use of a low-Q rf system, which is 
inefficient,  may  be  somewhat  expensive,  and  in  practice  may  produce  rf 
waveforms  that  are  less  ideal  than  assumed  in  our  initial  model.    We 
therefore  also  consider  an  alternative  bunching  system  consisting  of  a 
combination of low-harmonic rf sub-systems, which could be obtained using 
high-Q  fixed-frequency  cavities.    In  an  initial  example,  we  consider  a 
combination of h=1, 2, 3, 4 rf cavities with maximum voltages of 30, 15, 10 
and  7.5kV  respectively,  and  combined  in  order  to  obtain  an  approximately 
linear rf wave form.  In our simulation, these cavities are ramped from 0 to 
full strength over ~0.055s.  As in the previous example, the 4th-harmonic rf 
is  ramped  up  to  75kV  to  hold  the  beam  for  the  remainder  of  the  1.5s 
extraction  cycle.    Simulation  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  5.2.  The  final  beam 
state  is  similar  to  the  barrier  bucket  example,  with  an  rms  bunch  length  of 
~40  ns  and  an  energy  full  width  <  ~±100MeV.    The  finite  number  of 
harmonics  resulted  in  a  slightly  more  dilute  phase  space  than  a  more 
idealized linear or barrier bucket rf would obtain; however, a more complete 
optimization  and  a  more  accurate  evaluation  of  barrier  bucket  nonlinearity 
may remove the small difference.  The bunching did occur in a significantly 
shorter time than the above barrier bucket example, however.    
 

 

10

 

 
Figure  5.2.  Beam after h=1, 2, 3, 4 adiabatic bunching with h=4 bunch compression; 
beam properties are similar to the previous barrier-bucket example but with somewhat 
more phase-space dilution. 
 
 
5.4  Rebunching Discussion 
 
Further study of instability intensity limitations is needed.  The compressed 
beam has an enhanced space charge tune shift.  A formula for that tune shift 
is: 

δν

≅

r N
p
2
B
4
πβγ ε

, 

F N rms
,

 

where  BF  is  the  bunching  factor.    With  BF  =  0.06,  N=  1.5×1013,  εFermi  = 
6πεN,rms = 20πmm-mr, we obtain δν ≅ 0.1, which should be acceptable. 
 
The  energy  spread  of  ±100MeV  corresponds  to  δp/p  =  ±1%,  which  is  less 
than the full acceptance of the Debuncher, which was designed to be ±2%.  
It is therefore possible to compress the beam to shorter lengths, with more rf 
and bunching time, but the additional reduction would be less than a factor 
of 2.  The minimum bunch length is thus > 100ns. Some further study will 
be needed to determine whether this is adequate. 
 

 

11

5.5  PRISM/PRIME compatible bunching mode    
 
While this initial study is for a MECO-like experiment, a different approach 
is  being  developed  by  the  PRISM/PRIME  collaboration.  In  that  approach, 
the  proton  beam  is  formed  into  short  bunches,  and  single-bunch  extracted 
onto  a  target  to  produce  short  π→µ  bunches.    The  short  µ  bunches  are 
phase-energy  rotated  in  the  PRISM  ring  to  small  energy-spread  bunches 
which are then single bunch extracted onto the PRIME target/detector.   The 
phase-energy  rotation  requires  bunches  with  στ  <  5ns,  roughly  an  order  of 
magnitude shorter than the single intense bunch discussed above. However, 
the  Debuncher  proton  beam  could  be  bunched  into  a  number  of  short 
bunches,  and  then  be  single  turn  extracted  for  a  PRISM/PRIME-like 
experiment. As an example we bunch on harmonic h=12 (~7.14 MHz). The 
beam  is  initially  adiabatically  bunched,  with  an  rf  that  increases  to  10  kV 
over ~0.04s. The rf voltage is then increased to 200kV, and the bunches are 
phase-energy  rotated  in  0.001s  to  short  δτ  (στ  =  4ns).    Note  that  this  is, 
qualitatively, the inverse of the present Debuncher cycle which takes a string 
of  short  antiproton  bunches  (small  δτ,  large  δE),  fast-rotates  them  to  small 
δE, and adiabatically debunches to small δE contunous δτ for transfer to the 
accumulator. To maintain the short bunch length for later bunch extractions 
a  higher-  harmonic,  high  voltage  rf  system  would  be  used.  An  h=36  or  48 
system with Vrf ≅ 1MV would be needed. Alternatively, the beam could be 
rotated to long bunches (~0.001s), held at 10kV, and rerotated at 200kV for 
short  bunch  extractions.    In  the  baseline  SNUMI-compatible  mode,  this 
produces  ~12  bunches  of  protons,  with  ~1.25×1012  p/bunch  every  1.5s,  or 
~1020  protons/Snowmass-year.    This  is  an  order  of  magnitude  less  than 
desired  by  PRISM/PRIME.    If  not  shared  with  SNUMI,  this  could  be 
increased  by  ~4×,  which  may  still  not  be  enough.    An  eventual  “proton 
driver” booster upgrade would reach that level, however. 
 
 
6. 
 
Th  µ-N  →  e-N  experiment  requires  slow  extraction  to  generate  the  required 
beam structure.  Beam is rebunched into a single short bunch, and then slowly 
extracted  over  the  remainder  of  the  MI  cycle.    This  results  in  a  train  of  short, 
relatively low intensity pulses separated by the 1.69 µsec revolution time of the 
Debuncher. 
 

 SLOW EXTRACTION 

 

12

The techniques of slow extraction are well established.  The tune of the beam is 
moved near a harmonic resonance.  That resonance is excited and a separatrix 
created in phase space.  The tune is then swept toward that resonance and beam 
begins to “fall out” to higher amplitudes as it crosses the separatrix.  The high 
amplitude  beam  is  given  an  angular  kick  with  a  septum,  followed  by  an 
extraction  Lambertson  roughly  90°  later  in  phase.    The  beam  fallout  rate  is 
tuned so that the amplitude increases to fill the aperture of the extraction septum 
over  N  turns,  where  N  is  the  order  of  the  resonance.    In  the  ideal  case,  the 
inefficiency  is  entirely  due  to  the  beam  striking  the  septum  plane.    For  this 
reason,  electrostatic  septa  are  typically  employed,  which  use  a  plane  of  small 
diameter wires to create the extraction field. 
 
In  practice,  most  slow  extraction  schemes  have  involved  a  third  order 
resonance.    This  has  the  advantage  of  being  analytically  straightforward,  and 
because  it  is  inherently  nonlinear,  a  separatrix  is  naturally  produced.    On  the 
other hand, it is difficult to cleanly extract the last bit of beam.  Fermilab has 
historically chosen to use half integer resonances.  These are analytically more 
complex than third integer resonances, but have been thoroughly treated.  They 
are complicated by the fact that the driving quadrupoles are inherently linear, so 
the beam would tend to go unstable simultaneously over the entire phase space 
area.    A  series  of  0th  harmonic  octupoles  is  used  to  introduce  an  amplitude 
dependent tune shift and thereby create a separatrix. 
 
At this point, the details of the resonance are a secondary concern because the 
mechanics  of  the  extraction  are  the  same,  namely  an  electrostatic  septum 
followed  by  a  Lambertson.    The  issues  are  that  the  lengths  of  the  straight 
sections in the low dispersion regions are limited and that the beam will have to 
be bent rather sharply to clear the downstream quadrupole. 
 
The initial proposal is to essentially mirror the existing injection scheme, with 
the extraction located at AP30 or AP50, depending on which experimental area 
is  chosen.    Assuming  AP50  is  chosen,  the  lattice  and  approximate  layout  is 
shown  in  Fig.  6.1.  We  first  consider  an  extraction  septum  with  approximately 
the specifications of the MI extraction septa: 80 kV over 1 cm, with a length of 
approximately 3 m.  This would fit between Q403 and Q402 and would provide 
about  2.2  cm  of  horizontal  displacement  between  Q501  and  Q502.  The 
extraction field over that straight region would need to be about 0.8 T to clear 
the  Q502  quad.    This  field  is  well  within  the  capabilities  of  the  MI 
Lambertsons, but these only have an extraction channel of +- 5”. A reasonable 
solution would be a short (~1 m) version of one of these, followed by a longer 
C magnet.  

 

13

 

 

 
Figure 6.1 Lattice functions and approximate locations of extraction hardware. The labels 
in the top boxes indicate the existing hardware: injection septum, injection kicker and the 
DRF 1-3 cavity.  These would all be removed and replaced with the elements shown in the 
lower boxes.

 
 
Beam  loss  is  a  significant  worry.    The  best  slow  extraction  schemes  have  an 
inefficiency  of  roughly  2-3%.    In  our  proposed  scheme,  the  beam  power  is 
roughly 20 kW, so about 500 W of beam will be lost.  To set the scale, this is 
approximately  equivalent  to  the  entire  uncontrolled  beam  loss  in  the  Booster 
and  it  will  be  happening  in  an  area  with  only  a  few  feet  of  earth  shielding.  
Shielding  the  loss  will  be  complicated  by  the  fact  that  much  of  it  will  scatter 
back into the Debuncher or down the extraction line.  It’s clear we must address 
this issue early in the design. 
 
 
7. 
 
The  extinction  factor  for  this  experiment  is  defined  as  the  ratio  of  undesired, 
out-of-time  protons  to  desired,  in-time  protons  at  the  production  target.  The 
experiment calls for an extinction factor of one per billion or smaller. No single 
system  is  likely  to  achieve  that  factor,  so  it  will  be  necessary  to  implement 
several measures. Protons that circumvent all the countermeasures will likely be 
the result of high-order processes that populate the tails of various distributions. 
It  is  difficult  to  anticipate  of  all  the  relevant  high-order  processes,  let  alone  
simulate  them.  Therefore,  an  experimental  trial-and-error  approach  to  achieve 
the required rejection is advisable. This will require instrumentation to monitor 
the  rejection  factor  that  is  achieved  at  various  stages  of  the  beam  delivery 

BEAM CLEANING 

 

14

process.  A  real-time  monitor  of  the  final  extinction  factor  would  be  ideal 
because it would provide continuous assurance that nothing unusual happened 
to allow an undesired burst of out-of-time protons through the system while the 
experiment is taking data. 
 
The  plan  for  this  section  is  to  go  through  the  various  beam-handling  steps, 
noting  opportunities  along  the  way  to  suppress  the  delivery  of  undesired 
protons.  It  will  turn  out  that  many  countermeasures  can  be  conceived,  and  it 
seems likely that implementing all of them would be overkill. Some judgment 
will then be necessary to estimate the cost-effectiveness of various measures so 
that the most promising techniques can be implemented first. The trial-and-error 
process  of  implementing  and  testing  systems  sequentially  will  undoubtedly 
need substantial amounts of beam studies. 
 
After  the  8-GeV  beam  arrives  in  the  Debuncher  ring,  the  first  beam-handling 
step  is  to  form  a  single  bunch  that  occupies  a  small  fraction  of  the 
circumference.  In that process it is likely that some beam, perhaps one to ten 
percent,  will  remain  unbunched.    It  would  be  straightforward,  albeit  relatively 
expensive, to clear the gap by extracting the protons in the gap, via single-turn 
kickers through a septum, to a dump. This could be done periodically at a rate 
limited  mainly  by  the  achievable  repetition  rates  of  the  kickers  and  any  other 
pulsed extraction devices that may be used (e.g. the Booster 8-GeV extraction 
devices  run  at  15  Hz).  These  measures,  taken  together,  should  provide  a 
rejection  factor  of  several  orders  of  magnitude.  The  unbunched  particles  that 
survive will mainly be those that coincide in time with the bunched beam when 
the  kickers  fire.  That  suggests  that  each  abort  cycle  would  provide  about  an 
order of magnitude additional rejection. 
 
In addition to or instead of a single-turn abort system, particles in the gap could 
be removed by relatively modest time-varying fields in the ring.  For example, a 
pulsed  vertical  dipole  field  or  fields  varying  at  the  vertical  fractional  betatron 
frequency could drive the undesired particles in the gap toward the jaws of the 
collimation system that will probably be needed anyway to control losses in the 
ring.  A  similar  system  was  proposed  for  the  Brookhaven  AGS  for  the  MECO 
experiment. 
 
The  second  beam-handling  process  is  slow  extraction.  Since  a  detailed  slow 
extraction  design  has  not  yet  been  worked  out,  it  is  important  to  realize  that 
slow extraction can be implemented in ways that provide major rejection factors 
against unbunched beam. For example, the bunch could be slowly displaced in 
momentum, and the momentum offset together with nonzero chromaticity could 

 

15

move  part  of  the  beam  toward  the  betatron  frequency  of  the  resonance  that  is 
used  for  extraction.  An  extraction  system  that  uses  time-varying  fields  seen 
only by the particles in the bunch is another possible strategy. One interesting 
example of that approach is to use one or more Tevatron electron lenses, which 
by will become surplus, to provide part of the tune shift that causes protons in 
the bunch to be extracted. It is worth noting that both of these methods might 
provide extracted bunches that are shorter in time than the bunch circulating in 
the ring. 
 
The  beam  transport  to  the  experiment  provides  opportunities  for  further 
enhancements of the extinction factor.  One such possibility is a system of two 
dipoles separated by 180 degrees of betatron phase advance, each oscillating at 
the  ring  revolution  frequency  ω  or  half  of  that  frequency.  Such  a  two-bump 
would  provide  a  displacement  between  the  dipoles  proportional  to  sin  (ωt), 
where t is the time measured from the arrival time of the center of the desired 
bunches.  A  collimation  system  between  the  two  dipoles  would  then  remove 
protons  that  are  significantly  out-of-time.  Protons  downstream  of  the  second 
dipole would be undeflected. 
 
Various  opportunities  exist  to  monitor  the  efficacy  of  the  measures  that  are 
implemented  to  discriminate  against  untimely  protons.  It  would  be  relatively 
easy  to  measure  the  beam  intensity  in  the  single-turn  abort  line  by  standard 
techniques.  The  collimation  system  between  the  two  dipoles  in  the  transport 
line  might  also  be  instrumented.  It  would  be  desirable,  albeit  challenging,  to 
continuously monitor the flux of untimely protons in the beam upstream of the 
production  target.  Veto  tagging  counters  might  be  implemented  as  Cerenkov 
radiators  viewed  by  photomultipliers.  To  provide  the  tremendous  dynamic 
range  needed,  the  photomultiplier  gains  might  be  modulated  in  two  ways:  by 
using  Pockels  cells  as  photon  shutters,  and  by  varying  the  voltage  on  one  or 
more early stages of the dynode chain. 
 
8. 
 
The  presently  preferred  location  for  the  experimental  area  is  Northwest  of 
the  Debuncher.  The  beam  would  be  extracted  at  AP50,  and  an  external 
beamline  constructed  downstream  of  the  AP50  straight  section  (Fig.  8.1). 
The  experiment  would  be  located  ~680  feet  from  AP50  in  an  area  next  to 
Giese  Road  (Fig.  8.2).  This  area  is  an  undeveloped  open  meadow  (i.e.  not 
wetlands or woods) with easy access. 
 

EXPERIMENT LOCATION 

 

 

16

AP4 Line 

A-D Line 

    
 
 
Figure  8.1:  Preferred  location  for  the  beam  extraction  from  the  Debuncher  is  at  AP50, 
with the experiment located to the northwest. 
 

 

 

17

  

Target 

Giese Road 

Detector 

Extracted 
Beam Line 
From  
Debuncher 

AP-10 

AP-50 

AP-30 

MI-8 

 

SUMMARY 

 
Figure  8.2:  Preferred  location  for  the  experimental  area.  The  white  box  contains  the 
footprint  for  a  MECO-like  experiment,  including  proton  target,  decay  channel,  and 
detector. 
 
 
 
 
9. 
 
The  SNuMI  phase  2  upgrade  to  the  proton  source,  if  extended  to  include  a 
modified  Debuncher,  would  enable  1020  protons  per  year  at  8  GeV  to  be 
rebunched  and  slowly  extracted  for  a  low  energy  muon  program  at  Fermilab. 
This program could run in parallel with the future neutrino program, at the cost 
of reducing the number of MI protons for SNuMI by about 10%. To accomplish 
this  will  require,  in  addition  to  the  foreseen  SNuMI  phase  2  upgrades, 
equipping  the  Debuncher  with  an  rf  system  for  the  rebunching,  reversing  and 
relocating  the  D-A  beamline  so  that  protons  can  be  transferred  from  the 
Accumulator  to  the  Debuncher,  implementing  a  slow  extraction  system  in  the 

 

18

Debuncher, and a beamline from the Debuncher to a new experimental area (for 
example, 680 feet to the northwest). The scheme described in this document has 
not  been  engineered,  and  there  are  many  details  that  need  to  be  better 
understood.  Results  from  our  initial  studies  are  encouraging  and  motivate 
further  work  to  develop  the  scheme.  To  ensure  compatibility  with  the  SNuMI 
program,  it  is  desirable  that  this  further  work  is  integrated  with  the  work  on 
developing and planning the SNuMI phase 2 modifications. 
 
 
References 
 
[1]  See for example M. Albrow et al; Physics at a Fermilab Proton Driver, 
hep-ex/509019. 
 
[2]  D. Ayres et al; (NoVA Collaboration), NOvA Proposal to Build a 30 
Kiloton Off-Axis Detector to Study Neutrino Oscillations in the Fermilab NuMI 
Beamline, hep-ex/0503053. 
 
[3]  MECO Experiment: M. Bachman et al., A search for µ-N → e-N  with 
sensitivity below 10-16 (1997), research proposal to Brookhaven National 
Laboratory. 
 
[4]  D. McGinnis, Overview of SNuMI phase II, presented at the SNuMI 
Director’s Review, 14-16 November 2006. SNuMI-doc 44-v1. 

