Foreword

What is matter made of?  Subdivision of matter into its constituent parts has led us to molecules, atoms, 
nuclei, electrons, and about 100 other particles of modern physics.  Are these the fundamental constituents, or 
have we still not reached bottom?  Pair production suggests that the ultimate building block is the  EM field, plus 
energy.  A major goal for physics is understanding how nature creates particles, such as electrons, from energetic 
EM   fields.     A   model   is   needed   that   explains   the   “particle”   properties   of   rest   mass,   charge,   total   angular 
momentum, and spin.  Any acceptable model should conform with Maxwell's equations.  Whatever the nature of 
the binding of this assembly of EM fields, it is certain that the equilibrium state is dynamic.   Above all, the 
model must show how charge arises from EM fields.  Maxwell's equations appear to deny that charge can arise 
from EM fields alone.   Prior attempts to expound a structure of the electron begin with an assumption of the 
existence of   “charge”, and suggest innovative ways in which the charge is distributed in order to explain the 
other particle properties.  This is ultimately fruitless, because it begs the question:  “what is charge, and how is 
charge   itself   created   from   EM   fields   alone?”     Until   “charge”   is   understood,   there   can   be   no   progress   in 
understanding electrons and other PEPs. 
 

Provided that kinetic energy is stably bound up in the EM fields that constitute a particle, rest mass can 
be understood from m=E/c2.  Particle physicists seem more interested in “particles” than fields, and embrace a 
“Higgs” particle mechanism to explain how this kinetic energy is turned into mass.  Upon accepting that kinetic 
energy and mass are the same, the problem disappears.  Above all, an acceptable model must be simple.  The 
process must be easy, else we would not find so many particles in our universe (estimated to be 10 79).  Another 
challenge, asked but not addressed here,   is why there should be so many protons, equal in number to the 
electrons.  Assuming it to be so, why is the universe charge-neutral?  And where are all the antiparticles now, if 
pair production as we know it is the path nature uses to produce particles?  Perhaps nature has other, asymmetric, 
ways to produce particles, ways which automatically ensure equal quantities of positive and negative charge 
even though the masses differ. 

Just as understanding the simple atom of hydrogen was the first step in the path leading to quantum 
mechanics, an understanding of  the structure of an electron as a purely electromagnetic particle may lead us to 
understand how nature binds up EM fields into all the other particles of modern physics.  

Background: pair production

A pair of electrons (+ and -) can arise whenever a photon of sufficient energy impacts a heavy nucleus. 
The nucleus itself is unchanged, serving as a catalyst by conserving linear momentum.  The nucleus also serves 
as an anvil, against which the photon is broken into the different configurations of EM fields that form the pair 
of electrons. It seems certain that photons consist of EM fields and nothing else.  It takes a photon of at least 
1.022 Mev (million electron volts) of energy to do the trick.  The two particles each have a rest mass equivalent 
to 0.511 Mev .  Any excess energy of the photon appears as kinetic energy in the produced particles.

In similar fashion, still higher energy photons can  produce a pair of protons. The negative one of the 
pair is the  antiproton.  The pair production process is reversible.  A pair of antiparticles spontaneously attract 
one another, by the Coulomb force, and annihilate producing two or three photons whose total energy is that of 
the mass energy of the two particles.  

When  an  electron  and  a   proton  attract  one   another,   it   is   fortunate  that  no  annihilation  takes   place. 
Instead, they form a stable neutral atom of hydrogen.  Most of the known mass of the universe is hydrogen.  This 
hydrogen is thought to have been formed in the big bang that created our universe a couple of dozen billion 
years ago.  Much of this hydrogen has accumulated under the force of gravity into massive balls of gas.  Once 
the mass exceeds a critical value, spontaneous ignition occurs and fusion begins.   A star is born.   Hydrogen 
atoms fuse into heavier elements, and energy is radiated into space as starlight.  Some of these stars have since 
undergone nuclear detonation, i.e. gone supernova, and the remnants include all the heavier elements that form 
the earth and other planets (and us).

1

The first challenge, charge.

One of the first things we learn about electromagnetism is that charge is conserved.  We know of no way 
that   a   single   charge   can   be   created   or   annihilated.     Opposite   charges   sometimes   annihilate,   as   in   pair 
annihilation.   In a vacuum, EM fields are divergenceless.   That is, the  E  and the  B  fields form closed loops. 
Only when charges are present do the lines representing an E field start and end (at charges).  We know of no 
magnetic “charges” and so lines of  B  always form loops.   What is charge?   Gauss' law tells us that we can 
enclose a volume, calculate or measure the electric flux emanating through the surface, and find this flux zero 
unless there is enclosed a net charge.  The exact nature of “charge” has until now eluded us.  It just “is”.

A   way   to   create     “charge”   is   suggested   by     Faraday's   homopolar   generator.     Although   there   is   a 
difference of opinion about how to interpret them, the experimental facts are simple.  A cylindrical bar magnet, 
set spinning about its symmetry axis, produces a measurable voltage when the probes of a voltmeter are touched 
to the end and the waist of the magnet.  Faraday interpreted this as a consequence of the metal of the magnet 
moving across the B field within the bar magnet, the B field being static.  He relied on the Lorentz force law, 
describing the force exerted on a charge q by an electric field  E  and/or a   magnetic field  B  across which the 
charge q moves with velocity v.  In Faraday's view, the seat of the emf is within the bar magnet.  

F = q(E+vxB)                                                                                                                                            [1] 

The Lorentz equation defines the E and B fields, in terms of the force they exert on a charge, q.   So, is 
vxB also an electric field?  Relativity tells us, yes.  E and B  fields have no independent existence.  A given field 
can be transformed into the other, according to the motion of the observer.   Faraday's contemporary, Weber, 
interpreted the voltage as arising from an E field, arising in space from the rotating or spinning B field.  That is, 
the seat of the emf is external to the magnet.  A spinning dipolar B field is, at every point in space,  equivalent to 
an E field. Upon surrounding the spinning dipolar B field with a Gaussian surface, the electric flux through that 
surface is positive definite or negative definite according to the direction of the spin.   This finds a net charge 
exists within that surface.  In Weber's interpretation, charge conservation is not quite true since a charge of one 
sign can be created by spinning a bar magnet. These two explanations, deemed SF for static magnetic fields and 
MF for moving magnetic fields, have yet to be resolved.  Many clever experiments have been tried, but neither 
theory has yet emerged as “the” explanation.

Lets proceed with the Weber hypothesis, since it offers at least a glimmer of hope that one can create the 
electric fields we associate with charge from a spinning dipolar magnetic field.  Even if Faraday were right in his 
SF   interpretation   for   a   bar   magnet,   the   presence   of   angular   momentum   ensures   that   the     magnetic   fields 
representing the electron's magnetic moment must be spinning (i.e. MF is assured).   Magnetic moment is a 
measure of the strength of a dipolar B field.  It is easy to see that the E field created by this vxB mechanism is 
consistent with much of what we know about charge.   The  B  field of a bar magnet falls off as 1/r3.   The 
transverse velocity of a B field line, locked to its spinning source, is w
 is the angular spin rate 
 measures the field point relative to the spin axis. This means that vxB falls off as 1/r2, just like the familiar 
and q
E field  associated with charge.  It differs, in that the E field about a charge is isotropic while the vxB  electric 
field is strongest at the waist (q =p /2) and vanishes along the end of the bar magnet (q =0).  A solution to this 
problem is that the bar magnet precesses or wobbles, relative to the spin axis, about another axis oriented at 
q =arccos 1/√3 from the spin axis.  The average electric field is then isotropic.  If this is the mechanism by which 
charge  is  created,  we  must  accept  that  the    E  field about  an  ordinary  isolated  charge  is  unidirectional  but 
oscillates at the Compton frequency mc2/h.  We will later find it necessary  that this wobble rate and the spin rate 
are the same.  Present measuring instruments do not respond this quickly. Measuring only the average E field 
strength, they find it isotropic.

, where w

r sin q

It might seem that the   vxB   electric  field must fail at large distances, because the velocity “v=rw ” is 
limited by c.  This would turn a 1/r2 field into a 1/r3 field at large r.   Relativity saves the day.   SR holds that B is 
g    boosted and that  w
  shrinks by the same factor.   I prefer to apply mass-metric relativity MMR (1,2), which 
r and each of these terms decreases 
finds that a moving B field gets a g 2   boost.   The velocity term goes as v = w

2

by 1/g .   Either way, the vxB  electric field remains a 1/r2 field at all r.  

One very pleasant consequence of this wobble mechanism is that it provides an easy explanation of de 
Broglie waves, and so lets us understand quantum mechanics in terms of electromagnetism.  This wobble rate is 
identified as the Compton frequency.     The anisotropic electric field associated with a spinning bar magnet is 
equivalent to an isotropic electric field, diminished by a couple of pseudo-charges placed at each pole of the 
magnet.  The dynamic part of the electric field can be identified with this pair of charges, one advancing and the 
other retreating.  For a charge at rest, no “beat frequency” is observed.  Placed in motion, the forward-moving 
charge and the rearward moving charge are observed to have  different periods and the resulting beat frequency 
is precisely that needed to describe de Broglie waves.  (2)

The second challenge, stability.

We know, from Earnshaw's theorem, that no static assembly of charges is stable.   Early models of an 
electron either had the electron as a point charge, which led to an infinite amount of energy in its electric field, or 
as a sphere with charge arranged on the surface or within.  The point charge is unsustainable, of course.  The 
spherical model asks, why doesn't the Coulomb repulsion between like charge elements blow the electron apart? 
Stability  is   not  possible  in  a  static  model.     Stability  requires  dynamic  interaction of  the  elements  within  a 
particle.  We know this happens within atoms, where electrons endlessly move about and through the nucleus 
and never run down.  

The model proposed here envisions the formation of a toroidal (donut-shaped) ring of electric field, in 
the initial stage of pair production when the photon slams into a heavy nucleus.  It postulates that the decaying 
photon produces an electric field that splits into two equal halves. These pieces of electric field, initially toroidal, 
move apart and begin to decay in the absence of sources. When a toroidal region of electric field decays, the 
changing electric field  creates a dipolar magnetic field whose axis is perpendicular to the plane of the toroid. 
The consequence of changing one field is the creation of the other, according to Maxwell's equations:

curl E = -∂B/∂t                curl B = (1/c2)∂E/∂t                                                                                           [2]

Once produced, this dipolar magnetic field then decays, recreating a toroidal ring of electric field with E 
reversed, and so on.  This oscillating mechanism produces a dipolar B field whose direction in space reverses 
each half cycle.  Stability is enforced by quantizing the electric and magnetic fluxes.  This model reminds me of 
a child's toy, the whirlagig as we called it, in which a disk or even a large button is attached to a pair of strings 
passed through its center.  The child holds each end of the two strings in either hand.  Once the disk is started 
rotating, the child applies tension to reverse the rotation and then releases the tension to let the disk twist the 
strings in the opposite sense.  After a few cycles, the rotation rate of the disk increases remarkably and makes a 
noise that children love.  By itself, this model does not lead to “charge” because  vxB changes sign and  averages 
to zero.  Conservation of angular momentum requires that the assembly of EM fields spins in one direction, but 
the magnetic moment in this model reverses each half cycle and so reverses vxB.

A solution is had upon postulating that the spinning EM assembly is itself precessing in space about an 
axis not parallel to the spin axis of the dipolar B field, at the same rate as the oscillation between the E and B 
field configurations.  (Recall the behavior of a toy top, which at a high spin rate seems “sleeping” with angular 
momentum L vertical.  As it slows under friction, the top wobbles or precesses.)  This  dipolar B field can be 
resolved into components whose spin is parallel and perpendicular to the precession axis. The perpendicular 
component of the dipolar  B  field is then found to be always in the same direction, as observed.   It then only 
remains to find a mechanism that will spin this dipolar  B  field, so that an imputed charge of one sign only is 
produced.   This is no problem, since the electron is known to carry angular momentum. The only carrier of 
angular momentum is the EM field, and so it is spinning.  In the absence of precession,  the magnetic moment 
would oscillate in sign and its average value would vanish.   Since we can measure the electron's   magnetic 
moment, we are assured that precession occurs for the model considered here.

3

The third challenge, simplicity.

The model proposed here is very simple.  The standard model of charged elementary particles depends 
on the existence of electrons and quarks and neutrinos, the quarks having fractional charges of different signs 
and the neutrinos uncharged; a model of considerable complexity.   In the standard model, electrons have no 
structure.  Complexity sometimes has to be accepted, as in the interactions between people.  Fortunately, physics 
is ultimately simple. It seems to me unlikely that nature could have created particles in such large quantity, 
unless the process were simple and straightforward. 

The model.

Consider   a   set   of   Cartesian   axes,   in   terms   of   which   we   can   describe   the   proposed   motions   of   the 

electromagnetic field assembly.  The center of the EM assembly is at the origin.

We want to visualize the oscillating E and B fields of the proposed model.  In the next figure, a complete 
cycle of oscillation is displayed as it might be seen by looking into the “Y” axis.  The first diagram shows how a 
dipolar magnetic field directed along the Z axis would look, at its maximum when the toroidal field  E  has 
completely decayed.  A quarter of a cycle later, this B field has decayed and only the toroidal E field is present 
(shown in red). The next figure shows how the   B  field looks after the  E  field has decayed.   Notice that the 
direction of the B field has reversed.  The process continues, returning the fields to the original state at the end of 
each cycle.  The little (+) sign is an artifact of the drawing process, and should be ignored.

Figure 1.  EM field dispositions throughout one cycle, the assembly not rotating..

If the EM assembly is always spinning about the +Z axis, the vxB  electric field changes sign each half 
oscillation.  This vxB  electric field hence averages to zero, and is unhelpful in our quest for a mechanism that 
can produce “charge”.  To avoid the reversals of the  B field, lets postulate that the whole EM assembly is also 
rotating about the “X” axis and at the same rate.   The same observer, again looking into the Y axis at a ccw 
rotation of the EM assembly about X, would see field dispositions as follows: 

Figure 2.  Observer's view of the fields, when EM assemblage is rotating about X axis.

After the first quarter cycle, the view differs from Figure 1, and one observes the toroidal electric field 
face-on.  After the second quarter cycle, the observed  B field  orientation now continues to be directed along the 
observer's +Z axis.  And so it goes.  By setting the assembly into rotation about the X axis, the dipolar  B field 

4

oscillates but its north pole remains directed along +Z.   At every point in the observer's space,  B   oscillates 
between zero and a maximum value but does not change sign.  This rotation makes it possible to create “charge”.

Along the spin axis, the magnetic moment oscillates at the Compton frequency.   One can construct 3 
equivalent rotational axes as in the Cartesian coordinate system, aligning the spin axis along the 1,1,1 direction. 
We then rotate this spinning EM assembly about, say, the X axis and at the same rate.   The parallel component 
of the magnetic moment along the rotational axis X is 1/√3 of the total magnetic moment, and alternates in sign. 
The perpendicular component is  √(2/3) of the total magnetic moment, and does not change sign.  The   vxB 
electric field produced by the perpendicular component is unidirectional but still lacks spherical symmetry.  Its 
distribution in space is not isotropic; the waist area has the largest field and the polar area has zero field.  If one 
could simultaneously rotate the EM assembly about all 3 axes, X, Y, and Z, the  vxB   electric  field would be 
isotropic.  Failing this, one can  set the spin axis into rotation or precession about any one of these axes and, on 
average, find the average E field isotropic.  This precession of the spin axis about the X axis is equivalent to the 
rotation of the perpendicular component as shown in Figure 2.  The resulting average  vxB  produces an electric 
field similar to what one finds about a charge. Precession both enables a unidirectional  vxB  electric field and 
makes it isotropic. on average.  A rough analogy of the motion is a poorly thrown football, which spins and also 
wobbles.  Or, a wobbling toy top.

Calculating “charge”

Lets calculate the “charge” this model produces.  We know the measured magnetic moment,  the mass of 
the electron m, and Planck's constant h.  We assume the frequency of morphing from magnetic dipole to electric 
torus and back is the Compton frequency,  n = mc2/h, about 1020  Hz.  The frequency of rotation about, say, the X 
axis that keeps the sign of vxB the same direction in space, is assumed to be the same.   The transverse velocity 
of the spinning lines of B is

v = w

r sin q

                  (w =2p

,  and n

 = me c2 /h, the Compton frequency)                                            [3]

To calculate the “charge” Q, we surround the model with a spherical Gaussian surface and calculate the electric 
flux passing through it.  That is,

Q = e 0  ∫  vxB . dS                                                                                                                                       [4]

The velocity “v” is of course tangent to the surface.  The component of B tangent to this surface  is Bq  : 

Bq   = (m

0/4p )(m */r3)sin q

                                                                                                                            [5]

 as depicted later in the vector diagram, Figure 3.  One normally thinks of m

`The operative magnetic moment is the perpendicular component, designated m * because it is larger by 
 i s the observable magnetic 
, as with angular momentum.  This does not work in this 
  is proportional to the 
  because this is the 
*,

√2 than m
moment, and that the total magnetic moment m ** is √3m
model, because m ** oscillates in direction although L does not.   The magnitude of m
total angular momentum,   L.  We must identify the measured magnetic moment with   m
only component that doesn't change sign as the EM assembly morphs at the Compton frequency.  

L2 = S(S+1)           m

 =  m **/√3      m * =  √2 m

  =  √(2/3) m **                                                                   [6]

 is the component perpendicular to the rotation axis, X.  Collecting terms, the radial component of E at the 

Gaussian surface is 

E = (m 0/4p )(m */r3)(sin q )(2p sin q )(r me c2 /h)                                                                                            [7]

Notice that the E field [7] scales according to the product  “m m”.  The Bohr magneton (electron) and the nuclear 
magneton have similar form, and  m m is eh/4p
 in either case.  The Bohr magneton arises from the circular orbital 
motion of an electron about a proton, and it is probably accidental that is so close to the spin magnetic moment 
of an electron.  The nuclear magneton is similar, and has the order of magnitude about right for nuclei.

5

n
*
*
m
*
m B = eh/4p me                    and                     m

N  = eh/4p mp                                                                          [8]

To find the charge Q created by this model for an electron, we can rewrite [7]  and substitute m B for m

 :

 = m B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [9]

E = (1/4p

e 0)(Q/r2) = (m

0/4p )(m B/r3)(sin q )(2p sin q )(r me c2 /h)                                                                [10] 

Q = e<sin2 q >/2                                                                                                                                        [11]

Since <sin2 q > = 1/2, Q = e/(4) = 0.25e.    The measured value of  m
 is slightly greater than m B , by 1.00116 or 
half the g factor for an electron. With this correction, Q=0.25029e. The charge generated by this model is close 
enough to be interesting.  Applied to a proton, m P = 2.7829m
N   and leads to  Q = 0.6982e.  The fit to the unit of 
charge “e” can be improved by twiddling with the model.  

Spin and angular momentum

Spin is needed to understand atomic spectroscopy, and is somehow related to angular momentum.  If one 
accepts   that     electrons   contain  “charge”,  this  would  create   for  a   non-point   electron  a   magnetic  moment   in 
consequence of multiple current loops as the electron spins.  Models based on this have failed.  The confusion is 
illuminated by the  Wikipedia (3) web article on “Spin (physics)”, in which spin is described as follows:

“One of the most remarkable discoveries associated with quantum physics is the fact that elementary particles can possess 
non-zero spin.  Elementary  particles are particles  that  cannot be divided  into  any smaller  units,  such as  the  photon, the 
electron,   and   the   various  quarks.   Theoretical   and   experimental   studies   have   shown   that   the   spin   possessed   by   these 
particles cannot be explained by postulating that they are made up of even smaller particles rotating about a common center 
of mass (see classical electron radius); as far as we can tell, these elementary particles are true point particles. The spin that 
they carry is a truly intrinsic physical property, akin to a particle's electric charge and mass.” 

Lets see how the proposed model looks at “spin”.  The model begins with a toroidal E field that morphs 
into a dipolar  B  field having total magnetic moment  m
, proportional to the angular  momentum  L  of the 
assembly of EM fields and directed along the spin axis. The problem of associating angular momentum with 
magnetic   moment,   in   this   model,   is   that   the   angular   momentum   always   points   the   same   direction   but   the 
magnetic moment oscillates about zero as the EM fields collapse and reform.  The total magnetic moment of an 
electron in the proposed model cannot be measured directly, and indeed in the absence of precession has an 
average value of zero.  With precession about an inclined axis, the perpendicular component m
 always points 
the same direction and its average value does not vanish.   This, then, is the component of the total magnetic 
, and 
moment that can be measured experimentally.  The component of  m
this contributes nothing to “charge” because its sign oscillates about zero.   That is, <m >=0.   The  vxB  electric 
field from which charge is derived relies on m
 of the spinning 
dipolar B field creates by vxB an electric field that is inverse square with distance, but is anisotropic.  Precession 
about an axis inclined at the angle arccos 1/√3 averages this electric field so that it is the same, on average, in 
every direction.  The effective value of the magnetic moment for producing the vxB electric field is less than the 
amplitude of the total magnetic moment  m
 contributes to 
“charge”.  We will later suggest that the effective value is even less than that, due to phase differences.

   because only the perpendicular component  m

  parallel to the precessional axis is m

|).  This perpendicular component m

*= (cid:214) 2|m

 (m

*,

The vector model is sometimes used in atomic physics, holding that the parallel component  l  and the 
 
 oscillate about zero, but the 
 always points in the same direction (unless there is a phase factor slippage) and 

total angular moment L can be described in terms of a triangle, shown next.  The total magnetic moment   m
and total angular momentum  L   lie along the hypotenuse. .   Both  m
measured magnetic moment m
its average value does not vanish. 

   and   m

6

*
m
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
√l

L

l

Figure 3. L is the total angular momentum, “√l”  is the measurable (perpendicular) component.

This vector sum is usually written as L2  =  l(l+1).    For an electron,  l  = S.   This has little resemblance to the 
Pythagorean theorem, but makes sense when written as:

L2 = l2  +  (√l)2  =  l(l+1)                                                                                                                                                          [12]

Suppose we have “n” of the electrons in an atom, whose spins are coupled.  Why does m
 not increase linearly 
with the number of electrons, but increases only as  √n?   To increase as “n”, there must be phase coherence 
between the individual perpendicular components.  Lacking phase coherence, the sum would go as √n, as in a 
random walk.

Tweaking the model by dithering the phase

There may be a simple explanation for the failure of this model to produce the known unit of charge, e. 
Suppose that the requirement that spin and precession are at exactly the same rate is relaxed a bit.   In the 
proposed model, the spin rate is the Compton frequency, mc2/h.  Suppose there is some jitter between these, even 
though the average precession rate remains the Compton frequency.  This has little or no effect on the electric 
field, but diminishes the measured magnetic moment.  Why?  The Compton frequency of an electron is the order 
of 1020 Hz.  The magnetic moment has been only been measured at 1011 Hz or less.  If the phase angle between 
spin and precession varies linearly from -f
  , repeating itself at a rate somewhere between 1011 Hz and 1020 
Hz, the effect on the measured magnetic moment is that one finds a smaller value according to the average value 
of cos f
 .  In other words, 
there is a somewhat larger magnetic moment that produces “charge”, but changes of phase reduce the  measured 
value of the magnetic moment.  We can then increase m
 when calculating “charge”, by whatever factor yields 
Q=e. The value of the turning point f

.  This has the effect of reducing the measured magnetic moment by the factor (sin f )/f

, for an electron, is 141.74 degrees. For a proton, f

 is 81.06 degrees.

  to +f

If this sounds like a “fudge factor”, it is.  Fudge factors are sometimes needed in physics to account for 
unknown factors.  A case in point is the invention of the neutrino, needed to account for conservation of energy 
in beta decay.  Sometimes, the origin of fudge factors is found experimentally.  Sometimes, not.  If this dither 
explanation is found to be valid, it suggests that a single underlying magnetic moment is responsible for all 
charge production,  m C.   It cannot be measured at this time, because our measuring instruments respond too 
slowly.     In   common   with   the   concept   of   Bohr   and   nuclear   magnetons,   one   expects   that  m C  is   inversely 
proportional to mass.  To find Q=e, it needs to be of the form:

m C = eh/(p m)

More about rotating B fields

It seems sort of magical, that a rotating B field can source or sink electric fields.  If one follows the  vxB 
field inside a spinning magnetic moment source, such as a MF current-carrying solenoid, one realizes quickly 
that the interior B fields have the sign reversed and this leads to a change of sign of vxB.  Along the waist, this 
vxB field, inside, points inwards while the external  vxB field points outwards.  Or, vice-versa.  At radius zero, 
this vxB field vanishes entirely.  On a microscopic level, this suggests the presence of a ring of positive charge 
wrapped about the solenoid waist.  This cursory analysis is not quite right, since vxB vanishes at the poles while 

7

*
*
m
*
m
*
*
m
a ring of positive charge leads to a non-vanishing  E  field along the polar axis.   Whatever is the outcome of 
further analyses of a rotating dipolar  B  field, the most important feature is that it serves as an engine that 
“sources” or “sinks” external electric fields.

Magnetic monopoles?

This model appears to source or sink electric fields, and so describes an electric charge.  Suppose one 
wanted to build a magnetic monopole, to source or sink magnetic fields.  Figure 1 suggests a way.  If we could 
invert the fields, i.e. build a 1/r3 electric dipolar field that decays into a toroidal magnetic field and thence back to 
an electric dipolar field, this assembly would constitute a magnetic monopole.  A spinning dipolar electric field 
produces a 1/r2 B field, vxE/c2.  By this model, a magnetic monopole would exhibit a permanent  electric dipole 
moment. How can one create magnetic monopoles?   A vertical radio frequency antenna produces toroidal  B 
fields   and   electric   dipolar   fields,   upon   being   excited   with   an   oscillating   current.     To   produce   a   magnetic 
monopole with mass comparable with that of an electron, one needs to increase the frequency of excitation to the 
1020  Hz level (the Compton frequency). Not possible, with present technology. Even if one were to produce 
magnetic monopoles, it is not known whether they would be stable.   Other, more practical, ways may be found 
to create  magnetic  monopoles   like  those   predicted  in  this  model.     It  is  interesting to speculate  how  atoms 
constructed of magnetic monopoles would assemble, with the Coulomb attraction between charges replaced by a 
magnetic attraction between monopoles.  This would be an entirely new form of matter, which might be named 
“magmatter”.   Assuming that such matter is quantized like ordinary matter, the deexcitation of energy levels 
should   produce   photons   or   something   like   photons.     The   question   then   arises,   “would   these   photons   be 
distinguishable from ordinary photons?  If they are indistinguishable, astronomers may have already seen them. 
If the magnetic attraction between monopoles is weaker than the Coulomb force, it would shift the “atomic” 
spectra to longer wavelengths.  If magnetic monopoles now exist or can be made, Maxwell's equations will need 
modification (i.e. div  B=0 becomes div  B=r
' is the density of magnetic monopoles).   This would 
complete the symmetry between E and B fields.

', where  r

The standard model of particle physics

The standard model of leptons and hadrons takes a different approach.  Charge is not explained, but is 
simply  postulated as  needed to  make  the  model  work.   The  building  blocks  are all particles.    Particles  in, 
particles out.  What are they made of?  They just “are”.    Higgs particles are invented to carry mass.   Particle 
physics has embarked on a “hunter, gatherer” philosophy throughout my lifetime, and has found and described a 
hundred or so of   these “particles of modern physics”.   It has succeeded in finding a theoretical model based 
upon   an   underlying   shorter   list   of   building   blocks   (leptons,   neutrinos,   quarks),   but   it   has   so   far   failed   to 
understand any of these particles or building blocks in terms of the EM fields of which they are ultimately 
composed.   As for mass, I believe Einstein was right.  Mass is kinetic energy, and kinetic energy is carried by 
the EM fields.  (1)   Internal kinetic energy is rest mass.  External kinetic energy gives the g  boost to mass.

Concluding remarks

We set out to find the way in which nature assembles electromagnetic fields into the things we call 
fundamental particles, especially electrons.   The model proposed here addresses the concerns discussed in the 
foreword.  It may actually be the way nature does this.  There are problems of stability, but these are of the same 
kind that has bedeviled atomic physics since its inception.  EM fields are already known to be quantized, and this 
precludes that bits and pieces of the EM fields of the particle are lost in each cycle of oscillation.   

It is obvious that the only difference between an electron and a positron is the direction in which the 
dipolar B field spins.  Just as a paddle motion in still water creates eddies rotating in opposite directions, the pair 
creation process creates opposite spins in the ensuing EM fields. 

  Charge in the model described here is not an inherent quality of any thing.  Rather, it is a machine that 
sources or sinks EM fields.  Does nature use a different kind of machine?  Maybe, but this is the simplest one I 
can imagine.  And, simplicity counts if one wants to understand why there should be so many particles in the 

8

universe.  If the universe is now charge-neutral, as seems likely, there are equal numbers of positive and negative 
elementary particles.  Pair production does not assure one that equal quantities of protons and electrons will be 
produced. Any imbalance in the abundance of protons and electrons might be swiftly overcome by annihilations 
of the excess of one over the other.   That is, the ultimate fate of every produced electron in a charge-neutral 
universe is that it either annihilates with a positron, it finds a proton or other nucleus and makes a stable atom, or 
it is still wandering through space looking for a positron.   Given that the electromagnetic force is 40 orders of 
magnitude stronger than gravity, it may well be that annihilation alone has sufficed to balance the abundance of 
electrons  and protons  (and  of  their  antiparticles)  in the  several  dozen billions  of  years  since  the  big bang. 
Particle physicists have found a slight CP violation in pair production, favoring matter over antimatter.  Another 
solution obtains if nature somehow created equal numbers of electrons and protons, by an asymmetric pair 
production process.   An isolated neutron does just this, decaying into a proton, an electron, and a neutrino. 
Perhaps we should consider a pair production process for neutrons.  It does not appear to happen now, possibly 
because it needs different conditions such as the much larger gravitational potential and higher temperatures 
existing in the early universe.  Neutrons could then decay into matter, antineutrons could decay into antimatter, 
and charge neutrality would be assured.   This suggestion of an alternate pair production process in the early 
stages of the big bang is not made lightly.  Since there were presumably no heavy nuclei existing prior to the big 
bang, pair production as we currently understand it, simply could not happen.  This  reminds one of the paradox 
in Genesis where the question arises, where did Cain and Abel find wives?

It's interesting to speculate what kind of entity this model might describe, were there no spin.   The 
toroidal electric field is self-shielded, and the magnetic moment oscillates at the Compton frequency and has 
average value zero.  This suggests that there would be very little interaction when such an entity passes through 
matter, very like a neutrino.  If neutrinos have this structure, and carry very little mass, it then takes very little 
energy to move them at velocities near c.    The nature of a photon is not clear, but it is known that it has an 
energetic core sized at about half a wavelength plus an aura (for lack of a better word) that extends widely.  We 
know this because larger and larger astronomical mirrors result in smaller and smaller spot size at focus.  In my 
opinion, a photon is essentially a complex toroidal configuration of B fields that carries quantized magnetic flux, 
h/4e.  Perhaps, in pair production, the aura  is converted into a pair of neutrinos?   How large is a neutrino?   In 
my opinion, it is very big.  It moves like a large fluffy cloud, interacting very little with the airplanes through 
which it passes.

9

References

1.  R.L. Collins, http://mass-metricgravity.net.

2.  R.L. Collins, Rubber Rulers and Lackadaisical Clocks Simplify Gravity, Infinity Publishing.com, Haverford, 
PA (2003), 61.

3.  http://wikipedia.org/wiki/Spin_(Physics).

Typically, a scientific paper  will include a long list of references to print journals.  This  shows that the 
author has diligently searched the literature, and is aware of prior knowledge.  Although this has worked well in 
the past, the availability of information on the web has changed the paradigm.  Anyone, whether or not they have 
access to a comprehensive library, can now search on the terms of interest and swiftly get more information than 
they   really   want   to   read.     Search   terms   of   interest   for   this   paper   are:     Faraday   homopolar   generator,   pair 
production, charge, structure of the electron, quarks, CP violation, etc.   If they are unfamiliar to the reader, 
terms such as dipolar field, Maxwell's equations, curl, etc. can also be explored to whatever extent is wanted. 
There remains the problem that the web pages are not authenticated by anyone, whereas the paper references 
have all survived the refereeing process.  Time will tell, which is the more useful.  An example of the current 
state of confusion about the nature of charge is had by searching for “origin of electric charge”, illustrated below 
in the very first reference one finds for this inquiry.  It comes from an interesting site run by members of the 
University of Illinois physics department, http://van.physics.uiuc.edu/qa/listing.php?id=525. 

Origin of Electric Charge

Can you explain me what gives the electron (and proton) electric charge? Thanks!
Q
:

-Szabo Sorin (age 21)
West University, Romania

:That’s a very tough question, and I’m afraid the answer is no, I can’t answer it. 

In some cases, you can give a little bit of an answer. The proton gets its charge from the 
charges of the quarks that it’s made of. Of course then the question becomes why the 
quarks are charged. 

Of particular interest is why the electron and proton charges have the same magnitude 
but opposite sign so they cancel each other exactly (as far as we can tell) to make 
electrically neutral atoms. If we understood why the proton’s quarks’ charges all add up 
so neatly to cancel the electron’s charge, maybe we can make some progress in 
understanding why any of these particles is charged at all. 

Theorists do have arguments explaining the connection between the existence of 
electrical charge and the form of the equations describing the behavior of particles on a 
small scale. At some level, however, we always end up having to say that nature just 
gave us certain ingredients.

(republished on 07/13/06)

10

