 

Pulse tube cryocooler with self-cancellation of cold stage vibration 

 
 
Suzuki T., Tomaru T., Haruyama T., Shintomi* T., Sato N., Yamamoto A., 

  Ikushima Y **., Li R. ** 

 
High Energy Accelerator Research Organization, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki-ken 305-0801 , Japan 
*Advanced Research Institute for the Sciences and Humanities Nihon University,   
    Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo-to 102-0073, Japan 
** Sumitomo Heavy Industry Inc., Nishitokyo-shi, Tokyo-to 188-8585, Japan 

 
 
We experimentally demonstrate a new method for reducing the vibration of cold 
stage  of  a  cryocooler. A  model  cryocooler  consists  of  two  pairs  of  a  pulse-tube 
and  a  regenerator  with  identical  structures.  Each  pair  was  connected  with  a 
common cold stage. Comparing RMS amplitude with the case of no phase shift of 
driving gas pressure between the two pairs, the longitudinal vibration of the cold 
stage reduces 96.1% at 126K by supplying the gas pressure with 180 degrees of 
phase shift. 

 
 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 

Cryocoolers  are  used  for  cooling  many  kinds  of  cryogenic  instruments  because  of  their 
convenience and compactness. Particularly the pulse tube cryocooler is expected to apply to 
the  instruments  or  the  devices  that  are  easily  interfered  with  external  vibration.  A  typical 
value  of  the  cold  stage  vibration  of  an  ordinary  pulse  tube  cryocooler  is  about  ten 
micrometers, although the vibration of cold head is about 100 times smaller than that of the 
Gifford-McMahon cryocooler[1]. Even with the pulse tube cryocooler, vibration of the cold 
stage  is  still  destructive  for  applications  to  extremely  sensitive  instruments  such  as 
gravitational  wave  detectors.  So  it  has  been  required  to  develop  an  advanced  pulse  tube 
cryocooler  with  smaller  vibration.  Current  solution  is  to  put  an  additional  vibration  isolator 
on  the  pulse  tube  cryocooler. In  this  situation,  we  proposed the  method  of  self-cancellation 
for  reducing  the  vibration  of  the  cold  stage[2].  The  method  of  self-cancellation  can  keep 
convenience and compactness of the pulse tube cryocooler. 

The  vibration  of  the  cold  head  results  from  a  driving  mechanism  of  the  pulse  tube 
cryocooler.  An  alternating  pressure  of  gas,  which  is  generated  by  a  compressor  and  an 
appropriate valve mechanism, drives the pulse tube cryocooler. The variation of the pressure 
causes  a  vibration  of  the  cold  stage  through  elastic  deformation  of  pipes  of  the  regenerator 
and the pulse tube. The vibration of the cold stage can be considered as a forced oscillation 
by  the  alternating  pressure  of  gas.  The  driving  gas  pressure  works  as  an  external  force  that 
induces the cold stage vibration. One of the ideas to reduce the cold stage vibration is to use 
the gas pressure itself as a counterforce. The motion of the cold stage keeps stable when the 
resultant of external forces is zero. 

A simple example for realizing this is to connect a pair of pulse tube cryocoolers on the 
same  cold  stage  and  supply  the  periodic  gas  pressure  with  180  degrees  phase  shift  to  each 
cryocooler. The vibrations of the cold stage will be cancelled out when a configuration of the 
cryocoolers has a proper symmetry on the cold stage. The configuration can be generalized to 

 

the  case  of  n-pair  cryocoolers  with  the  same  cold  stage.  A  preliminary  experiment  showed 
that the cold stage vibration reduced more than 96% at 300K[2]. 

In  order  to  prove  the  method  of  self-cancellation,  we  measured  vibrations  of  the  cold 
stage of a model cryocooler. The model cryocooler is essentially a complex of two pulse tube 
cryocoolers  with  identical  structures.  In  the  followings,  details  of  the  experiment  will  be 
described. 

EXPERIMENTAL PROOF FOR THE METHOD OF SELF-CANCELLATION 

Experimental setup 
An  experimental  setup  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  The  model  cryocooler  was  installed  in  the 
vacuum  chamber.  A  valve  unit  generates  an  alternating  gas  pressure  by  switching  high  and 
low pressures supplied from a compressor. Gas pressures on each cryocooler were monitored 
by pressure transducers (PT). The valve timing controller supplied control pulses to the valve 
unit. Pulses with a period about 0.5 sec were generated by the circuit of timing IC. Vibration 
of the cold stage was measured by the optical transducer. The optical transducer was fixed on 
the  table  which  is  rigidly  connected  to the  top  flange  of  the  vacuum  chamber.  Two  silicon 
diode  thermometers  monitor  temperatures  on  the  model  cryocooler.  Buffer  volumes  were 
connected  to  pulse  tubes  by  needle  valves  (NV).  All  of  the  data  were  stored  in  the  data 
logger.   

 

 
 

 

 

Figure 1 Setup of the experiment. 
 

 

The model cryocooler 
Four stainless-steel tubes, which were two regenerators and two pulse tubes, were joined on 
the cold stage. Tubes are separated in 90 degrees on the same circle. Each two tubes which 
held the common diameter were connected by a horizontal hole in the cold stage to make a 
cryocooler unit. Sizes of the tubes are 20mm of diameter, 300mm of length and 0.25mm of 
thickness. Figure 2 shows the model cryocooler. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Figure 2 The model cryocooler (a) and the cartridges of regenerator. 

 

 

The regenerator cartridge consists of meshes (#100, stainless-steel) and a pipe with caps 
(G10) at both ends. The stainless-steel meshes were packed into the G10 pipe to a mass about 
59.1g  to  61.1g.    The  caps  were  joined  to  the  pipe  by  a  drop  of  cyanoacrylate  glue.  An 
O-ring  at  one  end  of  the  cap  stops  leakage  between  the  cartridge  and  the  regenerator  tube. 
Copper meshes were used as spacers in the bottom of regenerator tubes. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The optical transducer 
The optical transducer consists of a semiconductor laser module and a photo detector (PD). 
The PD monitors the light that was reflected 45 degrees by a small mirror on the bottom of 
the  cold  stage.  The  amount  of  an  incident  light  to  the  PD  was  modulated  by  a  distance 
between  the  PD  and  the  mirror  when  the  position  of  the  PD  to  the  light  beam  had  an 
appropriate offset. The optical transducer was fixed on the translation stage that could control 
the  distance  between  the  PD  and  the  mirror.  The  conversion  coefficient  of  the  optical 
transducer was 59.84 micrometers/V when the DC output was about 3 volts.   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Operation of the model cryocooler 
The supply and the return pressures of the compressor were respectively 1.45 MPa and 0.85 
MPa.  Both  the  compressor  and  the  valve  unit  were  located  in  the  neighbor  room  to  avoid 
their  mechanical  vibration  and  acoustic  noise.  Copper  tubes  with  1/4  inch  of  diameter 
connected  the  valve  unit  and  the  model  cryocooler.  The  volume  of  buffer  tanks  was 
approximately 0.6 liter. Needle valves were adjusted to an appropriate opening extent to be 
able to achieve the minimum cold head temperature. The optical transducer was set such that 
the DC component of the transducer showed to be about 3 volts. 

 

 
 

RESULTS 

 
The temperature of the cold head reached to 126 K about 90 minutes after the start of 
operation.  In  the  same  time,  the  middle  of  the  regenerator  tube  was  almost  at  the  room 
temperature. It was enough for elastomer of the O-rings to keep soft. Phase shifts of supplied 
gas  pressures  were  set  to  be  two  values.  The  0  degrees  phase  shift  corresponded  to  an 
ordinary  operation  of  cryocooler  and  the  180 degrees  phase  shift  corresponded  to  applying 
the  self-cancellation  operation.  The  RMS  (Root  Mean  Square)  amplitude  was  2.94 
micrometers for the case of 0 degrees phase shift and was 0.115 micrometers for the case of 
180 degrees phase shift. Also the noise level of the measurement was 0.033 micrometers in 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

RMS. Figure 3 shows the results of vibration measurement at 126 K. 

 
Figure 3 The vibration of the cold stage of the model cryocooler. The blue line shows the operation in 0 

degree phase shift. The red line shows the operation in 180 degrees phase shift. The width of the red line 
corresponds to the noise level. 
 
 

CONCLUSION 

 
Comparing  the  RMS  amplitudes,  the  vertical  vibration  of  the  cold  stage  reduced  96.1%  by 
applying  the  self-cancellation  from  the  ordinary  pulse  tube  cryocooler.  From  those  results, 
we  conclude  that  the  method  of  self-cancellation  is  effective  to  reduce  the  vibration  of  the 
cold stage. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

 
This work was supported by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research 16360110. We thank to 
Mr. K.Kasami and Mr. N.Kudo for their assistance in fabricating apparatus.   

REFERENCES 

 
1. Tomaru T., Suzuki T., Haruyama T., Shintomi T., Yamamoto A., Koyama T.    and Li R., 
Vibration analysis of cryocoolers, Cryogenics (2004) 44 309-317 
2.  Suzuki  T.,  Tomaru  T.,  Haruyama  T.,  Shintomi  T.,  Sato  N.,  Yamamoto A.,  Ikushima  Y. 
and  Li  R.,  Ultra-low  vibration  pulse  tube  cryocooler  with  a  new  vibration  cancellation 
method, Advances in Cryogenic Engineering (2006), 51B 1325-1331 

