1

How random is your heart beat?

Krzysztof Urbanowicz1,2, Jan J. Żebrowski1, Rafał Baranowski3 & Janusz A. Hołyst1

1Faculty of Physics, Warsaw University of Technology, Koszykowa 75, PL-00-662  

2 Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, Nöthnitzer Straße 38, 01187 

3Institute of Cardiology at Warszawa, Alpejska 42,  04-628 Anin, Poland

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Janusz Hołyst,

Warsaw, Poland

Dresden, Germany

tel.: +48-22-234-7133

fax: +48-22-628-2171 

e-mail: jholyst@if.pw.edu.pl

Abstract:

We measure the content of random uncorrelated noise in heart rate variability 

using a general method of noise level estimation using   a coarse grained entropy. We 

show that usually - except for atrial fibrillation - the level of such noise is within 5 - 

15% of the variance of the data and that the variability due to the linearly correlated 

processes   is   dominant   in   all   cases   analysed   but   atrial   fibrillation.   The   nonlinear 

deterministic   content   of   heart   rate   variability   remains   significant   and   may   not   be 

ignored.

PACS: 05.45.Tp 05.40.-a

Keywords: noise estimation, heart rate variability 

2

Introduction

The standard ECG trace that our physician examines looks regular. The pattern 

visible in the printout of the electrocardiogram seems to repeat itself while in fact the 

time intervals between heart beats usually change in a complex and irregular way. This 

phenomenon called heart rate variability is observable when the proper time resolution 

is used (tens to hundreds of miliseconds of change from heart beat to heart beat). A 

variety of physiological factors affect human heart rate. It is now well known that the 

properties  of  heart rate variability  may be an important factor  in the assessment of 

serious cardiac conditions especially of the risk of sudden cardiac death [1]. An open 

question is the source of heart rate variability. 

The normal heart cycle begins with the electrical activity of a specialized group of 

cells  in the  right atrium of  the heart – the sino-atrial node SA  -  which acts as the 

principal pacemaker of the heart. The action potential then propagates along the atria 

reaching the second node of the heart - the atrio-ventricular node AV.  Reacting to the 

potential of the AV node, the His-Purkinje system of fibers inside the ventricles delivers 

stimuli at different locations allowing the ventricles to contract in a concerted way. Both 

branches of the autonomous nervous system act on the SA and the AV node, constantly 

moderating the heart rate. The activity of the nervous system is a function of a number 

of   feedback   loops,   of   which   the   one   controlling   blood   pressure   (the   baroreceptor 

system)   and   the   one   keeping   the   level   of   carbon   dioxide   in   the   blood   at   bay   (the 

chemoreceptor system) play a decisive role [2]. All together the interplay of at least five 

nonlinear oscillatory processes affect the human blood distribution system [3,4] and so 

the heart rate. 

Heart rate variability is measured as a time series of the time intervals between 

successive contractions of the ventricles of the heart (i.e. the RR intervals of the ECG 

3

recording). If the sinus node is the pacemaker responsible for the heart rhythm then such 

a rhythm is called sinus rhythm. It is the most common and natural rhythm.

An important aspect of the heart rate variability generation process is the interplay 

between sinus rhythm and the propagation of the action potentials in the form of waves 

originating   in   the   SA   and   AV   nodes   within   the   atria   and   the   ventricles.   In   certain 

circumstances, parts of the heart tissue may become self-oscillatory (a property called 

automatism) so that various forms of arrhythmia in the atria and in the ventricles occur, 

disrupting the normal (sinus) rhythm [2]. In particular, during atrial fibrillation, when a 

break up of the waves occurs within the atria, the heart rate variability is so large and 

complex that the rhythm is accepted to be random [5].

However, even without arrhythmia, the variability of sinus rhythm in a healthy 

individual is very complex (fig.1). It is now accepted that, in general, disease as well as 

age may result in a decrease of heart rate variability. Denervation of the heart due to 

cardiac infarction or heart transplant reduces heart rate variability severely. In clinical 

practice, standards exist for the measurement of the properties of the variability of heart 

rate [1] - a means of assessing the state of the heart rate control system,  mainly that of 

the   autonomous   nervous   system.   In   this   context,   both   time   domain   (e.g.   standard 

deviation of the heart rate) and frequency domain methods (power spectral analysis) are 

used for diagnostic purposes and the assessment of the risk of sudden cardiac death, in 

particular. In many cases these methods are ineffectual: the standard deviation of the 

heart   rate   for   both   healthy   individuals   and   for   the   high   risk   patients   may   be 

indistinguishable (fig.2) while a large number of arrhythmia in the heart beat sequence 

renders frequency analysis of the sinus rhythm useless [1].

For this reason, both a search for better diagnostic tools for heart rate variability 

analysis is under way and the sources of the variability itself are researched. Both goals 

4

are, of course, closely related. Considerable effort has gone into methods based on the 

assumption that, in view of the complexity of the activity of the autonomous nervous 

system, at least a major part of the variability of the heart rate may treated as a noise 

driven process [6,7,8]. Most of these methods use fractal or multifractal scaling analysis 

[9]. The approach has also yielded stochastic models of heart rate variability [10,11].

Researchers using a predominantly deterministic approach [12,13,14] also claim 

success in the description of heart rate variability and propose various new methods for 

medical diagnostics. In some cases, such examples of typical deterministic structures in 

phase space as hyperbolic saddles [15] may be identified in heart rate variability data in 

the presence arrhythmia but also spiral trajectories around a saddle-focus [16] for pure 

sinus rhythm may be found.

We see then that the question what is the random (or noise) content in heart rate 

variability and how much of this phenomenon is due to the deterministic, nonlinear 

instability of the system is open and valid. In this paper, using a general method [17], 

we measure the content of random noise in heart rate data. We analyzed 70 24-hour 

recordings of heart rate variability measured in patients of the Institute of Cardiology at 

Warszawa. We show that usually - for both cases of disease and for healthy individuals 

- the level of random, uncorrelated noise is within 5 - 15% of the variance of the data. 

The exceptions were cases of atrial fibrillation where the level of random noise was 

found to exceed 60 %. We also show that linearly correlated processes are dominant in 

heart rate variability but with the advent of disease and of the risk of cardiac arrest the 

nonlinearly correlated components increase. We demonstrate that removing the random 

noise content from the data uncovers the deterministic trajectories obscured by it. Our 

results   show   that   heart   rate   variability   has   an   important   component   due   to   linearly 

correlated processes but that the role of deterministic processes is significant.

5

Methods

To  estimate  the  level  N  of  random  noise  in the  analyzed data  , we  applied a 

method  developed  by  Urbanowicz  and  Hołyst  [17].  All  data  sets   were  analyzed  by 

means of a 1000 data point sliding window shifted by 200 RR intervals. The method 

makes use of the properties and theorems of deterministic dynamical systems and chaos 

theory.     If   noise   is   added   to   the   trajectory   of   a   deterministic   dynamical   system 

(measurement noise) or if noise is present in the equation of motion (dynamical noise 

affecting   the   dynamics   of   the   system)   then   the   complexity   measure   called   coarse-

grained correlation entropy K2

 [18] increases. Knowing the analytical dependence of this 

entropy on the standard deviation of the uncorrelated noise s

 [17], we can estimate the 

noise level from the calculation of the entropy K2.  The method also allows to estimate 

the error of the standard deviation of the random noise s

. 

The level of random noise in the data N we define as the ratio of the variance s

2 of the 

random noise to the variance of the data. We express it and all similar quantities in 

percent.

The noise level estimation method [17] was developed for uncorrelated noise. In 

the case of a highly correlated stochastic process, our analysis may underestimate the 

stochastic component of the variability. This is because the method is sensitive to the 

occurrence   a   strong   autocorrelation   in   the   data   which   results   in   the   appearance   of 

deterministic   lines   in   the   recurrence   plots   [19,20,21].   This   affects   the   resultant   K2 

entropy. For example, if the underlying process was a linear stochastic process such as 

the highly correlated ARMA [22], the noise level would be estimated at below 100%.

In order to better understand the results of the estimation of random noise, we 

calculate an additional parameter  L  - the level of linear correlations in the data. This 

parameter is calculated as the maximal absolute value of autocorrelation function for the 

6

delay t  ˛

[1,10] with the delay expressed in the indices of the RR intervals. Increasing 

the maximal value of delay beyond 10 does not change the results significantly. The 

parameter  L  can  be  understood as  the  level of   variability  due to linearly correlated 

processes. 

We   used   the   noise   reduction   method  Local   Projection   with   Nonlinear   Constraints 

(LPNC)   [23]   that   applies   a   linear   approximation   of   an   attractor   in   the   nearest 

neighbourhood in the Takens space [24]. The main difference between the standard 

method of  Local Projection [24]  and the LPNC    are   the nonlinear constraints that 

appear   in   a   natural   way   in   deterministic   systems.   Because   the   constraints   are   used 

together with the calculation of the Jacobi matrix (the latter is usual for standard Local 

Projection   Methods),   the   numerical   errors   in   the   estimation   of   the   elements   of   this 

matrix do not cause large errors in the corrections to the trajectory estimated by the 

LPNC algorithm. A second important feature of the LPNC method is the possibility of 

an automatic termination of the calculation at an optimum. The main input parameter of 

our method is the minimal projection dimension which is a function of the attractor 

dimension of the clean trajectory (here we used 4). The remaining parameters can be set 

to default values so that the method can be used for noisy data from an unknown source. 

Note that the noise reduction method may be used only for a moderate level of noise 

The   source   and   executables   for   the   methods   [17,23]     can   be   found   at   the   site 

[25].

The data

http://www.chaosandnoise.org

For all cases discussed below, heart rate variability data was extracted from 24-

hour Holter ECG recordings analyzed with the 563 Del Mar Avionics system. All data 

7

were checked by a qualified cardiologist: normal beats were detected, artifacts were 

deleted   and   arrhythmias   were   recognized.   However,   contrary   to   the   usual   clinical 

practice, the arrhythmias were not filtered out. The data was sampled at 128 Hz.

The population studied consisted of 70 24-hour Holter ECG recordings.  34  of 

these were recorded in healthy individuals: 28 men (mean age 37 y  –

  10 y) and 6 

women (mean age 34 y  –

  13 y). In 7 cases sustained atrial fibrillation was recorded 

during all 24 hours and in one case atrial flutter was present. Finally, 15 cases at risk of 

cardiac arrest (CA) and their sex, age and disease matched controls completed the study 

population (two of the controls – young, healthy men - were included also into the 

group of normals). The recordings placed in the CA group belonged to persons who had 

survived   at   least   a   single   CA   or   had   died   during   follow   up.   This   group   was   very 

heterogeneous:   there   was   a   large   disparity   of   age,   some   had   severe   ventricular 

arrhythmia and some none at all. In three of the cases, CA occurred during the recording 

of the Holter ECG.

For noise reduction we chose two characteristic cases to demonstrate the effect of 

the removal of random noise from heart rate variability. The first, labelled LCH [15,16], 

was a post myocardial infarction patient 64 y of age, who died of ventricular fibrillation 

some time after the recording was made. Over 70 % of the RR intervals recorded were 

due to arrhythmia. The second case, CHM, was recorded in a healthy, 25 y old man 

with sinus rhythm and no arrhythmia.

Random noise in heart rate variability

We   assess   the   level   of   two   categories   of   variability   within   the   signal:   the 

variability of the data due to linearly correlated processes L and the uncorrelated noise 

content  N  – both given in per cent of the variance of the data. We analyzed the data 

separating it into four groups: the normals, the atrial fibrillation group, the cardiac arrest 

8

cases CA and their controls. The box plots in fig. 3 depict the four categories mentioned 

above.

In fig. 3a it can be seen that, for the normals, the uncorrelated noise level N in the 

signal is relatively low (less than 10%) and that it is slightly higher for those at risk of 

CA and their controls. On the other hand, atrial fibrillation seems to be associated with a 

large level of uncorrelated noise - as expected [3]. The star symbol marks the level of 

uncorrelated noise for the patient with atrial flutter.

The level of heart rate variability due to linearly correlated processes  L  for all 

three categories is depicted in fig.3b. The four diamond symbols mark the outliers of 

both the CA and of the control group. The star symbol again marks the case of atrial 

flutter. In keeping with the results shown in fig. 3a, when atrial fibrillation occurs this 

component of the variability was found to be rather low (on the average less than 20 %). 

On the other hand, the majority of the normals exhibit a heart rate variability with  L 

about 85 %. The controls of the CA cases have a slightly smaller level of the linearly 

correlated content in their heart rate variability with the group average at about 78 % 

and  a   smaller   spread.   The   cases   of   a   high   risk   of   CA   exhibit   a   somewhat   smaller 

average but the box plot is also characteristically much wider.  

We also assessed the potential clinical value of the methods proposed here. For a 

cardiologist, clinical value is in the accuracy of the separation of the group of normals 

from the cases of disease and in the level of the prediction of sudden death. Stepwise 

discrimination   analysis   using   the   SPSS   system   applied   to   all   groups   except   atrial 

fibrillation (which can be immediately identified from the ECG) shows that when only 

the   standard   deviation   of   the   heart   rate   and   the   mean   heart   rate   were   used   as 

independent variables an overall correct classification of only 67% was obtained (75% 

of the normals were properly classified and only 57% of the cases of disease were 

9

correctly   identified).   We   tried   different   combinations   of   independent   variables   and 

found that the best results were obtained using a stepwise procedure. The variables that 

remained in the analysis were N and L while standard deviation was rejected. An overall 

correct classification of 85 % was obtained in separating the normals from the CA cases 

and their controls. In this case, correctly identified were 83 % of the normals and 87% 

of the cases of disease. An attempt to use the same procedure to separate the study 

population into three categories - the normals, the cases of CA and their controls - 

yielded   a   somewhat   worse   result:   overall   accuracy  69,8%  with   correctly   classified 

82.5% of the normals , 71.5 % of the controls and 40 % of the CA cases. Note that the 

pathologies in the group of patients in our population were very diverse and that it is 

well   known   that   no   parameter   or   group   of   parameters   can   be   universal   in   the   risk 

stratification for all cardiologic pathologies.

Heart rate variability without random noise

Fig.4 depicts the Poincaré map of a fragment of the time series (2000  RR intervals) for 

the patient LCH15     before noise removal (Part a) and after (Part b). In this case the 

random noise component is exceptionally low although the standard deviation is large: 

308 ms. The noise reduction algorithm removed 2.5% of the original signal and retained 

the main feature of the evolution: the RR intervals are practically periodic with only a 

small spread. Such a periodic behaviour as shown in fig.4 is relatively rare and it is an 

example of a strong interaction between the arrhythmia (over 70 % of the RR intervals 

in this recording) and the sinus rhytm [15,16]

Fig.5  depicts  the same procedure  of  noise  removal for   the  case  CHM  [16],  a 

normal. In this case, the part of the signal removed by the noise reduction procedure 

was 9%. In effect, a well visible set of spiral trajectories may be seen. Such spiral 

trajectories occur in a vast majority of the normals [16]. Although this case was situated 

10

in the middle of the normals group in fig.3 which depicts the 24 h average of L without 

noise reduction, the parameter L calculated for the noise-reduced data shown in fig.5b is 

large: 98 %. Note that the LPNC procedure used for the removal of the random noise 

requires multiple recurrences to occur in phase space to be successful. Such a multiple 

recurrence does not occur in stochastic processes. Thus the high level of correlation 

indicated by the local value of L is compatible with a deterministic process.

Conclusions

variability. 

We measured the level of two components in human heart rate variability for 70 

characteristic examples of patients and normals: the level of uncorrelated noise (the 

random   component)   and   the   level   of   the   component   due   to   linearly   correlated 

The random component in atrial fibrillation was large as expected. Atrial flutter 

reduced   the   level   of   random   noise   in   heart   rate   variability   as   compared   to   atrial 

fibrillation.   The   random   component   of   heart   rate   variability   for   the   other   three 

categories studied here (the normals, the cases of CA and their controls ) was found to 

be in a surprising narrow range: the average not exceeding 10% for the normals while it 

was about 15 % for the controls of the high risk group and for the high risk group itself.

The results indicate that - except for atrial fibrillation – heart rate variability is 

principally   due   to   linearly   correlated   processes.   Thus,   it   may   be   due   either   to 

deterministic processes with strong autocorrelations or due to stochastic processes - the 

methods which we use are unable to distinguish the source of this component. The 

proportions of the components differ from group to group. Thus, in the case of the 

normals the dominant component in heart rate variability is due to linearly correlated 

processes (average 85 % in the group studied).  With disease and an increase of the risk 

of CA, this component diminishes dropping below 80 % for the controls and to slightly 

11

above   70   %   for   the   high   risk   group.   We   noted   also   a   much   wider   spread   of   our 

parameter L  - characterizing the level of linear correlations - in the CA group. 

Removing the random component from the RR interval time series and plotting 

the   data   as   a   Poincaré   map   yielded   spiral   trajectories   and   periodic   orbits   -   typical 

nonlinear   dynamics   behaviour.   Note   that   the   LNPC   noise   reduction   method   [18] 

removes noise due to random processes and is based on the analysis of recurrence – a 

deterministic property of a dynamical system. Thus, together with the above described 

assessment of the level of random noise and of the level of linear correlations in heart 

rate variability, this result demonstrates that deterministic processes are an important 

factor in the formation of heart rate variability.

When stepwise discrimination analysis  was performed to separate the normals 

from the cases with a high risk of CA and their controls, the parameters that represent 

simple   data   such   as   the   mean   RR   interval   (i.e.   the   mean   heart   rate)   and   standard 

deviation of the heart rate (the simplest parameter which describes heart rate variability) 

were   not   adequate   to   the   task   and   were   rejected   by   the   algorithm.  Although   the 

quantities calculated in this work cannot be used to assess the level of the risk of cardiac 

arrest, discriminant analysis shows that, using the two parameters N and L introduced by 

us, an 85 % overall accuracy may be achieved in distinguishing the normals from the 

group composed of the CA patients and their sex, age and disease controls. Besides a 

potential use in population studies, this result indicates a relation exists between disease, 

the level of randomness and the kind of correlations that occur in heart rate variability. 

Acknowledgements

K.U. would like to thank Holger Kantz for fruitful discussions. The work was supported by the COST 

Action P10- Physics of Risk, by Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education,  Grant No. 134/E-

365/SPB/COST/KN/DWM 105/2005-2007, and by a special Grant of Warsaw University of Technology.

12

References

1. Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society 

of Pacing and Electrophysiology, HEART RATE VARIABILITY STANDARDS 

OF MEASUREMENT, Physiological Interpretation and Clinical Use. Circulation 

93,1043-1065 (1996).

Futura Publishing, (1998).

2. Bayés da Luna, A., CLINICAL ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY: A TEXTBOOK, 

3. Stein, K.M., Walden, J., Lippman, N. & Lerman, B.R., Ventricular response in atrial 

fibrillation: random or deterministic, Am.J.Physiol.277, 452-458 (1999).

4. Stanley, G.B., Poolla, K. & Siegel, R.A., Threshold modeling of autonomic control 

of heart rate variability, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.47, 1147-1153 (2000).

5. Stanley, H.E. et al., Statistical physics and physiology: Monofractal and multifractal 

approaches, Physica A 270, 309-324  (1999).

6. Kuusela, T., Stochastic heart-rate model can reveal pathologic cardiac dynamics, 

Phys.Rev.E 69, 031916 (2004).

7. Eke, A., Herman, P., Kocsis, L. & Kozak, L.R., Fractal characterization of 

complexity in temporal physiological signals, Physiol. Meas. 23, 1-38 (2002).

8. Stein, P.K., Domitrovich, P.P., Huikuri, H.V., Kleiger, R.E., Traditional and 

nonlinear heart rate variability are each independently associated with mortality 

after myocardial infarction,. J Cardiovasc. Electrophys.16, 13-20 (2005).

9. Yulmetyev, R., Hanggi, P. & Gafarov, F., Quantification of heart rate variability by 

discrete nonstationary non-Markov stochastic processes, Phys.Rev. E 65, 046107 

(2002).

10. Kuusela, T., Shepherd, T. & Hietarinta, J., Stochastic model for heart-rate 

fluctuations, Phys.Rev. E 67, 061904  (2003).

13

11. Groome, L.J. et al., Human fetuses have nonlinear cardiac dynamics, J. Appl.  

Physiol. 87, 530-537 (1999).

12. Baselli, G., Cerutti, S., Porta, A. & Signorini, M.G., Short and long term non-linear 

analysis of RR variability series, Med. Eng. Phys 24 ,21-32 (2002).

13. He, Z.Y., Pei, W.J., Yang, L.X., Hull, S.S. &  Cheung, J.Y., Modeling and 

characterizing deterministic component of heart rate variability by cluster-weighted 

filtering, Int. J. Bif. and Chaos 12, 2967-2976 (2002).

14. T.A Denton, G.A. Diamond, R.H. Helfant, S.Khan, H.Karagueuzian, Fascinating 

rhythm: a primer on chaos theory and its application to cardiology, Am. Heart. J. 

120, 1419-40 (1990).

15. Żebrowski, J.J. & Baranowski, R., Direct observation of homoclinic orbits in human 

heart rate variability , Phys. Rev. E 67, 056216 (2003).

16. Żebrowski, J.J., Popławska, W. & Baranowski, R., Entropy, pattern entropy, and 

related methods for the analysis of data on the time intervals between heartbeats 

from 24-h electrocardiograms , Phys. Rev. E 50, 4187-4205 (1994).

17. Urbanowicz, K. & Hołyst, J.A., Noise-level estimation of time series using coarse-

grained entropy, Phys. Rev. E 67, 046218  (2003).

18. Urbanowicz, K., Hołyst, J.A., Stemler, T. &  Benner, H., Acta Phys. Pol. B 35, 2175 

(2004); arXiv:cond-mat/0308554.

19. Cencini, M., Falcioni, M., Olbrich, E., Kantz, H. & Vulpiani, A. ,Chaos or noise: 

Difficulties of a distinction, Phys. Rev. E 62 (1), 427-437 (2000).

20. Naschitz, J.E. et al., Search for disease-specific cardiovascular reactivity patterns: 

developing the methodology, Clin. Science 108, 37-46 (2005).

21. Wu, Z.B., Recurrence plot analysis of DNA sequences,  Phys.Lett. A 332, 250-255 

(2004).

14

22.  Thiel, M., Romano, M.C. & Kurths, J., How much information is contained in a 

recurrence plot?, Phys. Lett. A 330, 343-349 (2004).

23. Wei, W.W.S., TIME SERIES ANALYSIS. UNIVARIATE AND 

MULTIVARIATE METHODS, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, New York, 

Amsterdam, Sydney, Bonn, Madrid, Singapore, Tokyo, 1990.

24. Grassberger, P., Hegger, R., Kantz, H., Schaffrath, C. & Schreiber, T., On noise 

reduction methods for chaotic data, Chaos 3, 127 (1993).

25. For limitations of noise reduction schemes see H.Kantz at www.mpipks-

dresden.mpg.de/~tisean/TISEAN_2.1/docs/chaospaper/node24.html

26.

15

Fig.1 24-hour time series of the time intervals between heart beats measured as 

the RR intervals of the ECG recording for the normal CHM.  The heart rate 

variability was decrease at around index 500 due to a 10 minute exercise stress 

test. The pauses exceeding 1.5 s are normal.

16

Fig.2 Comparison of two examples of heart rate variability with indistinguishable 

standard deviation. The thick curve was measured in a normal individual while 

the thin one – in a case of a high risk of cardiac arrest.

17

Fig.3 Box plots for the patient categories: normals, high risk of cardiac arrest, 

their controls and the cases of atrial fibrillation. The *  symbol  marks the case of 

atrial flutter and the (cid:224)  symbols – the outliers of the boxplot in the CA and the 

control groups. Part a: heart rate variability component due to random noise, 

Part b: that due to linearly correlated processes. 

18

19

Fig.4 Effect of the removal of random noise from the RR interval time series for 

the case of a high risk of cardiac arrest LCH. Part a: raw data. Part b: after the 

application of the LNPC algorithm. The time series was 3000 data points long.

20

Fig. 5 The same as in fig.5 but for the normal CHM. The spiral trajectory visible 

in Part b is very typical for healthy individuals.

