IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 52, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2005

1899

Planar Edgeless Silicon Detectors for the TOTEM
Experiment

G. Ruggiero, E. Alagoz, V. Avati, V. Bassetti, V. Berardi, V. Bergholm, V. Boccone, M. Bozzo, A. Buzzo,
M. G. Catanesi, R. Cereseto, S. Cuneo, M. Deile, R. De Oliveira, K. Eggert, N. Egorov, I. Eremin, F. Ferro, J. Hasi,
F. Haug, R. Herzog, P. Jarron, J. Kalliopuska, A. Kiiskinen, K. Kurvinen, A. Kok, W. Kundrát, R. Lauhakangas,
M. Lokajíˇccek, D. Macina, M. Macrí, T. Mäki, S. Minutoli, L. Mirabito, A. Morelli, P. Musico, M. Negri,
H. Niewiadomski, E. Noschis, F. Oljemark, R. Orava, M. Oriunno, K. Österberg, V. G. Palmieri, R. Puppo,
E. Radicioni, R. Rudischer, H. Saarikko, G. Sanguinetti, A. Santroni, P. Siegrist, A. Sidorov, G. Sette, J. Smotlacha,
W. Snoeys, S. Tapprogge, A. Toppinen, A. Verdier, S. Watts, and E. Wobst

Abstract—Silicon detectors for the Roman Pots of the the large
hadron collider TOTEM experiment aim for full sensitivity at the
edge where a terminating structure is required for electrical sta-
bility. This work provides an innovative approach reducing the
conventional width of the terminating structure to less than 100
m, still using standard planar fabrication technology. The objec-
tive of this new development is to decouple the electric behavior of
the surface from the sensitive volume within a few tens of microm-
eters. The explanation of the basic principle of this new approach
together with the experimental conﬁrmation via electric measure-
ments and beam test are presented in this paper, demonstrating
that silicon detectors with this new terminating structure are fully
operational and efﬁcient to under 60 m from the die cut.

Index Terms—Microstrip, silicon radiation detectors.

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE TOTEM experiment will detect the large hadron col-

lider (LHC) leading protons at special beam pipe inser-
tions called Roman Pots. The detectors inserted in the roman

Manuscript received November 15, 2004; revised June 16, 2005.
G. Ruggiero, E, Alagoz, M. Deile, R. De Oliveira, K. Eggert, F. Haug, P.
Jarron, D. Macina, H. Niewiadomski, E. Noschis, M. Oriunno, P. Siegrist, W.
Snoeys, and A. Verdier are with the European Organization for Nuclear Re-
search (CERN), Physics Department, 231211 Geneva, Switzerland (e-mail: gen-
naro.ruggiero@cern.ch).

V. Avati, V. Bergholm J. Kalliopuska, A. Kiiskinen, K. Kurvinen, R.
Lauhakangas, T. Mäki, F. Oljemark, R. Orava, K. Österberg, V. G. Palmieri,
H. Saarikko, S. Tapprogge, and A. Toppinen are with the High Energy Physics
Division, Department of Physical Sciences, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
Institute of Physics, 02015 Helsinki, Finland.

V. Bassetti, V. Boccone, M. Bozzo, A. Buzzo, R. Cereseto, S. Cuneo, F. Ferro,
M. Macri, S. Minutoli, A. Morelli, P. Musico, M. Negri, R. Puppo, A. Santroni,
and G. Sette are with the Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN)—Sezione
di Genova and Universitá di Genova, I-16146 Genoa, Italy.

V. Berardi, M.G. Catanesi, E. Radicioni are with INFN Sez. di Bari and Po-

litecnico di Bari, Bari, Italy.

N. Egorov and A. Sidorov are with the Research Institute of Material Science

and Technology, Zelenograd, Moscow 124498, Russia.

I. Eremin is with the Russian Academy of Sciences, Megaimpulse/Ioffe

Physico-Technical Institute, St. Petersburg 190121, Russia.

J. Hasi, A. Kok, and S. Watts are with the Electric and Computer Engineering

Department, Brunel University, UB8 3PH Uxbridge, U.K.

R. Herzog, R. Rudischer and E. Wobst are with the ILK, Institut für Luft und

Kältetechnik, 01069 Dresden, Germany.

W. Kundrát, M. Lokajíˇcek and J. Smotlacha are with the Institute of Physics,

Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 162 53 Praha, Czech Republic.

L. Mirabito is with the Institute de Physique Nucleaire de Lyon, 69622 Lyon,

France.

G. Sanguinetti

is with the Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare

(INFN)—Sezione di Pisa, 56100 Pisa, Italy.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNS.2005.856910

pots have to fulﬁl stringent requirements set by the machine and
the TOTEM experiment [1]. During operation the detector edge
is positioned at a distance of less than 1 mm from the axis of the
high intensity proton beam where a 200- m window separates
the detectors from the primary beam vacuum. For optimal per-
envelope of the
formance, the detector has to approach the
beam as closely as possible. Consequently, the detectors should
be active up to their physical edge. It is our aim that the active
volume should be within 50 m of the edge.

In general, planar silicon detectors have a wide (0.5–1 mm)
insensitive border region around the sensitive area. This insensi-
tive region is occupied by a sequence of guard rings which con-
trols the potential distribution between the detector’s sensitive
area and the die cut to minimize the electrical ﬁeld and, thus, the
surface leakage current [2], [3]. In this paper, a new approach to
reducing this region will be described.

II. CURRENT TERMINATING STRUCTURE

A. Conception

After separating the dice contained in a wafer with a diamond
saw, each die presents a high density of lattice defects, dangling
bonds and disordered regions. It is known that a signiﬁcant frac-
tion of these defects is electrically active, i.e., they produce en-
ergy levels in the silicon forbidden gap [4], [5]. Given the wide
variety of the defects, their energy levels can be considered al-
most continuously distributed between the valence and conduc-
tion bands. Their high concentration is responsible for a high
conductivity of the cut surface producing an effective screening
of the electric ﬁeld in the layers adjacent to the chip cut. On the
other hand in the presence of an oxidizing atmosphere a natu-
rally grown layer of SiO appears on the cut surface reducing its
conductivity. All this means that the ﬁnal properties of the cut
surface are not well determined.

The need for independence from this wide range of possible
boundary conditions as close as possible to the edge has driven
to the development of a new approach for terminating struc-
tures in radiation silicon detectors. The basic idea is to apply
the full detector bias across the detector chip cut and collect the
resulting leakage current on an outer ring, which surrounds the
active area and which is biased at the same potential as the de-
tecting strips (see Fig. 1). This ring is separated from the de-
tector biasing electrode (the strips are biased by means of a
punch-through structure between this biasing electrode and the

0018-9499/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

1900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 52, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2005

Fig. 1. Cross section of a silicon detector with a CTS in the plane parallel to the
strips and its biasing scheme. In the drawing are also shown the characteristic
widths of the CTS, i.e., (a) the width of the CTR and (c) of the biasing ring, (b)
their distance and (d) the distance between the BR and the end of the strips.

TABLE I
CHARACTERISTIC WIDTHS OF THE FOUR TOPOLOGIES OF DETECTORS
WITH CURRENT TERMINATING STRUCTURE

Fig. 2. Detail of the edge of a microstrip silicon detector with CTS. With this
type of terminating structure the cut of the die can be even just 40 (cid:22)m away
from the end of the strips.

strips). Separating and biasing these two rings at the same po-
tential strongly reduces the inﬂuence of the current generated at
the detector edge on the active detector volume. In contrast with
other ring structures which provide voltage termination, this
structure terminates the current and, therefore, we have called
it a “current terminating structure” (CTS).

B. Device Description

These ﬁrst silicon detectors produced with the CTS have been
developed in a joint effort between the TOTEM group at CERN
and the Megaimpulse, a spin-off company from the Ioffe PT In-
stitute in St. Petersburg, Russia. A simpliﬁed cross section of
detectors with the CTSs at the sensitive edge together with the
biasing scheme is presented in Fig. 1. These devices were mi-
crostrip detectors of dimension 1 cm 1 cm with pitches of 50
and 100 m processed on a very high resistivity N-type silicon
k cm), 350 m thick. All of them had CTS with the
wafer (
current terminating ring (CTR) surrounding the whole sample
and AC coupled strips biased through the bias ring (BR) which
is placed between the CTR and the sensitive bulk. These detec-
tors were produced with four different topologies of CTS. They
differed in the width of the CTR and its distance from the biasing
ring. The characteristic widths of the four topologies as shown
in the Fig. 1 are summarized in Table I. For all the detectors the
distance from the end of the strips to the die’s cut ranged from
41 m to 91 m.

The distance between the CTR and the biasing ring on the
other three sides of the dice was of the order of hundreds of
micrometers and equal for all the different topologies.

The picture of a corner of a sample of type “B” with strip pitch
of 50 m is shown in Fig. 2. The picture shows the features of
the CTS such as the thinning of the biasing ring at the sensitive
edge to 5 m.

C. Thermoelectric Characterization

To study the fractions of the surface current ﬂowing in the
sensitive volume of the detector with CTS, the produced sam-

Fig. 3.

I–V characteristics measured at the CTR for the different topologies.

ples were tested on a sample holder with BR and CTR both
bonded to allow current/voltage (I–V) and current/temperature
(I–T) measurements.

The I–V characteristic dependence measured at the CTR for

the different topologies is shown in Fig. 3.

The current measured at the CTR is strongly dominated by
the current generated at the surface. If this current ﬂows even
partially in the active region, it will make the operation of the
detector impossible.

The variation of this current for the different samples does not
seem to be correlated with the changes in their ring structures at
the edge, but seems to be more an effect of the differences that
can arise at the surface after the cut.

In any case, given the cutting technique (diamond saw) some

variations are expected.

This is not the case for the current ﬂowing in the BR as shown
in Fig. 4 for the same samples: the current on the BR is less by
up to four orders of magnitude compared to the one ﬂowing in
the CTR.

The low current ﬂowing in the biasing ring conﬁrms the va-
lidity of the current termination approach: the sensitive bulk,
even if extends to a few tens of micrometers from the cut edge
is free of the large current ﬂowing at the surface. Moreover the
difference between the different topologies investigated seems
to be negligible.

This set of detectors depletes fully at a reverse bias of around
20 V and was shown to be stable for biases higher than 200 V.
In order to study the nature of the bulk and the surface currents
their behavior with different temperature was also measured. A

RUGGIERO et al.: PLANAR EDGELESS SILICON DETECTORS FOR THE TOTEM EXPERIMENT

1901

I–V characteristics measured at the biasing ring for the different
Fig. 4.
topologies. The current reduction is evident and illustrates the effectiveness of
grounding the outer ring.

Fig. 6. Picture of the front and back side of the board developed for the test
beam, hosting both test and RDs with the readout electronics.

Fig. 7. Arrangement of the TDs and RDs with respect to the beam axis (dashed
line).

Fig. 5. Arrhenius plot for the current ﬂowing through the CTR (I ) and the
biasing ring (I ) of the detector of type A. The substantial difference of four
orders of magnitude at room temperature increases at lower temperatures.

typical temperature dependence of these two currents is shown
in Fig. 5, for a reverse bias of 100 V.

The current collected by the BR shows an exponential in-
crease with the temperature. This behavior is consistent with
current generation via energy levels in the middle of the silicon
band gap. The origin of these levels could be related to the pro-
duction technology or to defects generated in the external part of
the sensor by mechanical stress at the cut of the die. On the other
hand, the current ﬂowing through the outer ring increases with
the temperature but not exponentially and less steeply than the
bulk current. Nevertheless, it is worth stressing that these data
still conﬁrm the basic idea of the CTS and the decoupling of the
bulk current from the surface current (a difference of four or-
ders of magnitude at room temperature and even higher at lower
temperatures) and show that a further reduction of the surface
current with temperature is possible: in order to halve this cur-
rent component, it is sufﬁcient to cool down to

C.

III. TEST BEAM

A. Experimental Setup

SilicondetectorswiththeCTSoftypeAandB(seeTableI)have
been tested in September 2003 with a muon beam in the X5 area
at CERN. For the test beam a special board hosting detectors and
front-end electronics wasproduced[1]. On one side of each board,
a pair of test detectors (TDs) of the same topology was mounted
with the cut edges facing each other and parallel (see Fig. 6). The

Fig. 8. Distribution of hits in the RD, in coincidence with hits in the two TDs,
compared to the beginning of the sensitive area of the two TDs (dashed line).

detectors were aligned under a microscope and the mechanical
distance between the detectors was measured within a precision
better than 10 m. A reference detector (RD) was mounted on the
other side of the boards with strip direction perpendicular to the
ones of the TDs, i.e., parallel to the sensitive edges of the two TDs.
Thus, due to the high spatial resolution of the RD (with 50- m
of strip pitch), the insensitive distance between the two TDs can
be measured precisely and can be compared with the mechanical
distance enabling a precise determination of the efﬁciency drop
at the edges of the TDs.

The silicon devices were coupled with the electronics foreseen
for the Roman Pot detectors in the TOTEM experiment, i.e., the
APV25 chip [6], developed within the CMS collaboration [7] for
the readout of the tracker. All the detectors were operated over-de-
pleted, with a bias voltage above 110 V. The measurements were
performed at room temperature. The detectors were triggered by
a 10
10 mm scintillation counter, placed 2 m away from the
detectors upstream on the beam line. In the experiment two boards

1902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 52, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2005

Fig. 9.
to the strip number 75 (b).

(a) S/N distribution of the TD for hits at the end of the strips as recorded by the RD in the strip number 74 of Fig. 8 (a) and 50 (cid:22)m away, corresponding

were placed one against the other along the beam axis as shown
in Fig. 7.

B. Analysis and Results

Tracks were deﬁned by one hit in each RD in coincidence

either with the left or with the right TDs.

The distribution of the hits in one RD which are in coinci-
dence with a hit in one of the two TDs of type A mounted on
the other side is plotted in Fig. 8. The end of the strips at the cut
edge of each detector was measured with micrometric precision
(
m) with respect to the 50- m strip pitch of the corre-
sponding RD. The dashed lines in the plot give the position of
the strip ends that are 40 m away from the cut.

In principle, with good statistics, these edges can be deter-
mined with high precision from the distributions in Fig. 8. We
estimate a combined statistical and systematic error of 20 m.
Since the strips start 40 m away from the physical edge the de-
tectors exhibit an insensitive edge region of maximum 60 m.
The results of the test on detectors of type-B are similar and they
are not discussed here.

The signal-to-noise (S/N) performance of the TDs, as func-
tion of the x-position recorded in the RD shows a constant value
around 22 until 50 m away from the strips end (Fig. 9). This
suggests full efﬁciency up to this position. However, the S/N dis-
tributions at the edges show a slight decrease in the pulse height,
indicating a small loss in efﬁciency.

IV. CONCLUSION

Detectors with a CTS which allows a very narrow insensitive
region near the die cut were successfully tested. They showed an

excellent and stable performance even at room temperature with
an insensitive border of less than 60 m. In conclusion they fully
meet the experimental requirements for their use in the Roman
Pots and are an excellent candidate for the detection of leading
protons in LHC. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, with
this development we have produced radiation silicon detectors
fabricated with standard planar technology and operated at room
temperature with the smallest insensitive region at the edge.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors are grateful to C. Da Viá for useful discussions,
to A. Honma for useful discussions and for providing the CMS
TOB hybrids used in the test beam, to I. McGill for helping us
in setting up, mounting and bonding the modules, and to S. Roe
for revising the document.

REFERENCES

[1] TOTEM TDR, CERN-LHCC-2004-002, TOTEM-TDR-001, Jan. 7, 2004.
[2] Y. C. Kao and E. D. Wolley, “High voltage planar p-n junctions,” Proc.

IEEE, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 1409–1414, Aug. 1967.

[3] M. S. Adler et al., “Theory of breakdown voltage for planar devices with
a single ﬁeld limiting ring,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-24,
no. 2, pp. 107–113, Feb. 1977.

[4] I. Tamm, “Über eine mögliche Art der Elektronenbindung an Kristal-

loberﬂächen,” Z. Phys., vol. 76, pp. 849–850, 1932.

[5] S. G. Davidson and J. D. Levine, “Surface States,” in Solid State Physics:
Advances in Research and Applications, H. Ehrenreich, F. Seitz, and D.
Turnbull, Eds. New York: Academic, 1970, vol. 25, pp. 1–149.

[6] L. Jones, APV25-S1 User Guide Version 2.2.
[7] “CMS Tech. Proposal CERN/LHCC 94-38, LHCC/P1,” CERN/LHC,

Geneva, Switzerland, 1994.

