Electrostatic deflection of the water molecule, 

a fundamental asymmetric rotor 

 

Ramiro Moro,1 Jaap Bulthuis,2 Jonathon Heinrich,3 and Vitaly V. Kresin3 
 
1Department of Physical Sciences, Cameron University, 

Lawton, Oklahoma 73505, USA 

 
2Department of Physical Chemistry and Laser Centre, Vrije Universiteit, 

De Boelelaan 1083, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands 

 
3Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southern California, 

Los Angeles, California 90089-0484, USA 

 

 

 

An  inhomogeneous electric field is used to study the deflection of a supersonic  beam  of  water 

molecules.    The  deflection  profiles  show  strong  broadening  accompanied  by  a  small  net 

displacement  towards  higher  electric  fields.    The  profiles  are  in  excellent  agreement  with  a 

calculation  of  rotational  Stark  shifts.    The  molecular  rotational  temperature  being  the  only 

adjustable  parameter,  beam  deflection  is  found  to  offer  an  accurate  and  practical  means  of 

determining this quantity.  A pair of especially strongly responding rotational sublevels, adding 

up  to  ≈25%  of  the  total  beam  intensity,  are  readily  separated  by  deflection,  making  them 

potentially useful for further electrostatic manipulation.   

I. INTRODUCTION 

It may be appropriate to regard H2O as the most basic asymmetric top molecule, in view 

of  its  general  importance,  clear  structure,  high  dipole  moment  (p=1.855  D  [1]),  low  mass,  and 

very large rotational constants (A=27.33 cm-1, B=14.58 cm-1, and C=9.50 cm-1 [2]: the highest set 

of values for any stable polyatomic molecule).  

Surprisingly, it appears that the only experiment to measure its deflection in a molecular 

beam  took  place  in  1939  [3].    The  result  was  only  a  qualitative  observation  of  field-induced 

beam  broadening  and  a  rough  estimate  of  the  dipole  magnitude.    At  that  time,  the  Stark 

deflection  patterns  of  linear  rotators  and  symmetric  tops  already  had  been  worked  out,  but  the 

asymmetric  rotor  was  considered  “almost  impossible  to  handle.  […]  Hence  no  quantitative 

approach to the study of the electrical nature of asymmetrical top molecules by the beam method 

is practicable” [4]. 

The situation having evolved, this paper describes a measurement of the deflection of a 

beam  of  water  molecules  by  an  inhomogeneous  electric  field  and  its  concordance  with  a 

calculation of the rotational Stark shifts.  The experimental arrangement is outlined in Sec. II and 

the  calculation  of  electrostatic  deflections  in  Sec.  III.    Sec.  IV  presents  the  results  of  the 

measurement, compares them with the theory, and discusses the implications.  

 

 

II. EXPERIMENTAL ARRANGEMENT 

The  beam  deflection  apparatus  has  been  described  elsewhere  [5].    A  supersonic 

molecular jet is formed by expansion of water vapor, either neat or mixed with He carrier gas, 

from  a  stainless  steel  oven  into  vacuum  through  a  75  μm  diameter  nozzle.    The  beam  passes 

through a skimmer into the second vacuum chamber, where it is collimated by a 0.25 mm × 2.5 

2

mm  slit  and  passes  through  a  “two-wire”  inhomogeneous  electric  field  [6,created  by  a  pair  of 

metal plates of length l=152 mm and separated by a 2.49 mm gap.  By applying voltage of up to 

25  kV  between  the  plates,  electric  fields  to  80  kV/cm  and  field  gradients  to  380  V/cm2  were 

created. 

The  deflected  molecules  then  pass  through  a  rotating  beam  chopper  and  travel  to  a 

quadrupole mass spectrometer (UTI-100) where they are ionized by electron bombardment at 70 

eV, mass selected (H2O registers in the mass spectrum mainly as H2O+ [8]) and detected by an 

analog multiplier.  The detector output is fed into a lock-in amplifier together with the chopper 

synchronization pulses.  The purpose is two-fold:  to eliminate noise from the background water 

in  the  chamber  and  to  determine  the  beam  velocity  v  from  the  phase  difference  between  the 

chopping and detection signals.  The molecular velocities were in the range of 800 m/s to 1300 

m/s  depending  on  the  chosen  source  conditions.    The  velocity  spread  of  a  supersonic  beam  is 

low, therefore v can be treated as a constant for all molecules in a particular experiment. 

To determine the beam profiles, a 0.25 mm wide slit is positioned in front of the detector 

entrance, a distance L=712 mm past the middle of the deflection field plates. The slit is scanned 

across the beam by a stepper motor in steps of 0.25 mm, measuring the intensity at each position 

with and without voltage applied to the deflection plates. 

The direction of the deflecting electric field E and its gradient will be labeled the z-axis.  

The net deviation d of an individual molecule is proportional (1) to the ratio of the impulse FΔt 

received from the field to the original forward momentum 

2H Om v , and (2) to the flight time from 

the field region to the detector slit.  The time spent between the deflection plates is Δt=l/v, and 

the flight time to the detector is L/v.  For a molecule in an eigenstate i adiabatically traversing 

the electric field region, the force in the field direction (z) is given by the shift of the energy level 

 

3

(εi):  

F
i

= ∂

ε
i

∂ = ∂
z

(

ε
i

∂
E

⋅ ∂
) (

E z

∂ .  For a fixed plate geometry,  E z E

∂ ∝ , and therefore for 

∂

)

the  deviation  of  this  molecule  we  can  write,  subsuming  all  geometrical  constants  into  one 

instrumental factor C,  

=
d C

i

E

m

H O
2

2

v

ε∂⎛
⎞
⋅⎜
i
⎟∂⎝
E
⎠

. 

(1) 

The factor C was determined from calibration measurements on a beam of Ar atoms and checked 

with SF6, agreeing with the latter’s standard polarizability within 2.3% [5].   

The slopes 

i Eε∂

∂  can equivalently be called the effective dipole projections on the z-

axis,  since 

εΔ = ⋅

(cid:71)(cid:71)
p E

.    They  were  derived  from  a  calculation  of  the  Stark  diagram  of  H2O’s 

rotational  states,  as  described  in  the  next  section,  plus  a  small  electronic  dipole  polarizability 

contribution. 

III. CALCULATION OF MOLECULAR DEVIATION BY STARK FORCES  

A. Evaluation of Stark curves 

The Stark shifts of the rotational states of H2O and D2O were calculated on the basis of 

the Hamiltonian  

=
H AJ

2
a

+

BJ

2
b

+

CJ

2
c

+

pE θ
, 
cos

(2) 

where Ja, Jb and Jc  are the components of the angular momentum along the three principal axes 

of inertia, with corresponding rotational constants A, B and C.  The last term on the right-hand 

side is the (Stark) interaction of the molecular dipole with the electric field E.  Since it describes 

a rigid asymmetric rotor, Eq. (2) would in fact be inadequate for an accurate description of the 

 

 

 

 

4

water molecule’s rotational spectrum.  In particular, centrifugal distortions, which are large for 

water, should be taken into account.  However, as will be shown below, Eq. (2) is sufficient for 

the present purpose of calculating the deflection patterns.  

For H2O we used the dipole moment and equilibrium rotational constant values listed in 

the  Introduction;  for  D2O  the  following  values  were  used:  A=15.39  cm-1,  B=7.26  cm-1,  and 

C=4.85 cm-1 [9] and p=1.87 D [10]. 

Following Ref. [11], the eigenvalues of Eq. (2) are found by using the set of symmetrized 

symmetric-rotor eigenfunctions |JKM> and truncating the Hamiltonian matrix at sufficiently high 

values  of  J  and  K.    Normally,  J  and  K  values  up  to  24  were  included,  which,  given  the  large 

rotational constants of H2O as well as D2O, is more than sufficient for the range of energies of 

interest.  M is the only good quantum number, and the diagonalization of the truncated matrix is 

done for all M-values that contribute detectably to the beam population.  (Absolute values of M 

were taken, because positive and negative M values occur in pairwise degenerate eigenfunctions.  

This  two-fold  degeneracy  was  taken  into  account  when  assigning  the  statistical  weights.)    The 

maximum value of |M| was set to 10 for H2O and to 12 for D2O.  

In the case of water, it is convenient to take the molecular b-axis as the z-axis.  Then K is 

the projection of J on the dipole axis.  With this choice, the Stark Hamiltonian takes its simplest 

form  and  does  not  mix  states  with  different  K.    The  rotational  Hamiltonian  mixes  K  with  K±2 

states,  so  that  matrix  elements  with  odd  and  even  K  can  be  treated  as  separate  blocks.    This 

reduces the size of the Hamiltonian matrix, but more importantly, it simplifies the assignment of 

spin statistical weights [12] and, moreover, avoided crossings of the Stark curves can easily be 

tracked  down.    In  the  conventional  notation  of  asymmetric-top  eigenfunctions,  K–  and  K+ 

 

5

(denoting  the  prolate  and  the  oblate  top  limits,  respectively)  are  used  as  subscripts  for  J,  or 

alternatively the states are labeled by J, τ= K–-K+, and M.  We follow the latter notation.  

Comparing  the  rotational  energies  [the  eigenvalues  of  Eq.  (2)  for  H2O  at  zero  electric 

field] with the experimental values given in Ref. [13], we find that for levels up to about 1000 

cm-1  the  deviations  are  ≤2%,  while  for  higher-energy  levels  (especially  those  with  large  Ka) 

stronger deviations occur.  The majority of the calculated energies lie above the corresponding 

experimental ones.  If the Stark shifts may be described by second-order perturbations, which is 

a reasonable approximation for water, the shifts and the slopes of the Stark curves have about the 

same  error  as  the  energies,  or  even  less  if  the  errors  in  the  interacting  energy  levels  have  the 

same sign.  Since the low-J states dominate the deflection patterns by virtue of their Boltzmann 

weights,  and  since  the  rotational  temperature  derived  from  the  deflection  pattern  has  an 

uncertainty of about 8% (see below), the treatment of water as a rigid rotor is fully justified in 

the present circumstances.  

The  calculated  Stark  curves  for  the  lowest  states  of  H2O  are  displayed  in  Fig.  1.    No 

complications  due  to  avoided  crossings  take  place.    The  Stark  curve  slopes 

i Eε∂

∂ ,  which 

determine  the  force  on  the  molecules,  are  calculated  numerically  by  incrementing  the  field  by 

0.01 kV/cm.  From the curves it is immediately visible that molecules in states |JτM>=|1,-1,1> 

and |1,1,1> will undergo large and opposite deflections.  Both have a spin-statistical weight of 3, 

compared to 1 for the τ even states.  These states are indeed prominent in the deflection profiles, 

see Sec. IVB.   

For D2O the Stark curves are very similar, although the energy differences between levels 

are, of course, smaller.  However, the spin statistical weights are markedly different:  the weight 

 

6

of τ even states is double that of the τ odd states.  For this reason, the deflections with the highest 

intensities generally do not originate from the same states as for H2O. 

 

B. Distribution of deflection probabilities 

Once  the  energies  and  slopes  of  the  rotational  Stark  levels  are  calculated,  they  can  be 

employed to evaluate the deflection pattern of molecules in the beam.  For a given value of the 

applied field, the Stark sublevels are populated with Boltzmann factors according to an assumed 

rotational temperature Trot, and their slopes at that point are used to calculate the corresponding 

deflections according to Eq. (1).  A small (~2%) contribution is added in the form of the static 

electronic  polarizability  of  H2O  (α=1.47  Ǻ3  [14]),  which  leads  to  an  additional  uniform  shift 

∂εi/∂E=-αE. 

The result can be depicted as a stick probability distribution of deviations, as illustrated in 

Fig.  2.    The  height  of  each  stick  represents  the  probability  of  a  water  molecule  occupying  a 

certain  rotational  Stark  sublevel,  and  thus  being  deflected  to  the  corresponding  position  in  the 

detecting plane.  Equivalently, it is the deviation pattern that would be produced if an infinitely 

thin beam of water molecules at a certain Trot passed through our deflection plates.  As will be 

described in Sec. IV, for comparison with the experimental data this pattern is convolved with 

the real beam profile and the rotational temperature remains the only adjustable parameter.  

Fig.  3  plots  the  average  projection  of  the  molecular  dipole  on  the  field  axis,  which 

represents the small average overall deflection of the molecular ensemble (i.e., the first moment, 

or the “center of mass” of the stick distribution).  It shows that for rotational temperatures above 

≈100 K and over a wide range of field magnitudes, this quantity is close to 

 

7

=

p

z

2
p E
3
k T
B rot

 

(3) 

In other words, the “orientation cosine” of the average angle between the molecular dipole axis 

and the field direction is well fitted by ‹cosθ›=‹pz›/p=pE/(3kBTrot).  This is the same form as one 

would  obtain  from  the  statistical  Langevin-Debye  orientational  susceptibility  formula  [15], 

however,  the  present  situation  is  different:  the  molecules  are  not  in  thermal  equilibrium  in  the 

field but instead respond to adiabatic entry into the electric field region.  Although the fact that 

low-field response should scale with the ratio pE/Trot is expected on dimensional grounds [16], 

the  value  of  the  numerical  coefficient  is  not  universal:    sample  calculations  for  linear  and 

symmetric  rotors  demonstrate  that  it  can  depend  on  this  ratio  as  well  as  on  the  ratio  of  the 

rotational constants.  Some precedents are discussed, e.g., in Ref. [17].  It is intriguing that the 

asymmetric  water  molecule,  treated  as  a  rigid  rotor,  follows  the  Langevin-Debye  average  so 

closely, even at relatively low temperatures (the rotational constants of H2O are equivalent to 40 

K, 21 K, and 13 K) and without external perturbations to the rotational motion [18,19].  

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

A. Comparison of experiment and theory.  Determination of the rotational temperature 

To compare the calculated deflection probability patterns such as those in Fig.2 with the 

experimental picture, we need to convolute the former with the actual beam shape, i.e., with the 

undeflected  intensity  profile  measured  by  the  scanning  slit.    This  profile  is  shown  as  the  thin 

solid black line in Fig. 4.  This experimentally obtained function is then convoluted with the stick 

probability  distributions  calculated  for  various  values  of  the  electric  fields,  and  the  results  are 

 

 

 

8

shown in Fig. 4 as the red dashed lines. Finally, the experimentally measured deflection profiles 

are shown as thick red solid lines.  Within the central region subtended by the mass spectrometer 

entrance area the agreement is extremely satisfying. 

As mentioned in Sec. III B, the only adjustable parameter in the above procedure is the 

rotational  temperature.  Fig.  5  illustrates  the  tight  constraint  on  Trot  produced  by  fitting  the 

profiles  in  Fig.4.    Put  another  way,  the  molecular  deflection  technique  offers  a  practical  and 

accurate method of determining the supersonic beam’s rotational temperature. 

The  calculations  and  measurements  were  also  carried  out  with  a  beam  of  heavy  water 

molecules, D2O, under different expansion conditions.  Fig. 6 shows that the results were slightly 

less precise, but satisfactory.  

 

 

B. Electrostatic separation of individual high-susceptibility quantum states 

The stick distributions in Figs. 2 and 4 depict two prominent peaks which evolve to very 

large  deviations  in  both  directions.    As  mentioned  above,  the  Stark  level  diagram  in  Fig.  1 

reveals  that  they  come  from  two  specific  quantum  states,  |JτM>=|1,±1,1>  which  display 

exceptionally steep Stark shifts and are strongly populated at the rotational temperature of this 

experiment.  The peaks’ strong deflections carried them beyond the acceptance window of our 

detector  when  the  latter  was  focused  on  the  central  part  of  the  beam,  as  in  Fig.4.    In  order  to 

verify  that  these  predicted  satellites  were  indeed  present  and  intense,  we  mounted  the  mass 

spectrometer 2.7 mm off-axis, towards the expected position of one of them.  Fig. 7, a combined 

plot, shows that an intense bump is indeed clearly observed at the prescribed location.   

These  particular  molecules  are  low-field  seekers  (hence  their  negative  deflection),  and 

obviously a companion high-field seeker signal will be present at the positive deflection position.  

9

As emphasized above, both of these “beamlets” are made up of molecules in the individual Stark 

sublevel  of  a  single  (low-energy,  hence  high-occupancy)  rotational  quantum  state.    The 

superposition of their intensity, very strong response to the electric field, and the lightness of the 

H2O  molecule  may  make  these  state-selected  species  appealing  subjects  for  manipulation  by 

electrostatic forces, such as molecular Stark deceleration [20] and electrostatic steering [21]. 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We would like to thank Drs. Philippe Dugourd, Bretislav Friedrich, and Maxim Olshanii 

for useful discussions, and Roman Rabinovitch and Chunlei Xia for their help in setting up the 

experiment.  J.B. acknowledges stimulating discussions on rotational Stark effects of water with 

Drs. Pepijn Pinkse and Sadiq Ringwala.  V.K. is grateful to the J. Heyrovský Institute of Physical 

Chemistry, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, for its hospitality during the preparation 

of this paper.  This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation under grant No. 

PHY-0354834. 

 

10

FIGURE CAPTIONS 

Fig. 1. Stark curves for the lowest states of H2O. The states are represented by J, τ, and M.  The 

spin statistical weights for states with τ odd are three times as large than those for τ even.  

Fig. 2.  Deviation probability distributions for the beam of H2O molecules, calculated from their 

Stark  shifts  and  electronic  polarizability.    The  parameters  for  this  example  are:  v=1250  m/s, 

E=63.5 kV/cm, ∂E/∂z=300 kV/cm2, and Trot=30 K (a) or Trot=300 K (b).  

Fig.  3.    A  comparison  between  the  calculated  average  projection  of  the  dipole  moment  of  the 

water  molecule  in  a  thermal  bath  (Langevin  function  [15],  solid  lines)  and  isolated  in  a  beam 

(Stark  shift  calculation,  dashed  lines)  for  two  magnitudes  of  the  external  electric  field.    For 

Trot>100 K, the difference is below 10%. 

Fig. 4.  Comparison of the experimental deflections of H2O molecules with the patterns derived 

from rotational Stark calculations.  The supersonic beam was produced with the source reservoir 

temperature  of  50°C,  nozzle  temperature  of  65°C  (nozzle  diameter  75  μm),  and  helium  carrier 

gas  pressure  of  670  Torr.    The  thin  solid  black  lines  are  the  experimental  undeflected  beam 

profiles.  The solid thick red lines are the experimental profiles taken with six different voltages 

applied to the deflection plates.  The blue stick patterns are the deviation probability distributions 

(as in Fig. 2) calculated for the beam at a rotational temperature of 84 K, the best fit value from 

Fig. 5.  The dashed red lines show the expected deflection profiles obtained by convolving the 

theoretical deviation probability distributions with the undeflected peak profiles.  Notice that in 

this  experimental  configuration  the  beam  can  be  detected  only  within  the  mass  spectrometer 

acceptance window, indicated by the vertical margins. 

 

11

Fig. 5.  Goodness of fit of the deflection profiles as a function of H2O rotational temperature for 

the six experiments shown in Fig. 4;  the best estimate is Trot=84±8 K. 

Fig. 6.  Experimental and theoretical profiles for heavy water (D2O) molecules prepared with the 

source and nozzle at room temperature, without carrier gas.  Lines are marked in the same way 

as in Fig. 4, and the best-fit rotational temperature is 167 K.  

Fig.  7.    Detection  of  the  intense  low-field  seeker  sideband  for  H2O,  at  a  setting  of  V=20  kV, 

E=63.5 kV/cm, ∂E/∂z=300 kV/cm2.  The central profile, from Fig. 4, was extended by shifting 

the mass spectrometer off-axis, thereby detecting the predicted high-deflection “beamlet” shown 

as the solid thick black line.  Its position and strength (11% of the total intensity) are reproduced 

without any adjustable parameters (dashed red curve).  A companion high-field seeker sideband 

of similar magnitude (14%) will be present on the opposite side. 

 

 

12

 

Figure 1 

13

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2 

Figure 3 

14

Figure 4 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5 

15

Figure 6 

 

 

 

Figure 7 

16

REFERENCES 

 
[1] S. A. Clough, Y. Beers, G. P. Klein, and L. S. Rothman, J. Chem. Phys. 59, 2254 (1973). 

[2] G. Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure, Part II (Van Nostrand Reinhold, 

New York, 1945), p. 488. 

[3] H. Scheffers, Phys. Z. 40, 1 (1939). 

[4] R. G. J. Fraser, Molecular Beams (Chemical Publishing Co., New York, 1938). 

[5] R. Moro, R. Rabinovitch, C. Xia, and V. V. Kresin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 123401 (2006). 

[6] N. F. Ramsey, Molecular Beams (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1956). 

[7] G. Tikhonov, K. Wong, V. Kasperovich, and V. V. Kresin, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 73, 1204 

(2002). 

(1972). 

[8] NIST Mass Spec Data Center, “Mass Spectra,” in NIST Chemistry WebBook, NIST Standard 

Reference Database No. 69, ed. by P. Linstrom and W. G. Mallard (National Institute of 

Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, 2003), http://webbook.nist.gov/chemistry. 

[9] W. S. Benedict, N. Gailar, and E. K. Pleyler, J. Chem. Phys. 21, 1301 (1953). 

[10] A. H. Brittain, A. P. Cox, G. Duxbury, T. G. Hersey, and R. G. Jones, Mol. Phys. 24, 843 

[11] J. Bulthuis, J. Möller, and H. J. Loesch, J. Phys. Chem. A 101, 7684 (1997). 

[12] C. H. Townes and A. L. Schawlow, Microwave Spectroscopy (Dover, New York, 1975). 

 

17

 
[13] J. M. Flaud, C. Camy-Peyret, and J. P. Maillard, Mol. Phys. 32, 499 (1976). 

[14] G. Avila, J. Chem. Phys. 122, 144310 (2005). 

[15] M. A. Omar, Elementary Solid State Physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1993). 

[16] M. Schnell, C. Herwig, and J. A. Becker, Z. Phys. Chem. 217, 1003 (2003). 

[17] V. Visuthikraisee and G. F. Bertsch, Phys. Rev. A 54, 5104 (1996). 

[18] M. Abd El Rahim, R. Antoine, M. Broyer, D. Rayane, and Ph. Dugourd, J. Phys. Chem. A 

109, 8507 (2005). 

110, 10006 (2006). 

[19] R. Antoine, M. Abd El Rahim, M. Broyer, D. Rayane, and Ph. Dugourd, J. Phys. Chem. A 

 

18

