A Proposed Exact Integer Value for Avogadro’s Number
by
Ronald F. Fox and Theodore P. Hill
12/8/2006

From the early 1600’s until the latter part of the twentieth century, the speed of light was
determined experimentally by various methods, based on the physical definition of a
second at the time of the experiment (e.g., in recent times, via the integer number of cycles
in the Cesium-133 standard, i.e. 9,192,631,770 hertz vibrations of a cesium atom), and an
artifact meter stick. On October 21, 1983, the roles of the two constants were reversed
when the speed of light c was defined as exactly 299,792,458 meters per second, and the
distance 1m has since been approximated experimentally using these values of the speed of
light and the second. This new numerical value chosen for c was within the best known
limits of accuracy at the time, and eliminated the necessity of the artifact meter stick.

Similarly, Avogadro's number, N A , is formally defined to be the number of carbon-12
atoms in 12 grams (0.012 kg) of unbound carbon-12 in its rest-energy electronic state. This
definition relies on a precise definition of a gram, which for the past 117 years has been
taken to be 1/1000th of the mass of “Le Gran K”, a single precious platinum-iridium
cylinder in Sevres, France. Various experimental approximations have resulted in the
current best estimate of this number, (6.0221415 ± 0.0000010)×1023. But, since the
definition of N A  depends on the artifact cylinder, there has been an effort to define N A  via
various other methods, and hence, at least theoretically, allowing replacement of the
kilogram artifact.

http://physics.nist.gov:80/News/TechBeat/9501beat.html

An alternative, purely mathematical solution to the approximation of N A  is to follow the
precedent set in defining the speed of light, and simply to define N A  once and for all. Since
its formal definition suggests that it counts something, it is natural to require that the
definition of N A  be an integer, and one that it accurate to within the present state of the art
in accuracy. Here is our proposed value, N A *, of Avogadro’s number:

N A * = (84446888)^3 

It is easy to check that N A * is within (in fact nearly dead center) the NIST standard and
relative standard uncertainty of N A

http://physics.nist.gov/cgi-bin/cuu/Value?na|search_for=avogadro%27s+number

so it is exactly correct by current standards, as was the case when a fixed value for the
speed of light was selected.

1

Moreover, defining Avogadro’s number as N A *  has a number of advantages over
experimentally determined values:

1. N A * does not vary in time, as any definition depending on an artifact will. (The long-
term instability of the French artifact is well known. In fact, Le Gran K is decreasing in
time, since each cleaning presumably removes atoms, and none are replaced, so formally
speaking, N A  is decreasing in time.)

2. N A * is tractable (8 digits) and easy to remember (in contrast to the defined speed of
light, for which there are mnemonics (“Since a nine-digit sequence is a bit hard to
remember, there are several useful mnemonics for c in m/s, which use the letters on a
telephone keypad: Constant Which We Remember Well Because It's Light's Velocity; and
A Way We Remember What Constant Is Light's Velocity”). 

3. N A * is a perfect cube, divisible by 2^9. That it is divisible by 2^9 simplifies many
calculations, and that it is a perfect cube is consistent with Avogadro’s hypothesis that
equal volumes of gases with the same pressure and temperature contain the same number
of molecules. Since the shape of a volume certainly affects the numbers of molecules it can
contain – extremely long thin cylinders may contain none – it seems natural to require the
shape to be a perfect geometric cube, with integral numbers of molecules along each edge,
implying that the number of molecules it contains is a perfect cube.

4. N A * allows acceptable experimental determination of the value of 1kg, thus offering a
possible replacement for the kilogram standard. As accuracy of measuring equipment
improves, the N A *-derived value of a kilogram will be within NIST standards, if it is not
already so. Here are the analogs of two classical experiments designed to determine N A ,
but which may equally well be used, via N A *, to determine 1kg. (Of course theoretically, a
gram would now be, by definition, 1/12 the mass of a cube of carbon-12 atoms exactly
84446888 atoms on a side – and to within today’s accuracy, that same value is also exact
using N A . In time, a direct measurement of the mass of the perfect N A * carbon-12 cube
should be possible.)

A. Oleic acid method. (high school physics laboratory experiment). 

In short, the experimenter weighs out a small amount of oleic acid, forms it into a liquid
monolayer of oleic acid one molecule thick, measures its area (diameter), and using the (for
high school purposes known) value for the diameter of an oleic acid molecule, calculates
the number of atoms in the thin disc monolayer. Using the (again assumed known) value
for the molecular weight of oleic acid, N A * then yields the mass in grams of the oleic acid
monolayer (which may then be used to calibrate the scales it was originally weighed on,
i.e., to determine the value of 1g). For more details:  

http://www.gpc.edu/~ddonald/chemlab/oleicavagno.html

2

B. X-ray diffraction in crystal silicon lattices. (Current state of the art). 

In short, using an Si artifact sphere of diameter about 10cm of very high purity (grown
using the Float Zone process, and nitrogen doped to reduce the content of swirl defects –
see photos of such spheres on following websites), three quantities are measured: the
volume occupied by a single Si atom (via precise knowledge of the lattice structure, taking
into account impurities and self-point crystal defects, and using a scanning X-ray
interferometer; the volume of the sphere (via measuring the diameter using optical
interferometry) ; and  the molar value of the lattice (i.e., its isotropic composition) via
fluorinating the Si and measuring isotope ratios using a mass spectrometer. Knowing the
volume of a single Si atom and the volume of the 10-cm artifact determines the number of
atoms in the artifact. Using the determined molecular weight of the artifact, N A * then
yields its mass, i.e., yielding the value of 1kg.

The following two sites have detailed descriptions of the experiment.

http://www.aist.go.jp/aist_e/latest_research/2004/20040129/20040129.html

http://www.npl.co.uk/environment/pdf/avogadro.pdf

The proposal to use N A * has one more marked advantage in reducing experimental errors.
Using today's methods for determining Avogadro’s number requires TWO distinct
experiments, usually far apart in time and space, namely: first calibrating the scales (at the
laboratory in US or Japan etc) with Le Gran K in France; and second, running the N A
experiment. The resulting best current approximation to N A  thus compounds the errors
from BOTH experiments.  Our proposal will not necessitate any new apparatus; rather, it
eliminates the need for Le Gran K in France altogether. Precisely the same experiment that
is currently used to determine N A , would now simply measure 1 gram.

Ron.fox@physics.gatech.edu   School of Physics
hill@math.gatech.edu School of Mathematics

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta GA 30332 USA

3

