Industrial Strength Software in Computer Based Engineering 
Education (CBEE): a Case Study 

M. V. Bogdanov1, D. Kh. Ofengeim1, A.V. Kulik1, D.V. Zimina1, M.S. Ramm2, A.I. Zhmakin1,3 

1 Soft-Impact, Ltd., P.O.Box 83, 27 Engels av., St.Petersburg, 194156 Russia 

2 Semiconductor Technology Research, Inc., P.O.Box 70604, Richmond, VA,  USA 
3 A.F. Ioffe Physical Technical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, St.Petersburg, 194121 Russia 
 

Abstract:    Challenging  problems  of  modern  engineering  education  and  a  role  of  information 
technology  are  reviewed.  An  importance  of  simulation  of  real  world  problems  in  both  graduate  and 
lifelong/corporate education is discussed. It is proposed to integrate the hypermedia theory courseware 
with  industrial  strength  simulation  software.  As  a  proof  of  the  concept  an  educational  environment 
“Heat and Mass Transfer in Advanced Semiconductor Technology” has been developed. 

Keywords: Engineering Education; Computer-Based Education; Simulation; Heat and Mass Transfer; 
Materials Sciences 

Interactive Demonstration: A demo version of the Integrated Educational Environment (IEE) “Heat 
and Mass Transfer in Advanced Semiconductor Technology” can be downloaded from 
http://www.semitech.us/products/IEE. 

1  Introduction 

 

In today's rapidly changing knowledge-based economy, learning is needed to survive. This is true for 
individuals, for organizations, for communities, for nations. However, numerous researches show that 
the traditional didactic lecture practice supports memorization of factual information but is by far less 
effective in promoting the ability to apply the learned concepts to the real world problems (McCray, 
DeHaan and Schuck, 2003). Too often graduates “know everything, but can do nothing” (Eyerer, Hefer 
and Krause, 2000).  Modern education should fully exploit the possibilities provided by advances in 
information technologies (IT).  
 
These concerns are widely recognized at the different levels – from faculty to government. E.g., the 
strategic  goals  for  US  education  listed  in  Report  “Education  the  engineer  of  2020:  adapting 
engineering  education  to  the  new  century”  (NAE,  2005)  include  the  following  ones:  “how  to  enrich 
and broaden engineering education so that graduated will be better prepared to work in a constantly 
changing global economy; institutions must teach students to  be lifelong learners; growing need for 
interdisciplinary  and  system-based  approaches”.  Similar  programs  are  considered  by  other  nations. 
The Korean government announced the Basic Framework for National Human Resource Development 
aiming at the creation of an educational information infrastructure and a cyber education system [1]. 
The European Commission has adopted a Communication on “Making a European Area of Lifelong 
Learning  a  Reality”  [2].  Probably,  the  most  urgent  need  for  novel  approaches  to  education  is  in 
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM).  
 
The aim of the paper is to review the problems of modern engineering education and to discuss how 
most of them could be, to a great extent, resolved by using next-generation Computer-Based Education 
software environment  - Integrated Educational Environment (IEE). The paper is organized as follow. 
Main  requirements  to  outcome  of  engineering  education  and  aspects  of  the  learning  process  are 
discussed in the next section. The role of information technologies in education is analyzed in section 

3. Design principles and basic features of IEE for Advanced Semiconductor Technology are described 
in section 4. Closing remarks are contained in Conclusions.  

2  Modern engineering education 
Engineers  “scope,  generate,  evaluate,  and  realize  ideas”  (Sheppard,  2003).  Improvement  of 
engineering  education  is,  first  of  all,  a  better  alignment  of  engineering  curricula  with  challenges 
graduates  will  face  in  the  workplace  (NAE,  2005).  Extended  list  of  requirements  to  outcome  of 
education formulated by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) includes, 
among  others,  the  following  items  (Prados,  Peterson  and  Lattuca,  2005)  :  “(a)  an  ability  to  apply 
knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering; … (j) a knowledge of contemporary issues; (k) 
an  ability  to  use  the  techniques,  skills,  and  modern  engineering  tools  necessary  for  engineering 
practice.” Education evolution should proceed along the well-known Bloom’s taxonomy of the extent 
of  knowledge  mastering  (Jensen  and  Wood,  2000):  Knowledge  (list  or  recite);  Comprehension  
(explain  or  paraphrase);  Application  (calculate,  solve,  determine  or  apply);    Analysis  (compare, 
contrast,  classify,  categorize,  derive,  model);  Synthesis  (create,  invent,  predict,  construct,  design, 
imagine,  improve,  produce,  propose);  Evaluation    (judge,  select,  decide,  critique,  justify,  verify, 
debate, assess, recommend). Zhurakovsky, Pokholkov and Agranovich (2001) stress that the student in 
high  technologies  needs  to  go  out  of  the  area  of  knowledge  into  the  area  of  practice.  Modern 
requirements for undergraduate and corporate education in engineering are similar: as  Bourne, Harris 
and  Mayadas    (2005)  note,  a  distinction  between  education  and  training  is  being  blurred:  “In 
engineering, yesterday’s education can become today’s training overnight”.  
 
Success  of  education  depends  on  both  teaching  practices  and  student  abilities/preferences.  The  great 
pedagogical challenge has been formulated almost two decades ago by Felder and Silverman (1988):  
“What can be done to reach students whose learning styles are not addressed by standard methods of 
engineering education?”  
 
2.1 Learning styles 
 
Students have different levels of motivation and different responses to specific instructional practices. 
name  three  categories  of  diversity  that  have  important  implications  for  teaching  and  learning:  
differences  in  students’  learning  styles,  approaches  to  learning  and  intellectual  development  levels. 
Learning  styles  are  “characteristic  cognitive,  affective,  and  psychological  behaviors  that  serve  as 
relatively  stable  indicators  of  how  learners  perceive,  interact  with,  and  respond  to  the  learning 
environment” (Keef, 1979). Students’ approach to study could be characterized in one of three ways 
(Entwistle, 1988): 1) a reproducing orientation leading to a surface approach, relying on memorization; 
2)  a  meaning  orientation  resulting  in  a  deep  approach,  exploring  the  limits  of  applicability  of  new 
material; 3) an achieving orientation ending in a strategic approach, doing whatever is necessary to get 
the highest grade.  
 
Correlation of learning styles with student’s attributes has been studied in numerous works. A number 
of classification systems have been proposed, the most widely used being, probably, The Myers-Briggs 
Type  Indicator  (MBTI),  Kolb's  Learning  Style  Model,  Herrmann  Brain  Dominance  Instrument 
(HBDI), Felder-Silverman Learning Style Model  (Felder and Silverman, 1988, Felder, 1996, Jensen 
and Wood, 2000). The conclusion to be drawn by assessment of traditional engineering education is, 
however,  the  same  whatever  model  one  is  using:  the  teaching  patterns  do  not  suit  the  majority  of 
students. Traditional approach (by presenting lectures and requiring individual assignments) is oriented 
toward  introverts,  intuitors,  thinkers,  and  judgers  in  terms  of  MBTI,  Type  2  learners  (Kolb  model), 
strongly Quadrant A dominant (HBDI), intuitive, verbal, deductive, reflective, and sequential learners 
(Felder-Silverman model). To cope with the problem, approaches for “teaching to all types” (Felder, 
1996) have been proposed as well as test-based identification of the student’s preferences (Jensen and 
Wood, 2000).  National Academy of Engineering realizes the severity of this problem indicating as one 

of  priority  strategies  better  alignment  of  faculty  skill  sets  with  those  needed  to  deliver  the  desired 
curriculum in light of the different learning styles of students (NAE, 2005).  

The problem of gender and cultural style preferences is also actual. E.g., NAE states that engineering 
in US is a profession where minorities and women remains underrepresented (NAE, 2005). One of the 
recommendations  of  Workshop  “Information  Technology  (IT)-Based  Educational  Materials”  held  in 
2003  requires  the  creation  of  models  on  how  people  learn  STEM  concepts,  including  how  retention 
rates can be improved for women and students from underrepresented groups [3]. Studies of minorities 
and female learning style dictate flexibility in teaching practices and patterns. E.g., it has been found 
that Hispanic students prefer conformity, peer-oriented learning and a high degree of structure while 
African American students tend to prefer inferential reasoning, to focus on people rather than things, 
and to be more proficient in nonverbal communications; when dealing with Native American students, 
teachers  should  minimize  lecturing,  place  less  emphasis  on  competition,  and  minimize  teacher 
directions (Heredia, 1999). Women students respond better to the use of visualization and computers; 
female-friendly  pedagogy  includes  active,  cooperative  learning  (Ribando,  Richards  and  O’Leary, 
2004).  USA  national  scale  effort  to  improve  the  retention  of  under-represented  engineers  has  been 
reported by Agogino and His (1995).  

 Teaching practices  

2.2 
There  is  a  number  of  teaching  practices,  most  common  ones  being  listed  by  Spalter  and  Simpson 
(2000):  laboratory,  visualization,  simulation,  lecture  and  demonstration,  case-study,  role-  playing, 
mastery  learning,  creative  project,  student  teaching,  playground,  drill,  behavior  modification,  and 
incidental learning. Similar but different taxonomy of “learning processes” has been given by Lytras, 
Pouloudi and Poulymenakou (2002): presentation, explanation, relation synthesis, analysis, evaluation, 
reasoning,  problem  solving,  collaboration,  learning  story  preparation.  Only  few  of  these  approaches 
are  used,  as  a  rule,  in  teaching  practice  simultaneously.  Nichols  (2002)  summarized  best  practice 
principles for XXI century education identified by a number of educators. 

From engineering perspective, project-based learning (PBL) and case study (Hills and Tedford, 2003) 
are ones of the most promising practices. The acronym PBL is also used in the education literature to 
signify problem-based learning, in which abstract theoretical material is introduced in more familiar, 
everyday  problem  situations.  The  two  PBL’s  have  some  common  features,  but  they  are  nonetheless 
distinct  pedagogical  styles  (Dym,  Agogino,  Eris,  Frey  and  Leifer,  2005).  Project-based  learning 
provides  students  the  possibility  to  “learn  by  doing”  which  differ  greatly  from  traditional  sequential 
“chalk  and  talk”  approach    (Delaney,  Mitchell  and  Delaney,  2003).  The  introduction  of  PBL  into 
educational courses is supported by the constructivist theory of learning, the most important principles 
of  the  latter  being  formulated  by  Kolari  and  Savander-Ranne  (2003)  as  “learning  is  a  process; 
knowledge cannot be directly transmitted from the teacher to the learner, it will have to be constructed 
or reconstructed by the learner him/herself; goal-directed learning is a skill that can be learned”. 

To conclude this section, the main requirements to engineering education can be summarized as 

•  practice orientation (knowledge as a skill, not as a matter); 
•  multidisciplinarity and system-level approach; 
•  adaptativity to the learner’s objectives, background, style and needs; 
lifelong learning (“shelf-life” of knowledge in today’s world is short). 
• 

 
Evidently, the system of engineering education needs a radical reformation to meet these challenges. 
Information Technology (IT) development provides the necessary means. 

3  Computer-based education (CBE) 
 
Unfortunately,  IT  enhanced  education  in  all  disciplines  including  engineering  is  almost  exclusively 
understood  as  online  learning,  usually  enriched  by  multimedia  features.  The  benefits  of  online 

education  have  been  listed  in  numerous  papers  (see,  e.g.  Evans  and  Haase,  2001).  Its  scale  is 
impressive  –  over  2  million  learners  today;  50-75  %  of  more  than  2,000  corporate  universities  are 
Web-based  (Bourne et al., 2005). There is no consensus, however, on the quality of online education. 
According  to  some  reports  (Bourne  et  al.,  2005,  Aragon,  Johnson  and  Shaik,  2002),  there  are  no 
significant  differences  in  learning  outcomes  for  online  and  on-campus  (face-to-face)  students  as 
measured  by  test  scores  while  there  are  also  claims  referring  to  higher  drop-out  and  poorer 
performance that “e-learning is virtually guaranteed to fail” (Van Liew, 2005). Thus, as Bartley and 
Golek  (2004)  note,  at  present  there  is  no  conclusive  research  concerning  the  effectiveness  of  online 
education. 
 
Different terms are used for computer-based and online education. Recent analysis of taxonomy of IT 
educational  technologies  such  as  computer-based  learning,  distance  learning,  e-learning,  online 
learning etc., mainly based on the technical aspects of the knowledge deliver rather than on the content 
improvement  and enhancement, has been reported by Anohina (2005). This focus on technology in IT 
education  reflects  the  common  attitude  that  is  righteously  termed  as  “misunderstanding”  [4]  and 
“misconception”  (Bourne  et  al.,  2005)  :  “Without  appropriate,  interactive  and  stimulating  course 
content,  the  technology  is  useless”.  Van  Dam,  Becker  and  Simpson  (2005)  state:  “Although  IT  had 
certainly some impact, it has become a cliché to note that education is the last field to take systematic 
advantage  of  IT”.  Among  the  reasons  listed  by  the  authors,  the  most  important  ones  seem  to  be  the 
following two: 

•  The general conservatism of educational institutions; 

• 

Inadequate investment in the creation of new dynamic and interactive content. 

 
It  seems  that  IT  education  terminology  and  its  usage  are  somewhat  confusing.  Online  (distance) 
education and computer-based education (CBE) are not synonyms. Distance learning has existed since 
the 19th century, when farmers used correspondence courses to bone up on plowing techniques. Even 
optimal  use  computer-based  and  Internet-based  technology  for  delivery  (Kulacki,  Sakamoto  and 
Swope,  2002),  does  not  make,  in  our  opinion,  this  kind  of  education  “computer-based”  one.  Such 
transformation of traditional course by means of digital and telecommunication technologies does not 
fully  exploit  the  possibility  to  enhanced  education.  As  noted  by  Bartley  and  Golek  (2004),  “A  dull, 
unrewarding course taught in the classroom environment becomes even duller and less rewarding in 
the online environment”, be it recorded in a radio studio (Kulacki et al., 2002) or delivered live using 
video-conferencing  software  (Bhavnani,  Bar-Cohen  and    Joshi,  1999).  As  Felder  (2005a)  stresses,  
“using  technology  simply  to  archive  traditional  lectures  or  Power  Point™  shows  on  the  Web 
represents a regression rather than an improvement over traditional methods”. Thus, it is suggested to 
use  “CBE’  term  when  computer  is  used  to  enhance  the  learning  material,  not  just  to  deliver  it: 
“Content is king” (Gates, 1996).  

There  are  unique  features  that  (potentially)  provide  CBE  advantage  over  traditional  teaching 
approaches: hypermedia and, in case of engineering, simulations. 
 
From an instructional perspective, a critical feature of hypermedia is that it provides a non-sequential 
information  presentation  that  differs  markedly  from  the  text-based  material  used  in  conventional 
instructional  systems  (Gomes,  Choy,  Barton  and  Romagnoli,  2000).  Thus,  hypermedia  based 
courseware  can  offer  distributed,  interactive,  both  synchronous  and  asynchronous,  student-centred 
learning. Educational Adaptive Hypermedia Applications (EAHA) provide personalized views on the 
learning  content  and  adaptive  sequencing  (navigation)  over  the  learning  content  (Retalis  and 
Papasalouros, 2005). A statistically significant increase in academic achievement has been recorded in 
comparison of hypermedia assisted and conventional learning (Zywno and Waalen, 2002). 

While  hypermedia  is  practically  a  standard  in  IT  education  (“Content  modules  include  digitally 
encoded lessons on specific topics, assembled textbooks, and interactive displays of information based 

on  inputs  from  users”  [3]),  simulation  as  an  educational  tool  is  present  in  a  lesser  degree.  The  term 
'simulation'  is  being  applied  in  an  increasingly  broad  manner  and  is  sometimes  used  synonymously 
with  'animation'  (Thomas  and  Milligan).  For  the  purposes  of  this  work  a  simulation  is  defined  as 
having the following two key features:  
1. There is a computer model of a real system that contains information on how the system behaves. 
2. Experimentation can take place, i.e. changing the input to the model affects the output. 

As a numerical model of a system, presented for a learner to manipulate and explore, simulations can 
provide a rich learning experience for a student and can be used in a two ways (Feisel and Rosa, 2005): 

• 

• 

as a pre-lab experience to give students (both undergraduate and corporate) some idea of what 
they will encounter in an actual experiment. 

as  stand-alone  substitutes  for  physical  laboratory  exercises,  which  is  imperative  for  systems 
that  are  too  large,  too  expensive,  or  too  dangerous  for  physical  measurements  by 
undergraduate students. 

E.g., only large universities usually offer semiconductor design courses because they have the funding 
available  to  setup  and  maintain  a  laboratory.  Using  simulation,  however,  gives  the  opportunity  for 
smaller schools with a tighter budget to become more competitive by teaching these topics using the 
computer as a substitute for a semiconductor processing laboratory (Johnson and Ula, 1996).  

Use of Java Applets in education is common. Their main advantage is zero overhead involved, such as 
in learning to use the courseware (Wie, 1998). The problems solved, however, are if not toy ones, but 
quite simple. Exploiting industrial strength software allows to introduce complex real-world problem 
solving into the classroom on a routine basis and thus to enhance carrier opportunities for students by 
giving  them  advanced  experience  in  future  work  (Li  and  Liu,  2003;  Mcintyre  and  Venkitachalam, 
2005). Students need  “a tool for doing science and engineering, not a 'sandbox'” [3].  
The most sophisticated simulation tool used in a number of university courses is probably combined 
research  and  educational  software  environment  “Interactive  Ground  Water  (IGW)”  for  unified 
deterministic and stochastic groundwater modeling (Li and Liu, 2003) that winned 2002 NSF Award 
as  the  best  courseware.  Other  scarce  examples  include  fluid  dynamics  and  heat  transfer  software 
(Pieritz, Mendes, da Silva and  Maliska, 2004; Ribando et al. 2004), acoustics and signal processing 
(Rahkila and Karjalainen, 1998), semiconductor processing (Johnson and Ula, 1996). 
 
In summary, CBE certainly has a potential to meet educational challenges and to cope with learning 
styles problem providing tools that are “pedagogically neutral” (Kaw and Besterfield, 2004) and can 
be tuned for teacher/learner preferences.  
 
Two pillars of Computer-Based Engineering Education (CBEE) are hypermedia and simulation. What 
was  lacking  so  far  is  their  two-way  coupling  that  provides  unprecedented  flexibility  in  choosing 
learning  and  teaching  patterns  keeping  in  sight  future  real-world  problems  that  will  encounter  the 
learner. 
 
An example of such novel educational environment that combines theory course (in hypermedia form) 
and industrial strength simulation is described in the next section. 

4  Integrated  Educational  Environment  (IEE)  “Heat  and  Mass 

Transfer in Advanced Semiconductor Technology” 

 
Crystal growth seems to be a good example to illustrate the proposed approach. Firstly, the growth of 
crystals involves a number of physical processes: heat transfer, including conduction, convection and 
radiation (Figure 1), mass transfer, phase change, homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical reactions, 

electromagnetic  phenomena  (Bogdanov,  Demina,  Karpov,  Kulik,  Ramm  and  Makarov,  2003; 
Bogdanov,  Ofengeim  and  Zhmakin,  2004).  Therefore,  one  is  forced  to  deal  with  the  conjugated 
multidisciplinary problem. Moreover, since the crystal quality is of primary interest, the thermal stress, 
formation of point defects and dislocations in the crystal and their evolution during the growth and the 
post-growth  processing  should  be  also  considered  (Zhmakin,  Kulik,  Karpov,  Demina,  Ramm  and 
Makarov, 2000). Secondly, growth equipment is expensive and only a few universities can afford it. 
Finally, growth process is long and complex, thus the price of operator’s error is high in terms of time 
and money. Evidently, numerical simulation could be beneficial for both under/postgraduate education 
and corporate training. 
 

 
Figure 1: Heat transfer in crystal growth: a concept map 

 

The drawback of using general-purpose commercial software is a long learning curve. A week or two 
(and  frequently  a  lot  longer)  needed  to  master  software  may  be  acceptable  in  industry,  while  in  the 
university  class  time  is  too  valuable.  As  was  noted  by  Rahkila  and  Karjalainen  (1998),  educational 
software  should  teach  its  content,  not  its  usage.  Moreover,  as  a  rule,  it  is  a  time-consuming  task  to 
adjust  general  software  to  solution  of  multidisciplinary  coupled  problems.  That's  the  reason  that 
sometimes  in-house  software  is  developed  for  use  in  education  (Ribando  et  al,  2004).  On  the  other 
hand, research software usually differs in many aspects from industrial codes (Bogdanov et al., 2004) 
and thus does not allow the student to get familiar with modern engineering tools.  
Probably,  specialized  codes  for  crystal  growth  are  the  best  candidates  for  incorporation  into 
educational  software.  Being  designed  and  developed  from  a  scratch  as  dedicated  simulators  for  a 
limited  class  of  growth  processes,  they  could  be  made  both  powerful  and  user-friendly.  It  has  been 
claimed that terms such “user-friendly” or “easy-to-learn” are ambiguous because they are subjective 
and  thus  unverifiable  (Hooks,  1993).  However,  they  can  be  measured  in  the  relative  units  -  one  can 
easily compare two codes using the time needed to master the code operation by an uninitiated user or 
the time required for the specification of the geometry and the problem parameters.  

IEE “Heat and Mass Transfer in Advanced Semiconductor Technology” has been developed using the 
software  tool  Virtual  Reactor  (ViR)  [5]  as  the  simulation  engine.  ViR  employs  advanced  models  of 
surface  kinetics  important  for  adequate  predictions  of  the  growth  process.  ViR  has  an  easy-to-learn 
interface  that  allows  the  user  either  to  describe  the  geometry  manually  or  to  import  a  CAD  file.  All 
geometric  and  process  parameters  entered  by  the  user  are  checked  automatically  to  belong  to  the 
corresponding interval of admissible values. The code has a number of features aimed at minimizing 
the user's efforts such as  

automatic initial identification of the blocks from the wire frame geometry 
automatic identification of the types of the inner boundaries 

• 
• 
•  one-time specification of the whole growth process 
• 
• 

automatic updating of the boundaries of the crystal and deposit blocks 
automatic  processing  of  the  topological  changes  of  the  computational  domain  (formation  of 
new blocks and boundaries)  
automatic (re)generation of the unstructured grid in the modified and new blocks 

• 

 
Thus, IEE combines two components: 1) hypermedia textbook “Heat and Mass Transfer in Advanced 
Semiconductor Technology” (Figure 2) with links to laboratory tasks and 2) an adapted version of the 
Virtual Reactor software.  

Figure 2: A snapshot of the textbook contents 

A Template file specified independently for each laboratory task includes the following items: 

 

•  Reference  to  a  pre-defined  project  file  (an  example  of  such  file  opened  in  the  Geometry 

window is shown in Figure 3) 

•  Reference  to  a  relevant  Quick  Help  file  (Figure  4)  simplifying  the  accomplishment  of  the 

given task.  

 

 

Figure 3: An example of the Geometry window 

 

Figure 4: An example of the Quick Help window.  

 

The  simulation  code  incorporated  in  IEE  code  provides  students  and  corporate  engineers  with 
exhaustive information about numerous physical processes responsible for the growth of bulk crystal 
and its quality. It provides an accurate solution of all major physical-chemical phenomena relevant to 
this method such as resistive or RF heating; conductive, convective and radiative heat transfer; mass 
transfer    in    gas  and  porous  media;  heterogeneous  chemical  reaction  at  catalytic  walls  and  on  the 
surface of powder granules; polycrystal formation; development of elastic strain and dislocations in the 
growing  crystal;  evolution  of  crystal  and  deposit  shape,  including  partial  facetting  of  the  crystal 
surface. The problem is solved using a quasi-stationary formulation. 
 
Unstructured  grid  is  generated  block-wise  using  Delauney  algorithm,  an  advancing  front  method  or 
their  combination.  Non-matched  grids  in  the  neighbour  blocks  are  allowed.  At  the  each  virtual  time 
step a number of subproblems is solved subsequently. Joule heat source distribution is determined by 
solution  of  Maxwell  equations  in  the  frequency  domain.  Global  heat  transfer  analysis  includes 
radiative  transfer  using  the  configuration  factors.  Darcy  law  is  used  to  relate  the  velocity  and  the 
pressure  distribution in the powder. Conjugate mass transfer in the gas and the powder using Hertz-
Knudsen fluxes in the formulation of the boundary conditions for the species concentrations gives the 
growth  rate  at  the  catalytic  surfaces.  The  type  of  the  surface  and  local  concentration  of  gas  phase 
components  determine  the  kind  of  growing  crystal.  Computation  of  thermal  stresses  and  dislocation 
density is implemented as a post-processing procedure.  
 
Transfer  to  the  next  global  time  instant  includes  the  propagation  of  the  crystal  and  deposit(s) 
boundaries, identification of new blocks and boundaries (if needed), the movement of the inductor (if 
specified by the user) and generation of unstructured or hybrid structured/unstructured grid in the new 
and  altered  blocks.  A  special  optimization  procedure  for  the  growing  front  advancement  has  been 
developed that eliminate the effect of the numerical noise in the growth rate distribution and allows a 
stable evolution of the crystal and deposit(s) shape and a monitoring of the topological changes in the 
computational domain.  
 
The straightforward use of the model is referred to as a direct problem. From a practical point of view 
the reversed formulation is more useful: how one should change the equipment design or the process 
parameters to improve the crystal quality or to reduce production costs, for example. The simplest way 
is  a  "try-and-error"  approach:  use  one's  intuition  to  introduce  changes  in  the  process  specification, 
perform  simulation  and  evaluate  results.  A  more  systematic  way  is  to  state  an  inverse  problem  by 
indicating 1) what geometry characteristics or process parameters (control parameters) could be varied 
with valid ranges and 2) what criteria should be used to measure the success of the optimization. The 
difficulty  of  the  solution  of  inverse  problems  is  their  ill-posedness  (Tihonov  and  Arsenin,  1977). 
Simulation engine of IEE allows student to solve both direct and inverse problems. 
 
As an example the crystal shape along with the isotherms is shown in Figure 5 after 10 hours since the 
start of the growth. Note that two regions of parasitic polycrystal grown near the crystal seed and in the 
crucible  corner  merge  at  the  later  time.  Evolution of  the  porous  source  during  the  growth  process  is 
illustrated  by  Figure  6  where  distribution  of  porosity  along  with  streamlines  is  shown  for  two  time 
instants: after 2 hours (left) and 10 hours (right). It can be seen that at early time source sublimation is 
the most intensive near the crucible wall while later dense regions due to recrystallization are formed 
at the crucible bottom and at the source surface reducing the source efficiency. To increase the powder 
source utilization and to attain a stable long-term growth one had to search for conditions that provide 
a uniform temperature distribution across the source, i.e. to solve an inverse problem.  
 
Results of the crucible shape optimization aiming at the minimization of the temperature gradients in 
the porous source both along the radius and along the axis are presented in Figure 7 and 8. In the first 
one  isotherms  in  the  initial  (a)  and  modified  (b,c)  crucibles  are  shown.  Temperature  distributions  in 
Figure 8 plotted in black, blue and red correspond to cases (a), (b) and (c), respectively. 

Figure 5: Growth fronts and isotherms after 10 hours 

 

 

 

 

Figure 6: Streamlines and evolution of the source porosity 

 

Figure 7: Optimisation of the crucible shape 

 

 

Figure 8: Temperature distribution in the porous source along axis (left) and radius (right) 

 

 

5  Conclusions & Future Work 
 
Problems  of  modern  engineering  education  are  reviewed.  A  novel  tool  for  Computer-Based 
Engineering  Education  (CBEE)  –  an  Integrated  Educational  Environment  (IEE)  -  based  on 
combination  of  hypermedia  textbook  and  simulation  code  is  proposed.  As  a-proof-of-concept  IEE 
“Heat  and  Mass  Transfer  in  Advanced  Semiconductor  Technology”  has  been  developed  using  the 
software  tool  Virtual  Reactor  (ViR)  as  the  simulation  engine.  The  code  provides  students  and 
engineers with exhaustive information about numerous physical processes responsible for the growth 
of  bulk  crystal  and  its  quality.  The  software  simulates  global  heat  transfer  in  the  whole  system, 
diffusion and convective mass transport in the growth cell and porous charge, accounting for crystal 
faceting,  deposit  formation  and  for  evolution  of  the  source  during  long-term  growth.  Virtual 
characterization  of  the  growing  crystal  at  various  stages  of  growth  provided  by  the  ViR  includes 
analysis of thermo-elastic stress and tracing of threading dislocations with subsequent virtual mapping. 

The described IEE is widely used in educational process by Russian technical universities, including 
Saint-Petersburg State Polytechnic University, Moscow Engineering Physics Institute, Moscow State 
Technical University. . IEE for advanced electronics and optoelectronics is being developed now. It is 
planned  that  first  version  will  include  simulation  tools  for  novel  devices  based  on  group  III-nitride 
heterostructures:  High  Electron-Mobility  field-effect  Transistors  (HEMT),  Light  Emitting  Diodes 
(LED) and Laser Diodes (LD). 

Acknowledgements: The authors are grateful to Yu.E. Gorbachov for useful discussions. The work 
has been supported by The Foundation for Assistance to Small Innovative Enterprises (Russia), grants 
2072р /4225 (2003) and 3955/р/6183 (2005). 

6  References 
Agogino, A.M. and Hsi, S.(1995). Learning style based innovations to improve retention of female 
engineering students in the Synthesis Coalition.  http://best.me.berkeley.edu/pubs/95_0701_P.pdf 
 
Anohina, A. (2005). Analysis of the terminology used in the field of virtual learning. Educ. Techn. 
Soc., 8 (3), 91-102. 
 

Aragon, S. R., Johnson, S. D., and Shaik, N. (2002). The influence of learning style preferences on 
student success in online versus face-to-face environments. The American Journal of Distance 
Education, 16 (4), 227-244. 
 
Bartley, S. J. and Golek, J. H. (2004). Evaluating the cost effectiveness of online and face-to-face 
instruction. Educ. Techn. Soc., 7 (4), 167-175. 
 
Bhavani, S.H., Bar-Cohen, A. and Joshi,Y. (1999). The classroom of the future. 
http://www.asme.org/education/enged/awards/cia99/bhavnani.pdf 
 
Bogdanov, M.V., Demina, S.E., Karpov, S.Yu., Kulik, A.V., Ramm, M.S. and Makarov, Yu.N.(2003). 
Advances in modeling of wide-bandgap bulk crystal growth. Crystal Res.Techn., 38, 237-249. 
 
Bogdanov, M.V., Ofengeim, D.Kh. and Zhmakin, A.I. (2004). Industrial challenges for numerical 
simulation of crystal growth. Centr. Eur. Jour. Phys. 2 (1) 183-203. 
 
Bourne, J., Harris, D. and Mayadas, F. (2005). Online engineering education: learning anywhere, 
anytime. Journal of Engineering Education, 94 (1) 131-146 
 
Delaney  J.  D.,  Mitchell  G.G.  and  Delaney  S.  (2003).  Software  engineering  meets  problem-based 
learning. The Engineers Journal, 57, (6), 57-59. 
 
Dym, C.L., Agogino, A.M., Eris, O., Frey, D.D. and Leifer, L.Y. (2005). Engineering design thinking, 
teaching, and learning. Journal of Engineering Education 94 (1) 103-120. 
 
Entwistle, N. (1988). Motivational factors in students’ approaches to learning, in Schmeck, R.R., ed., 
Learning Strategies and Learning Styles, Ch. 2, New York, N.Y.: Plenum Press. 
 
Evans, J. R. and Haase, I. M. (2001). Online business in the twenty-first century: an analysis of 
potential target markets. Internet Research: Electr. Networking Applications Policy, 11 (3), 246-260. 
 
Eyerer, P., Hefer, B. and Krause, D. (2000). The reformation of technical education through project-
orientated education. Global J. of Engng. Educ., 4, (3), 281-286. 
 
Feisel, L.D. and Rosa, A.J. (2005). The role of the laboratory in undergraduate Engineering Education. 
Journal of Engineering Education 94 (1) 121-130. 
 
Felder, R.M. (1996). Matters of style. ASEE Prism, 6(4), 18-23. 
 
Felder, R.M. and Brent, R. (2005) Understanding student differences. Journal of Engineering 
Education, 94 (1), 57-72. 
 
Felder, R.M., Sheppard, S.D.and Smith, K.A. (2005). A new journal for a field in transition. Journal of 
Engineering Education 94 (1) 7-10. 
 
Felder, R.M. and Silverman, L.K. (1988). Learning and teaching styles in engineering education. Engr. 
Education, 78 (7), 674–681. 
 
Gates,B. (1996). Content is King.  
http://www.microsoft.com/billgates/columns/1996essay/essay960103.asp 
 
Gomes, V.G., Choy, B., Barton, G.W. and Romagnoli, J.A. (2000). Web-based courseware in teaching 
laboratory-based courses. Global J. of Engng. Educ., 4, (1), 65-70. 
 

Jensen, D. and Wood, K. (2000). Incorporating learning styles to enhance mechanical engineering 
curriculum by restructuring courses, increasing hands-on activities and improving team dynamics.  
http://www.asme.org/education/enged/awards/cia00/jensen.pdf 
 
Johnson,C. and Ula, N. (1996). Incorporating Computer Aided Device and Process Simulation Tools 
in Undergraduate Courses.  http://fie.engrng.pitt.edu/fie96/papers/107.pdf 
 
Heredia, A. (1999). Cultural learning styles.  http://library.educationworld.net/a12/a12-166.html 
 
Hills, G. and Tenford, D. (2003). The education of engineers: the uneasy relationship between 
Engineering, Science and Technology. Global J. of Engng. Educ., Vol.7, No.1, 17-27. 
 
Hooks, I. (1993). Writing Good Requirements. Proceedings of 3rd International Symposium NCOSE. 
http://www.incose.org/rwg/writing.html. 
 
Kaw, A. and Besterfield, G. (2004). Novel web-based modules for a course in numerical methods.  
http://www.asme.org/education/enged/awards/cia04/usf.pdf 
 
Keefe, J.W. (1979). Learning style: an overview, in Keefe, J.W., ed., Student Learning Styles: 
Diagnosing and Prescribing Programs, Reston, Va.: National Association of Secondary School 
Principals. 
 
Kolari, S. and Ranne, C.S. (2000). Will the application of constructivism bring a solution to today’s 
problems of engineering education?. Global J. of Engng. Educ., 4, (3), 275-280 
 
Kulacki, A., Sakamoto, H. and Swope, J.L. (2002). Implementation of an on line course on heat 
transfer and fluid mechanics.  http://www.asme.org/education/enged/awards/cia02/umn.pdf 
 
Li, S.G. and Liu, Q. (2003). Interactive Ground Water (IGW): An innovative digital laboratory for 
groundwater education and research. Computer Applications in Engineering Education. 11(4),179-202.  
 
Lytras, M.D., Pouloudi, A. and Poulymenakou, A. (2002). A framework for technology convergence 
in learning and working. Educ. Techn. Soc. 5(2), 99-106 
 
McCray, R.A., DeHaan, R.L. and Schuck, J.A., Editors, (2003). Improving Undergraduate Instruction 
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics: Report of a Workshop. The National 
Academies Press, Washington. 
 
Mcintyre, D.R. and Venkitachalarm, S. (2005). Industrial strength software components: Their use in 
teaching advanced topics in an Enterprise Java course. Computer Applications in Engineering 
Education. 13 (2), 158-167. 
 
National Academy of Engineering (NAE) (2005). Education the Engineer of 2020:Aadapting 
Engineering Education to the New Century. The National Academy Press, Washington. 
 
Nichols, M. (2002). Principles of best practice for 21st Century education. Educ. Techn. Soc. 5(2), 7-9. 
 
Pieritz, R.A., Mendes, R., da Silva, R.F.A.F. and Maliska, C.R. (2004). CFD studio: An educational 
software package for CFD analysis and design. Computer Applications in Engineering Education 12 
(1), 20-30. 
 
Pieritz, R.A., Mendes, R., da Silva, R.F.A.F. and Maliska, C.R. (2004). CFD Sinflow Library: A 
framework to develop engineering educational codes in CFD and thermal sciences. Computer 
Applications in Engineering Education 12 (1), 31-43. 

 
Prados, J. W., Peterson, G.D., and Lattuca, L.R. (2005). Quality assurance of engineering education 
through accreditation: the impact of engineering criteria 2000 and its global influence. Journal of 
Engineering Education, 94, (1), 165–184. 
 
Rahkila, M. and Karjalainen, M. (1998). Considerations of Computer Based Education of Acoustics 
and Signal Processing. Proceedings, FIE'98, Tempe, Arizona, USA. 679-684. 
 
Retalis, S. and Papasalouros, A. (2005). Designing and generating Educational Adaptive Hypermedia 
Applications. Educ. Techn. Soc., 8(3) 26-35. 
 
Ribando, R.J., Richards, L.G. and O’Leary, G.W. (2004). “Hands-on” approach to teaching 
undergraduate heat transfer. http://www.asme.org/education/enged/awards/cia04/uva.pdf 
 
Sheppard, S.D. (2003). A description of engineering: an essential backdrop for interpreting 
engineering education. Proceedings (CD), Mudd Design Workshop IV, Claremont, Cal.: Harvey Mudd 
College. 
 
Spalter, A. M. and Simpson, R.M. (2000). Considering a full range of teaching techniques for use in 
interactive educational software: a practical guide and brainstorming session, Proceedings of IEEE 
Frontiers in Education (FIE). 
 
Tihonov, A.N. and Arsenin, V.Ya. (1977). Solution of Ill-posed problems. Wiley, New York. 
 
Thomas, R. C. and Milligan, C. D. (2004). Putting teachers in the loop: tools for creating and 
customising simulations. Journal of Interactive Media in Education, (15), 1-22. 
Van Dam, A., Becker, S. and Simpson, R.M. (2005). Next-generation educational software: why we 
need it and a research agenda for getting it. Educause Review 40 (2) 26-43.  
 
Van Liew, R. (2005) Effective corporate IT training: Bursting the e-learning bubble. ITworld.com 
6/3/05.  http://www.itworld.com/Career/3710/050603elearning/ 
 
Wie, C.R. (1998). Educational Java Applets in Solid State Materials. IEEE Trans. On Educ. 41(4), 
354. 
 
Zhmakin, I.A., Kulik, A.V., Karpov, S.Yu., Demina, S.E., Ramm, M.S. and Makarov Yu.N. (2000). 
Evolution of thermoelastic strain and dislocation density during sublimation growth of silicon carbide. 
Diamond and Related Materials, Vol.9, p.446-451 
 
Zhurakovsky, V.M., Pokholkov, Y.P. and Agranovich, B.L. (2001). Engineering education in Russia 
and the quality training of specialists in the area of high technologies. Global J. of Engng. Educ., 5, 
(1), 7-17. 
 
Zywno, M.S. and Waalen, J.K. (2002). The effect of individual learning styles on student outcomes in 
technology-enabled education. Global J. of Engng. Educ., 6, (1), 35-44. 
 
7  Footnotes  
 
[1] Korea Ministry of Education (2000). Adapting Education to the Information Age. A White Paper.  
 
[2] Making a European Area of Lifelong Learning a Reality. 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/education/policies/lll/life/index_en.html 
 

[3] Information Technology (IT)-Based Educational Materials. Workshop Report with 
Recommendations. 2003, The National Academy Press. 
 
[4] Scan of the Fields of Distance Education and Simulation Technology. The Rose Research Group, 
LLC, April 2001. www.entreworld.org/Bookstore/PDFs/Futures21/Distance_ED_Scan.pdf 

 

[5] Semiconductor Technology Research, Inc. http://www.semitech.us/products/Virtual_Reactor/ 

