Experimental investigations of local-time effect existence on 
laboratory scale and heterogeneity of space-time. 

 

V.A. Panchelyuga1, V.A. Kolombet1, M.S. Panchelyuga1 and S.E. Shnoll1,2 

 
Institute of Theoretical and Experimental Biophysics of RAS (1) 
Lomonosov Moscow State University (2) 
 
panvic333@yahoo.com, shnoll@iteb.ru 
 
 
 
The main subject of the work is experimental investigation of local-time effect existence on laboratory scale, 
which means longitudinal distances between locations of measurements from tens to one meter. Also short 
revue of our investigations of local-time effect existence for distances from 15 km to 500 m are presented. 
Besides investigations of the minimal spatial scale of local-time effect existence the paper presents 
investigations of the named effect for time domain. In this relation a structure of intervals distribution in 
neighborhood of local-time peak was studied and splitting of the peak was found out. Further investigations 
shows second order splitting of local-time peak. From this result arise a supposition that space-time 
heterogeneity, which following from local-time effect existence probably has fractal character. Obtained 
results lead to conclusion about sharp anisotropy of space-time. 
 
 
 
 
 

Introduction. 

 
1. 
 
Our previous works [1 – 4] give detailed description of macroscopic fluctuations phenomena, which 
consists in regular changes of fine structure of histograms shapes built on the base of short samples 
of  time  series  of  fluctuations  in  different  process  of  any  nature  –  from  biochemical  reactions  and 
noises  in  gravitational  antenna  to  fluctuations  in  α-decay  rate.  From  the  fact  that  fine  structure  of 
histograms,  which  is  main  object  of  macroscopic  fluctuations  phenomena  investigations,  doesn’t 
depend on qualitative nature of fluctuating process follows a conclusion that the fine structure can be 
caused  only  by  such  common  factor  as  space-time  heterogeneity.  Consequently,  macroscopic 
fluctuations  phenomena  can  be  determined  by  gravitational  interaction  or  as  shown  in  [5,  6]  by 
gravitational wave influence. 

Present work was carried out as further investigations of macroscopic fluctuations phenomena. 
The  local  time  effect,  which  is  the  main  subject  of  this  paper,  is  synchronous  in  local  time 
appearance  of  pairs  of  histograms  with  similar  fine  structure  constructed  on  the  base  of 
measurements  of  fluctuations  in  processes  of  different  nature  fulfilled  in  different  geographical 
locations. The effect points out on the dependence of fine structure of the histograms on the Earth 
rotations around its axis and around the Sun.  

The local time effect is closely connected with space-time heterogeneity. In other words, this 
effect  is  possible  only  if  experimental  setup,  consisting  of  pair  of  spaced  sources  of  fluctuations 
moving  through  heterogeneous  space.  It  is  obvious  that  for  the  case  of  homogeneous  space  the 
named effect don’t exist. Existence of local-time effect for some space-time scale can be considered 
as evidence of space-time heterogeneity, which corresponds to this scale. Dependence of local-time 
effect  on  the  local  time  or  longitudinal  difference  between  places  of  measurements  leads  to 
conclusion that space heterogeneity has axial symmetry. 

The  existence  of  local  time  effect  was  studied  for  different  distances  between  places  of 
measurement from hundred kilometers up to highest possible on the Earth distances (~ 15000 km). 
The goal of the present work is the investigations of the existence of the effect for distances between 
places  of  measurements  from  tens  meters  up  to  one  meter.  Such  distances  in  title  of  the  paper  are 
named as ‘laboratory scale’. 
 

 

1

2.  Experimental investigations of local-time effect existence for 

longitudinal distances between places of measurements from 15 km to 
500 m. 

 
The main problem of experimental investigations of local-time effect at the small space distances is 
resolution  enhancement  of  the  macroscopic  fluctuations  method,  which  defined  by  histograms 
duration.  As  a  rule  all  investigations  of  local-time  effect  were  carried  out  by  using  α-decay  rate 
fluctuations  of  239Pu  sources.  Histograms  duration  in  this  case  are  one  minute.  But  such  source  of 
fluctuations becomes uselessness for distances in tens of kilometers or less when histograms duration 
must  be  about  one  second  or  less.  By  this  reason  in  work  [7-8]  we  refuse  α-decay  sources  of 
fluctuations.  As  such  a  source  was  chosen  noise  generated  by  semiconductor  diode.  Used  diodes 
gives  noise  signal  with  frequency  band  up  to  tens  of  megahertz  and  because  of  this  satisfies  the 
requirements of present investigations.  

To  check  convenience  of  selected  noise  source  for  local-time  effect  investigations  it  was 
tested  on  distances  for  which  existence  of  the  effect  was  proved  by  using  of  α-decay  sources  of 
fluctuations [7]. This work was shown appropriateness of semiconductor noise diode for studies of 
local-time effect.  

Below we presents short description of our experiments dedicated to investigation of local-
time effect for longitudinal distances between locations of measurements from 15 km up to 500 m. 
The  first  experiment  is  study  of  the  local-time  effect  existence  for  longitudinal  distance  between 
locations  of  measurements  equal  15 km,  the  second  one  for  set  of  distances  from  6 km  to  500 m. 
More detailed description of this experiments is given in [8]. 

In  first  experiment  series  of  synchronous  measurements  were  carried  out  in  Pushchino 
(Lat. 54°50.037′ North,  Lon. 37°37.589′ East)  and  Bolshevik  (Lat.  54°54.165′  North,  Lon. 
37°21.910′ East). Longitudinal difference α between places of measurements was α = 15.679′. This 
value of α corresponds to difference of local time ∆t = 62.7 sec and longitudinal distance ∆l, equal 
∆l=15 km.  

To study local-time effect in Pushchino and Bolshevik were obtained 10-minute time series by 
digitizing fluctuations from noise generators with sampling frequency equal to 44100 Hz. From this 
initial  time  series  with  three  different  steps  equal  735,  147,  and  14  points  were  extracted  single 
measurements  and  obtained  three  time  series  with  equivalent  frequency  equal  60 Hz,  300 Hz  and 
3150 Hz.  On  the  base  of  this  time  series  in  a  standard  way  [1-3]  on  the  base  of  60-points  sample 
length  for  first  and  second  time  series  and  63-points  sample  length  for  third  time  series  were 
constructed three sets consisting of histograms with duration 1 sec, 0.2 sec and 0.02 sec. 

Fig. 1 presents intervals distribution obtained after expert comparisons of 1-sec histogram sets. 
The distribution has a peak, which corresponds to time interval equal to 63±1 sec, which with good 
accuracy corresponds to local time difference ∆t = 62.7 sec between places of measurements. 

Local time peaks ordinary obtained on the interval distributions are very sharp and consist of 
1-2 histograms [1-3] i.e. is practically structureless. Peak on the Fig. 1 a) also can be considered as 
structureless. This reason leads us to the problem of further investigating of its structure. 

The  fact  that  all  sets  of  histograms  were  obtained on the base of the same initial time series 
from one hand enables enhancement of time resolution of the method of investigation and from the 
other – eliminates necessity of very precise and expensive synchronization of spaced measurements. 
Intervals  distribution  obtained  for  1-sec  histograms  set  allows  using  information  about  location  of 
local-time peak alignment of time series. The alignment makes possible using set of histograms of 
the next order of smallness. 

Using  of  0.2-sec  histograms  set  increase  resolution  in  five  times  and  allows  more  detailed 
investigations of local-time peak structure and its position on the time axis. Since the positions of the 
peak on the 1-sec intervals distribution (Fig. 1) are known it is possible to select their neighborhood 
by means of 60 sec relative shift of initial time series and prepare after this 0.2-sec histograms set for 
further expert comparison. 

Intervals  distribution  obtained  in  result  of  expert  comparisons  for  0.2-sec  histograms  set  is 
presented  on  Fig. 1b).  One  can  see  that  maximum  similarity  of  histograms  shape  is  observed  for 
pairs  of  histograms  separated  by  interval  in  63±0.2 sec.  This  value  is  the  same  as  for  1-sec 
histograms intervals distribution, but in latter case it is defined with accuracy in 0.2 sec.  

 

2

a) 

b) 

 

 

 

c) 
Fig. 1. Intervals distributions obtained after expert comparisons of 1-sec (a), 0.2-sec (b), and 0.02-sec (c) 
histogram sets. Y-axis presents number of histograms, which were found similar; X-axis – time interval 
between pairs of histograms, sec. 

 

3

It’s easy to see from intervals distribution, Fig. 1b), that after 5-times enhancement of resolution, the 
distribution has single sharp peak again. So, change of time scale in this case doesn’t lead to change 
of intervals distribution. This means that we must enhance time resolution again to study the local 
time peak structure. We can do this by using of 0.02-sec histograms set. 

Intervals  distribution  for  case  of  0.02-sec  histograms  is  presented  on  the  Fig. 1c).  Unlike  to 
intervals distributions on the Fig. 1a) and Fig. 1b) distribution on the Fig. 1c) consists of two distinct 
peaks. The first peak corresponds to local time difference equal 62.98±0.02 sec, the second one to 
63.16±0.02 sec. The difference between the peaks is ∆t′ = 0.18±0.02 sec. 

Splitting of local-time peak on the Fig 1 c) is similar to splitting of daily period on two peaks 
with periods, which equal to solar and sidereal days [9-11]. This result will be considered in the next 
section. 

Above  described  experiment  demonstrates  the  existence  of  local-time  effect  for  longitudinal 
distance between locations of measurements in 15 km and splitting of local-time peak corresponding 
to that distance. It is natural to investigate the question: which is the minimal distance of local time 
effect existence? Next step in this direction is the second experiment presented below. 

In  this  experiment  two  measurement  systems  were  used:  stationary  and  mobile  one.  Four 
series  of  measurements  were  carried  out.  Longitudinal  difference  of  locations  of  stationary  and 
mobile  measurement  systems  was  6 km,  3.9 km,  1.6 km  and  500 m.  Method  of  experimental  data 
processing  was  the  same  as  for  first  experiment.  Was  found  that  for  every  of  above  presented 
distances local-time effect exists and the local-time peak splitting can be observed. 
 
 
3.  Second-order splitting of local-time peak. Preliminary results. 
 
Four-minute  splitting  of  daily  period  of  repetition  of  histograms  shape  on  solar  and  stellar  sub-
periods was reported in [3]. In sited paper the phenomena is considered as an evidence of existence 
of  two  preferential  directions:  to  the  Sun  and  to  the  coelosphere.  Really  after  time  interval  equal 
1436 min  the  Earth  makes  one  complete  revolution  and  measurement  system  plane  has  the  same 
direction in the space as one stellar day before. After four minutes from this moment measurement 
system plane will be directed to the Sun. This is the cause of solar-day period – 1440 min.  

Let us suppose that splitting described in the present paper has the same nature as splitting of 
T∆ = min  its  possible  to  obtain 

daily  period.  Then  from  daily  period  splitting  T∆ ,  which  equal 
proportionality coefficient 

: k

4

(1) 

 

 

 

k

=

240sec
86400sec

≈

2.78 10
⋅

3
−

. 

Longitudinal difference between places of measurements presented in second section is ∆t = 62.7 sec 
and we can calculate splitting of local-time peak for this value of 
(2) 
62.7 2.78 10
As it is easy to see from Fig. 1c) splitting of local-time peak is equal to 0.18±0.02 sec. This value 
agrees  with estimation (2). Values of splitting of the local-time peak, which was found for mobile 
experiment, also are in good agreement with values obtained by the help of formula (2). 

t∆ : 
0.17sec

′∆ = ∆ =

k t

×

≈

. 

3
−

t

⋅

 

 

 

This result allows us to consider sub-peaks of local-time peak as stellar and solar and 
suppose that in this case the cause of splitting can be the same as for daily-period splitting. 
But the question about local-time peak structure remains open.  

In order to further investigations of the local-time peak structure was carrying out the 
experiment on synchronous spaced measurements in Rostov-on-Don (Lat. 47°13.85′ North, 
Lon. 39°44.05′ East) and Bolshevik (Lat. 54°54.16′ North, Lon. 37°21.91′ East). Local-time 
difference  for  locations  of  measurements  is  ∆t = 568.56 sec.  Value  of  local-time  peak  splitting, 
according  to  (2),  is  ∆t′ = 1.58 sec.  Method  of  experimental  data  processing  was  the  same  as 
described in second section.  

On the fig. 2 in form of diagram summa of all expert comparisons results are presented. For 
considered case we avoid presentations of our results in the form of intervals distributions, like on 
fig 1, because of it multiplicity (about of ten graphs).  

Diagram  on  the  fig. 2  consists  of  four  lines.  At  the  leftmost  side  of  every  line  is  presented 
duration  of  single  histogram  in  the  four  sets  of  histograms,  which  was  prepared  for  expert 

 

4

comparisons.  So,  we  have  four  sets  consisting  of  1-sec,  0.2-sec,  0.0286-sec  and  1.36 msec 
histograms.  Rectangle  in  the  first  line  schematically  shows  local-time  peak,  obtained  as  result  of 
expert  comparisons  of  1-sec  histograms  set.  Taking  into  account  synchronization  error  (about  one 
second),  expert  result  is  567±2 sec.  This  value  is  in  agreements  with  calculated  longitudinal 
difference  of  local  time  ∆t = 568.56 sec  (everywhere  on  the  diagram,  fig. 2,  calculated  values  are 
given in parenthesis). 
 

 
Fig. 2. Local-time peak splitting obtained in the experiment on synchronous spaced measurements of 
fluctuations of pair of semiconductor noise generators, which was carried out in Rostov-on-Don and 
Bolshevik. 
 

 

 

 
Fig. 3. Expected structure of local-time peak splitting for experiment on synchronous spaced measurements in 
Rostov-on-Don and Bolshevik, which was calculated on the base of formula (4). 
 
Second  line  on  the  fig. 2  presents  results  for  0.2-sec  histograms  set.  Values  in  rectangles  show 
sidereal  and  solar  subpeaks  of  the  local-time  peak.  Value  between the rectangles gives splitting of 
local-time  peak.  Experimentally  obtained  splitting  value  is  1.6±0.2 sec.  This  value  is  in  good 
agreement with value calculated on the base of formula (2). 

 

5

Third  and  fourth  lines  of  diagram  present  further  investigation  of  local-time  peak  structure.  In  the 
third  line  we  have  result  of  expert  comparisons  of  0.0286-sec  histograms  set  for  intervals,  which 
constitute closest neighborhood of 567.2±0.2-sec peak. Using of 0.0286-sec histograms set increase 
resolution  almost  in  ten  times  and  defines  peak  position  on  the  intervals  distribution  at 
567.22±0.03 sec.  Obtained  peak  is  structureless.  Further  increasing  of  resolution  allows  1.36-msec 
histograms  set,  presented  in  fourth  line.  In  this  case  resolution  enhancement  discover  splitting  of 
567.22±0.03 sec peak. 

Splitting, presented in last line of the diagram can be named as second-order splitting. It can be 

 

 

 

t′∆ = 1.58 sec by the analogue of formula (2): 

calculated using first-order splitting 
′′
(3) 
k t
∆ = ∆
As  easy  to  see  from  (3)  and  from  diagram  on  fig. 2,  for  second-order  splitting 
order splitting
t′′∆ =
(3) gives 
splitting value 5.44±1.36 msec.  

t′∆
4.39 msec. This estimation of 

t′′∆
  value  of  first-
t′∆ . Numerical calculations using 
t′′∆  is in good agreement with experimentally obtained 

 plays the same role as local-time value 

t∆  for 

′
 .

t

n

n

 

 

t

k

 .

nt∆

∆ = ∆t

Experimental  evidence  of  existence  of  second-order  splitting  leads  us  to  supposition  about 
 can be 

possibility of n-order splitting. As easy to see from (2) and (3), n-order splitting value 
obtained in the following way: 
(4) 
 
Fig. 3 presents idealized structure of local-time peak splitting for considered experiment, which was 
calculated  on  the  base  of  formula  (4).  Unlike  to  fig. 2  structure  of  local-time  peak  splitting  on  the 
fig. 3 is symmetrical. Studies of possible splitting of 565.6±0.2 sec peak is our immediate task. At 
the time, results presented on the fig. 2 can be considered as preliminary. 
 
 
4. 

Experimental investigations of local-time effect existence for 
longitudinal distances between places of measurements from 12 m to 
1 m. 

 
Experiments  described  in  two  previous  sections  demonstrate  existence  of  local-time  effect  for 
longitudinal  distance  between  locations  of  measurements  in  500 m  and  existence  of  second-order 
splitting of local-time peak. Next step in our investigations is study of local-time effect existence on 
the laboratory scale. 

Fig. 4. Values of local time shift as function of distance between two sources of fluctuations. The graph 
presents results of investigations of local-time effect existence for distances 12 m, 3m, 2m, and 1 m. 
 
The  main  difference  of  local-time  effect  investigations  on  laboratory  scale  from  experiments 
described above is absence of special synchronization system. In laboratory case experimental setup 
consists  of  two  synchronous  data  acquisition  channels  and  two  spaced  noise  generators,  which 

 

 

6

symmetrically  connected  to  it.  In  role  of  data  acquisition  system  was  used  LeCroy  WJ322  digital 
storage  oscilloscope.  Standard  record  length  of  the  oscilloscope  consists  of  500 kpts  per  channel. 
This allows obtaining two synchronous sets of 50-points histograms. Maximum length of every set is 
10000 histograms. 

Fig. 4 presents values of local time shift as function of distance between two noise generators. 
The graph presents results of investigations of local-time effect existence for distances in 12 m, 3m, 
2m, and 1 m. Local-time values was found with accuracy in 9.52 msec for 12-meters experiment and 
with accuracy in 1.36 msec for 1 m, 2 m, and 3 m experiments. 

 

Fig. 5. Example of intervals distribution for longitudinal distance between two spaced sources of fluctuations 
in one meter. Single histogram duration – 0.5 msec. 
 
An example of intervals distribution for longitudinal distance between two noise generators in one 
meter  is  presented  on  fig. 5.  The  intervals  distribution  was  obtained  on  the  base  of  0.5-msec 
histograms  set.  By  using  of  Earth  equatorial  radius  value  (6378245 m)  and  latitude  of  place  of 
measurements (54°50.0.37′) is possible to estimate local-time difference for longitudinal distance in 
one meter. Estimated value is 3.7 msec. As easy to see from fig. 5, experimentally obtained value of 
local-time peak is 4±0.5 msec. This experimental value is in good agreement with theoretical one. 

Discussions. 

Results of our investigations for laboratory scale, which are presented in this section, confirm 
local-time effect existence for distances up to one meter. So, we can state that local-time effect exists 
for  distances  from  thousands  kilometers  to  one  meter.  This  is  equivalent  to  statement  that  space 
heterogeneity can be observed up to one-meter scale. 
 
 
5. 
 
Local-time  effect  as  pointed  in  [1],  is  linked  to  rotatory  movement  of  Earth.  The  simplest 
explanation  of  the  fact  can  be  following.  Due  to  the  rotatory  movement  of  the  Earth  after  time  ∆t 
measurement  system  No. 2  appears  in  the  same  places  where  was  system  No. 1  before.  The  same 
places cause the same shape of fine structure of histograms. Actually such explanation is incorrect 
because  of  orbital  motion  of  Earth,  which  noticeably  exceeds  rotatory  movements.  Therefore 
measurement  system  No. 2  cannot  appear  in  the  same  places  where  was  system  No. 1.  But  if  we 
consider  two  directions  defined  by  center  of  Earth  and  two  points  were  we  conduct  spaced 
measurement, then after time ∆t measurement system No. 2 take the same directions in the space as 
system  No. 1  before.  From  this  it  follows  that  similarity  of  histograms  shapes  in  some  way  is 
connected  with  the  same  space  directions.  This  supposition  also  agrees  with  experimental  results 
presented in [12-13]. 

Speaking  about  preferential  directions  we  implicitly  supposed  that  measurement  system  is 
directional and because of this can resolve these directions. Such supposition is quite reasonable for 
the case of daily period splitting but for splitting of local-time peak observed on the one-meter scale 

 

7

becomes utterly problematic because an angle, which must be resolved by the measurement system, 
is neglible. Most likely that in this case we deal with space-time structure, which in some way are 
connected  with  preferential  directions  to  the  Sun  and  coelosphere.  Second-order  splitting  of  local-
time  peak  also  can  be  considered  as  an  argument  confirming  this  supposition.  Apparently  we  can 
speak  about  sharp  anisotropy  of  near-earth  space-time.  Existence  of  local-time  effect  leads  us  to 
supposition that this anisotropy is axial-symmetric. 

 
 

Authors  grateful  to  Dr.  Hartmut  Muller,  V.P. Tikhonov  and  M.N. Kondrashova  for  valuable 
discussions  and  financial  support.  Special  thanks  to  our  colleagues  O.A. Mornev,  R.V. Polozov, 
T.A. Zenchenko, K.I. Zenchenko and D.P. Kharakoz. 
 
 
References. 
 
1. 

K.I. Zenchenko, 

E.V. Pozharskii, 

T.A. Zenchenko, 

S.E. Shnoll,  V.A. Kolombet,  E.V. Pozharskii,  T.A. Zenchenko,  I.M. Zvereva,  A.A. Konradov 
“Realization of discrete states during fluctuations in macroscopic processes” , Physics-Uspekhi 
41(10), 1025-1035 (1998) 
S.E. Shnoll, 
V.A. Kolombet, 
A.A. Konradov  “Regular  variation  of  the  fine  structure  of  statistical  distributions  as  a 
consequence of cosmophysical agents” Physics – Uspekhi 43(2) 205-209 (2000) 
S.E. Shnoll  Periodical  changes  in  the  fine  structure  of  statistic  distributions  in  stochastic 
processes  as  a  result  of  arithmetic  and  cosmophysical  reasons.  Time,  Chaos,  and  Math. 
Problems, No. 3, University Publ. House, Moscow, 2004, 121–154. 
S.E. Shnoll Changes in the fine structure of stochastic distributions as consequence of space-
time fluctuations. // Progress in Physics, 2006, v.6, pp.39-45. 
V.A. Panchelyuga, S.E. Shnoll Experimental investigations of gravitational-wave influence on 
the  form  of  distribution  function  of  α-decay  rate  //  Abstracts  of  VI  International  Crimean 
Conference  ‘Cosmos  and  Biosphere’,  Partenit,  Crimea,  Ukraine,  September  26  –  October  1, 
2005, pp. 50-51. 
V.A. Panchelyuga, S.E. Shnoll Experimental investigation of spinning massive body influence 
on  fine  structure  of  distribution  functions  of  alpha-decay  rate  fluctuations  //  Space-Time 
Structure. Collected papers. M.: TETRU, 2006. – pp. 328 – 343. 
V.A.  Panchelyuga,  V.A.  Kolombet,  A.V.Kaminsky,  M.S.Panchelyuga,  S.E.Shnoll  The  local 
time effect observed in noise processes. // Bulletin of Kaluga University, 2006, (in print). 
V.A. Panchelyuga, V.A. Kolombet, M.S. Panchelyuga, S.E. Shnoll Local-time effect on small 
space-time  scale  //  Space-Time  Structure.  Collected  papers.  M.:  TETRU,  2006.  –  pp.  344  – 
350. 
S.E. Shnoll  Discrete  distribution  patterns:  arithmetic  and  cosmophysical  origins  of  their 
macroscopic fluctuations. Biophysics, 2001, v. 46(5), 733–741. 

10.  S. E. Shnoll, K. I. Zenchenko, and N. V. Udaltsova Cosmophysical Effects in the Structure of 
Daily  and  Yearly  Periods  of  Changes  in  the  Shape  of  Histograms  Constructed  from  the 
Measurements of 239Pu alpha-Activity // Biophysics, 2004 Vol. 49, Suppl. 1, p. 155. 

11.  S.E.Shnoll,  K.I.Zenchenko,  N.V.Udaltsova,  Cosmo-physical  effects  in  structure  of  the  daily 
and  yearly  periods  of  change  in  the  shape  of  the  histograms  constructed  by  results  of 
measurements of alpha-activity Pu-239, 2005 http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0504092 

12.  Simon E. Shnoll,  Konstantin I. Zenchenko, 

and 
Ilia A. Rubinstein  Fine  structure  of  histograms  of  alpha-activity  measurements  depends  on 
direction  of  alpha  particles  flow  and  the  Earth  rotation:  experiments  with  collimators. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0412007 

Iosas I. Berulis,  Natalia V. Udaltsova 

13.  Shnoll S.E.,  Rubinshtejn I.A., 

Shlekhtarev V.A.,  Kaminsky A.V., 
Konradov A.A., Udaltsova N.V. Experiments with Rotating Collimators Cutting out Pencil of 
α-Particles at Radioactive Decay of  239Pu Evidence Sharp Anisotropy of Space // Progress in 
Physics, V. 1, 2005, pp. 81-84. http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0501004 

Zenchenko K.I., 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 

 

8

