Multi-sensor system for simultaneous ultra-low-field 
MRI and MEG 
 

a,*

Vadim S. Zotev

, Andrei N. Matlachov
a
a
a
Henrik J. Sandin
,  
, Michelle A. Espy
, John C. Mosher
a
a
a
. 
, Robert H. Kraus, Jr
, Shaun G. Newman
Algis V. Urbaitis

a
a
,  
, Petr L. Volegov

 
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Group of Applied Modern Physics MS D454, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA 

a

 
 
Abstract.  Magnetoencephalography  (MEG)  and  magnetic  resonance  imaging  at  ultra-low  fields 
(ULF  MRI)  are  two  methods  based  on  the  ability  of  SQUID  (superconducting  quantum 
interference  device)  sensors  to  detect  femtotesla  magnetic  fields.  Combination  of  these  methods 
will allow simultaneous functional (MEG) and structural (ULF MRI) imaging of the human brain. 
In  this  paper,  we  report  the  first  implementation  of  a  multi-sensor  SQUID  system  designed  for 
both  MEG  and  ULF  MRI.  We  present  a  multi-channel  image  of  a  human  hand  obtained  at  46 
microtesla field, as well as results of auditory MEG measurements with the new system. 
 
Keywords: biomagnetism; MEG; MRI; SQUID; co-registration 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 

Magnetoencephalography  (MEG),  that  measures  magnetic  fields  directly  associated 
with  neuronal  activity  [1],  is  a  well-established  technique  for  studies  of  brain  function 
[2].  The  high  temporal  resolution  and  non-invasive  nature  of  MEG  make  it  a  valuable 
tool  for  both  fundamental  brain  research  and  clinical  diagnostics  such  as  pre-surgical 
evaluation  in  treatment  of  epilepsy  [3].  In  many  applications  requiring  spatial 
information,  magnetic  sources,  determined  by  the  MEG,  have  to  be  precisely  mapped 
onto  anatomical  brain  structure,  usually  obtained  with  the  conventional  high-field 
magnetic  resonance  imaging  (MRI).  Therefore,  spatiotemporal  brain  imaging  based  on 
the  fusion  of  MEG  and  MRI  data  requires  two  very  different  (and  expensive) 
instruments. Moreover, in addition to the MEG source localization errors [2], there are 
errors associated with MEG/MRI co-registration. 

                                                 
*
 Corresponding author. Tel: 1-505-665-8460. Fax: 1-505-665-4507. 

E-mail address: vzotev@lanl.gov.  

A  typical  MEG/MRI  co-registration  procedure  includes  three  steps  [3,4].  First,  the 
MEG  sensor  array  is  used  to  detect  positions  of  several  small  localization  coils 
connected  to  the  subject’s  head.  Then,  both the  head  surface  and  the  localization  coils 
are digitized by means of the Polhemus 3D digitizer. Finally, the digitized head surface 
is matched with the scalp surface obtained from the subject’s MRI. This procedure, apart 
from being time-consuming and laborious, introduces errors. The Aston group recently 
reported average co-registration error of 4 mm when using localization coils mounted on 
a  bite-bar,  and  9  mm  error  in  case  of  the  coils  attached  to  the  scalp  [4].  This  level  of 
inaccuracy (~5 mm and more) appears typical in MEG/MRI co-registration. 

The  best  way  to  solve  this  problem  is  to  eliminate  the  need  for  co-registration 
altogether by acquiring both MEG signals and anatomical images with the same sensors. 
This can be achieved if one uses the MEG sensor array to perform magnetic resonance 
imaging  at  ultra-low  fields  (ULF  MRI).  In  this  imaging  method,  introduced  by  the 
Berkeley group [5-7], the nuclear spin population in a sample is pre-polarized [8] by a 
relatively  strong  (up  to  0.1  T)  magnetic  field,  and  the  spin  precession  is  encoded  and 
detected  at  an  ultra-low  (microtesla  range)  measurement  field  after  the  pre-polarizing 
field  is  removed  [5-8].  Because  sensors  of  the  same  type  –  superconducting  quantum 
interference device (SQUID) sensors – are used for both MEG [2] and ULF MRI [5], the 
two  techniques  are  compatible.  Moreover,  it  was  demonstrated  recently  by  our  group 
that  MEG  and  ULF  MRI  signals  could  be  measured  simultaneously  with  the  same 
SQUID sensor and separated by filtering during data processing [9]. The combination of 
these two methods will allow simultaneous functional (MEG) and structural (ULF MRI) 
imaging of the brain with the additional benefits of reduced imaging time and cost. 

In  this  paper,  we  report  the  first  implementation  of  a  multi-sensor  SQUID  system, 
specifically designed for measuring both MEG and ULF MRI signals, and present initial 
results demonstrating the system’s performance. 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 

Design of the system we have developed for measurements of MEG and ULF MRI has 
been  described  in  detail  elsewhere  [10].    In  this  section,  we  only  specify  the  main 
physical characteristics of the system and experimental parameters.  

The  system  includes  seven  second-order  gradiometers  with  SQUID  sensors  installed 
inside a liquid He dewar. The gradiometers have 37 mm diameter and 60 mm baseline. 
They  are  arranged  in  parallel  (with  one  gradiometer  in  the  middle  and  six  others 
surrounding  it  in  a  circle)  with  45  mm  separations  between  coil  centers.  The  noise 
spectral density is 1.2 fT/√Hz at 1 kHz for the central channel and 2.5-2.8 fT/√Hz for the 
surrounding channels. The noise spectra are essentially flat down to ~3 Hz.  

The ULF MRI coil system is designed for 3-D Fourier imaging of large objects such as 
the human brain. However, only 2-D imaging experiments have been performed so far. 
In section 3, we present a multi-channel 2-D image of the human hand. It was obtained 
at the measurement field of 46 µT (frequency ~1950 Hz), with a pre-polarization field of 
10  mT.  The  standard  2-D  gradient  echo  imaging  sequence  was  employed  with  the 
encoding time  of 40 ms and acquisition time of 80 ms. The limiting values of the two 
gradients were ±94 µT/m (±40 Hz/cm), yielding 3 by 3 mm imaging resolution. 

  

3. Results 
 

Results of 2-D ULF MRI of the human hand are exhibited in Figs. 1 and 2. The hand 
was  positioned  under  the  bottom  of  the  dewar.  Fig.  1  shows  images  from  the  seven 
individual channels. The frequency and phase encoding directions are the horizontal and 
vertical directions in Fig. 1, respectively. The composite image, exhibited in Fig. 2, was 
obtained as a sum of the seven individual images, and then sensitivity-corrected with the 
use of an experimentally determined seven-channel sensitivity map.  
  

      
 Fig. 1. Images of the human hand measured by the seven individual channels. The coordinates are in cm. 
  

 

   
    
Fig. 2. Left: The composite image with sensitivity correction. Right: The subject’s hand and the channel map. 
   
 

To test the system’s MEG performance, we carried out an auditory MEG experiment. 
The  auditory  stimulus  (a  train  of  1.2  ms  clicks  following  with  14  ms  intervals)  was 
applied  50  ms  after  the  start  of  data  acquisition.  The  auditory  evoked  magnetic  fields, 
measured  by  the  seven  channels,  are  exhibited  in  Fig.  3.  They  are  consistent  with  the 
orientation of the equivalent current dipole perpendicular to the Sylvian fissure [2]. 

 

     
Fig. 3. Left: Auditory MEG measured by the seven channels. Right: Position of the head during the experiment. 
 
4. Conclusion 
 

 

The experimental results, presented in this work, demonstrate that our seven-channel 
SQUID  system  can  be  successfully  used  for  both  human-subject  ULF  MRI  and  MEG. 
Our  next  goal  is  to  implement  3-D  ULF  MRI  of  the  human  brain  and  thus  prove 
feasibility of simultaneous functional and anatomical brain imaging. 
 
References 
 

[1]  D.  Cohen.  Magnetoencephalography:  evidence  of  magnetic  fields  produced  by  alpha-rhythm  currents. 

Science 1968;161:784-786. 

[2]  M.  Hämäläinen,  R.  Hari,  R.J.  Ilmoniemi,  J.  Knuutila,  O.V.  Lounasmaa.  Magnetoencephalography  – 
theory, instrumentation, and applications to non-invasive studies of the working human brain. Rev Mod 
Phys 1993;65:413-505. 

[3]  S.  Knake,  E.  Halgren,  H.  Shiraishi,  et  al.  The  value  of  multichannel  MEG  and  EEG  in  the  presurgical 

evaluation of 70 epilepsy patients. Epilepsy Res 2006;69:80-86. 

[4]  P.  Adjamian,  G.R.  Barnes,  A.  Hillebrand,  et  al.  Co-registration  of  magnetoencephalography  with 
magnetic  resonance  imaging  using  bite-bar-based  fiducials  and  surface  matching.  Clin  Neurophysiol 
2004;115:691-698. 

[5]  R.  McDermott,  S.K.  Lee,  B.  ten  Haken,  A.H.  Trabesinger,  A.  Pines,  J.  Clarke.  Microtesla  MRI  with  a 

superconducting quantum interference device. Proc Nat Acad Sci 2004;101:7857-7861. 

[6]  R.  McDermott,  N.  Kelso,  S.K.  Lee,  et  al.  SQUID-detected  magnetic  resonance  imaging  in  microtesla 

magnetic fields. J Low Temp Phys 2004;135:793-821. 

[7]  M. Mößle, W.R. Myers, S.K. Lee, et al. SQUID-detected in vivo MRI at microtesla magnetic fields. IEEE 

Trans Appl Superconduct 2005;15:757-760. 

[8]  A. Macovski, S. Conolly. Novel approaches to low cost MRI. Magn Reson Med 1993;30:221-230. 
[9]  P.  Volegov,  A.N.  Matlachov,  M.A.  Espy, 

Jr.  Simultaneous 
magnetoencephalography  and  SQUID  detected  nuclear  MR  in  microtesla  magnetic  fields.  Magn  Reson 
Med 2004;52:467-470. 

J.S.  George,  R.H.  Kraus, 

[10]  V.S. Zotev, A.N. Matlachov, P.L. Volegov, et al. Submitted to IEEE Trans Appl Superconduct. 

