 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reply to Comment on “Negative refractive index in artificial 

metamaterials” 

A.N. Grigorenko, 

UK 

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, 

We discuss claims of the preceding comment. We show that Kildishev et al. misread our 

method  of  extracting  of  optical  constants  of  nanostructured  films.  The  theoretical 

calculations  performed  in  the  preceding  comment  appear  to  be  in  a  direct  contradiction 

with an experiment. We demonstrate that the theoretical calculations suggested being free 

from  ambiguities  (Shalaev  et  al.,  Opt.  Lett.  30,  3345  (2005))  require  an  additional 

experimental  verification,  which  can  be  performed  by  observing  physical  effects  of 

negative refraction. 

handed materials. 

OCIS codes: (160.4670) Optical materials, metamaterials, negative refraction, left-

We  thank  Shalaev’s  group  for  the  time  devoted  to  our  work  [1,2]  where  we  have 

demonstrated  metamaterials  with  permeability  μ'=0.5  for  double-pillar  arrays  without 

glycerol  [1]  and μ'=-0.3  and  n'=-0.7  for  a  sample  covered  with  optically  thin  layer  of 

glycerol  [1,2].  We  have  also  stated  [1]  that  we  did  not  observe  negative  refraction 

because  of  large  dissipation  in  our  samples.  By  negative  refraction  we  understand  a 

physical  effect  of  light  refraction  at  a  negative  Snellius  angle  (contrary  to  a  negative 

value  of  n′  calculated  with  some  theory  for  some  theoretical  medium.)  In  negative 

refraction  experiments  we  attempted  to  measure  a  negative  displacement  of  an  oblique 

beam  experiencing  multiple  reflections  inside  the  sample  without  success  due  to  large 

dissipation. 

 

 

In the comment [3] and an unrefereed preprint [4] Shalaev’s group disputes our results. It 

is  not  the  first  time  Shalaev  makes  an  attempt  to  undermine  our  priority  in  this  rapidly 

developing  area  of  nanooptics.  At  first,  Shalaev’s  group  tried  to  claim  their  priority  in 

developing  optomagnetic  metamaterials  for  visible  optics  on  the  basis  of  an  unrefereed 

preprint [5]. Now they dispute our results on the basis of their theoretical analysis of our 

data. As far as we understood, there are three main criticisms of our work. 

1. Use of the Drude model. 

We agree that the Drude model is not the best approximation for describing the behaviour 

of  electrons  in  nanometre  sized  metal  particles.  We  doubt,  however,  that  the  matching 

Debye model suggested in [3,4] is much better for modelling an electromagnetic response 

of  a  nanoparticle  of  a  general  shape  placed  on  any  substrate  and  in  any  environment. 

This  is  a  theoretical  suggestion  which  requires  experimental  verification.  At  the  same 

time, one can easily check that, for the symmetric and antisymmetric shape resonances of 

a pair of nanoobjects [6,7], the choice of the spectrum is of secondary importance and the 

resonance positions can be adjusted by the parameters of the Drude model. In addition, 

the  choice  of  the  electron  model  does  not  significantly  change  the  calculated  magnetic 

moment (provided the model adequately describes the plasmonic resonances). Therefore, 

a concern about the Drude model application is irrelevant. 

 

 

2. Method of optical constant determination.  

The  comments  [3,4]  introduce  a  Shalaev’s  interpretation  of  our  method  (SIM)  of 

extracting optical constants of nanostructured media. SIM is based on measurements of 

reflection spectra at only one (normal) angle of incidence and the comments [3,4] prove it 

to be wrong. We will not defend SIM (although we do not entirely agree with all claims 

[3,4]) simply because it was not the method that has been used in our analysis.  

By  an  effective  optical  film  for  a  nanostructured  sample  we  understand  a  film  of  some 

thickness,  permittivity  and  permeability  which  reflection  and  transmission  coefficients 

give the best approximation to the reflection and transmission coefficients measured for a 

sample  illuminated  by  light  of  an  arbitrary  angle  of  incidence.  Therefore,  optical 

constants of our samples should be determined and have been determined by a combined 

analysis of the reflection spectra and ellipsometric data, see the supplementary material 

of Ref. [1]. For this reason, the thickness of an effective optical film in our calculations is 

a parameter that should be determined from experiments. In the comments [3,4], on the 

other hand, the thickness of an effective optical film is predetermined and is given by the 

size  of  nanoparticles.  This  is  obviously  wrong.  Indeed,  two  identical  arrays  of 

nanoparticles  of  different  (small)  sizes  but  of  the  same  electric  and  magnetic 

susceptibilities  would  produce  the  same  reflection  and  transmission  coefficients 

illuminated by a light (of an arbitrary angle of incidence). As a result, these two arrays 

should  have  the  same  effective  optical  thickness  despite  having  different  sizes  of 

nanomolecules, which contradicts to the approach [3,4].  

 

 

In  addition  to  the  combined  analysis  of  the  reflection  for  p-  and  s-polarizations  under 

oblique  and  normal  angles,  we  have  checked  the  extracted  optical  constants  of  our 

samples using interferometry (see below), which allows one to directly observe the phase 

of the transmitted wave and an optical path length in a sample. 

3. Theoretical calculations [3,4] for our structures. 

Shalaev  and  co-authors  model  our  reflection  spectra  using  their  theory  and  find 

disagreement  with  our  results.  As  we  mentioned  above,  theoretical  optical  constants 

obtained  from  normal  reflection  spectra  are  obsolete  unless  they  are  checked  with  the 

reflection under some angle (or phase measurements), see the point 2. (SIM gives a large 

error  for  many  experimental  geometries).  As  we  understand,  the  approach  [3,4]  could 

provide an effective optical film capable of modelling the response of our structures for a 

normal  reflection  (transmission)  but  most  probably  failing  for  reflection  (transmission) 

under  an  oblique  angle.  Unfortunately,  it  is  impossible  to  judge  on  agreement  of  the 

model [3,4] with our ellipsometry data since the Brewster angle is not calculated nor the 

reflection near Brewster angle is given in [3,4].  

 

However, it appears that the theory [3,4] contradicts to our interferometric measurements. 

It is very difficult to present the interferometric measurements on samples covered with 

optically  thin  layer  of  glycerol  due  to  residual  of  glycerol  near  the  structures,  which 

affects  the  interferometric  pattern.  (We  leave  a  discussion  of  such  samples  and  their 

optical  thickness  to  a  later  publication).  Instead,  we  demonstrate  interferometry  of 

samples with higher density of nanopillars (the lattice constant of a=320nm). Reflection 

spectra  of  these  samples  mimic  the  spectra  of  the  samples  covered  with  glycerol.  The 

parameters of nanomolecules for these samples are analogous to those used in [1]. Figure 

1(a)  depicts  the  standard  interferometric  scheme  that  we  applied  to  measure  an  optical 

path length in the sample. This scheme utilises the standard Mach-Zander interferometer, 

Zoom 160 optical system and high resolution CCD. The interferometer is set in the fringe 

mode and the sample is placed in one arm of the interferometer. If an optical medium is 

present on a substrate, the optical path due to this medium contributes to the beam phase 

and the fringes bend. For glycerol, which refractive index is larger than that of the air, the 

phase difference lags and the fringes bend to the right. Figure 1(b) shows the phase lag of 

light  passing  through  the  glycerol  droplet  placed  on  a  glass  substrate.  In  case  of  the 

double-dot structures observed in red light (λ=632.8nm), Fig. 1(c), the refractive index of 

the sample is close to the refractive index of the air and the fringes do not bend at all. For 

this  reason,  Fig.  1(c)  shows  zero  phase  difference.  In  case  of  the  double-dot  structure 

observed  in  green  light  (λ=543.5nm),  Fig.  1(d),  the  interferometric  fringes  bend  in  the 

opposite direction (to the left), which corresponds to a lead of the phase of light passing 

through the medium in relation with the air (the sample edges are shown by a grey box). 

This experimental result directly contradicts to Shalaev’s group theory shown in Fig. 3(b) 

of [3], where they obtained n′>1 for our structures at green light. The phase lead of Fig. 

1(d)  is  large  and  corresponds  to  a  negative  optical  path  length  for  the  light  travelling 

through our medium (in our understanding of an effective optical film). Fig. 3(e) gives a 

zoomed version of the phase lead observed in green light. Fig. 1(f) shows the phase shift 

for  our  best  sample  (with  larger  nanopillars  connected  by  a  metallic  bridge)  at 

λ=543.5nm. Here the phase lead is about π which results in a negative optical path length 

(in  any  model!)  and  corresponds  to  n′<-1  at  the  green  wavelength.  Measurements  of  a 

light  phase  for  small  objects  require  a  lot  of  attention  and  we  hope  to  present  detailed 

analysis of these experiments soon. 

 

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first experimental demonstration of a negative 

optical path length in visible light optomagnetic metamaterials (impossible if theory [3,4] 

is  right).  These  interferometry  experiments  (and  ellipsometry  data)  make  us  to  believe 

that  calculations  [3,4]  cannot  be  applied  to  our  experiments.  It  is  difficult  to  judge  on 

reasons for this discrepancy. It could happen that [3,4] use  an erroneous  distribution of 

glycerol  (glycerol  should  be  placed  just  in  between  nanopillars  [8]),  or  an  influence  of 

glycerol on surface states of electrons in a particle has been miscalculated. It is possible 

that the Debye model does not work for the double dots with glycerol in between them. It 

has to be said that [3,4] do not provide any details of calculations for the samples with 

optically  thin  layer  of  glycerol  where  we  found  negative  n′.  (We  skip  a  discussion  of 

misleading statements of the comment [3], such as misleading Fig. 1(a) and 1(b), which 

combine two different experiments, misleading statement about a mass average thickness, 

etc.) 

 

We  understand  limitations  and  difficulties  of  theoretical  analysis  of  such  a  complex 

system and we tend to believe experiments rather than elaborate theory. For this reason, 

when  demonstrating  non-trivial  magnetic  permeability  [1],  we  have  presented  an 

experimental observation of impedance matching for non-zero magnetic permeability. It 

is suggested in [3,4] that the work on infrared structures [9] is based on “unambiguous” 

theory and therefore could be regarded as error-free. We do not share this view. We feel 

that work [9] suffers from experimental and theoretical ambiguities and therefore requires 

an additional experimental verification. 

 

1. Experiments.  

The  Shalaev’s  group  claims  that  they  measure  absolute  phases  to  determine  complex 

transmission  (and  reflection)  coefficients.  It  is  well  known,  however,  that  an  absolute 

phase  is  notoriously  difficult  to  measure  (especially  for  transmission)  and  one  can  get 

ambiguous results using such approach. Later in Ref. [9], Shalaev et al. state that they do 

not measure an absolute phase, instead they measure a relative phase of the transmitted 

signal.  However,  the  phase  of  an  optical  signal  coming  from  a  small  sample  has  a 

tendency to average with the phase from the other parts of a Gaussian beam, which gives 

an ambiguous  phase result. Adequate  determination of the relative phase  requires some 

lenses,  which  are  absent  in  the  interferometer  set-up  shown  in  the  preprint  [10].  It  also 

appears that Shalaev’s group uses focused beams to measure an optical phase of a beam 

transmitted through the sample [10] which can itself contribute to a large phase error.  

 

2. Theory. 

We  leave  aside  the  question  of  determining  5  parameters  of  an  effective  optical  film 

(Re(ε),  Im(ε),  Re(μ),  Im(μ)  and  thickness)  from  just  4  measured  experimental  data 

(amplitudes  and  phases  of  the  transmitted  and  reflected  waves).  We  believe  that  such 

approach should be checked by confirming extracted optical constants using light of an 

oblique angle of incidence. There are 3 main difficulties with the theory [9]. 

i) Due to nature of the lithographic process, the infrared structure studied in [9] has the 

top stick that is notably smaller than the bottom one. As a result, the antisymmetric mode 

[6,7]  in  geometry  [9]  has  a  large  contribution  from  an  uncompensated  dipole  moment, 

which strongly affects the magnetic response. This is not discussed in [9]. 

ii)  The  infrared  structures  [9]  do  not  posses  a  nice  property  of  a  local  excitation  of  the 

magnetic  antisymmetric  mode  by  an  electric  field  (in  contrast  to  single-spit  resonators 

[11]  or  our  structures  [1])  because  of  different  geometry  of  the  nanomolecules  (the 

antisymmetric mode in [9] is a dark mode with respect to electric field). For this reason, it 

appears  that  the  infrared  structures  [9]  generate  a  non-local  magnetic  response,  which 

does not lead to a standard permeability. Again, this is not discussed in [9] or anywhere. 

iii) Since the magnetic response of the infrared structures is non-local, it appears that one 

needs to take into account the non-local contribution of a quadrupole electric mode which 

happens  to  have  the  resonance  at  the  same  frequency  as  the  magnetic  dipole  mode  and 

which  gives  a  contribution  to  a  non-local  electric  permittivity.  We  did  not  find  a 

discussion of the quadrupole electric contribution in the works of Shalaev’s group either. 

 

 

These  suggest  that  the  theoretical  result  concerning  negative  n′  [9]  should  be  regarded 

with  some  amount  of  sound  scepticism.  We  believe  that  any  theoretical  negative  n′ 

should  be  backed  up  with  an  experimental  observation  of  negative  refraction  by  which 

we  mean  a  negative  Snellius  angle,  a  negative  optical  path  length  or  a  negative 

displacement  of  the  beam  passing  through  a  negative  index  medium  under  some  angle. 

The visible and near infrared spectrums have a nice property that the phase of light can be 

visualised.  It  would  be  of  great  benefit  to  metamaterial  community  if  Shalaev’s  group 

could back up their own theoretical calculations of negative index of refraction [9] for the 

infrared  system  by  an  experimental  observation  of  any  physical  effect  connected  to 

negative  refraction  (or  at  least  non-trivial  permeability!),  e.g.,  a  negative  optical  path 

length. Till then, we consider the claims about negative index of refraction made in [9] 

(and other works) as useful theoretical speculations. 

To  conclude,  the  comments  [3,4]  misinterpret  our  methods  while  the  theoretical 

calculations [3,4] appear to contradict our experiments. We suggest that the calculations 

for  the  infrared  structure  [9]  should  be  supported  by  an  experimental  observation  of 

negative  refraction.  Please  be  advised  that  in  [3]  (the  comment  that  was  sent  to  us)  the 

numeration  of  references  is  wrong.  On  behalf  of  all  co-authors  of  Ref.  [1],  A.N. 

Grigorenko. e-mail address: sasha@man.ac.uk

References: 

 

1.  A.  N.  Grigorenko,  A.  K.  Geim,  H.  F.  Gleeson,  Y.  Zhang,  A.  A.  Firsov,  I.  Y. 

Khrushchev, J. Petrovic, Nature 438, 335 (2005). 

2. A. N. Grigorenko, Optics Letters 31, 2483 (2006). 

3.  A.V.  Kildishev,  V.  P.  Drachev,  U.  K.  Chettiar,  D.  Werner,  D.-H.  Kwon,  and  V.  M. 

Shalaev, the preceding comment. 

4.  A.V.  Kildishev,  V.  P.  Drachev,  U.  K.  Chettiar,  D.  Werner,  D.-H.  Kwon,  and  V.  M. 

Shalaev, preprint arXiv.org:physics/0609234. 

5. V. M. Shalaev, W. Cai, U. Chettiar, H.-K. Yuan, A. K. Sarychev, V. P. Drachev, and 

A. V. Kildishev, preprint arXiv:physics/0504091. 

6. V. A. Podolskiy, A. K. Sarychev, V. M. Shalaev, J. Nonlinear Opt. Phys. & Mat. 11, 

65 (2002). 

7. L. V. Panina, A. N. Grigorenko, D. P. Makhnovskiy, Phys. Rev. B 66, 155411 (2002). 

8. A. N. Grigorenko, H. F. Gleeson, Y. Zhang, N. W. Roberts, A. R. Sidorov, and A. A. 

Panteleev, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 124103 (2006). 

9. V. M. Shalaev W. Cai, U. Chettiar, H.-K. Yuan, A. K. Sarychev, V. P. Drachev, and A. 

V. Kildishev, Optics Letters 30, 3356 (2005). 

10. A. V. Kildishev, W. Cai, U. K. Chettiar, H.-K. Yuan, A. K. Sarychev, V. P. Drachev, 

V. M. Shalaev, preprint arXiv.org:physics/0510001. 

11. S. Linden, C. Enkrich, M. Wegener, J. Zhou, T. Koschny, C. M. Soukoulis, Science 

306, 1351 (2004). 

Figure Captions. 

 

Fig. 1. Interferometry of optomagnetic metamaterials. 

(a) The interferometric set-up. (b) Interferometry of a glycerol droplet placed on a glass 

substrate.  The  phase  of  light  passing  through  glycerol  lags  and  the  fringes  bend  to  the 

right.  (c)  Red  light  interferometry  of  a  double-dot  sample  (the  edges  of  the  sample  are 

shown  by  a  box).  The  phase  lag  is  zero  and  fringes  do  not  bend.  (d)  Green  light 

interferometry of the structure. The phase of light that passes the medium leads the phase 

of light passing through the air and the fringes bend to the left. (e) The zoomed version of 

(d). (f) Green light inerferometry of the structures with electrically connected nanopillars. 

The  lead  of  the  phase  in  cases  (d)-(f)  suggests  a  negative  optical  path  length  of  the 

sample. 

 
 

(a) 

Polariser

Phase shift

Sample

Laser

Beam 
expander

Mirrors

phase lag 

(b) 

Zoom 160

glycerol 

CCD

(c) 

sample 

(d) 

(e) 

sample 

(f) 

zero phase 

phase lead

phase lead 

phase lead

Fig. 1. 

