Gödel and Physics

John D. Barrow
DAMTP
Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Cambridge University
Wilberforce Rd.,
Cambridge CB3 0WA
UK

Summary

We introduce some early considerations of physical and mathematical impossibility as 
preludes to Gödel’s incompleteness theorems. We consider some informal aspects of 
these theorems and their underlying assumptions and discuss some the responses to these 
theorems by those seeking to draw conclusions from them about the completability of 
theories of physics. We argue that there is no reason to expect Gödel incompleteness to 
handicap the search for a description of the laws of Nature, but we do expect it to limit 
what we can predict about the outcomes of those laws, and examples are given. We 
discuss the Gödel universe and the role it played in revealing the possibilities that a 
global understanding of space-time would reveal. Finally, we show how recent studies of 
supertasks have shown how global space-time structure determines the ultimate 
capability of computational devices within them.

2

1: Some Historical Background

Physical Impossibilities
     There is a long history of scientific and philosophical consideration of physical 
impossibilities1. The Aristotelian worldview outlawed the possibility that physical 
infinities or local physical vacua could be created or observed2. During the Middle Ages, 
physicists devised ingenious thought experiments to try to imagine how Nature could be 
‘tricked’ into allowing an instantaneous vacuum to form, and then arguing about how this 
possibility was stopped from occurring by natural processes or, if that failed, by the 
invocation of a Cosmic Censor, to prevent its appearance3. Chemistry had its own 
ongoing alchemical debate about the possibility or impossibility of making gold from 
baser metals, and engineering maintained an enduring attachment to the quest for a 
perpetual motion machines that only fully abated when the consequences of laws of 
thermodynamics were systematically understood during the nineteenth century. Subtle 
examples, like Maxwell’s sorting demon, still remained until they were eventually fully 
exorcised by the application of the modern thermodynamic theory of computation in 
19614. 
    
Mathematical Impossibilities
         Mathematicians also occasionally considered the question of impossibility in the 
context of a several fundamental problems of arithmetic, geometry, and algebra. 
Supposedly, in about 550BC, the Pythagoreans first encountered the ‘irrationality’ of 
numbers like 2, which could not be expressed as the ratio of two integers5. This gives us 
the first glimpse of operations and questions which have no answers given a particular set 
of rules. In the first quarter of the 19th century, the problem of finding an explicit form for 
the solution of a general quintic algebraic equation in terms of its coefficients was proved 
to have no solution by Abel6. Unlike the case of quadratic, cubic, or quartic equations, the 
general quintic cannot be solved by any exact formula. Just a few years later, in 1837, 
rigorous proofs were given that an of angle 60 degrees could not be trisected just by use 
of a straight-edge and pair of compasses. These examples revealed for the first time, to 
those who looked at them in the right way, some hints as to the limitations of particular 
axiomatic systems.

 In the light of the ongoing impact of Gödel’s work on speculations about the 

limitations of the human mind, it is interesting to reflect briefly on the sociological and 
psychological effects of some of these early results. The discovery of irrational numbers 
was alleged to have had dire consequences for the person who revealed the ‘secret’, and 
the existence of such numbers was of the deepest concern to the Pythagoreans, as can be 
judged by the label ‘irrational’ that was subsequently attached to them. However, as far 
as we can judge, there were no deep philosophical questions about the limitations of 
mathematical reasoning raised by the demonstration that the quintic could not be solved. 
Yet, there was a change. Previously, there were many things that could not be proven 
despite many efforts to do so. But now there were proofs that something could not be 
done.

3

Axiomatics
       The development of understanding of what constructions and proofs could be carried 
out by limited means, such as ruler and compass construction, showed that axioms
mattered. The power and scope of a system of axioms determined what its allowed rules 
of reasoning could encompass. 
     Until the 19th century, the archetypal axiomatic system was that of Euclidean 
geometry. But it important to appreciate that this system was not then viewed, as it is 
today, as just one among many axiomatic possibilities. Euclidean geometry was how the 
world really was. It was part of the absolute truth about the Universe. This gave it a 
special status and its constructions and elucidation, largely unchanged for more 2000 
years, provided a style that was aped by many works of philosophy and theology.  The 
widespread belief in its absolute truth provided an important cornerstone for the beliefs of 
theologians and philosophers that human reason could grasp something of the ultimate 
nature of things. If challenged that this was beyond the power of our minds to penetrate, 
they could always point to Euclidean geometry as a concrete of example of how and 
where this type of insight into the ultimate nature of things had already been possible. As 
a result, the discoveries by Riemann, Bolyai, Lobachevskii, and Gauss that other 
geometries existed, but in which Euclid’s parallel postulate was not included, had a major
impact outside of mathematics7. The existence of other logically consistent geometries 
meant that Euclid’s geometry was not the truth: it was simply a model for some parts of 
the truth. As a result, new forms of relativism sprang up, nourished by the demonstration 
that even Euclid’s ancient foundational system was merely one of many possible 
geometries – and indeed one of these alternatives was a far more appropriate model for 
describing the geometry of the Earth’s surface than Euclid’s. Curious books appeared 
about non-Euclidean models of government and economics. ‘Non-Euclidean’ became a 
byword for new and relative truth, the very latest intellectual fashion8. Later, new logics 
would be created as well, by changing the axioms of the classical logical system that 
Aristotle had defined. 
       Out of these studies emerged a deeper appreciation of the need for axioms to be 
consistently defined and clearly stated. The traditional realist view of mathematics as a 
description of how the world ‘was’ had to be superseded by a more sophisticated  view 
that recognised mathematics to be an unlimited system of patterns which arise from the 
infinite number of possible axiomatic systems that can be defined. Some of  those 
patterns appear to be made use of in Nature, but most are not. Mathematical systems like 
Euclidean geometry had been assumed to be part of the absolute truth about the world 
and uniquely related to reality. But the development of non-Euclidean geometries and 
non-standard logics meant that mathematical existence now meant nothing more than 
logical self-consistency (ie it must not be possible to prove that 0 = 1). It no longer had 
any necessary requirement of physical existence.

Hilbert’s programme
       The careful study of axiomatic systems revealed that even Euclid’s beautiful 
development of plane geometry made use of unstated axioms. In 1882, Moritz Pasch 
gave a very simple example of an intuitively ‘obvious’ property of points and lines that 
could not be proved from Euclid’s classical axioms9. If the points A, B, C,  and D lie on a 
straight line such that B lies between A and C and C lies between B and D then it is not 

4

possible to prove that B lies between A and D. The picture of the set up made it appear 
inevitable but that is not a substitute for a proof.

                                           A            B                    C                D

_____________________________

Pasch wanted to distinguish between the logical consequences of the axioms of geometry 
and those properties that we just assumed were intuitively true. For him, mathematical 
argumentation should not depend on any physical interpretation or visualisation of the 
quantities involved.
      David Hilbert, the greatest mathematician of the day, felt the influence of Pasch’s 
writings and began a systematic programme in 1900 to place mathematics upon a formal 
axiomatic footing10. He believed that it would be possible to determine the axioms 
underlying each part of mathematics (and hence of the whole), demonstrate that these 
axioms are self-consistent, and then show that the resulting system of statements and 
deductions formed from these axioms is both complete and decidable. More precisely, a 
system is consistent if we cannot prove a statement S and its negation, S, are both true 
theorems. It is complete if for every statement S we can form in its language, either S or 
its negation, S is a true theorem. It is decidable if for every statement S that can be 
formed in its language, we can deduce whether S is true or false. Thus, if a system is 
decidable it must be complete.
     Hilbert’s formalistic vision of mathematics was of a tight web of deductions spreading 
out with impeccable logical connections from the defining axioms. Indeed, mathematics 
was defined to be the collection of all those deductions. Hilbert set out to complete this 
formalisation of mathematics with the help of others, and believed that it would 
ultimately be possible to extend its scope to include sciences like physics11 which were 
built upon applied mathematics. He began with Euclidean geometry and succeeded in 
placing it on a rigorous axiomatic basis. His programme then imagined strengthening the 
system by adding additional axioms, showing at each step that consistency and 
decidability remained, until eventually the system had become large enough to 
encompass the whole of arithmetic. 
       Hilbert’s programme began confidently and he believed that it would just be a matter 
of time before all of mathematics was corralled within its formalistic web. Alas, the 
world was soon turned upon its head by the young Kurt Gödel. Gödel had completed one 
of the early steps in Hilbert’s programme as part of his doctoral thesis, by proving the 
consistency and completeness of 1st-order logic (later Alonzo Church would show that it 
was not decidable). But the next steps that he took have ensured his fame as the greatest 
logician of modern times. Far from extending Hilbert’s programme to achieve its key 
objective – a proof of the completeness of arithmetic – Gödel proved that any system rich 
enough to contain arithmetic must be incomplete and undecidable. This took almost 
everyone by surprise, with the exceptions perhaps of John von Neumann, who was 
present at the conference in Königsberg (Hilbert’s home town) on 7th September 1930 
when Gödel briefly communicated his results, and Paul Finsler (who tried unsuccessfully 
to convince Gödel that he had discovered these results before him), and effectively killed 
Hilbert’s programme with one stroke.

5

Theory

Is it Consistent?

Is it Complete? 

Is it Decidable?

Propositional 
calculus
Euclidean 
geometry
1st order logic

Arithmetic 
(+,-) only
Arithmetic
In full (+,-,,)

Yes
Gödel 
Yes
Tarski
Yes
Gödel
Yes
Presburger
??

Yes
Gödel
Yes
Tarski
Yes
Gödel
Yes
Presburger
No
Gödel

Yes
Gödel
Yes
Tarski
No
Church
Yes
Presburger
No
Gödel

Table: Summary of the results established about the consistency, completeness, and 
decidability of simple logical systems.
      

2: Some Mathematical Jujitsu

The Optimists and the Pessimists
     Gödel 's monumental demonstration, that systems of mathematics have limits, gradually  
infiltrated the way in which philosophers and scientists viewed the world and our quest to 
understand it. Some commentators claimed that it shows that all human investigations of the 
Universe must be limited. Science is based on mathematics; mathematics cannot discover all 
truths; therefore science cannot discover all truths. One of Gödel's contemporaries, Hermann 
Weyl, described Gödel's discovery as exercising a 'constant drain on the enthusiasm' with which 
he pursued his scientific research. He believed that this underlying pessimism, so different from 
the rallying cry which Hilbert had issued to mathematicians in 1900, was shared 'by other 
mathematicians who are not indifferent to what their scientific endeavours mean in the context of 
man's whole caring and knowing, suffering and creative existence in the world'. In more recent 
times, one writer on theology and science with a traditional Catholic stance, Stanley Jaki, 
believes that Gödel’s theorem prevents us from gaining an understanding of the cosmos as a 
necessary truth,

'Clearly then no scientific cosmology, which of necessity must be highly mathematical, can have 
its proof of consistency within itself as far as mathematics goes. In the absence of such 
consistency, all mathematical models, all theories of elementary particles, including the theory of 
quarks and gluons...fall inherently short of being that theory which shows in virtue of its a priori 
truth that the world can only be what it is and nothing else. This is true even if the theory 
happened to account with perfect accuracy for all phenomena of the physical world known at a 
particular time.' 12

It constitutes a fundamental barrier to understanding of the Universe, for:

'It seems that on the strength of Gödel's theorem that the ultimate foundations of the bold 
symbolic constructions of mathematical physics will remain embedded forever in that deeper level 
of thinking characterized both by the wisdom and by the haziness of analogies and intuitions. For 

6

the speculative physicist this implies that there are limits to the precision of certainty, that even in 
the pure thinking of theoretical physics there is a boundary...An integral part of this boundary is 
the scientist himself, as a thinker..' 13

    Intriguingly, and just to show the important role human psychology plays in assessing 
the significance of limits, other scientists, like Freeman Dyson, acknowledge that Gödel 
places limits on our ability to discover the truths of mathematics and science, but 
interpret this as ensuring that science will go on forever. Dyson sees the incompleteness 
theorem as an insurance policy against the scientific enterprise, which he admires so 
much, coming to a self-satisfied end; for14

'Gödel proved that the world of pure mathematics is inexhaustible; no finite set of axioms and rules 
of inference can ever encompass the whole of mathematics; given any set of axioms, we can find 
meaningful mathematical questions which the axioms leave unanswered. I hope that an analogous 
situation exists in the physical world. If my view of the future is correct, it means that the world of 
physics and astronomy is also inexhaustible; no matter how far we go into the future, there will 
always be new things happening, new information coming in, new worlds to explore, a constantly 
expanding domain of life, consciousness, and memory.' 

       Thus, we see epitomised the optimistic and the pessimistic responses to Gödel. The 
‘optimists’, like Dyson, see his result as a guarantor of the never-ending character of 
human investigation. They see scientific research as part of an essential part of the human 
spirit which, if it were completed, would have a disastrous de-motivating effect upon us –
just as it did upon Weyl. The ‘pessimists’, like Jaki, Lucas15, and Penrose16, by contrast, 
interpret Gödel as establishing that the human mind cannot know all (maybe not even 
most) of the secrets of Nature. 
       Gödel's own view was as unexpected as ever. He thought that intuition, by which we 
can 'see' truths of mathematics and science, was a tool that would one day be valued just 
as formally and reverently as logic itself,

'I don't see any reason why we should have less confidence in this kind of perception, i.e., in 
mathematical intuition, than in sense perception, which induces us to build up physical theories 
and to expect that future sense perceptions will agree with them and, moreover, to believe that a 
question not decidable now has meaning and may be decided in the future.'17

        

However, it is easy to use Gödel’s theorem in ways that play fast and loose with the 
underlying assumptions of his theorem. Many speculative applications can be found 
spanning the fields of philosophy, theology, and computing and they have been examined 
in a lucid critical fashion by the late Torkel Franzén18. 
     Gödel was not minded to draw any strong conclusions for physics from his 
incompleteness theorems. He made no connections with the Uncertainty Principle of 
quantum mechanics, which was advertised as another great deduction which limited our 
ability to know, and which was discovered by Heisenberg just a few years before Gödel 
made his discovery. In fact, Gödel was rather hostile to any consideration of quantum 
mechanics at all. Those who worked at the same Institute for Advanced Study (no one 
really worked with Gödel) believed that this was a result of his frequent discussions with 
Einstein who, in the words of John Wheeler (who knew them both) 'brainwashed Gödel' 
into disbelieving quantum mechanics and the Uncertainty Principle. Greg Chaitin 

7

records19 this account of Wheeler's attempt to draw Gödel out on the question of whether 
there is a connection between Gödel incompleteness and Heisenberg’s Uncertainty
Principle,

'Well, one day I was at the Institute for Advanced Study, and I went to Gödel's office, and there 
was Gödel. It was winter and Gödel had an electric heater and had his legs wrapped in a blanket. 
I said 'Professor Gödel, what connection do you see between your incompleteness theorem and 
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle?' And Gödel got angry and threw me out of his office!' 20

     The claim that mathematics contains unprovable statements -- physics is based on 
mathematics -- therefore physics will not be able to discover everything that is true, has 
been around for a long time. More sophisticated versions of it have been constructed 
which exploit the possibility of uncomputable mathematical operations being required to 
make predictions about observable quantities. From this vantage point, Stephen Wolfram, 
has conjectured that21

'One may speculate that undecidability is common in all but the most trivial physical theories. 
Even simply formulated problems in theoretical physics may be found to be provably insoluble.'

Indeed, it is known that undecidability is the rule rather than the exception amongst the 
truths of arithmetic22. 

Drawing the Line Between Completeness and Incompleteness 
      With these worries in mind, let us look a little more closely at what Gödel's result 
might have to say about physics. The situation is not so clear-cut as some commentators 
would often have us believe. It is useful to layout the precise assumptions that underlie 
Gödel's deduction of incompleteness. Gödel's theorem says that if a formal system is

1.  finitely specified
2.  large enough to include arithmetic
3.  consistent

then it is incomplete.
  Condition 1 means that there are not an uncomputable infinity of axioms.  We could not, 
for instance, choose our system to consist of all the true statements about arithmetic 
because this collection cannot be finitely listed in the required sense.
    Condition 2 means that the formal system includes all the symbols and axioms used in 
arithmetic.  The symbols are 0, 'zero', S, 'successor of', +, , and  =. Hence, the number 
two is the successor of the successor of zero, written as the term SS0, and two and plus 
two equals four is expressed as SS0 + SS0 = SSSS0. 
     The structure of arithmetic plays a central role in the proof of Gödel's theorem. 
Special properties of numbers, like their factorisations and the fact that any number can 
be factored in only one way as the product of  prime divisors (eg. 130 = 2513), were 
used by Gödel to establish a crucial correspondence between statements of mathematics 
and statements about mathematics. Thereby, linguistic paradoxes like that of the 'liar' 
could be embedded, like Trojan horses, within the structure of mathematics itself. Only 

8

logical systems which are rich enough to include arithmetic allow this incestuous 
encoding of statements about themselves to be made within their own language. 
      Again, it is instructive to see how these requirements might fail to be met. If we 
picked a theory  that consisted of references to (and relations between) only the first ten 
numbers (0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9) then Condition 2 fails and such a mini-arithmetic is 
complete.  Arithmetic makes statements about individual numbers, or terms (like SS0, 
above). If a system does not have individual terms like this but, like Euclidean geometry, 
only makes statements about points, circles, and lines, in general, then it cannot satisfy 
Condition 2. Accordingly, as Alfred Tarski first showed, Euclidean geometry is 
complete. There is nothing magical about the flat, Euclidean nature of the geometry 
either: the non-Euclidean geometries on curved surfaces are also complete. Completeness 
can be long-winded though. A statement of geometry involving n symbols can take up to
exp[exp[n]] computational steps to have its truth or falsity determined23.
     Similarly, if we had a logical theory dealing with numbers that only used the concept 
of 'greater than', without referring to any specific numbers, then it would be complete: we 
can determine the truth or falsity of any statement about real numbers involving just the 
'greater than' relationship. 
     Another example of a system that is smaller than arithmetic is arithmetic without the 
multiplication, , operation. This is called Presburger24 arithmetic (the full arithmetic is 
called Peano arithmetic after the mathematician who first expressed it axiomatically, in 
1889). At first this sounds strange, in our everyday encounters with multiplication it is 
nothing more than a shorthand way of doing addition (eg 2+2+2+2+2+2 = 26), but in 
the full logical system of arithmetic, in the presence of logical quantifiers like 'there 
exists' or 'for any', multiplication permits constructions which are not merely equivalent 
to a succession of additions. 
        Presburger arithmetic is complete: all statements about the addition of natural 
numbers can be proved or disproved; all truths can be reached from the axioms25. 
Similarly, if we create another truncated version of arithmetic, which does not have 
addition, but retains multiplication, this is also complete. It is only when addition and 
multiplication are simultaneously present that incompleteness emerges.  Extending the 
system further by adding extra operations like exponentiation to the repertoire of basic 
operations makes no difference. Incompleteness remains but  no intrinsically new form of 
it is found. Arithmetic is the watershed in complexity.
       The use of  Gödel to place limits on what a  mathematical theory of physics (or 
anything else) can ultimately tell us seems a fairly straightforward consequence. But as 
one looks more carefully into the question, things are not quite so simple. Suppose, for 
the moment, that all the conditions required for Gödel's theorem to hold are in place. 
What would incompleteness look like in practice?  We are familiar with the situation of 
having a physical theory which makes accurate predictions about a wide range of 
observed phenomena: we might call it 'the standard model'.  One day, we may be 
surprised by an observation about which it has nothing to say. It cannot be 
accommodated within its framework. Examples are provided by some so called ‘grand 
unified theories’ in particle physics. Some early editions of these theories had the 
property that all neutrinos must have zero mass. Now if a neutrino is observed to have a 
non-zero mass (as experiments have now confirmed) then we know that the new situation 
cannot be accommodated within our original theory. What do we do? We have 

9

encountered a certain sort of incompleteness, but we respond to it by extending or 
modifying the theory to include the new possibilities. Thus, in practice, incompleteness 
looks very much like inadequacy in a theory. 
      In the case of arithmetic, if some statement about arithmetic is known to be 
undecidable (there are known statements of this sort, it means that both their truth and 
falsity are consistent with the axioms of arithmetic) then we have two ways of extending 
the structure. We can create two new arithmetics: one which adds the undecidable 
statement as an extra axiom, the other which adds it negation as a new axiom. Of course, 
the new arithmetics will still be incomplete, but they can always be extended to 
accommodate any incompleteness. Thus, in practice, a physical theory can always be 
enlarged by adding new principles which force all the undecidability into the part of the 
mathematical realm which has no physical manifestation. Incompleteness would then 
always be very hard, if not impossible, to distinguish from incorrectness or inadequacy.
      An interesting  example of this dilemma is provided by the history of mathematics. 
During the sixteenth century, mathematicians started to explore what happened when 
they added together infinite lists of numbers. If the quantities in the list get larger then the 
sum will 'diverge', that is, as the number of terms approaches infinity so does the sum. An 
example is the sum

1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 +........ = infinity.

However, if the individual terms get smaller and smaller sufficiently rapidly26 then the 
sum of an infinite number of terms can get closer and closer to a finite limiting value 
which we shall call the sum of the series; for example

1 + 1/9 + 1/25 +1/36 + 1/49 +..... =  2/8 =  1.2337005..

This left mathematicians to worry about a most peculiar type of unending sum,

1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + 1 -..... = ?????

If you divide up the series into pairs of terms it looks like (1-1) + (1-1) +.... and so on. 
This is just 0 + 0 + 0 +... = 0 and the sum is zero. But think of the series as 1-{1-1 + 1 - 1 
+ 1 -...} and it looks like 1 - {0} = 1. We seem to have proved that 0 = 1. 
      Mathematicians had a variety of choices when faced with ambiguous sums like this. 
They could reject infinities in mathematics and deal only with finite sums of numbers, or, 
as Cauchy showed in the early nineteenth century, the sum of a series like the last one 
must be defined by specifying more closely what is meant by its sum. The limiting value 
of the sum must be specified together with the procedure used to calculate it. The 
contradiction 0 = 1 arises only when one omits to specify the procedure used to work out 
the sum. In both cases it is different, and so the two answers are not the same because 
they arise in different axiomatic systems. Thus, here we see a simple example of how a 
limit is side-stepped by enlarging the concept which seems to create limitations. 
Divergent series can be dealt with consistently so long as the concept of a sum for a 
series is suitably extended27.

10

     Another possible way of evading Gödel’s theorem is if the physical world only makes 
use of the decidable part of mathematics. We know that mathematics is an infinite sea of 
possible structures. Only some of those structures and patterns appear to find existence 
and application in the physical world. It may be that they are all from the subset of 
decidable truths. Things may be even better protected than that: perhaps only computable 
patterns are instantiated in physical reality?
       It is also possible that the conditions required to prove Gödel incompleteness do not 
apply to physical theories. Condition 1 requires the axioms of the theory to be listable. It 
might be that the laws of physics are not listable in this predictable sense. This would be 
a radical departure from the situation that we think exists, where the number of 
fundamental laws is believed to be not just listable, but finite (and very small). But it is 
always possible that we are just scratching the surface of  a bottomless tower of laws, 
only the top of which has significant effects upon our experience.  However, if there were 
an unlistable infinity of physical laws then we would face a more formidable problem 
than that of incompleteness. 
      In fact, in 1940, Gerhard Gentzen, one of Hilbert's young students who lost his life in 
the War soon afterwards, showed that it was possible to circumvent Gödel's conclusions 
and deduce all the truths of arithmetic if a procedure of transfinite induction is included. 
Again, the operations of Nature might include such a non-finite system of axioms. We are 
inclined to think of incompleteness as something undesirable because it implies that we 
will not be able to 'do' something. But we could turn the situation on its head and 
conclude that Nature is consistent and complete but cannot be captured by a finite set of 
axioms. To some, there is something aesthetically satisfying about this superhuman 
complexion to things.  
     An equally interesting issue is that of finiteness. It may be that the universe of 
physical possibilities is finite, although astronomically large28. However, no matter how 
large the number of primitive quantities to which the laws refer, so long as they are finite,
the resulting system of inter-relationships will be complete. We should stress that 
although we habitually assume that there is a continuum of points of space and time this 
is just an assumption that is very convenient for the use of simple mathematics. There is 
no deep reason to believe that space and time are continuous, rather than discrete, at their 
most fundamental microscopic level; in fact, there are some theories of quantum gravity 
that assume that they are not. Quantum theory has introduced discreteness and finiteness 
in a number of places where once we believed in a continuum of possibilities. Curiously, 
if we give up this continuity, so that there is not necessarily another point in between any 
two sufficiently close points you care to choose. Space-time structure becomes infinitely
more complicated because continuous functions can be defined by their values on the 
rationals. Many more things can happen. This question of finiteness might also be bound 
up with the question of whether the universe is finite in volume and whether the number 
of elementary particles (or whatever the most elementary entities might be) of Nature are 
finite or infinite in number.  Thus, there might only exist a finite number of terms to 
which the ultimate logical theory of the physical world applies. Hence, it would be 
complete. 
     A further possibility with regard to the application of Gödel to the laws of physics is 
that Condition 2 of the incompleteness theorem might not be met. How could this be? 
Although we seem to make wide use of arithmetic, and much larger mathematical 

11

structures, when we carry out scientific investigations of the laws of Nature, this does not 
mean that the inner logic of the physical Universe needs to employ such a large structure. 
It is undoubtedly convenient for us to use large mathematical structures together with 
concepts like infinity but this may be an anthropomorphism. The deep structure of the 
Universe may be rooted in a much simpler logic than that of full arithmetic, and hence be 
complete. All this would require would be for the underlying structure to contain either 
addition or multiplication but not both. Recall that all the sums that you have ever done 
have used multiplication simply as a shorthand for addition. They would be possible in 
Presburger arithmetic as well. Alternatively, a basic structure of reality that made use of 
simple relationships of a geometrical variety, or which derived from 'greater than' or 'less 
than' relationships, or subtle combinations of them all could also remain complete29. The 
fact that Einstein's theory of general relativity replaces many physical notions like force 
and weight by geometrical distortions in the fabric of space-time may well hold some 
clue about what is possible here.
      The laws of physics might be fully expressible in terms of a mathematical system that 
is complete, but in practice we would always be far more concerned with making sure 
that we had got the correct system than a complete system.  
       There is another important aspect of the situation to be keep in view. Even if a 
logical system is complete, it always contains unprovable 'truths'. These are the axioms 
which are chosen to define the system. And after they are chosen, all the logical system 
can do is deduce conclusions from them. In simple logical systems, like Peano arithmetic, 
the axioms seem reasonably obvious because we are thinking backwards -- formalising 
something that we have been doing intuitively for thousands of years. When we look at a 
subject like physics, there are parallels and differences. The axioms, or laws, of physics 
are the prime target of physics research. They are by no means intuitively obvious, 
because they govern regimes that can lie far outside of our experience. The outcomes of 
those laws are unpredictable in certain circumstances because they involve symmetry 
breakings. Trying to deduce the laws from the outcomes is not something that we can 
ever do uniquely and completely by means of  a computer programme. 
     Thus, we detect a completely different emphasis in the study of formal systems and in 
physical science. In mathematics and logic, we start by defining a system of axioms and 
laws of deduction. Then, we might try to show that the system is complete or incomplete, 
and deduce as many theorems as we can from the axioms. In science, we are not at liberty 
to pick any logical system of laws that we choose. We are trying to find the system of 
laws and axioms (assuming there is one -- or more than one perhaps) that will give rise to 
the outcomes that we see. As we stressed earlier, it is always possible to find a system of 
laws which will give rise to any set of observed outcomes. But it is the very set of 
unprovable statements that the logicians and the mathematicians ignore -- the axioms and 
laws of deduction -- that the scientist is most interested in discovering rather than simply 
assuming. The only hope of proceeding as the logicians do, would be if for some reason 
there is only one possible set of axioms or laws of physics. So far, this does not seem 
likely30; even if it were we would not be able to prove.

3: Laws versus Outcomes

Symmetry Breaking

12

       The structure of modern physics presents with an important dichotomy. It is 
important to appreciate this division in order to understand the significance of Gödel  
incompleteness for physics. The fundamental laws of Nature governing the weak, strong, 
electromagnetic, and gravitational forces, are all local gauge theories derived from the 
maintenance of particular mathematical symmetries. As these forces become unified, the 
number of symmetries involved will be reduced until ultimately (perhaps) there is only 
one over-arching symmetry dictating the form the laws of Nature – a so-called ‘Theory of 
Everything’, of which M theory is the current candidate. Thus the laws of Nature are in a 
real sense ‘simple’ and highly symmetrical. The ultimate symmetry which unites them 
must possess a number of properties in order to accommodate all the low-energy 
manifestations of the separate forces, the states that look like elementary ‘particles’ with 
all their properties, and it must be big enough for them all to fit in. 
        There is no reason why Gödel incompleteness should hamper the search for this all-
encompassing symmetry governing the laws of Nature. This search is, at root, a search 
for a pattern, perhaps a group symmetry or some other mathematical prescription. It need 
not be complicated and it probably has a particular mathematical property that makes it 
specially (or even uniquely) fitted for this purpose. 
        In reality, we never ‘see’ laws of Nature: they inhabit a Platonic realm. Rather, we 
witness their outcomes. This is an important distinction,  because the outcomes are quite 
different to the laws that govern them. They are asymmetrical and complicated and need 
possess none of the symmetries displayed by the laws. This is fortunate because, were it 
not so, we could not exist. If the outcomes of the laws of Nature possessed all the 
symmetries of the laws then nothing could happen which did not respect them. There 
could be no structures located at particular times and places, no directional asymmetries, 
and nothing happening at any one moment. All would be unchanging and empty. 
        This dichotomy between laws and outcomes is what I would call ‘the secret of the 
universe’. It is what enables a Universe to be governed by a very small number (perhaps 
just one) of simple and symmetrical laws, yet give rise to an unlimited number of highly 
complex, asymmetrical states – of which we are one variety31. 
         Thus, whereas there is no reason to worry about Gödel incompleteness frustrating 
the search for the mathematical descriptions of the laws of Nature, we might well expect 
Gödel incompleteness to arise in our attempts to describe some of the complicated 
sequences of events that arise as outcomes to the laws of Nature.

Undecidable Outcomes
      Specific examples have been given of physical problems in which the outcomes of 
their underlying laws are undecidable. As one might expect from what has just been said, 
they do not involve an inability to determine something fundamental about the nature of 
the laws of physics, or even the most elementary particles of matter. Rather, they involve 
an inability to perform some specific mathematical calculation, which inhibits our ability 
to determine the course of events in a well-defined physical problem. However, although 
the problem may be mathematically well defined, this does not mean that it is possible to 
create the precise conditions required for the undecidability to exist.
      An interesting series of examples of this sort have been created by the Brazilian 
mathematicians, Francisco Doria and N. da Costa32. Responding to a challenge problem 
posed by the Russian mathematician Vladimir Arnold, they investigated whether it was 

13

possible to have a general mathematical criterion which would decide whether or not any 
equilibrium was stable. A stable equilibrium is a situation like a ball sitting in the bottom 
of a basin – displace it slightly and it returns to the bottom; an unstable equilibrium is like 
a needle balanced vertically – displace it slightly and it moves away from the vertical33. 
When the equilibrium is of a simple nature this problem is very elementary; first-year 
science students learn about it.  But, when the equilibrium exists in the face of more 
complicated couplings between the different competing influences, the problem soon 
becomes more complicated than the situation studied by science students34. So long as 
there are only a few competing influences the stability of the equilibrium can still be 
decided by inspecting the equations that govern the situation. Arnold’s challenge was to 
discover an algorithm which tells us if this can always be done, no matter how many 
competing influences there are, and no matter how complex their inter-relationships. By 
‘discover’ he meant find a formula into which you can feed the equations which govern 
the equilibrium along with your definition of stability, and out of which will pop the 
answer ‘stable’ or unstable’.
     Da Costa and Doria discovered that there can exist no such algorithm. There exist 
equilibria characterised by special solutions of mathematical equations whose stability is 
undecidable. In order for this undecidability to have an impact on problems of real 
interest in mathematical physics the equilibria have to involve the interplay of very large 
numbers of different forces. While such equilibria cannot be ruled out, they have not 
arisen yet in real physical problems. Da Costa and Doria went on to identify similar 
problems where the answer to a simple question, like ‘will the orbit of a particle become 
chaotic’, is Gödel undecidable. They can be viewed as physically grounded examples of 
the theorems of Rice35 and Richardson36 which show, in a precise sense, that only trivial 
properties of computer programs are algorithmically decidable. Others have also tried to 
identify formally undecidable problems. Geroch and Hartle have discussed problems in 
quantum gravity that predict the values of potentially observable quantities as a sum of 
terms whose listing is known to be a Turing uncomputable operation37. Pour-El and 
Richards38 showed that very simple differential equations, which are widely used in 
physics, like the wave equation, can have uncomputable outcomes when the initial data is 
not very smooth. This lack of smoothness gives rise to what mathematicians call an ‘ill-
posed’ problem. It is this feature that gives rise to the uncomputability. However, Traub 
and Wozniakowski39 have shown that every ill-posed problem is well-posed on the 
average under rather general conditions. Wolfram40 gives examples of intractability an 
undecidability arising in condensed matter physics. 
         The study of Einstein’s’ general theory of relativity also produces an undecidable 
problem if the mathematical quantities involved are unrestricted41. When one finds an 
exact solution of Einstein’s equations it is always necessary to discover whether it is just 
another,  known solution that is written in a different form. Usually, one can investigate 
this by hand, but for complicated solutions computers can help. For this purpose we 
require computers programmed to carry out algebraic manipulations. They can check 
various quantities to discover if a given solution is equivalent to one already sitting in its 
memory bank of known solutions. In practical cases encountered so far, this checking 
procedure comes up with a definite result after a small number of steps. But, in general, 
the comparison is an undecidable process equivalent to another famous undecidable 

14

           

problem of pure mathematics, ‘the word problem’ of group theory, first posed by Max 
Dehn42 in 1911 and shown to be undecidable in 195543.  
        The tentative conclusions we should draw from this discussion is that, just because 
physics makes use of mathematics, it is by no means required that Gödel places any  limit 
upon the overall scope of physics to understand the laws of Nature44. The mathematics 
that Nature makes use of may be smaller, and simpler than is needed for undecidability to 
rear its head.  

4: Gödel and Space-time Structure

Space-time in a Spin
       Although Kurt Gödel is famous amongst logicians for his incompleteness theorems, 
he is also famous amongst cosmologists, but for a quite different reason. In 1949, 
inspired by his many conversations with Einstein about the nature of time and Mach’s 
principle, Gödel found a  new and completely unsuspected type of solution to Einstein’s 
equations of general relativity45. Gödel’s solution was a universe that rotated and 
permitted time travel to occur into the past.  The idea of time travel first appeared in H.G. 
Wells’ famous 1895 story, The Time Machine, but it was widely suspected that 
backwards46 time travel into the past would in some way be in conflict with the laws of 
Nature. Gödel’s universe showed that was not necessarily so: it could arise as a 
consequence of a theory obeying all the conservation laws of physics.
          Gödel’s universe is not the one that we live in. For one thing, Gödel’s universe is 
not expanding; for another, there is no evidence that our Universe is rotating – if it is then 
its rotation rate must be at least 105 times slower than its expansion rate because of the 
isotropy of the microwave background radiation47. Nonetheless, Gödel’s universe was a 
key discovery in the study of space-time and gravitation. If time travel was possible, 
perhaps it could arise in other universes which are viable descriptions of our own? It 
revealed for the first time the subtlety of the global structure of space-time, particularly 
when rotation is present. Later, Roger Penrose would introduce some powerful new 
methods of differential topology to this problem and  prove the first singularity theorems 
in cosmology. But it was Gödel’s universe that first showed how unusual space-times 
could be.
            In recent years, Gödel’s study of space-time structure and his work on the 
incompleteness of logical systems have been pulled together in a fascinating way. It has 
been shown that there is a link between the global structure of a space-time and the sorts 
of computations that can be completed within them. This unexpected link arises from a 
strange old problem with a new name: is it possible to do an infinite number of things in a 
finite amount of time? And the new name for such a remarkable old activity is a 
‘supertask’.

Supertasks
    The ancients, beginning with Zeno, were challenged by the paradoxes of infinities 
on many fronts48. But what about philosophers today? What sort of problems do they 
worry about? There are live issues on the interface between science and philosophy that 
are concerned with whether it is possible to build an "infinity machine" that can perform 
an infinite number of tasks in a finite time. Of course, this simple question needs some 

15

clarification: what exactly is meant by "possible", "tasks", "number", "infinite", "finite" 
and, by no means least, by "time". Classical physics appears to impose few physical 
limits on the functioning of infinity machines because there is no limit to the speed at 
which signals can travel or switches can move. Newton's laws allow an infinity machine. 
This can be seen by exploiting a discovery about Newtonian dynamics made in 1971 by 
the US mathematician Jeff Xia49. First take four particles of equal mass and arrange them 
in two binary pairs orbiting with equal but oppositely-directed spins in two separate
parallel planes, so the overall angular momentum is zero. Now, introduce a fifth much 
lighter particle that oscillates back and forth along a perpendicular line joining the mass 
centres of the two binary pairs. Xia showed that such a system of five particles will 
expand to infinite size in a finite time!

How does this happen? The little oscillating particle runs back and forth between 

the binary pairs, each time creating an unstable meeting of three bodies. The lighter 
particle then gets kicked back and the binary pair recoils outwards to conserve 
momentum. The lighter particle then travels across to the other binary and the same 
ménage à trois is repeated there. This continues without end, accelerating the binary pairs
apart so strongly that they become infinitely separated while the lighter particle 
undergoes an infinite number of oscillations in the finite time before the system achieves 
infinite size.

Unfortunately (or perhaps fortunately), this behaviour is not possible when 
relativity is taken into account. No information can be transmitted faster than the speed of 
light and gravitational forces cannot become arbitrarily strong in Einstein's theory of 
motion and gravitation; nor can masses get arbitrarily close to each other and recoil -
there is a limit to how close separation can get, after which an "event horizon" surface 
encloses the particles to form a black hole50. Their fate is then sealed – no such infinity 
machine could send information to the outside world.

But this does not mean that all relativistic infinity machines are forbidden51. 
Indeed, the Einsteinian relativity of time that is a requirement of all observers, no matter 
what their motion, opens up some interesting new possibilities for completing infinite 
tasks in finite time. Could it be that one moving observer could see an infinite number of 
computations occurring even though only a finite number had occurred according to 
someone else? Misner52 and Barrow and Tipler53 have shown that there are examples of 
entire universes in which an infinite number of oscillations occur on approach to 
singularities in space-time but it is necessary for the entire universe to hit the singularity; 
in effect, the whole universe is the infinity machine. It still remains to ask whether a local 
infinity machine could exist and send us signals as a result of completing an infinite 
number of operations in a finite amount of our time.

The famous motivating example of this sort of temporal relativity is the so-called 
twin paradox. Two identical twins are given different future careers. Tweedlehome stays 
at home while Tweedleaway goes away on a space flight at a speed approaching that of 
light. When they are eventually reunited, relativity predicts that Tweedleaway will find
Tweedlehome to be much older. The twins have experienced different careers in space 
and time because of the acceleration and deceleration that Tweedleaway underwent on 
his round trip. 

So can we ever send a computer on a journey so extreme that it could accomplish 
an infinite number of operations by the time it returns to its stay-at-home owner? Itamar 

16

Pitowsky first argued54 that if Tweedleaway could accelerate his spaceship sufficiently 
strongly, then he could record a finite amount of the universe's history on his own clock 
while his twin records an infinite amount of time on his clock. Does this, he wondered, 
permit the existence of a "Platonist computer" - one that could carry out an infinite 
number of operations along some trajectory through space and time and print out answers 
that we could see back home. Alas, there is a problem - for the receiver to stay in contact 
with the computer, he also has to accelerate dramatically to maintain the flow of 
information. Eventually the gravitational forces become stupendous and he is torn apart.
Not withstanding these problems a check-list of properties has been compiled for 

universes that can allow an infinite number of tasks to be completed in finite time, or 
"supertasks" as they have become known. These are called Malament-Hogarth (MH) 
universes after David Malament, a University of Chicago philosopher, and Mark 
Hogarth55, a former Cambridge University research student, who, in 1992, investigated 
the conditions under which they were theoretically possible. Supertasks56 open the 
fascinating prospect of finding or creating conditions under which an infinite number of 
things can be seen to be accomplished in a finite time. This has all sorts of consequences 
for computer science and mathematics because it would remove the distinction between 
computable and uncomputable operations. It is something of a surprise that MH universes 
are self-consistent mathematical possibilities but, unfortunately, have properties that 
suggest they are not realistic physical possibilities unless we embrace some disturbing 
notions, such as the prospect of things happening without causes, and travel backwards 
through time. 

The most serious by-product of being allowed to build an infinity machine is 

rather more alarming though. Observers who stray into bad parts of these universes will 
find that being able to perform an infinite number of computations in a finite time also 
means that any amount of radiation, no matter how small, gets compressed to zero 
wavelength and amplified to infinite frequency and energy along the infinite 
computational trail. Thus any attempt to transmit the output from an infinite number of 
computations will zap the receiver and destroy him. So far, these dire problems seem to 
rule out the practicality of engineering a relativistic infinity machine in such a way that 
we could safely receive and store the information. But the universes in which infinite 
tasks are possible in finite time includes a type of space that plays a key role in the 
structure of the very superstring theories that looked so appealingly finite. 
         If you could see the output from an infinity machine that completes supertasks then 
you have the possibility of deciding undecidable problems by direct search through the 
infinite catalogue of possibilities: Turing’s uncomputable operations seem to become 
completeable in a finite amount of our wristwatch time. Is this really possible? 
Remarkably, Hogarth showed57 in some space-times it was possible to decide Gödel 
undecidable questions by direct search by sending a computer along a certain space-time 
path, , so that it could print out and send you the answer to the question. Now, create a 
hierarchy of n space-time structures of ascending complexities such that the nth in the 
sequence allows a supertask to be completed which can check the truth of any 
arithmetical assertion made in the nth  but not the (n+1)st quantifier arithmetic in Kleene’s 
logical hierarchy, by which logicians calibrate the complexity of possible logical 
expressions. There is a neat one-to-one correspondence between the list of space-times 
and the complexity of the logical statements that they can decide. Subsequently, Etesi and 

Nemeti58 showed that some relations on natural numbers which are neither universal nor 
co-universal, can be decided in Kerr space-times.Welch59 recently generalised these 
results to show that the computational capability of space-times could be raised beyond 
that of arithmetic to hyper-arithmetics, and showed that there is upper bound on the 
computational ability in any space-time which is a universal constant defined by the 
space-time.

17

P

d = 
along 



I-(P)

Figure: The space-time of an MH space-time with time mapped vertically and space 
(compressed to one dimension) horizontally. We are located at P and our causal past, 
I-(P) consists of all the events that can influence us. If there is a path in our past, , such 
that there is an infinite amount of its own time passing on approach to the space-time 
point where it intersects our past line cone, the edge of  I-(P).

   

        Thus, in conclusion, we find that Gödel’s ideas are still provoking new research 
programmes and unsuspected properties of the worlds of logical and physical reality. His 
incompleteness theorems should not be a drain on our enthusiasm to seek out and codify 
the laws of Nature: there is no reason for them to limit that search for the fundamental 
symmetries of Nature in any significant way. But, by contrast, in situations of sufficient
complexity, we do expect to find that Gödel incompleteness places limits on our ability to 
use those laws to predict the future, carry out specific computations, or build algorithms: 
incompleteness besets the outcomes of very simple laws of Nature. Finally, if we study 
universes, then Gödel’s impact will always be felt as we try to reconcile the simple local 
geometry of space and time with the extraordinary possibilities that its exotic global 
structure allows. Space-time structure defines what can be proved in a universe.

Acknowledgements I would like to thank Philip Welch for discussions.

18

                                                
1 J.D. Barrow, Impossibility, Oxford UP, Oxford, (1998).
2 J.D. Barrow, The Book of Nothing, Cape, London, (2000).
3 E. Grant, Much Ado About Nothing: Theories of Space and Vacuum from the Middle Ages to the Scientific 
Revolution, Cambridge UP, Cambridge,  (1981). Earlier examples of some of these challenging thought 
experiments can be found in Lucretius, De Rerum Natura Book 1.
4 See H. Leff and A. Rex (eds.), Maxwell’s Demon, Princeton UP, Princeton, (1990) for an overview with 
reprints of all  the crucial papers.
5 K. Guthrie (ed.), The Pythagorean Sourcebook and Library, Phares Press, Grand Rapids, (1987).
6 P. Pesic, Abel’s Proof: an essay on the sources and meaning of mathematical unsolvability, MIT Press, 
Cambridge (2003). This book also contains a new translation of Abel’s 1824 discovery paper.
7 J. Richards, The Reception of a Mathematical Theory: Non-Euclidean geometry in England 1868-1883, in 
Natural Order: Historical Studies of Scientific Culture, eds. B. Barnes and S. Shapin, Sage Publ., Beverly 
Hills, (1979).
8 J.D. Barrow, Pi in the Sky, Oxford UP, Oxford, (1992), pp.8-15.
9 M. Pasch, Vorlesungen über neuere Geometrie, Leipzig,  (1882)
10 See J. Gray, The Hilbert Challenge, Oxford UP, Oxford, (2000) which contains the text of Hilbert’s 
Address to the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1900 on pp. 240-282 and M. Toepell, Archive 
for History of Exact Sciences 35, 329 (1986)
11 L. Corry,  Archive for History of Exact Sciences 51, 83 (1997)
12S. Jaki, Cosmos and Creator, Scottish Academic Press, Edinburgh, (1980), p49.
13S. Jaki, The Relevance of Physics, Univ. Chicago P, Chicago, (1966), p129.
14 F. Dyson, The World on a String, New York Review of Books, May 13th, (2004)
15 J.R. Lucas, Philosophy 36, 112 (1961) and Freedom of the Will (1970).
16 R. Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind, Oxford UP., Oxford, (19XX).
17 K. Gödel, What is Cantor's Continuum Problem?, Philosophy of Mathematics ed. P. Benacerraf & H. 
Putnam p 483
18 T. Frenzén, Gödel’s Theorem: An Incomplete Guide to its Use and Abuse, A.K. Peters, Wellesley, 
(2005).
19 Quoted in J. Bernstein, Quantum Profiles, Basic Bks., NY, (1991). Pp. 140-1; see also J.D. Barrow, 
Impossibility, Oxford UP, Oxford, (1998), chap. 8.
20Recorded by Chaitin see J. Bernstein, Quantum Profiles,  pp 140-1 and K. Svozil, Randomness and 
Undecidability in Physics, World Scientific, Singapore, (1993), p112.
21S. Wolfram,  Cellular Automata and Complexity, Collected Papers, Add. Wesley, Reading MA, (1994).
22C. Calude, Information and randomness -- An Algorithmic Perspective, Springer, Berlin, (1994); C. 
Calude, H. Jürgensen, and M. Zimand, Is Independence an Exception?, Appl. Math. Comput. 66, 63 
(1994); K. Svozil, in Boundaries and Barriers: on the limits of scientific knowledge, eds. J. Casti and A. 
Karlqvist, Add. Wesley, NY, (1996), p. 215.
23 D. Harel, Computers Ltd., Oxford UP, Oxford (2000).
24 M. Presburger, Comptes Rendus du Congrès de Mathématiciens des Pays Slaves, Warsaw pp. 92-101 
(1929); D.C. Cooper, Theorem Proving in Arithmetic without Multiplication, in B. Meltzer and D. Michie 
(eds.), Machine Intelligence, Edinburgh UP, Edinburgh, (1972), pp. 91-100.
25The decision procedure is in general double-exponentially long, though. That is, the computational time 
required to carry out N operations grows as (2N)N. Presburger arithmetic allows us to talk about positive 
integers, and variables whose values are positive integers. If we enlarge it by permitting the concept of sets 
of integers to be used, then the situation becomes almost unimaginably intractable. It has been shown that 
this system does not admit even a K-fold exponential algorithm, for any finite K. The decision problem is 
said to be non-elementary in such situations. The intractability is unlimited; see M.J. Fischer and M.O. 
Rabin, Super-Exponential Complexity of Presburger Arithmetic, Proc. SIAM-AMS Symp. 7, 27-41 
(1974).Appl. Maths, 7, 27-41 (1974).
26That the terms in the sum get progressively smaller is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for an 
infinite sum to be finite. For example, the sum 1+1/2+1/3+1/4+1/5+... is infinite.

19

                                                                                                                                                
27R. Rosen, On the Limitations of Scientific Knowledge, in  Boundaries and Barriers: on the limits of 
scientific knowledge, eds. J.L. Casti and A. Karlqvist, Add. Wesley, NY, (1996), p. 199.
28 This could be because it has positive spatial curvature or a compact spatial topology like that of the 3-
torus even though it has non-positive curvature, see J.D. Barrow, The Infinite Book, Cape, London, (2005), 
chap. 7.
29John A. Wheeler has speculated about the ultimate structure of space-time being a form of 'pregeometry' 
obeying a calculus of propositions restricted by Gödel incompleteness. We are proposing that this 
pregeometry might be simple enough to be complete; see C. Misner, K. Thorne, and J.A. Wheeler, 
Gravitation, W.H. Freeman, San. Fran, (1973), pp. 1211-2. 
30The situation in superstring theory is still very fluid. There appear to exist many different, logically self-
consistent superstring theories, but there are strong indications that they may be different limiting cases of 
another, as yet unfound, theory which has been dubbed M theory.  
31 J.D. Barrow, New Theories of Everything, Oxford UP, Oxford, (2007).
32N.C. da Costa and F. Doria, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 30, 1041 (1991), Found. Phys. Letts., 4, 363 (1991) 
33Actually, there are other more complicated possibilities clustered around the dividing line between these 
two simple possibilities and it is these that provide the indeterminacy of the problem in general.
34 It is may not be determined  at linear order if there are eigenvalues which are zero or are purely 
imaginary.
35 H.G. Rice, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 74, 358 (1953).
36 D. Richardson, Symbolic Logic 33, 514 (1968).
37R. Geroch and J. Hartle, Computability and Physical Theories, Foundations of Physics, 16, 533 (1986). 
The problem is that the calculation of a wave function for a cosmological quantity involves the sum of 
quantities evaluated on every 4-dimensional compact manifold in turn. The listing of this collections of 
manifolds is uncomputable.  
38M.B. Pour-El and I. Richards, A computable ordinary differential equation which possesses no 
computable solution, Ann. Math. Logic, 17, 61 (1979), The wave equation with computable initial data 
such that its unique solution is not computable, Adv. Math. 39, 215 (1981), Non-computability in models of 
physical phenomena, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 553 (1982).
39J.F. Traub and H. Wozniakowski, Information-based Complexity: New Questions for Mathematicians, 
The mathematical Intelligencer, 13, 34 (1991). 
40S. Wolfram, Undecidability and Intractability in Theoretical Physics,  Phys. Rev. Lett., 54, 735 (1985); 
Origins of Randomness in Physical Systems, Phys. Rev. Lett.  55, 449 (1985);  Physics and Computation, 
Int. J. Theo. Phys. 21, 165 (1982).
41If the metric functions are polynomials then the problem is decidable, but is computationally double-
exponential. If the metric functions are allowed to be sufficiently smooth then the problem becomes 
undecidable, see the article on Algebraic Simplification by Buchberger and Loos in Buchberger, Loos and 
Collins, Computer Algebra: symbolic and algebraic computation', 2nd ed., Springer, Wien, (1983). I am 
grateful to Malcolm MacCallum for supplying these details. 
42 M. Dehn, Math. Ann. 71, 73 (1911).
43 See W. Boone,  Annals of Mathematics, 70, 207 (1959)
44 For a fuller discussion of the whole range of limits that may exist on our ability to understand the 
universe see the author’s discussion in J.D. Barrow, Impossibility, Oxford UP, (1998) on which the 
discussion here is based.
45 K. Gödel, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 447 (1949). For details of the global structure of the Gödel universe see 
S.W. Hawking and G.F.R. Ellis, The Large scale Structure of Space-time, Cambridge UP, Cambridge 
(1973); for a study of its stability and a discussion of its Newtonian counterpart, see J.D. Barrow and C.G. 
Tsagas, Class. Quantum Gravity 21, 1773 (2004).
46 Forward time travel into the future is routinely observed and is a simple consequence of special relativity. 
For example, in the case of the twin paradox, the twin who has undergone accelerations returns to find that 
he is younger than his twin: he has in effect time travelled into his twin’s future.
47 J.D. Barrow, R. Juszkiewicz and D.H. Sonoda, MNRAS 213, 917 (1985).
48 A. Grünbaum, Modern Science and Zeno’s Paradoxes, Allen and Unwin, London (1968), and 
Philosophical Problems of Space and Time, 2nd. Edn., Reidel, Dordrecht, (1973), chap. 18.
49 Z. Xia, Ann. Math.  135,, 411 (1992) and D.G. Saari and Z. Xia,  J. Diff. Eqns. 82, 342 (1989). The 
connection between Xia’s remarkable construction is pointed out in and J.D. Barrow, The Infinite Book, 

20

                                                                                                                                                
Cape, London, (2005), chap.10.  Note however, that the initial conditions needed for Xia’s specific 
example are special (a Cantor set) and will not arise in practice. 
50 Once two masses, each of mass M, fall inside a radius 4GM/c2 an event horizon forms around them.
51 We could be living inside a very large black hole along with the infinity machine.
52 C.W. Misner, Phys. Rev.  186, 1328 (1969).
53 J.D. Barrow and F.J. Tipler, The Anthropic Cosmological Principle, Oxford UP, Oxford (1986), chap. 
10.
54 I. Pitowsky, Iyyun 39, 81 (1990).
55 M.L. Hogarth, Found. Phys. Lett. 5, 173 (1992).
56 J. Earman and Norton, Phil. of Sci. 60, 22 (1993) and J.D. Barrow, The Infinite Book, Cape, London, 
(2005), chap.10. 
57 M. Hogarth, Brit. Journal  Phil. of Sci.  55, 681 (2004).
58 G. Etesi and I. Németi, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 41, 341 (2002).
59 P.D. Welch, gr-qc/0609035

