RESPONSE TO FENG HAO'S PAPER "KISH'S KEY EXCHANGE SCHEME IS
INSECURE" *

L. B. KISH†,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3128,
USA

Submitted to Fluctuation and Noise Letters: 21 November 2006
Revised: 5 December 2006

In a forthcoming paper in IEE Proceedings Information Security, Feng Hao claims that temperature
inaccuracies  make  the  key  exchange  scheme  based  on  Kirchhoff  Loop  with  Johnson-like  Noise
insecure. First we point out that this claim is irrelevant for the security of the idealized/mathematical
communicator because it violates basic assumptions. Furthermore, in general practical applications,
as  it  has  been  pointed  out  in  the  very  first  paper,  the  use  of  thermal  noise  is  disadvantageous
therefore the issue of temperature and its accuracy is unimportant even for the security of common
practical realizations. It is important to emphasize that any deviation from the idealized scheme can
lead to a finite level of security. Thus, if the above-mentioned author had stressed the inaccuracy of
the  resistor  values;  his  claim  would  have  been  practically  valid.  However  the  impact  of  such
systematic errors can be kept under control. Here we cite our relevant analysis (Phys.  Lett. A 359,
(2006) 741-744) of 1% voltage inaccuracy along the line due to wire resistance effects, which can be
considered  as  a  general  result  for  inaccuracies  of  this  order.  The  necessity  to  build  a  statistics  to
extract  information  during  the  properly  chosen  clock  time  leads  to  extremely  poor  eavesdropper
statistics and this situation provides a good practical raw bit security that can be orders of magnitude
beyond the raw bit security of idealized quantum communicators.

Keywords: secure classical communication with Johnson-like noise and Kirchhoff loop.

1.  Feng Hao's comments

In  a  forthcoming  paper  [1],  Feng  Hao  claims  that  temperature  inaccuracy/difference  at
the  resistors  in  the  Kirchhoff  Loop  Johnson-like  Noise  (KLJN)  communicators  [2-8]
compromises  its  security.  Indeed,  if  we  run  the  communicator  with  itself  the  Johnson
noise  of  the  resistors  (stealth  communication  [9])  and  the  temperature  of  one  of  the
resistors  deviates  from  the  temperature  of  the  other  resistors,  there  will  be  a  net  power
flow between the communicators (Alice and Bob), see Figure 1. As it was pointed out in
the  first  paper  [2],  non-zero  net  power  flow  between  Alice  and  Bob  compromises
security.  In  the  present  case,  if  the  clock  period  were  infinite,  the  situation  when  the
resistor  with  different  temperature  is  connected  to  the  line  could  be  identified  by  the
measurement  of  the  net  power  flow  and  its  direction.  Though  the  eavesdropper  (Eve)
cannot identify the bit, high or low, she can identify this situation whenever it happens,
provided the temperature is fixed and the clock period is long enough. That means 50%
of  the  shared  key  or  its  inverse  could  be  extracted.  Similarly,  with  proper  differences
between  the  temperatures  of  the  other  resistances,  the  whole  secure  key  or  its  inverse
could be extracted by Eve provided the clock period is sufficiently long. After getting the
key or its inverse, Eve can test it and its inverse on the message and can decrypt the data.
                                                            
* In an email on October 29, 2006, the author of this paper asked the Editors in Chief of the IEE  Proceedings
Information Security for an opportunity of publishing a response following directly Feng Hao's paper. However
the  email  answer  (November  20,  2006)  contained  a  negative  response  saying  that  such  practice  "is  not  the
custom in respected venues in cryptography".
†  Until 1999, L.B. Kiss

Response to Feng Hao's comments about security versus temperature inaccuracies.

A

Low-Pass
Filter

Distributed resistance

Distributed capacitance

Low-Pass
Filter

B

R1

R0

R0

R1

U1A(t)
Su1(f)

U0A(t)
Su0(f)

U0B(t)
Su0(f)

U1B(t)
Su1(f)

Figure  1. The  Kirchhoff  Loop  Johnson-like  Noise  (KLJN)  setup.  Feng  Hao's  comment  is  based  on  the
assumption  that  the  voltage  noise  spectra  Su(f)  are  different  because  the  temperatures  of  the  resistors  are
different at practical (non-ideal) conditions. However, in practical cases, the voltage noise generators are not
thermal but external generators [2] with 1-100 million times greater voltages than the thermal noise therefore
the temperature has no relevance and Hao's comments are inappropriate.

In  Section  2,  we  show  several  reasons  why  Feng Hao's comments [1] are irrelevant. In
Section 3, we show how these comments can be modified and be made partially relevant
for practical situations within the class of non-ideality problems of security. Finally, we
show  the  solution  how  to  keep  the  practical  security  at  any  required  level,  beyond
quantum  security.  This  is  the  very  same  method  that  was  already  described  in  the  first
paper [2] and security data were published in [6].

2.  Why are Feng Hao's comments irrelevant?

2.1. 

Irrelevance for the case of idealized (totally secure) KLJN communicators

It  is  important  to  emphasize  that  the  comments  [1]  are  irrelevant  for  the
idealized/mathematical KLJN key exchange scheme [2] because the comments [1] violate
the mathematical conditions assumed for total security. In the KLJN scheme it is assumed
that  the  temperatures  or  the  spectra  of  voltage  noise  generators  are  equal  and  violating
that  key  assumption  naturally  leads  to  compromised  security.  It  is  like  assuming  that
quantum  communicators  requiring  single  photons  for  security  cannot  produce  single
photons  but  only  larger  packages  of  photons,  which  is  a  valid  practical  problem  at
quantum  communication.  Though  all  the  practical  quantum  communicators  suffer  from
this  deficiency  compromising  practical  security,  we  do  not  say  that  the
idealized/mathematical  quantum  communicator  schemes  are  insecure.  Therefore,  we
conclude  that Feng  Hao's  comments  violate  basic  assumptions  thus  they  are  irrelevant
for the theoretical KLJN scheme which remains totally secure.

2.2. 

Irrelevance for the case of practical KLJN communicators

From the very beginning [2], Johnson (-like) noise  was  used  for  the  KLJN  scheme  and
the Johnson noise based considerations were used only for educational purpose, for the
sake of simplicity, because the well known statistical physical characteristics of Johnson

L.B. Kish

noise make the total security of the idealized KLJN cipher obvious.

As it has been pointed out in the very first paper [2], at practical applications, the use
of  thermal  noise  is  disadvantageous  (except  stealth  communication  [9])  therefore  the
issue  of  temperature  and  its  accuracy  is  unimportant  even  for  the  security  of  common
practical  realizations.  In  practical  applications,  the  voltage  noise  generators  are  not
thermal but external voltage noise generators [2] with 1-100 million times greater RMS
noise  voltage  than  the  Johnson  noise.  Therefore  the  temperature  has  no  relevance  and
Feng Hao's comments are inappropriate for the practical KLJN realizations, too.

3.  A valid practical case: inaccuracies as non-idealities and how to treat them

It is important to emphasize that any deviation from the idealized scheme of a physical
secure  communication  scheme  can  lead  to  a  finite  level  of  security.  Relevant  examples
for that are practical quantum communicators with the impossibility of generating strictly
ideal single photon packages or with the impossibility to avoid detector noise which also
compromise the quantum security. Thus, if the above-mentioned author had stressed the
inaccuracy of the resistor values, his claim would have been practically valid. However
the  impact  of  such  systematic  errors  can  be  kept  under  control  in  practical  KLJN
realizations.  Here  we  cite  our  relevant  analysis  [6]  of  1%  voltage  inaccuracy  (voltage
drop)  along  the  line  due  to  wire  resistance  effects.  The  results  can  be  considered  as
general  result  for  the  security  leak  at  inaccuracies  of  this  order  (1%).  The  necessity  to
build  a  statistics  to  extract  information  during  the  properly  chosen  clock  time  leads  to
extremely poor eavesdropper statistics and this situation provides an excellent practical
raw  bit  security  that  can  easily  be  beyond  the  raw  bit  security  of  idealized  quantum
communicators.

Figure  2  shows  the  results  of  an  analysis  of  the  information  leak  due  to  systematic
errors/inaccuracies  [6],  with  1%  relative  effect,  which  is  a  significantly  worse  situation
than  the  0.5%  systematic  temperature  error  supposed  by  Feng  Hao  [1].  In  the  case  of
Feng Hao's supposed situation, Eve would need 4 times longer clock period to extract the
same  amount  of  information  as  the  analysis  indicates  below.  Practical  parameters  and
noise rectifiers  have been assumed (see [6]). The noise bandwidth (correlation time) and
clock time period are selected so that Alice, Bob and Eve are able to extract only a few
independent  samples  during  the  clock  period.  Alice  and  Bob  must  decide  between  the
amplitude  distributions  f  and  g   on  Figure  2  (a)  and  Eve  must  decide  between  the
amplitude distributions  f and g on Figure 2 (b) while they have a few random hits at the x
coordinates. It is obvious that Alice and Bob have an easy decision and Eve has a very
poor case. Still, the application of Shannon's channel code theorem indicates that, if Eve
finds out the best possible decoding method, she may be able to extract about 0.7% of the
exchanged  bits.  However  this  raw  bit  leak  is  still  better  than  raw  bit  leaks  in  idealized
quantum communicators (see [6]).

Response to Feng Hao's comments about security versus temperature inaccuracies.

Figure  2. Analysis of the information leak due to systematic errors/inaccuracies [6], with 1% relative effect,
which is a significantly worse situation than the 0.5% systematic error supposed by Hao. In the case of Hao's
situation, Eve would need a 4 times longer clock time period to reach the same situation as indicated by these
amplitude density functions.

Finally we note that 1% inaccuracy is an "economical" one and, if higher raw bit security
is  needed,  the  accuracy  can  be  improved  with  sufficient  resources.  For  example,  a  10
times increase of the wire diameter decreases the 1% inaccuracy (voltage drop) in [6] to
0.01%  which  would  make  the  curves  f and g  in  Figure  2  (b)  indistinguishable  by  the
naked eye and decrease the bit leak to 0.00007% which is a raw bit leak /security much
beyond the reach of any quantum communicator.

References

[1]  Feng Hao, "Kish's key exchange scheme is insecure", to appear in IEE Information Security;
manuscript  is  at  http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~fh240/pdf/total.pdf  and  discussions  are  at:
http://www.lightbluetouchpaper.org/2006/10/08/kishs-totally-secure-system-is-insecure
(version downloaded at October 29, 2006).

[2]  L.B.  Kish,  "Totally  secure  classical  communication  utilizing  Johnson  (-like)  noise  and
Kirchhoff's law", Physics Lett. A 352 (2006) 178-182; also at http://arxiv.org/physics/0509136.
[3]  Adrian Cho, "Simple noise may stymie spies without quantum weirdness", Science 309 (2005)

2148.

[4]  L.B.  Kish,  "Protection  against  the  man-in-the-middle-attack  for  the  Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson(-
like)-noise cipher and expansion by voltage-based security", Fluctuation  and  Noise  Letters 6
(2006) L57-L63; also at http://arxiv.org/physics/0512177.

[5] L.B.  Kish  and  R.  Mingesz,  "Totally  secure  classical  networks  with  multipoint  telecloning
(teleportation) of classical bits through loops with Johnson-like noise", Fluctuation and Noise
Letters 6 (2006) C9-C21.

[6]  L.B.  Kish,  "Response  to  Scheuer-Yariv:  "A  Classical  Key-Distribution  System  based  on
Johnson  (like)  noise  -  How  Secure?",  Physics  Letters  A 3 5 9,  (2006)  741-744;
doi: 10.1016/j.physleta.2006.07.037 ; http://arxiv.org/physics/0602013.

[7]  L.B.  Kish,  "Response  to  Bollinger:  "On  the  Impossibility  of  Keeping  Out  Eves  Using  Only
Classical  Physics"  and  to  Some  Other  Comments  at  Bruce  Schneier's  Blog  Site",
http://www.ece.tamu.edu/~noise/research_files/Response_Bollinger.pdf

[8]  L.B. Kish, "How Secure, How to Design, and How to Run Practical Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson-

like-Noise Ciphers", in preparation.

[9]  L.B.  Kish,  "Stealth  communication:  Zero-power  classical  communication,  zero-quantum
quantum  communication  and  environmental-noise  communication",  Applied Physics Lett. 87
(2005), Art. No. 234109.

L.B. Kish

