NOTES 

Measurement of the absorp-
tion spectrum of H2O+ in the
visible region

ZHUANG Hua, CHEN Yangqin, JI Wenhai,
WU Shenghai, BI Zhiyi, LIU Yuyan & MA Longsheng

Key Laboratory of Optical and Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, De-
partment of Physics, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062,
China
Correspondence should be addressed to Chen Yangqin (e-mail: yqchen
@publicl.sta.net.cn

~
2
BX

~
2
AA
1

Abstract Together with the 74 lines belonging to (0,9,0)-
(0,0,0) band, the high-resolution absorption spectrum of
−
H2O+
system was observed in the visible
−1 using optical heterodyne mag-
region of 16680 (cid:1) 17300 cm
netic rotation enhanced velocity modulation spectroscopy for
the first time, which verifies the high sensitivity and high
signal to noise ratio (S/N) of this technique.

1

Keywords: H2O+, optical heterodyne technique, magnetic rotation
spectroscopy, velocity modulation spectroscopy.

H2O+ plays an important role in the study of the
astrophysics, chemical physics and biophysics, as well as
the study of the origin of life and searching living species
on the other stars. Furthermore, the observation of H2O+
would be the only way of detecting the existence of the
neutral H2O in the visible region, because H2O has no
emission spectrum in the visible region due to the predis-
sociation of its electronic excited states. In 1976, Lew[1]
reported the observation of the emission spectrum of H2O+
in the visible region using a conventional grating spectro-
graph and performed a detailed analysis including the
rotational transitions. However, under the same condition,
he failed in getting the absorption spectrum. Due to much
lower densities of molecular ions generated in a conven-
tional discharge, and the interference of very intense lines
from the neutral species occurring in the same region,
lifetime and active
especially, due to the very short
chemical characteristics of molecular ions, it makes ab-
sorption spectroscopy more difficult to achieve.

In 1983, Gudman et al.[2] developed the velocity
modulation spectroscopy (VMS) technique, which has
been proved to be an effective method for selective de-
tecting the spectra of molecular ions. Later, Das[3] and
Huet et al.[4] obtained the high-resolution absorption spec-
trum of H2O+ in the near-infrared and infrared region us-
ing VMS. However, a serious problem in VMS is a co-
herent background noise arising from the glow emission
and/or the electric pickup of the discharge to the detection
circuitry. When the measurement of VMS is taken in the
visible region, the amplitude fluctuation of dye laser at the
velocity modulation frequency can also be a dominant

noise to limit the measuring sensitivity. Despite of all the
efforts such as using the dual beam subtraction technique[5]
and double-modulation technique[6], it is still difficult to
eliminate both the interference and the fluctuation noise
completely. Recently, we developed an improved VMS
technique named optical heterodyne magnetic rotation
enhanced velocity modulation spectroscopy[7,8] (OH-MR-
VMS) and applied it to detecting the absorption spectrum
system of H2O+ in the visible re-
of the
gion for the first time. In this note, we reported the ex-
perimental results and preliminary analysis of 74 transi-
tions which belong to the Σ and ∆ subband of (0,9,0)-
(0,0,0) band.

~
2
BX
1

~
2
AA
1

−

1 Experiment

To improve the sensitivity of VMS in the measure-
ment of the visible region, we combined the optical het-
erodyne detection technique and magnetic rotation spec-
troscopy (MRS) with the VMS. Optical heterodyne detec-
tion was implemented by phase modulation of the incident
laser beam with an electro-optical modulator (EOM)
driven at 480 MHz. The modulated laser beam passed
through an absorption sample cell and then fell on an ava-
lanche photodiode detector (APD) to obtain the rf beat
note at 480 MHz which was generated by the laser carrier
and its two sidebands. The laser fluctuation noise could be
reduced to as low as its limit given by shot noise at such a
high detected frequency. The modulation frequency in the
experiment was chosen as 480 MHz to match the half-
Doppler linewidth, and thus the maximum beat signal
could be obtained without broadening linewidth.

H2O+ is a paramagnetic molecule with strong Fara-
day effect, which will alter polarization of the incident
light. The absorption cell was surrounded by a solenoid,
which provided a dc longitudinal magnetic field. A pair of
nearly crossed polarizers with extinction ratio 5 × 10−5
placed on both sides of the cell was used to obtain the
signal enhanced by the magnetic rotation effect. The com-
bination of magnetic rotation spectroscopic technique not
only greatly improves the S/N, but also presents the ad-
vantage for selective detection of paramagnetic species.

The detail description of the experimental setup for
OH-MR-VMS has been given in ref. [7]. In the present
experiment, a ring dye laser (Coherent 899-29), pumped
by a compact cw diode-pumped Nd:YVO4 laser system
(Verdi 10) was used to provide a tunable radiation with
single-mode output power of higher than 300 mW. The
autoscan function in a wide range and the precise deter-
mination of laser wavelength in real time by an attached
wavemeter are provided by the laser system. An I2 refer-
ence absorption cell was used for calibration of the abso-
lute wavenumber, the accuracy was better than 0.006 cm−1,
and the relative precision better than 0.001 cm−1.

The discharge cell was made of a 40-cm-long quartz

1866

Chinese Science Bulletin Vol. 46 No. 22 November 2001

NOTES 

pipe with an internal diameter of 1 cm. The mixture of
H2O vapor (25 Pa) and He gas (665 Pa) flowed continu-
ously through the cell with the discharge current 250 mA
peak-to-peak at 37 kHz. The transmitting light through the
cell was focused onto the APD detector attached a narrow
band-frequency tuned preamplifier at 480 MHz, which
further reduced the discharge interference noise at 37 kHz.
The output from the detector was demodulated by a dou-
ble balance mixer (DBM) at the frequency of 480 MHz
and then by a lock-in amplifier at the velocity modulation
frequency of 37 kHz. Finally, data were acquired and
processed by a computer. The experimental apparatus is
such a kind of system with double-modulation and dou-
ble-demodulation. The sensibility of this absorption spec-
troscopic technique has been greatly improved due to the
combination of those three kinds of zero-background
spectroscopic techniques.

2 Result and discussion

Using OH-MR-VMS technique, we obtained 74 lines
in the region of 16700 (cid:1) 17300 cm−1. The line positions
are the same as Lew’s results[1]. However, in comparison
with somewhat low resolution of the emission spectrum
technique, in the experiment, the frequency stabilized la-
ser source with the single mode was used and the wave-
length calibration was simultaneously recorded according
to the I2 spectra while the scanning laser, the accuracy of
the wavenumber were determined as better than 0.006
cm−1. All these 74 lines belong to the Σand ∆subbands of
2~
(0,9,0)-(0,0,0) vibational band of H2O+
BX
1
electronic transition. In the emission spectra of Lew[1],

2~
AA
1

~

some strong lines, which were not assigned, mostly
came from perturbation of the neutral species. However,
due to the profit of VMS, all spectra of those interfering
species disappeared, except those of H2O+ that could be
detected in our measurement.

Fig. 1 shows the portion of the absorption spectra of
the Σsubband of PQ1,N band. The line shape presents the
second derivative in an approximation due to common
contributions from the optical heterodyne detection and
velocity modulation technique. In contrast with the ob-
servation in the near infrared region by Heut et al.[4], the
absorption cell which they used was 2(cid:2)1 m in length and
the integral time constant was 1 s, while that in our ex-
periment was only 0.4 m in length and 0.3 s, respecti-
vively. Moreover, the absorption was weaker in the visible
region than that in the infrared due to the Frank-Condon
principle, the signal-to-noise ratio in our experiment was
still a little better than those by Heut et al.

As shown in fig. 1, due to the statistical weights ex-
changing two identical hydrogen nucleons, the intensity of
the lines changes alternatively in the ratio 3(cid:3)1 with the
rotational quantum number N. According to the interac-
tion of the electronic spin and molecular rotation, with a
fixed N value the line splits into two lines to form a pair of
spin components F1(J = N + 1/2) and F2(J = N − 1/2) with
the opposite phase due to the magnetic rotation effect,
therefore, this is very helpful to confirm the assignment of
the spectral lines.

Figs. 2 and 3 show the variation of the signal inten-
sity with increase of the magnetic field strength in the

Fig. 1. Portion of the the spectra of PQ1,N band in the

~
2
AA
1

−

~
2
BX
1

of H2O+.

Chinese Science Bulletin Vol. 46 No. 22 November 2001

1867

NOTES 

measurement of the line near 17237.9 cm−1. The intensity
grows linearly with the magnet field within the magnetic
intensity range of 40 mT.

Fig. 2. The spectral intensity varies with magnetic field.

Fig. 3. The signal in the different magnetic field.

In our measuement, by introducing the optical het-
erodyne and MRS technique, the fluctuation noise from
the laser source and the coherent discharge noise could be
ignored, while the shot noise was considered as a domi-
nant one. In this situation, the minimum detectable sensi-
tivity for H2O+ can be estimated as follows if S / N =1[9]:

(cid:1)

∆
(cid:1)
f
e
(cid:1)
k

(cid:1)

F

,

∆δ

min

=

4

(cid:1)

1

)

(

)

Bf
(

(cid:1)
MJMJ
)

(
P
0
0
where the f (B)=1+kB(cid:1)B (here kB = 0.93/mT)
is the
enhancement factor of magnetic field which has been con-
cluded from the experimental results (see fig. 2.); Ji(M) are
ith Bessel components for the carrier and sidebands of the
modulated laser beam with the modulation degree of M, the
maximum value of J0(M)J1(M) is equal to 0.34 when M =
1.1, e = 1.9×10−19C is the charge of electron, ∆ƒ = 1/2πT is
the detection bandwidth where T is the lock-in integral time
constant, F = Gχ = 3.2 is the excess noise factor of APD
detector where G = 10 is the gain of the detector and χ=

k =

η
e
ω
h

0.5 is the excess noise figure.

denotes the photo

current per unit light power, η= 0.77 is the quantum effi-
ciency. So the achievable relative minimum absorptivity in
our system is about 2.9×10−10. Actually, the practical sensi-
tivity is always lower than this estimation because of the
existence of residual amplitude modulation (RAM) from
the imperfect frequency modulation of the EOM. However,
the result agrees well with the exeriment.

~
and the first excited electronic state A

The analysis of H2O+ spectra is still under processing.
H2O+ is an asymmetry top molecule, and its ground state
~
are two
X
Renner-Teller components of a degenerated 2Πu state in a
linear configuration. It reflects the interaction between the
electronic motion and the nuclear vibration of the mole-
cule. Under this situation,
the Born-Oppenheimer ap-
proximation breaks down. In 1993, an ab initio calcula-
tion was performed by Brommer et al.[9], who considered
the Renner-Teller effect to deduce the three dimension
potential function of 2A1-2B1 system of H2O+, D2O+ and
HDO+. The result of theoretical calculation agreed well
with that of the experiment. To further verify those kinds
of theoretical problems, the precise measurement of H2O+
spectra with high sensitivity and high resolution will be of
great significance.

Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Prof. Ding L. E.
and Yu Shanshan for the use of the laser. This work was supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 19974011)
and the Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance and Atomic and Molecular
Physics (Grant No. 991516).

References

2028.

1. Lew, H., Electronic spectrum of H2O+, Can. J. Phys, 1976, 54:

2. Gudeman, C. S., Saykally, R. J., Velocity modulation infrared la-
ser spectrocopy of molecular ions, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1984,
35: 387.

3. Das, B., Farley, J. W., Observation of the visible absorption spec-

trum of H2O+, J. Chem. Phys., 1991, 95: 8809.

4. Huet, T. R., Bachir, I. H., Destombes. J. L. et al., The transition of
H2O+ in the near infrared region, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107: 5645.
5. Nesbitt, D. J., Petek, H., Gudeman, C. S. et al., A study of the v1
fundamental and bend-excited hot band of DNN+ by velocity
modulation absorption spectroscopy with an infrared difference
frequency laser, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 81: 5281.

6. Lan, G., Tholl, H. D., Farley, J. W., Double-modulation spectros-
copy of molecular ions: Eliminating the background in velocity-
modulation spectroscopy, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1991, 62: 944.

7. Wang, R., Chen, Y., Cai, P. et al., Optical heterodyne velocity
modulation spectroscopy enhanced by a magnetic rotation effect,
Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 307: 339.

8. Wang, R., Chen, Y, Cai, P. et al., A new spectroscopy technique of
detecting molecular ions, Optics Transaction(in Chinese), 2000,
20: 14.

9. Luo, M., Bi, Z., Cai, P. et al., Optical heterodyne Stark modulation

spectroscopy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 327: 171.

10. Brommer, M., Weis, B., Follmeg, B. et al., Theoretical spin-rovi-
bronic 2A1((cid:1)u)−2B1 spectrum of the H2O+, HDO+, and D2O+
cations, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98: 5222.

(Received June 14, 2001)

1868

Chinese Science Bulletin Vol. 46 No. 22 November 2001

