On a Finite Universe with no Beginning or End 
 
 
Peter Lynds1 

c/- 61B Rimu St, Waikanae, Kapiti Coast 6010, New Zealand 

Based  on  the  premise  that  rather  than  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics 
inevitably  be  breached  as  matter  approaches  a  big  crunch  or  a  black  hole 
singularity,  the  order  of  events  should  reverse,  a  model  of  the  universe  that 
resolves  a  number  of  longstanding  problems  and  paradoxes  in  cosmology  is 
presented.  A  universe  that has no  beginning (and no  need for  one), no  ending, 
but  yet  is  finite,  is  without  singularities,  precludes  time  travel,  in  which  events 
are neither determined by initial or final conditions, and problems such as why 
the universe has a low entropy past, or conditions at the big bang appear to be so 
(cid:147)special,(cid:148) require no causal explanation, is the result. This model also has some 
profound philosophical implications.   
  
 

1.  Introduction 

 

 

 

In  his  monumental  1781  Treatise,  Critique  of  Pure  Reason  [1],  the  German 
philosopher, Immanuel Kant, argued that the  notions  of the universe  having  no 
beginning  and  stretching  back  infinitely  in  time,  versus  it  beginning  at  some 
finite  time  in  the  past,  were  equally  contradictory.  If  the  universe  had  no 
beginning, there would be an infinite period of time before any event. To Kant, 
this idea (cid:150) that time could stretch back forever (cid:150) was absurd. On the other hand, 
if the universe did have a beginning, what happened beforehand to cause it? And 
what before that? He thought this second notion, that the universe could have a 
finite past, was equally contradictory. Although we have since realized that it is 
meaningless  to  talk  of  the  concepts  of  time  and  space  without  the  presence  of 
matter (as would be the case before a big bang singularity at the said beginning 
of the universe),2 this still does not actually address Kant(cid:146)s paradox, nor does it 
provide  any  answer  to  the  most  basic  and  fundamental  question  of  cosmology: 
what caused the big bang and  where did the  matter that became this unrivalled 
explosion come from? Although Kant(cid:146)s argument has been given great attention 
over  the  two  centuries  since,  I  do  not  think  that  it  has  been  fully  realized  just 
what  a  perfect  paradox  he  put  forward  here.  Few  would  disagree  that  it  is 
suggesting something deep to us about our assumptions concerning time, cause 
and cosmology, but I do not think that the actual root of this contradiction has yet 
been  fully  questioned  i.e.,  what  is  going  wrong  with  our  assumptions  that  this 
great breakdown in reason occurs?  

Based  on  the  premise  that  rather  than  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics 
inevitably  be  breached  as  matter  approaches  a  big  crunch  or  a  black  hole 
singularity,  the  order  of  events  should  reverse,  in  this  paper,  a  model  of  the 
universe which provides a solution to the mystery of its origin, as well as to the 
paradox  posed  by  Kant,  is  presented.  Implications  of  the  model,  one  which 
appears  to  be  compatible  with  general  relativity  and  standard  hot  big  bang 
theory,  include  that  the  universe  has  neither  a  beginning  nor  ending,  but  yet  is 
finite;  singularities  are  never  actually  encountered  in  nature;  events  are  neither 

                                                 

1 E-mail: peterlynds@xtra.co.nz 
2 Unless one were specifically referring to intervals of time and space as (cid:147)represented(cid:148) by 
clocks or rulers, strictly speaking, it would be meaningless to talk about time and space 
after the big bang also. 

 

2

determined by initial or final conditions; problems such as why the universe has 
a low entropy past [2, 3], or conditions at the big bang appear to be so (cid:147)special(cid:148) 
[4],  require  no  causal  explanation;  and  that  time  travel  is  not  possible.  Several 
predictions made by the model are then explained, followed by an assessment of 
its  specific  weaknesses  and  strengths.  This  paper  also  has  some  profound 
philosophical implications, a discussion of which will largely be left for a more 
suitable forum. Lastly, I should note that this paper is largely non-mathematical, 
as,  with  one  notable  exception,  I  do  not  feel  that  the  arguments  herein  can  be 
made so.  As the paper  deals  with some  difficult and  unfamiliar concepts, but I 
would still like to try to have it be readily accessible, I have tried to write it in as 
clear,  simple  and  explanatory  way  possible,  including  devoting  much  of  the 
initial  sections  to  providing  introduction  and  context.  For  this  reason,  this  is  a 
somewhat  non-typical  and  awkward  paper  (cid:150)  it  sitting  somewhere  between 
physics and philosophy, and having too much of each to be either. I am hopeful 
that readers will be sympathetic of this. 

 
2.  The Second Law of Thermodynamics and Time Reversal 
 

As  most readers will be aware, the second law  of thermodynamics  is related to 
the fact that heat can never pass spontaneously, or of itself, from a hot to hotter 
body. Hot flows to cold. As a result of this, natural processes that involve energy 
transfer tend to have one direction and to be irreversible. This law also predicts 
that the entropy of an isolated system increases with time, with entropy being the 
measure  of  the  disorder  or  randomness  of  energy  and  matter  within  a  system. 
This is shown by Ludwig Boltzmann(cid:146)s great entropy formula, S = k log V, where 
k is  Boltzmann(cid:146)s constant 1.3806505(24) (cid:215) 10−23 J K-1, and log  V is the  natural 
logarithm  of  the  number  of  possible  microstates  corresponding  to  the 
macroscopic  state  of  a  system  [5].  Because  of 
law  of 
thermodynamics,  both  energy  and  matter  in  the  universe  are  becoming  less 
useful, or more disordered, as time goes on. As the second law is thought to give 
a  one-way  direction  in  time  to  events,  and  all  of  the  laws  of  physics,  with  the 
exception  of  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics,  are  time  symmetric  and  can 
equally be reversed,3 it is also sometimes refereed to (somewhat misleadingly) as 
the (cid:147)Arrow of time.(cid:148) The second law of thermodynamics, however, is of course a 
statistical claim. Chance fluctuations and decreases in entropy on an atomic scale 
are  reasonably  commonplace.  Although  it  is  generally  believed  that  the  only 
truly isolated system in nature is the universe itself, and as a consequence, it is a 

the  second 

3  The  second  law  of  thermodynamics  is  not  reversible,  for  if  it  were,  a  system  would 
evolve  in  the  direction  in  which  entropy  was  generally  decreasing,  something  that,  by 
definition,  the  second  law  statistically  forbids.  Although  the  question  of  how  such  an 
asymmetry  can  arise  from  completely  time-symmetric  mechanical  laws  (this  being 
augmented  by  Loschmidt(cid:146)s  reversibility  paradox  [6,  7]) is  a  very  pertinent  one,  it  does 
not make the second law any less irreversible. It is important to note, however, that the 
second  law  makes  no  distinction  which  direction  in  time  entropy  should  increase, 
whether towards (what we call) the future, or (what we call) the past. This point seems to 
have been first recognized by  Boltzmann himself [5]. Surprisingly, what does not seem 
to have been realized is the reason why entropy does not simultaneously increase in both 
time directions (and in this sense, the increase of entropy is asymmetric). It is unable to, 
for  if  a  system  is  evolving  with  entropy  increasing in  one  time  direction  (for  example, 
towards what we call the future), and then went to evolve, with entropy increasing, in the 
opposite  time  direction  (towards  what  we  call  the  past), as the  system(cid:146)s  past is  already 
set, entropy would be decreasing in that direction. A past with entropy increasing would 
not be an option, as a system cannot have a different past if it already has one. As such, a 
system  can  evolve  only  in  one  direction,  with  entropy  generally  increasing,  at  a  time, 
whether that direction be towards what we call the future, or what we call the past. 

                                                 

 

3

safe bet to say that the thermodynamics will never be breached just by chance, as 
the  statistical  possibility  cannot  ever  be  absolutely  discounted,  when  strictly 
stating  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics,  it  is  more  correct  to  say  that  the 
entropy of an isolated system is extremely likely to increase over time, rather than 
always.4    

In a 1985 paper [8], Stephen Hawking discussed what effect the second law 
of thermodynamics might have on the future of the universe. Like Thomas Gold 
in the 1960s [9, 10], he had come to the conclusion that if the universe began to 
contract,  something  he  believed  would  eventually  happen,  the  thermodynamic 
arrow of time would reverse with it. Everything would go into the reverse of the 
way we experience things today: light would travel back to the stars, and broken 
eggs on the floor would miraculously put themselves back together again. Unlike 
Gold, who thought that  when the universe began to  contract and  grow smaller, 
hot could  not  flow to cold, but  would tend to  hotter objects, Hawking came to 
this  conclusion  by  way  of  quantum  cosmology  and  the  idea  that  when  the 
universe  began  to  contract,  entropy  would  also  decrease  because  the  universe 
would have to return to a symmetrical state of low  entropy and  high  order at a 
big crunch [8, 11]. 

This meant that Hawking and Gold(cid:146)s (cid:147)big crunch(cid:148) would be what we call the 
(cid:147)big  bang,(cid:148)  and  for  events  to  get  there,  everything  in  our  current  epoch  of 
expansion would have to play over (cid:150) backwards (cid:150) as the universe recontracted. 
This  was  in  spite  of  the  consideration  that  for  events  to  reverse  in  the  way 
Hawking and Gold  had  envisaged, radiation  would  need to be converging back 
towards the stars of such a contracting phase from within the universe(cid:146)s present 
epoch of expansion. In other words, light might be returning from our eyes to the 
stars today. Such a situation would give rise to some very troublesome problems, 
including  a  system  having  two  arrows  of  time  pointing  in  opposing  directions. 
Inevitable  interaction  of  opposing  time-directed  radiation  would  mean  that  at 
least some of the time-reversed radiation would have a different evolution to that 
radiation(cid:146)s  (previously)  non  time-reversed  evolution;  its  evolution  could  not 
actually be symmetrically time-reversed. The question of  what  might  cause the 
radiation to begin reversing, while the rest of the system continued to evolve as 
usual,  is  also  problematic.  During  the  universe(cid:146)s  recontraction,  effects  would 
precede causes, a person would grow younger as time passed, and one would be 
dead before they were born. Nevertheless, as the same thermodynamic processes 
would  underlie  our  physiology  and  brain  processes,  people  living  during  the 
recontraction would also think in the direction in which entropy was decreasing. 
Because this  would  mean that their  mental processes,  memory and  direction of 
causality  would  also  be  reversed,  everything  would  seem  quite  normal  to  such 
back-to-front people.  

The theory, however, was dependant on something of a big ask (cid:150) that entropy 
would decrease as the universe began to contract, thus violating the second law 
of thermodynamics in the process. If one  grants that this can happen, one  must 
also  face  up  to  all  the  apparent  contradictions  and  science  fiction-like 
possibilities  that  such  a  situation  would  naturally  entail.  Hawking  eventually 
changed his mind about this idea when he was shown that entropy would still go 
on  increasing  after  the  universe  began  to  contract,  and  called  it  his  "greatest 
mistake"[12].  Puzzlingly,  while  rightfully  pointing  out  the  error  of  assigning  a 
preferred direction in time to events in physics, and also tackling Hawking on a 

                                                 

4 For good discussions of the second law of thermodynamics, see, for example: Zeh, H. 
D., The Physical Basis of the Direction of Time, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989; Davies, 
P. C. W., 1974 The Physics of Time Asymmetry, University of California Press Berkeley 
and Los Angeles, 1974; and, Penrose, R., The Road to Reality, A Complete Guide to the 
Laws of the Universe, Ch. 27, Knopf, 2005.     

 

4

(cid:147)double standard(cid:148) in his cosmology (cid:150) a case of Hawking deriving a temporally 
asymmetric consequence from a symmetric theory (cid:150) in his book, Time(cid:146)s Arrow 
and Archimedes(cid:146) Point, Huw Price still claimed that the arrow of time should flip 
with the universe(cid:146)s contraction [3].   

 

3.  The Big Crunch and Cyclic Universes  
 
Probably  like  millions  of  others,  when  I  first  read  Hawking(cid:146)s  book,  A  Brief 
History of Time [11], it was also the first time that I gave more than just a little 
thought to the origins, and possible future, of the universe. Central to my interest 
was  that  I  thought  it  made  much  more  sense  for  the  universe  to  be  positively 
spatially curved (i.e. OmegaM = ρ0 / ρc = > 1). If the universe had begun with a 
big bang and then expanded, it seemed equally plausible that one day it could do 
the reverse and contract to a big crunch. There is an obvious symmetry to such a 
situation.  Furthermore,  rather  than  being  billions  or  trillions  the  amount,  it 
seemed  an  odd  coincidence  that  the  amount  of  mass  required  to  form  a  closed 
universe  was  so  relatively  close  to  what  could  be  detected  (according  to  2003 
WMAP  results,  approximately  27%,  with  OmegaM  =  0.27,  inclusive  of  dark 
matter [13]; while by combining data from the WMAP study and surveys such as 
SDSS  [Sloan  Digital  Sky  Survey]  and  SDF  [Two-Degree  Field],  2004  results 
suggest another two-thirds of the universe(cid:146)s mass to be made up of an unknown 
type of energy named (cid:147)dark energy(cid:148) [14]). Most crucially, however, an eternally 
expanding  cosmos  did  not  help understand the birth of the universe any better. 
Indeed,  it  only  added  to  the  mystery  of  what  could  have  possibly  happened  to 
cause the big bang.   

If the universe were positively spatially curved and destined for a big crunch, 
this naturally posed the question of what might happen next. There seemed to be 
two general options: either the universe would contract to a singularity, a point of 
infinite density and geometric space-time curvature, and everything would cease 
to  be;  or  alternatively,  it  might  bounce  back  with  a  great  explosion.  This  (cid:147)big 
bounce(cid:148)  would  be  much  like,  or  possibly  exactly  the  same  as,  the  big  bang 
before it. If the latter, and the universe had exactly the same configuration as the 
previous big bang, not only would the explosion be exactly the same, but so too 
would  the  entire  evolution  of  the  universe  following  it.  Such  cyclic  ideas, 
whether  the  universe  is  thought  to  be  exactly  the  same  in  each  cycle,  or 
completely different, are not new. Before the Christian view of history took hold, 
where  things  are  always  seen  to  take  place  in  a  linear  fashion  and  only  once, 
cyclic views of the world and cosmos were the prevalent belief in ancient times 
[15]. More recently,  however, in the 1930s, Richard Tolman also pondered the 
possibility  of  a  cyclic  cosmos,  and  questioned  what  would  happen  if  a  closed 
universe were to survive its contraction to a big crunch, and burst forth again in a 
new  cycle  [16].  Unfortunately,  as  Tolman  realized,  the  universe  would  gather 
entropy  during  each  new  phase,  and  to  make  up  for  it,  it  would  have  to  grow 
each  time  like  a  runaway  snowball.  This  made  its  continued  progression  from 
one cycle to the next unfeasible. As the universe would be bigger and bigger in 
each  new cycle,  it also  meant that, looking backwards in time, such a universe 
would need to have had a beginning [17]. 

In 2002, however, Paul Steinhardt and Neil Turok put forward a similar idea 
with  what  they  called  the  cyclic  or  (cid:147)ekpyrotic(cid:148)  model  [18]  (cid:150)  a  (cid:148)Pre-big  bang(cid:148) 
model of the universe that shares a number of common features with another first 
developed  by  Gabriele  Veneziano  in  the  early  90s  [19,  20].  According  to 
Steinhardt and Turok and their work with M-theory, which states that space-time 
has  11  dimensions,  our  universe  may  be  just  in  the  current  cycle  of  an  infinite 
number of previous  ones. They further assert that our four-dimensional  "brane" 

 

5

is moving among the remaining dimensions or branes, which are hidden at very 
small or very large lengths. They argue that a big crunch/big bang bounce occurs 
when  two  such  branes  collide.  They  also  claim  that  the  density  of  matter  is 
completely finite during such a collision, and that a singularity only occurs in the 
sense  that  the  dimension  that  separated  these  branes  disappears  momentarily 
during  the  collision.  Steinhardt  and  Turok(cid:146)s  model  relies  upon  (cid:147)dark  energy(cid:148) 
[14]  (cid:150)  a  kind  of  repulsive  gravitation,  which  was  proposed  to  explain  recent 
observations that indicate that the universe is  expanding at an ever-accelerating 
rate. In their model, dark energy is required to reduce entropy while the universe 
expands,  thus  avoiding  Tolman(cid:146)s  conclusion  that  each  new  cycle  would  gather 
more and more entropy [16, 17, 21].5 

 

4.  Reversing an Assumption About Time Reversal 

 
When I first began to think seriously about these questions, I found it strange that 
it  seemed  little  consideration  had  been  put  into  how  the  second  law  of 
thermodynamics  might  affect  the  big  crunch  itself.6  Namely,  as  the  universe 
contracted  and  became  smaller  and  smaller,  it  would  also  become  hotter  and 
hotter.  As  it  neared  a  big  crunch,  gravity  would  become  so  strong,  and  the 
universe so small, that nothing could escape. It would be much like hot air inside 
a  balloon,  that  when  contracted,  becomes  more  and  more  dense.  At  a  certain 
critical point,  when the balloon  gets too small and the air inside too  dense and 
hot, it would explode, allowing the hot air inside to flow to and merge with the 
cooler air outside. What might happen to the universe at this point though? There 
would be a big difference between the situation with the balloon, because outside 
of  the  rapidly  contracting  universe,  there  would  not  actually  be  anything  there. 
The whole system (the contracting universe) would be completely self-contained 
and  isolated.  Moreover,  as  the  universe  became  smaller,  hotter,  and  gravity 
stronger  and  stronger,  nothing  (cid:150)  including  heat  (cid:150)  could  escape.  Hot  could  not 
flow to cold. As everything continued to become more and more condensed, heat 
could only flow, of itself, from  hot to hotter. This would suggest a violation  of 
the second law of thermodynamics.  

On  a  microscopic  level,  this  would  presumably  mean  that,  as  the  universe 
exponentially compressed and heated, hot particles  would  more and  more often 
begin  interacting  with  hotter  particles  (rather  than  cooler  ones).  As  the  system 
compressed  further  and  particle  collisions,  energies,  and  particle  and  photon 
density also increased further, when photons were emitted by particles and later 
absorbed by other particles, the secondary particles would more and more often 
absorb photons (heat) in the meantime. As the system compressed further still, a 
point  would  be  reached  where  the  particle  and  photon  density,  and  the  rate  of 
photon absorption, was such that (cid:150) more often than not (cid:150) the secondary particles 
would be hotter than the initial particles. The balance of the system(cid:146)s heat would 
begin flowing from hot to hotter. (For convenience sake and ease of explanation, 
for  the  remainder  of  this  paper,  the  word  entropy  will  be  used  to  indicate  heat 

                                                 

5 There have been several other models proposed that, in various ways, could be classed 
as  being  (cid:147)cyclic.(cid:148)  These  include  those  by  G(cid:246)del,  K.,  An  Example  of  a  New  Type  of 
Cosmological  Solutions  of  Einstein’s  Field  Equations  of  Gravitation,  Rev.  Mod.  Phys. 
Vol. 21, p. 447, 1949; Gott. R. J. III, and Li, L., Can the Universe Create Itself? Phys. 
Rev.  D,  Volume  58,  Issue  2,  1988;  Linde,  A.,  Eternally  Existing  Self-Reproducing 
Chaotic Inflationary Universe, Phys. Lett. B 175, 395, 1986; and, Smolin, L., The Life of 
the Cosmos,  Oxford  University  Press,  USA,  1999.  As  they  have  little  direct relation  to 
the arguments of the present paper, however, I will avoid going into them.    
6  There are exceptions to this. See footnote 7, Penrose (1979) and Markov (1984). 
 

 

6

flow. An increase in entropy thus represents heat spontaneously flowing from hot 
to  cooler,  and  a  decrease  in  entropy,  hot  to  hotter.  Talk  of  the  second  law  of 
thermodynamics will be within this context). 

The  natural question then became,  what would  happen if the second  law  of 
thermodynamics  were  breached?  People  such  as  Hawking  [8,  11]  and  Gold  [9, 
10]  had  assumed  that  all  physical  processes  would  go  into  reverse.  In  other 
words, they had assumed that events would take place in the direction in which 
entropy was decreasing, rather than increasing as we observe today. Furthermore, 
they  had  assumed  that  entropy  would  decrease  in  the  direction  in  which  the 
universe contracted towards a big crunch (in their case, towards what we call the 
big bang). But if the second law correctly holds, on a large scale, entropy should 
still always increase. Indeed, what marks it out so much from the other laws of 
physics in the first place, is that it is asymmetric (cid:150) it is not reversible. If all of the 
laws  of  physics,  with  the  exception  of  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics,  are 
time  symmetric  and  can  equally  be  reversed,  it  became  apparent  that  if  faced 
with a situation where entropy might be forced to decrease rather than increase, 
rather than actually doing so, the order of events should simply reverse, so that 
the  order  in  which  they  took  place  would  still  be  in  the  direction  in  which 
entropy  was  increasing.  The  second  law  would  continue  to  hold,  events  would 
remain continuous, and no other law of physics would be contravened. 

 

5.  A Finite Universe with no Boundaries 

 
This  conclusion  was  then  applied  to  a  possible  big  crunch.  What  might 
happen if the second law of thermodynamics were to be breached as the universe 
became  extremely  contracted,  dense  and  hot?7  As  outlined  earlier,  rather  than 
entropy decease and the second law not hold, the order of events would simply 
reverse  so  that  events  took  place  in  the  direction  in  which  entropy  was  still 
increasing. In relation to the big crunch, this would mean that at the point where 
the  second  law  would  have  been  breached,  any  future  events  in  this  direction 
(where entropy would be decreasing) would reverse. Because it would represent 
the  first  opportunity  at  which  events  could  take  place  in  a  direction  in  which 
entropy was increasing, this would mean that events would immediately take up 
at where the big crunch singularity would have been had events not reversed, and 
in this direction, no singularity would be encountered. The universe would then 
expand from  where the big crunch singularity  would  have been  had  events  not 
reversed  (i.e.  the  big  crunch  reversed),  and  with  events  going  in  this  direction, 
entropy  would  still  be  increasing,  no  singularity  would  be  encountered,  and  no 
laws of physics would be contravened. They would all still hold. 

Such  a  situation  could  only  last  so  long.  Very  quickly,  events  would  reach 
the  point  at  which  the  second  law  would  have  originally  been  breached  had 
events not reversed. In the current direction, the universe would face an order of 
events  (the  entire  history  of  our  universe,  stretching  back  to  the  big  bang),  in 
which  entropy was decreasing. If the second  law  were to still  hold and  entropy 
still be able to increase, the  order of  events  would be reversed  here once  more, 
immediately  taking  up  again  at  the  first  chance  they  could  in  the  direction  in 
which entropy was increasing. This would be the big bang.  

                                                 

7 The possibility  of the second law of thermodynamics being violated and the arrow  of 
time resultantly flipping (ala Hawking and Gold) as events approached a singularity, has 
been  considered  (see  Penrose,  R.,  Singularities  and  Time-Asymmetry,  pp.  612,  in 
General Relativity: An Einstein Centenary Survey, Eds. Hawking, S. W. and Israel, W., 
Cambridge  University  Press,  1979;  and,  Markov,  M.  A.,  Problems  Of  A  Perpetually 
Oscillating Universe, Annals Phys. 155:333-357, 1984), being generally dismissed on the 
grounds of seeming contradiction and non-physicality. 

 

7

At this point, it becomes apparent that this would not only lead things back to 
the  big  bang,  but  it  would  actually  cause  it.  The  universe  would  then  expand, 
cool, and eventually our solar system would take shape. It would also mean that 
this would be the exact repeat of the universe we live in now. Something further 
becomes  evident,  however,  and  it  is  perhaps  the  most  important  (and  will 
probably be the most misunderstood and puzzled over) feature of this model. If 
one  asks  the  question,  what  caused  the  big  bang?,  the  answer  here  is  the  big 
crunch. This is strange enough. But is the big crunch in the past or the future of 
the big bang? It could equally be said to be either. Likewise, is the big bang in 
the past or future of the big crunch? Again, it could equally be said to be either. 
The  differentiation  between  past  and  future  becomes  completely  meaningless. 
Moreover, one is now faced with a universe that has neither a beginning nor end 
in  time,  but  yet  is  also  finite  and  needs  no  beginning.  The  finite  vs.  infinite 
universe paradox of Kant completely disappears.  

Although if viewed from our normal conception of past and future (where we 
make  a  differentiation),  the  universe  would  repeat  over  and  over  an  infinite 
number  of times, and could also be said to have  done so in the past. Crucially, 
however,  if  one  thinks  about  what  is  actually  happening  in  respect  to  time,  no 
universe  is  in  the  future  or  past  of  another  one.  It  is  exactly  the  same  version, 
once, and it is non-cyclic. If so desired, one might also picture the situation as an 
infinite  number  of  the  same  universe  repeating  at  exactly  the  same  time.  But 
again,  if  properly  taking  into  account  what  is  happening  in  respect  to  time,  in 
actuality, there is no infinite number of universes. It is one and the same.   

To perhaps help picture the situation, imagine that the period of time between 
the big bang and a subsequent big crunch is a mere 10 seconds. A clock begins at 
t = 0 at the big bang, the universe then expands, and at 5 seconds, it then begins 
to contract. If it were to contract to a big crunch singularity, it would reach the 
singularity  at  exactly  t  =  10  seconds.  However,  just  before  a  singularity 
inevitably results, at 9.9 seconds  events reverse, so the  clock immediately goes 
from 9.9 seconds to 10 seconds  without the  intervening  interval  of 0.1 seconds 
passing. The universe then expands from where the big crunch singularity would 
have been had events not reversed, and the interval between 10 seconds and 9.9 
seconds  passes.  At  9.9  seconds,  the  universe  reaches  the  point  where  events 
originally reversed as the universe contracted towards a big crunch, and is now 
faced  with  an  order  of  events,  with  entropy  decreasing,  stretching  all  the  way 
back to the big bang singularity. Subsequently, the order of events are reversed 
once more, and the clock immediately restarts (inasmuch as the word (cid:147)restarts(cid:148) 
can  have  meaning  here)  at  t  =  0,  at  the  big  bang,  with  no  singularity  being 
encountered.                                                                                                  

[Figure 1]              
                   

                                                                   

8

 

 
 

A. Universe expands from the big bang.8 
B.  Point  at  which,  as  the  universe  approaches  a  big  crunch  (C),  the  second  law  of 
thermodynamics would be breached in direction B→C. 
C→B. Order of events reverse so entropy can continue increasing. Universe expands 
from  big  crunch  (reversed)  with  no  singularity  being  encountered,  very  quickly 
reaching original point at which the second law of thermodynamics would have been 
breached had events not reversed. 
A→B.  Faces  order  of  events  in  which  entropy  is  decreasing  (B→A).  Rather  than 
second  law  be  breached,  order  of  events  reverse  once  more,  with  no  big  bang 
singularity being encountered. 
 
It is important to recognize that when the clock starts at t = 0 at the big bang, 
the universe is not in the future or past of another one. In a sense, it is time itself 
that  restarts  (although,  again,  nothing  in  fact  actually  (cid:147)restarts(cid:148)),  so  there  is  no 
past or future universe. Because of this, no conservation laws are violated. It is 
also  important  to  note  that  it  is  simply  just  the  order  of  events  that  reverse. 
Nothing  travels  into  the  future  or  past  of  anything  (cid:150)  including  time  and  some 
imagined  (cid:147)present  moment(cid:148)  [22,  23].  Indeed,  this  model  contains  another 
interesting consequence. As there is no differentiation between past and future in 
it, and, strictly speaking, no event could ever be said to be in the future or past of 
another one, it would appear to provide a clear reason as to why time travel is not 
possible.  In  relation  to  future  and  past,  there  is  clearly  nothing  there  to  travel 
into. Physically speaking, the same can be said for travel through an interval of 
time, a flow of it, as well as space-time [22, 23].  

Time  travel  is  precluded  due  to  a  further  reason  arising  from  this  model. 
Probably the greatest problem with time travel as a theory is that, due to it having 
already happened, the past seems set and unchangeable, and if it were possible to 
travel  into  it,  one  would  then  be  faced  with  a  number  of  impossible  situations, 
including  the  well-known  grandfather  paradox  [24,  25].  But  what  about  the 
future? As it is seen as not yet having happened, it did not seem that time travel 
into the future would be quite as problematic. However, if the past and future are 
completely interchangeable (as they are in this model), and what we call the past 
is set, then what we call the future would also be set. In other words, time travel 
into the future would not be possible either.  

Based on the understanding provided by this model, it is now also interesting 
to  note  that  if  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  were  to  be  violated  if  the 
universe began to contract (as was argued by Hawking and Gold, etc), rather than 
the  universe(cid:146)s  current  epoch  of  expansion  playing  over,  backwards,  as  events 
returned to the big bang, the whole contraction of the universe to the big crunch 
would be reversed (cid:150) at the culmination  of  which,  events stretching back to the 
big bang  would also be reversed. That is, the  only change to the present  model 
would be that point B (see Figure 1) would be at the universe(cid:146)s transition from 
expansion to contraction, rather than just before a big crunch.  

5.1   Potential Criticisms 

 

 

An  obvious  criticism  for  the  model  seems  to  raise  itself.  It  implies  that  the 
universe  can somehow anticipate future  or past events in  exact detail, and then 
play them over at will. At first glance, this just seems too far-fetched. How could 

                                                 

8  Note  that  this  diagram  shows  the  universe  expansion  as  decelerating  rather  than 
accelerating,  as  currently  appears  to  be  the  case.  The  universe  being  closed  and 
eventually collapsing, however, is the important factor here.    

 

9

it possibly know? With a little more thought, however, one recognizes that such a 
contention  would  assume  that  there  actually  was  a  differentiation  between  past 
and future events in the universe. With this model, it is clear there would not be. 
Events could neither be said to be in the future or past of one another; they would 
just be. Moreover, as there is nothing to make one time (as indicated by a clock) 
any more special than another, there is no present moment gradually unfolding; 
all different events and times share equal reality (in respect to time, none except 
for  the  interval  used  as  the  reference).  Although  physical  continuity  (i.e.  the 
capability for events to be continuous), and as such, the capability for motion and 
of clocks and rulers to represent intervals, would stop them from all happening at 
once (and to happen at all), all events and times in the universe would already be 
mapped out. As such, as long as it still obeyed all of its own physical laws, the 
universe would be free and able to play any order of events it wished. Please note 
that  this  timeless  picture  of  reality  is  actually  the  same  as  that  provided  by 
relativity and the (cid:147)block(cid:148) universe model [26], the formalized view of space-time 
resulting from the  lack  of a (cid:147)preferred(cid:148) present  moment  in Einstein(cid:146)s relativity 
theories, in which all times and events in the universe (cid:150) past, present and future (cid:150) 
are all mapped out together, fixed, and share equal ontological status.  

 

5.2   Kaon Time Reversal Invariance Violation 

 
Finally,  another  problem  with  this  model  seems  to  present  itself.  The  time 
reversal invariance (T) violation of the decay of the weak interacting sub-atomic 
particle, the neutral kaon (or K-meson). While avoiding a detailed discussion of 
kaon decay, the rate at which neutral kaons turn into neutral anti-kaons does not 
exactly match the rate at which neutral anti-kaons turn into neutral kaons.9 This 
not only violates CP invariance (the conjugating of all charges and inversion of 
parity  and  all  spatial  coordinates),  but  T  also.  When  the  kaon(cid:146)s  asymmetrical 
behaviour was first discovered in 1964 by Christensen, Cronin, Fitch and Turlay 
[27], it came as a tremendous shock, as not only  was CP invariance thought to 
hold  universally,  the  derivatives  (i.e.  momenta  and  angular  momenta)  of  all 
particle  interactions  were  also  thought  to  be  perfectly  invariant  and  conserved 
under time reversal (this being the formal  definition  of T). CP violation  means 
non-conservation  of  T,  provided  that  the  general  CPT  theorem  is  valid  (cid:150) 
something there is no reason to doubt [28]. Such a T-violation would represent a 
very  serious  problem  for  the  present  model,  as,  in  light  of  kaons,  the  time 
reversal of B→C could not be truly symmetric.  

What makes the behaviour of kaons so strange is that they seem able to tell 
the  difference,  in  a  local  sense,  between  the  two  directions  of  time  (cid:150)  past  and 
future (cid:150) showing a slight bias towards the positive time direction, or future [29, 
30]. The most convincing theories addressing the observed dominance of matter 
over  antimatter  in  the  universe  are  based  on  this  observation,  with  a  small 
amount  of  time  reversal  violation  being  said  to  occur  in  the  decay  of  certain 
heavy particles in the very early universe [28]. It has been argued that the kaon(cid:146)s 
apparent ability to discern future from past could be the result of the expansion 
of  the  universe  denoting  a  temporal  direction  away  from  the  big  bang  towards 
the  future,  and  that  the  kaon  is  somehow  able  to  pick  up  on  this  [12].  What 
exactly would it pick up on, however? In this sense, in 1970, Yuval Ne(cid:146)eman, a 
founder of the quark theory of matter, argued that the direction of time attached 
to kaon decay was directly related to the universe(cid:146)s large-scale evolution [31]. If 
the universe was contracting rather than expanding, the time asymmetry of kaon 

                                                 

9 For a good explanation of kaon decay, see, for example, Davies, P. C. W., About Time: 
Einstein(cid:146)s Unfinished Revolution. pp. 208, Viking, London, 1995. 
 

 

10

decay would be reversed: a contracting matter universe would be the same as an 
expanding antimatter universe. The key to Ne(cid:146)eman(cid:146)s argument was that a kaon 
would be able tell the difference between an expanding and contracting universe. 
As gravity, the relevant factor here, is currently attractive, however, and should 
remain  so  if  the  universe  begins  to  contract,  it  is  difficult  to  see  what  could 
trigger the kaon(cid:146)s reversal.  

Considering the possible relation between gravity and kaon T-violation, Paul 
Davies asks, (cid:147)It was Einstein(cid:146)s theory of gravitation that gave us the possibility 
of an expanding universe. Perhaps there is some ill-understood aspect of gravity 
that  relates  to  T-violation?(cid:148)  [12].  He  continues,  (cid:147)[Roger]  Penrose  believes  that 
gravity holds the key to the arrow of time: that there is an intrinsic lopsidedness 
to time when it comes to gravitational fields. At least there is when those fields 
are  situated  in  the  vicinity  of  space-time  singularities(cid:133)Penrose  concedes  he 
doesn(cid:146)t  know the  origin of this  lopsidedness, but thinks  it  might somehow  link 
up with the kaons(cid:146) T violation.(cid:148) Investigating such issues, in a series of papers 
[32,  33,  34],  Gabriel  Chardin  found  that  the  CP  violation  observed  in  neutral 
kaon system might be well explained by (cid:147)antigravity,(cid:148) showing (cid:147)just the amount 
of anomalous regeneration that we call CP violation(cid:148) [32], while also examining 
and dispelling a number of possible problems sometimes associated with such an 
idea. In relation to the present model, I feel the fore-mentioned considerations to 
be suggestive. If the kaon(cid:146)s ability to distinguish past from the future (in a local 
sense)  really  is  related  to  gravity  (or  perhaps  even  to  anti-gravity),  something 
denoted by  its attractiveness  (or in the case  of antigravity, repulsion), it should 
reverse under a reversal of the direction of gravity, as would be the case in this 
model between C→B. As such, no kaon T-violation would occur under the time 
reversal of B→C. Indeed, somewhat surprisingly, if gravity is directly linked to 
kaon  T-violation,  such  a  violation  would  actually  argument  this  model,  fitting 
neatly  with  it,  while  the  model  clearly  arguments  the  case  of  kaon  T-violation 
being connected to  gravity. With the B-meson having very recently been found 
to  also  violate  CP  symmetry  [35],  the  same  considerations  outlined  here  in 
respect to gravity, the kaon, and it seemingly being able to distinguish past from 
future,  would  presumably  also  apply  to  the  B-meson,  as  they  would  to  any 
particle that violated T symmetry.  

  

6.  Black Holes 
 
In 1965, Roger Penrose proved, as he did with Stephen Hawking five-years later 
in  relation  to  the  big  bang  (and  a  possible  big  crunch)  [36],  that  if  Einstein(cid:146)s 
general  theory  of  relativity  is  correct,  and  some  specific  criteria  are  met,  a 
singularity  must  result  inside  a  black  hole  [37].  This  means  that  gravity  has 
become infinitely strong at its centre, also causing the geometry of space-time to 
be infinitely curved. It is not difficult to see the similarity between a black hole 
and a big crunch. The situation is much the same, with matter being contracted 
by immense gravity, becoming more and more dense and hot, and the geometry 
of  space-time  contracting  towards  an  infinite  point.  However,  there  is  a 
difference between the two. A black hole has the vast universe outside it, while 
with a big crunch, there is nothing outside the collapsing region as it represents 
the entire universe.  

As,  locally,  they  represent  the  same  situations,  if  the  second  law  of 
thermodynamics  were  to  be  breached  as  the  universe  contracted  towards  a  big 
crunch, one should expect the same to happen as matter approached a black hole 
singularity.  In  exactly  the  same  way  as  the  order  of  events  would  reverse  just 
before a big crunch so that entropy could still increase, the same should happen 
in  a  black  hole.  Events  would  immediately  take  up  from  the  point  where  the 

 

11

singularity  would  have  been  had  events  not  reversed,  and  in  this  direction,  as 
with  the  big  crunch,  no  singularity  would  be  encountered.  Furthermore,  in  this 
direction,  events  would  be  going  in  the  direction  in  which  entropy  was  still 
increasing and the second law would still hold. It is also interesting to note why 
Penrose(cid:146)s black hole singularity theorem would not apply here, as it assumes that 
all in-falling matter would do so in a regular linear order towards the singularity 
[37].  As  we  can  see  with  the  model  being  discussed,  this  would  not  actually 
happen. Matter would always be moving away from it, so no singularity would 
be encountered. In relation to matter always moving away from a singularity and 
it not actually being encountered, the exact same can be applied to Penrose and 
Hawking(cid:146)s big bang (and big crunch) singularity theorem [36].   

As with the big crunch scenario, this situation could last only so long. Very 
quickly,  events  would  soon  reach  the  point  at  which  the  second  law  of 
thermodynamics  would  have  been  breached  had  events  not  reversed.  In  the 
current direction, events would soon face another order of events (that of matter 
falling into the black hole and  entire universe outside). In the current  direction, 
this  means  that  events  (inside  the  reversed  region)  would  face  an  opposing 
direction  of  events  in  which  entropy  was  decreasing  (outside  the  reversed 
region). This would present an interesting situation. Which order of events would 
take  precedence?  Would  this  force  the  reversal  of  the  order  of  events  of  the 
whole  universe  back  to  the  big  bang  like  in  the  big  crunch  scenario,  or  would 
there be a difference between the two situations?  As  outlined  earlier, there  is a 
difference  between  them.  The  reversed  region  in  the  black  hole  would  be 
surrounded  by  a  much  larger  and  more  dominant  system,  the  universe  itself, 
while the reversed big crunch would represent the entire universe, with nothing 
outside of it. This would suggest that as events reached this point inside the black 
hole,  because  the  region  outside  of  the  reversed  region  would  easily  be  the 
dominant  system,  the  order  of  events  of  the  universe  outside  would  take 
precedence  and  not  be  reversed.  As  such,  this  would  also  mean  that  no  matter 
would be able to escape beyond this point from inside the reversed region of the 
black  hole,  but  matter  could  still  enter  from  the  outside.  As  soon  as  it  entered, 
however,  it  would  immediately  be  reversed:  instead  of  contracting  towards  a 
singularity, it would be moving away from it.  

 

[Figure 2]          
 
A→B. Matter falls into black hole, beyond its event horizon.  
B. Point at which, as matter approaches black hole singularity (C), the second law of 
thermodynamics would be breached in direction B→C. 
C→B.  Order  of  events  reverse  so  entropy  can  continue  increasing.  Matter  moves 
outwards  from  where  black  hole  singularity  would  have  been  had  events  not 
reversed, with no singularity being encountered.  

 

 

12

C→B.  Matter  reaches  original  point  at  which  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics 
would  have  been  breached  had  events  not  reversed  (B),  and  faces  order  of  events 
B→A with entropy decreasing in this direction. As the outer region is the dominant 
system, order of events B→C reverses again.  
 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  once  at  the  end  of  its  initial  reversal,  matter 
within  this  reversed  region  could  not  merge  and  build  up  over  time  with  other 
matter  that  later  fell  into  it.  This  is  a  subtle  point,  and  the  following  will 
hopefully  help  to  illustrate  it.  If  one  imagines  some  matter  falling  into  a  black 
hole  and  reaching  B  at  t  =  9.9  seconds,  C  being  at  t  =  10  seconds,  and  C→B 
repeating  as  the  matter  is  continually  reversed,  one  can  see  that  it  is  the  same 
epoch that repeats i.e., the interval between 10 and 9.9 seconds. As matter falling 
into  the  reversed  region  after  that  0.1  second  interval  had  passed,  could  not 
possibly merge with the original matter (as that epoch would now be repeating), 
it would have a later epoch that repeated (for example, the interval between 10.1 
and  10  seconds).  As  such,  the  two  epochs  would  be  entirely  causally 
disconnected,  and  the  matter  within  them  could  not  merge  and  accumulate. 
Indeed, in a sense, each epoch would represent its own (very small) universe (cid:150) a 
system entirely cut off from the previous one, and which, to an outside observer, 
would appear to repeat  endlessly, but that in respect to time, would actually be 
non-cyclic and  happen  only  once. This,  of course,  would also  mean that if and 
when  a  black  hole  eventually  evaporated  by  Hawking  radiation  [38]  (the 
timeframe being given by 1071 M3 seconds, where M is solar masses), solely the 
matter that had not yet fallen beyond its reversed region would be returned to the 
outside universe. Furthermore, as the outside universe and the reversed region of 
a black hole would be entirely causally disconnected, although gravity would be 
repulsive  in  the  reversed  region,  presumably  no  gravitational  effects  of  the 
reversed  region  (whether  attractive  or  repulsive)  would  be  felt  by  the  outside 
universe.  With  this  being  the  case,  all  new  matter  falling  beyond  the  reversed 
region would do so as if to be the initial cause of a singularity.  

That different  epochs  such  as  this  could  co-exist,  but  not  come  in  contact, 
may  sound  strange,  but  it  really  should  not  do.  The  overall  model  that  I  have 
been discussing states that the same applies to the entire universe, as indeed does 
the relativistic (cid:147)block(cid:148) universe model. The only difference presently is that we 
are now talking about entirely disconnected systems, or if one prefers, universes. 
It is also interesting to note that such a reversed epoch of a black hole would very 
closely resemble a "baby universe(cid:148) [39], offering the same solution to the black 
hole information loss paradox [40, 41] originally put forward by Zeldovich [42] 
and Hawking [43, 44],  while in the sense that  matter  would always be  moving 
away  from  a  (hypothetical)  singularity  rather  than  towards  it,  also  not  be 
dissimilar  to  the  Schwarzschild  solution  of  general  relativity  of  a  "white-hole" 
[45].  

Finally, it is also interesting to see that, in the case of a big crunch, if there 
possibly  were still a region  outside  of the reversed region  due to the universe(cid:146)s 
matter  not  all  converging  in  unison  and  some  arriving  later  (cid:150)  and  this  outer 
region  was the  larger and  more  dominant system (cid:150) the big crunch would be no 
different from a black hole. Matter within the reversed region could  not escape 
and  would  continually  be  reversed.  As  further  matter  continued  to  fall  into  the 
reversed  region,  however,  and  the  remaining  matter  in  the  universe  had  all  but 
disappeared  into it, the reversed region  would  eventually become the  dominant 
system, and at the point at which it did, the order of events stretching back to the 
big bang would be reversed, as outlined earlier.  

 

 

7.  Predictions and Discussion 

 

13

Let us now return to the overall model being discussed, both in connection to the 
big bang, big crunch, and black holes. As a theory, what potentially verifiable or 
falsifiable predictions can it make?  

 
I. It predicts that the universe is closed and will eventually collapse towards a 
big crunch. As such, it also predicts OmegaM = > 1. 
 
II. It predicts that the basic big bang model [46], where a tremendously hot 
explosion is followed by the universe(cid:146)s expansion, is correct. 
 
III. It predicts that singularities are never encountered in nature. 
 
IV. It predicts that the order of a series of events can be reversed in certain 
extreme conditions (i.e. at a big crunch, inside a black hole). As such, it also 
predicts that the balance of heat of a closed system can never spontaneously 
flow from hot to hotter (i.e. instead, events would simply reverse).  
 
V.  It  predicts  that  the  universe  had  no  beginning,  has  no  ending,  but  yet  is 
finite (cid:150) in a similar sense as Hawking held that imaginary time would enable 
a  closed  universe  to  have  no  boundaries  [11,  47].  As  Hawking  put  it,  the 
boundary condition of the universe is that it has no boundary.  
 
VI. It predicts that time travel is not possible. 
 
It must be said that the model(cid:146)s value is greatly lessened by the speculative 
nature of how the flow of heat from hot to hotter would cause events to reverse 
direction.  At this point, this  is as far as I am able to  take it.  At the same time, 
however, I would suggest that the overall and basic picture  of the universe this 
model provides, makes too much sense, and fits too well, for it to be wrong, even 
if the  detail  of  how the reversal  is caused is  incorrect. Hopefully this  may also 
spur  some  theorists  into  seeing  if  they  can  elucidate  anything  further  in 
connection to this mechanism themselves. Another big shortcoming of the model 
is that it is reliant on the universe being closed. At this stage, it is far from certain 
whether the universe really will one day stop expanding and begin to contract, or 
if  it  will  continue  to  expand  forever.  Indeed,  that  the  universe(cid:146)s  expansion 
appears  to  be  accelerating,  rather  than  decelerating  as  was  previously  thought, 
seems  to  have  generally  swung  the  consensus  towards  a  universe  that  will 
expand indefinitely. As discussed earlier, however, and although this model does 
not  shed  any  light  on  the  possible  reason(s)  behind  the  current  accelerating 
expansion,  or  the  nature  of  (cid:147)dark  energy(cid:148)  (or,  other  than  the  potential  of  such 
energy  inevitably running  down  over time,  how the transition to a deceleration 
may occur), I feel that there are some good reasons to believe that the universe 
eventually will collapse. This model represents a further one. Indeed, I feel that 
once  this  model  has  been  fully  understood,  it  becomes  difficult  to  see  how  the 
universe  could  be  any  other  way.  The  greatest  problem  with  this  model, 
however, and it applies to all cosmological theories, is that we can never be sure 
if  it  is  correct.  We  were  not,  and  will  not,  be  around  to  find  out.  Then  again, 
considering what the universe would be like just after the big bang or as it neared 
a  big  crunch,  this  is  probably  just  as  well.  Still,  I  think  there  are  some  good 
reasons to justify one feeling at least a little confident in the overall picture of the 
universe that this model provides. Let us go over some of them.   

 
1. It would appear to be the only possible self-consistent cosmological model 
that would enable the universe to not need a beginning, not have an ending, 

 

14

and yet be finite in both space and time, avoid Kant(cid:146)s paradox, and have no 
paradoxical infinities.  
 
2. It is consistent with standard big bang cosmology.  
 
3.  It  illustrates  why  singularities  would  never  actually  be  encountered. 
Indeed,  the  reversal  of  an  order  of  events  just  before  one  is  inevitably 
encountered,  would  suggest  itself  as  being  nature(cid:146)s  way  of  avoiding 
singularities.          
 
4.  It  explains  why  matter  falling  into  a  black  hole  or  approaching  a  big 
crunch does not get squashed out of existence at a gravitational singularity. 
 
5. It is without Gold and Hawking (cid:147)Arrow of time(cid:148) reversal paradoxes (i.e. 
with  entropy  decreasing). Indeed, the reversal of the  order of  events so that 
heat can still flow to cold avoids them and guarantees that events are always 
causally  related  (irrespective  of  (cid:147)cause(cid:148)  and  (cid:147)effect(cid:148)  being  equally 
exchangeable for one another).   
 
6. It renders  meaningless the  question  of  whether  events are  determined by 
initial or final conditions [48]. In this model, initial and final, past and future, 
can equally be exchanged, and they are not objectively differentiable. Other 
than perhaps employing basic anthropic-like reasoning such as positing that if 
were  different,  the  universe  would  not  exist  (and  neither  would  we  to  ask 
questions  about  it),  conditions  in  the  universe  just  are.  For  example, 
problems  such  as  why  the  universe  has  a  low  entropy  past  [2,  3],  or 
conditions  at  the  big  bang  appear  to  be  so  (cid:147)special(cid:148)  [4],  require  no  causal 
explanation.  
 
7. It would appear to be compatible with general relativity.  
 
8. It does not breach any conservation laws. 
 
9. It precludes time travel. 
 
10.  It  provides  insights  into  the  possible  relationship  between  kaon  T-
violation and gravity. 
 
11. It provides a solution to the black hole information-loss paradox. 
 
12.  Although  highly  counter-intuitive,  once  understood,  it  makes  a 
tremendous amount of sense.   

 

 

8.  Conclusion 

Before  finishing,  I  would  like  to  make  some  personal  comments  about  this 
model. When I initially came across it in 1998, I did nothing to pursue it further. 
There  are  at  least  three  reasons  for  this.  As  outlined  earlier,  regardless  of  how 
confident I might be about the basic ideas behind the model, there is no way we 
will ever know if it is actually correct. This consideration took the shine off it a 
little for me, as did the speculative nature of how exactly the reversal might be 
caused.  Another  reason  for  my  hesitancy  in  pursuing  it  further  was  due  to  just 
how  counter-intuitive  (and  in  some  ways,  perhaps  even  beyond  the  scope  of 
people(cid:146)s regular thinking) it was. I did not think that many people would be able 

15

 

 

 

to understand it. Having since explained it to a number of people, however, and 
them  evidentially  being  able  to  comprehend  it,  I  have  changed  my  mind  about 
this. A third reason concerned the actual value of knowledge. Whether correct or 
not,  what  value  might  people  knowing  the  implications  of  this  model  serve? 
Although  I  personally  found  them  beneficial,  I  initially  had  doubts  over  how 
many others would find them the same. However, I have since changed my mind 
about  this  as  well.  I  feel  that,  once  understood,  most  people  would  find  a 
knowledge of the implications of this model beneficial (and for various reasons, 
comforting),  and  if  given  the  choice,  most  would  choose  to  have  that 
knowledge.10  

To  conclude  then,  based  on  the  premise  that  rather  than  the  second  law  of 
thermodynamics inevitably be breached as matter approaches a big crunch  or a 
black hole singularity, the order of events should reverse, in this paper, a model 
of  the  universe  which  provides  a  resolution  to  the  mystery  of  the  origin  of  the 
universe, as well as to Kant(cid:146)s finite vs. infinite universe paradox, was presented. 
Implications of this model included that the universe has neither a beginning nor 
ending,  but  yet  is  finite;  that  singularities  are  never  actually  encountered  in 
nature; there is no differentiation between past and future, and events are neither 
determined by  initial  or final conditions (cid:150) they  just are; problems such as why 
the universe has a low entropy past, or conditions at the big bang appear to be so 
(cid:147)special,(cid:148) require no causal explanation; and that time travel is not possible.  
 
9.  Acknowledgements 
    
I would like to thank Francis Healy, Jonathon  Vos Post, Philip Fellman, Roger 
Penrose, Paul Halpern, Brooke Yigitoz, Jojanneke van der Toorn, Andrei Linde, 
and Lee Smolin for valuable comments and suggestions regarding the contents of 
this paper.  

 

10.   References 
 
[1]  I.  Kant.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  P.  Guyer  and  A.  W.  Wood  (eds.),  Cambridge 

 

University Press, (1999).  

[2] J.J. Halliwell, J. PØrez-Mercador, and W. H. Zurek (eds.), Physical Origins of Time 

Asymmetry. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, (1994).   

[3] H. Price, Time(cid:146)s Arrow and Archimedes(cid:146) Point. Oxford University Press, (1996). 
[4] R. Penrose, The Road to Reality. A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe, Ch. 

27 & 28, Knopf, (2005).    

[5]  L.  Boltzmann.  (cid:220)ber  die  Beziehung  eines  allgemeine  mechanischen  Satzes  zum 
zweiten  Haupsatze  der  W(cid:228)rmetheorie,  Sitzungsber.  Kais.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien, 
Math. Naturwiss. Classe, 75, 67-73, (1877). 

[6] J. Loschmidt, Sitzungsber. Kais. Akad. Wiss. Wien, Math. Naturwiss. Classe 73, 128(cid:150)

142 (1876) 

[7] R. Penrose, The Emperor(cid:146)s New Mind, pp. 410, Penguin, (1991). 
[8] S. W. Hawking, Arrow of time in cosmology, Phys. Rev. D 32, 2489(cid:150)2495, (1985). 
[9] T. Gold, The Arrow of Time, American Journal of Physics, 30: 403-10, (1962). 

                                                 

10 In this regard, I am referring to that if past and future are viewed in the regular fashion, 
with  a  meaningful  differentiation  being  made  between  them,  the  universe  can  be 
interpreted as repeating over, exactly, an infinite number of times. While avoiding going 
into any detail, this has clear implications for the concepts of determinism, free will, and 
perhaps  most  significantly,  the  notion  of  life  after  death.  There  are  some  interesting 
points to be noted in connection to the last one in particular, but I feel they may be out of 
place in the present paper.  

 

16

[10]  T.  Gold,  (ed.),  The  Nature  of  Time.  Cornell  University  Press,  Ithaca,  New  York, 

[11] S. W. Hawking, A Brief History of Time. Bantam, New York, (1988). 
[12] P. C. W. Davies, About Time: Einstein(cid:146)s Unfinished Revolution. pp. 230, 231, 217, 

(1967).   

Viking, London, (1995). 

[13] C. L. Bennett, et al., First Year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) 
Observations: Preliminary Maps and Basic Results. Astrophysical Journal, 148 
213,  (2003). 

[14] R. R. Caldwell. Dark energy, Physics Web, Institute of Physics and IOP Publishing 

[15] P. Halpern, The Cyclical Serpent. Plenum Press, New York, (1995). 
[16]  R.  C.  Tolman,  Relativity,  Thermodynamics  and  Cosmology.  Clarendon  Press, 

[17] J. R. Minkel and G. A. Musser, A Recycled Universe. Scientific American, Feb, pp. 

[18] P. J. Steinhardt and N. Turok, Cosmic evolution in a cyclic universe. Phys. Rev. D 

[19]  M.  Gasperini  and  G.  Veneziano,  Pre-Big  Bang  in  String  Cosmology.  Astropart. 

[20] G. Veneziano, The Myth of the Beginning of Time, Scientific American, May, pp. 

Limited, (May, 2004). 

Oxford, (1934). 

25-26, (2002).  

65, 126003, (2003). 

Phys. 1, 317, (1993). 

54-65, (2004). 

[21] K. Pennicott, Cyclic Universe Bounces Back. Physics Web, Institute of Physics and 

IOP Publishing Limited, (April 26, 2002). 

[22]  P.  Lynds,  Time  and  Classical  and  Quantum  Mechanics:  Indeterminacy  vs. 

Discontinuity. Foundations of Physics Letters, 16(4), (2003). 

[23] P. Lynds, Book manuscript.   
[24]  J.  R.  Gott  III,  Time  Travel  in  Einstein’s  Universe:  The  Physical  Possibilities  of 

Travel Through Time, Mariner Books; Reprint edition (September 19, 2002). 

[25] K. S. Thorne, Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein’s Outrageous Legacy, Ch. 14, 

pp. 483, W. W. Norton & Company; Reprint edition, (January 1995). 

[26]  C.  J.  Isham  and  J.  C.  Polkinghorne,  The  Debate  Over  the  Block  Universe.  In 
Quantum Cosmology and the Laws of Nature, edited by R. Russell, N. Murphy 
and  C.J.  Isham.  University  of  Notre  Dame  Press:  Notre  Dame,  IN,  139-147, 
(1996). 

[27] J. H. Christensen, J. W. Cronin, V. L. Fitch, and R. Turlay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 138, 

(1964).  

[28] I. I. Bigi and A.I. Sanda, CP violation, Cambridge University Press, (2000). 
[29] P. C. W. Davies, The Physics of Time Asymmetry, pp. 176, University of California 

Press Berkeley and Los Angeles, (1974). 

[30]  S.  G.  Sachs,  The  Physics  of  Time  Reversal, pp. 208, University  of  Chicago  Press, 

Chicago, (1987). 

[31]  Y.  Ne’eman,  CP  and  CPT  Violations,  Entropy  and  the  Expanding  Universe, 
International journal of Theoretical Physics, Vol.3, No. 1, p. 1, (1970).  
[32] G. Chardin and J.-M. Rax, CP violation. A matter of (anti)gravity?, Physics Letters 

B, Volume 282, Issue 1-2, p. 256-262, (1992). 

[33]  G.  Chardin,  CP  violation  and  antigravity  (revisited),  Nuclear  Physics  A,  Volume 

558, p. 477-495, (1993). 

[34]  G.  Chardin,  Motivations  for  antigravity 

in  General  Relativity,  Hyperfine 

Interactions, Volume 109, Issue 1-4, pp. 83-94, (1997). 

[35]  P.  Harrison,  Nature’s  flawed  mirror,  Physics  Web,  Institute  of  Physics  and  IOP 

Publishing Limited, (July, 2003). 

[36]  S.  W.  Hawking  and  R.  Penrose,  The  singularities  of  gravitational  collapse  and 
cosmology, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A314: 529-548, (1970). 
[37] R. Penrose, Gravitational Collapse and Space-time Singularities, Phys. Rev. Lett.14: 

[38] S. W. Hawking, Particle creation by black holes, Commun. Math. Phys. 43, 199-220, 

57-59, (1965). 

(1975).  

 

17

[39]  S.  W.  Hawking,  Black  Holes  and Baby  Universes  and  Other  Essays,  Ch. 104,  pp. 

[40] S. W. Hawking, Breakdown of predictability in gravitational collapse, Phys. Rev. 

104, Bantam, (1994). 

D14, 2460, (1976). 

[41] J. Preskill, Do black holes destroy information?, International symposium on black 
holes,  membranes,  wormholes  and  superstrings,  World  Scientific,  River  Edge, 
NJ, (1993). 

[42]  Y.  B.  Zeldovich,  Sov.  Phys.  JETP  45,  9  (1977),  [Zh.  Eksp.  Teor.  Fiz.  79,  18, 

(1977)]. 

[43] S. W. Hawking and R. Laflamme, Baby universes and the non-renormalizability of 

gravity, Phys Lett. B209, 39, (1988).  

[44] S. W. Hawking, Mod. Phys. Lett. A5 145, 453, (1990). 
[45]  K.  S.  Thorne,  C.  W.  Misner,  and  J.  A  Wheeler,  Gravitation,  W.  H.  Freeman, 

(September, 1973).  

[46]  P.  J.  E.  Peebles,  D.  N.  Schramm,  E.  L.  Turner,  and  R.G.  Kron,  The  Case  for  the 
Relativistic Hot Big Bang Cosmology, Nature, 352, 769 (cid:150) 776, (1991). 
[47] J. B. Hartle and S. W. Hawking, Wave Function of the Universe. Phys. Rev. D 28: 

2960(cid:150)2975, (1983).  

[48] O. Penrose, An asymmetric world, Nature, Vol. 438, p.919, 15 Dec, (2005). 

