A Numerical Model-derived Boundary Layer Turbulence Product 
 

Kenneth L. Pryor 
Center for Satellite Applications and Research (NOAA/NESDIS)  
Camp Springs, MD  

Abstract 

A suite of numerical model-derived turbulence assessment products has recently been developed by 
NESDIS/STAR and implemented on the World Wide Web.  The suite of products is designed to 
indicate the potential for clear-air turbulence (CAT) resulting from Kelvin-Helmholtz instability. The 
existing product suite is intended to provide turbulence information to aircraft flying in the vicinity 
of the jet stream.  Turbulence is also a frequently occurring phenomenon in the boundary layer and 
may pose a threat to low-flying aircraft and aircraft during the take-off and landing phases of flight.  
Therefore, a numerical model-derived boundary layer turbulence product is under development.  The 
boundary layer turbulence index (TIBL) product is designed to assess the potential for turbulence in 
the lower troposphere, generated using National Center for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) Rapid 
Update Cycle (RUC)-2 model data.  The index algorithm approximates boundary layer turbulent 
kinetic energy (TKE) by parameterizing vertical wind shear, responsible for mechanical production, 
and kinematic heat flux, responsible for buoyant production. The TIBL product is expected to be 
most effective during the afternoon hours in a regime characterized by a well-established convective 
mixed layer. Preliminary case studies and validation have revealed a strong correlation between 
TIBL values and wind gust magnitude observed at the surface in mature afternoon convective 
boundary layers.  This paper will discuss validation efforts and present case studies that demonstrate 
potential operational utility.  Particular emphasis will be given to the coordinated use of the TIBL 
product with other aviation applications, such as the GOES microburst products. 

 

1.  Introduction 
 
A suite of numerical model-derived turbulence assessment products has recently been 
 
developed by NESDIS/STAR and implemented on the World Wide Web.  The suite of products is 
designed to indicate the potential for clear-air turbulence (CAT) resulting from Kelvin-Helmholtz 
instability (Ellrod and Knapp 1992). The prototype product, known as the deformation-vertical 
shear index (DVSI) or turbulence index (TI) product is currently generated utilizing operational 
numerical weather prediction model data. The TI algorithm consists of two terms:  horizontal 
deformation (DEF) at a standard pressure level and total vector vertical wind shear (VWS) between 
two pressure levels.  A recent enhancement to the TI has been the inclusion of a "divergence trend" 
(DVT) term to account for the time variation of divergence present in unbalanced anticyclonic jet 
streams (Knox et al 2006), resulting in the implementation of the D-DVSI product based on the 
following algorithm: 
D-DVSI = DEF X VWS + DVT                                                                                                   (1)  
The existing product suite is thus intended to provide turbulence information to aircraft flying in the 
vicinity of the jet stream. 
Turbulence is also a frequently occurring phenomenon in the boundary layer and may pose a 
 
threat to low-flying aircraft and aircraft during the take-off and landing phases of flight.  Therefore, 
a numerical model-derived boundary layer turbulence product is under development.  The boundary 

Sorbjan (1989) states that turbulent heat flux (w'T') is related to the mean vertical 

layer turbulence index (TIBL) product is designed to assess the potential for turbulence in the lower 
troposphere, generated using National Center for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) Rapid Update 
Cycle (RUC)-2 model data.  The index algorithm approximates boundary layer turbulent kinetic 
energy (TKE) by parameterizing vertical wind shear, responsible for mechanical production, and 
kinematic heat flux, responsible for buoyant production. Equation 2 describes the relationship 
between shear, bouyancy, and turbulence in boundary layer turbulence generation: 
TKE ~ VWS + H                                                                                                                           
(2) 
where TKE represents turbulent kinetic energy, VWS represents total vector vertical wind shear 
between the 700 and 850-mb levels, and the quantity H represents vertical heat flux. The TKE index 
computation does not result in an absolute TKE value, but rather an index value that represents the 
relative contribution of shear and buoyancy in the generation of turbulence.  In the boundary layer, 
turbulence is visualized as the superimposition of many different size eddies, forced primarily by 
solar heating of the surface that results in the development of thermals and subsequent eddy 
circulation (Sorbjan 2003).  Stull (1988) notes that the largest boundary layer eddies scale to the 
depth of the boundary layer and are typically the most intense, produced by solar heating, vertical 
wind shear, or a combination thereof.  The RUC TIBL algorithm is intended to be a “mixed layer” 
index, assessing the potential for turbulence in the boundary layer above the surface layer.  
Accordingly, the TIBL product parameterizes convective sources of turbulence as well as wind 
shear in the upper boundary layer that may also contribute to turbulence generation. 
 
temperature gradient dT/dz. Similarly, vertical wind shear (VWS) may be represented by total vector 
shear dV/dZ (Ellrod and Knapp 1992). In addition, the relationship between vertical wind shear and 
vertical momentum transfer dictates that surface wind gust magnitude will be proportional to vertical 
shear, and thus would be an effective measurement to quantify boundary layer turbulence.  
Therefore, assuming horizontal homogeneity and substituting absolute temperature T for potential 
temperature θ, boundary layer TKE can be approximated by the equation 3, based on simplification 
of the TKE equations as given in Stull (1988) and Sorbjan (1989): 
dE/dt ~ dV/dz + dT/dz                                                                                                                 (3) 
The terms on the r.h.s. of equation 3 are considered to be the most important contributors to 
boundary layer turbulence. The second term on the r.h.s. represents the temperature lapse rate 
between the 700 and 850-mb levels.  Pryor (2006) identified a typical warm season mixed layer 
depth of 670 mb based on inspection of twenty GOES proximity soundings from the summer of 
2005 over Oklahoma. It is assumed that buoyant heat flux is associated with a steep temperature 
lapse rate in the mixed layer that is nearly dry adiabatic.  Thus, boundary layer turbulence potential, 
quantified by eq. 2, may be contributed equally by significant values of VWS and H.  The TIBL 
product is expected to be most effective during the afternoon hours in a regime characterized by a 
well-established convective mixed layer. Preliminary case studies and validation have revealed a 
strong correlation between TIBL values and wind gust magnitude (u') observed at the surface in 
mature afternoon convective boundary layers.  This paper will discuss validation efforts and present 
case studies that demonstrate potential operational utility.  Particular emphasis will be given to the 
coordinated use of the TIBL product with other aviation applications, such as the GOES microburst 
products. 
 
2.  Methodology and Validation 

TIBL product imagery was collected for significant wind events that occurred over the 

 
 
Oklahoma Panhandle region during the months of October and November 2006.  TIBL product 
images were generated by Man computer Interactive Data Access System (McIDAS) and then 
archived on an FTP server (ftp://ftp.orbit.nesdis.noaa.gov/pub/smcd/opdb/tke/).Surface wind gusts, 
as observed by Oklahoma Mesonet stations in the panhandle region were compared to 
corresponding TKE index values, nearest in time and space.  Since dE/dt=1/2du'²/dt and u'=u-U 
(Sorbjan 1989), variables easily measured by mesonet observing stations, comparing observations of 
wind speed fluctuation (u') to TKE index values was the most effective means of assessing the ability 
of the TIBL product to represent mixed layer turbulence. 
 
The panhandle region was selected as an area of study due to the wealth of surface 
observation data provided by the Oklahoma Mesonet (Brock et al. 1995), a thermodynamic 
environment typical of the High Plains region, and relatively homogeneous topography. The High 
Plains region encompasses the Oklahoma Panhandle that extends from 100 to 103 degrees West (W) 
longitude. The ground elevation on the panhandle increases from near 2000 feet at 100W longitude 
to nearly 5000 feet at 103W longitude (Oklahoma Climatological Survey 1997). Surface wind 
observations, as recorded by Oklahoma Mesonet stations, were measured at a height of 10 meters 
(33 feet) above ground level. In addition, proximity RUC sounding profiles were collected for each 
significant wind event. Also, in order to assess the predictive value of the TIBL product for 
downburst events, data used in validation was obtained for product valid times one to three hours 
prior to the observed peak surface wind gusts, assuming that no change in environmental static 
stability and air mass characteristics between valid time and time of observed wind gusts had 
occurred. Correlations between TKE index values and observed surface wind gust velocities as well 
as between TKE values and surface dewpoint depression (DD) were computed for non-convective 
significant wind events during the validation period. Stull (1988) has identified that large surface 
DDs were associated with turbulent, well-mixed convective boundary layers.  Hypothesis testing 
was conducted, in the manner described in Pryor and Ellrod (2004), to determine the statistical 
significance of linear relationships between observed wind gust magnitude and TKE index values for 
selected significant non-convective wind events.    
 
For significant wind gust observations associated with convective downbursts, Next 
Generation Radar (NEXRAD) base reflectivity imagery (level II/III) from National Climatic Data 
Center (NCDC) was utilized to verify that observed wind gusts were associated with convective 
storm activity. NEXRAD images were generated by the NCDC Java NEXRAD Viewer (Available 
online at http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/radar/jnx/index.html). Another application of the NEXRAD 
imagery was to infer microscale physical properties of downburst-producing convective storms. 
Particular radar reflectivity signatures, such as the bow echo and rear-inflow notch 
(RIN)(Przybylinski 1995), were effective indicators of the occurrence of downbursts.  
 
3.  Case Studies 
 
14 November 2006 Downbursts 
 
 
Panhandle as observed by several Oklahoma Mesonet stations. Mid-afternoon (2100 UTC) 
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) Hybrid Microburst Index (HMI) (Pryor 

During the afternoon of 14 November 2006, strong downbursts occurred over the Oklahoma 

2006) product imagery indicated a favorable boundary layer thermodynamic structure and displayed 
high risk values (greater than or equal to 24) over the central and western panhandle.  In addition, 
corresponding Rapid Update Cycle (RUC) boundary layer turbulence product imagery indicated 
elevated risk values over the same region.  The combination of large GOES HMI and RUC 
Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE) index values signified the existence of a deep, dry convective mixed 
layer and the resultant favorability for downburst development due to sub-cloud evaporation of 
precipitation associated with a low-reflectivity, weakly convective rainband.  Although HMI values 
were large, very low CAPE, as indicated in proximity sounding profiles, was more typical for warm-
season dry microburst environments over the High Plains (Caracena et al 2006; Wakimoto 1985).  
This study will focus on downbursts observed over Cimarron County between 2200 and 2300 UTC.  
 
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) Hybrid Microburst Index (HMI) 
imagery and a Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE) Index product image based on a Rapid Update Cycle 
(RUC) model analysis at 2100 UTC 14 November 2006 are shown in Figure 1.  The HMI product 
image displays high values over the central and western Oklahoma Panhandle.  The corresponding 
TKE index product image displays maxima or "ridges" (yellow scalloped lines) over the central and 
western panhandle in close proximity to locations of observation of downburst winds (knots, plotted 
in yellow over respective mesonet stations). The combination of high HMI and TKE index values 
indicated the presence of a deep, dry convective mixed layer with strong vertical wind shear prior to 
the onset of convective storm activity during the following one to three hour period.  In addition to 
buoyancy effects, downward momentum transport by convective downdrafts was also likely a factor 
in the magnitude of wind gusts observed by the mesonet stations.  Correlation statistics and 
observation data for this event are displayed in Table 1. 
 
and 2300 UTC.  Although radar reflectivity associated with the rainband was weak (below 15 dBZ), 
embedded small-scale bow echoes with associated RINs were apparent in the downburst-producing 
segments over Kenton and Boise City as apparent in Amarillo, Texas (KAMA) NEXRAD base 
reflectivity imagery in Figure 2.  The strongest downburst wind gust of the event, 63 knots, 
displayed in Figure 3, was recorded by the Boise City mesonet station at 2225 UTC.  Corresponding 
to the downburst at Boise City were the largest HMI value in the region of 29 and an elevated TKE 
index value of 18, indicated in the HMI and TKE product images at 2100 UTC, over an hour prior 
to downburst occurrence.  The 2100 UTC HMI image displayed a rainband over southeastern 
Colorado that would eventually track southeastward over the Oklahoma Panhandle between 2200 
UTC and 0000 UTC 15 November 2006.  The location of the observation of downburst winds was 
in close proximity to a TKE ridge, suggesting that intense turbulent mixing due to a combination of 
solar heating of the surface and vertical wind shear primed the boundary layer for strong convective 
downdraft development. A proximity RUC sounding profile at 2100 UTC in Figure 4 as well as a 
meteogram from Kenton in Figure 3 most effectively portrayed the favorable boundary layer 
thermodynamic structure that evolved during the afternoon over the western panhandle. 
 
revealed a wind speed of 48 knots at approximately 3000 feet above ground level (AGL).  The peak 
downburst wind gust of 48 knots recorded at 2205 UTC highlighted the role of downward 
horizontal momentum transfer by convective downdrafts from the mixed layer to the surface. 
By 2300 UTC, the favorable environment for downbursts had shifted eastward to Texas County as 
indicated in HMI and TKE imagery at 2300 UTC in Figure 5.  The 2300 UTC TKE product image 
displayed a northeast to southwest oriented ridge over northern Texas County.  Between 2300 and 

In addition to the "inverted-v" profile apparent in the sounding, the sounding over Kenton 

The first downburst-producing rainband tracked through Cimarron County between 2200 

Corfidi et al. (2004) have noted that downburst-producing mesoscale convective systems 

During the afternoon of 20 November 2006, strong and gusty winds were observed over the 

0000 UTC, a series of rainbands moved eastward through Texas County in the central panhandle, 
producing severe downbursts at Goodwell and Hooker.  Associated with the rainbands were higher 
radar reflectivities up to 35 dBZ (not shown).  Again, in a similar manner to the downbursts that 
occurred earlier, bow echoes were embedded in the rainbands at the time of downburst observation.   
 
(MCSs) can occur in environments of limited surface moisture (surface dewpoints at or below 50F). 
In these cases, strong convective downdraft development is driven by sub-cloud evaporational 
cooling of precipitation resulting from a combination of steep low to mid level lapse rates and large 
dewpoint depressions. Since the HMI incorporates the low to mid level temperature lapse rate and 
dewpoint depression difference (Pryor 2006), it is expected that downburst activity will be 
maximized in regions of large HMI values. It was also noted that moderate to strong vertical wind 
shear is instrumental in strengthening and deepening low-level system relative inflow, and hence 
contributing to MCS sustenance. Thus, in this case, the development of cold convective downdrafts 
in the presence of vertical wind shear was an important factor in downburst generation and system 
maintenance, demonstrating the value of the GOES HMI and RUC TIBL products in the short-term 
forecasting of downburst potential. 
 
Non-convective High Winds 20 November 2006 
 
 
Oklahoma Panhandle in association with an anticyclone over the central United States. The mid-
afternoon (2100 UTC) Rapid Update Cycle (RUC) boundary layer turbulence product (Turbulent 
Kinetic Energy, TKE) image indicated a maximum in risk values over southeastern Colorado and the 
extreme western Oklahoma Panhandle. Peak wind gusts of up to 35 knots were observed by 
Oklahoma Mesonet stations in the western panhandle between 2000 and 2100 UTC. Elevated RUC 
TKE index values signified the existence of a well-established convective mixed layer with strong 
vertical wind shear, and the resultant favorability for high surface wind gusts due to downward 
horizontal momentum transport.  Correlation statistics and observation data for this event is 
displayed in Table 2. 
 
Update Cycle (RUC) model analysis at 2100 UTC 20 November 2006, and an Oklahoma Mesonet 
meteogram from Kenton located in the western panhandle. The TKE index product image displays a 
maximum (yellow scalloped lines) over the western panhandle in close proximity to the observation 
of high wind gusts at Kenton. Downward momentum transport by intense convective eddy 
circulations was likely a factor in the magnitude of wind gusts observed by the Kenton mesonet 
station as portrayed in Figure 7.  The 2100 UTC RUC sounding in Figure 8 over Kenton supported 
this hypothesis.  Upper mixed layer wind velocity, at a height of near 1500 feet AGL, was indicated 
to be 35 knots, the exact wind gust speed observed at Kenton at 2045 UTC.  Close correspondence 
between mixed layer wind velocities and observed surface wind gusts demonstrated that turbulence 
was acting to redistribute momentum within the boundary layer.  Comparison of afternoon TKE 
index values with observed surface wind fluctuation (u') revealed a strong correlation between TKE 
and wind gust magnitude.  Figure 9, the 2045 UTC surface analysis, incorporating Oklahoma 
Mesonet observations, displayed that locally, the highest surface wind gusts were associated with a 
maximum in TKE index values. 
 

Figure 6 displays the Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE) Index product image based on a Rapid 

4.  Summary and Conclusions 
 
 
A boundary layer turbulence index (TIBL) product has been developed to assess the 
potential for turbulence in the lower troposphere, generated using RUC-2 numerical model data.  
The index algorithm approximates boundary layer turbulent kinetic energy by parameterizing vertical 
wind shear, responsible for mechanical production of TKE, and kinematic heat flux, parameterized 
by the vertical temperature lapse rate dT/dz and responsible for buoyant production of TKE.  
Validation for the TIBL product has been conducted for selected convective and non-convective 
wind events.  This paper presented studies of two significant wind events during November 2006 
over the Oklahoma Panhandle region.  It was found that for the 14 November downburst event, the 
observation of strong surface wind gusts occurred in close proximity to local maxima or "ridges" of 
TKE.  This case also demonstrated a close correspondence between TKE index values and GOES 
sounder-derived microburst risk values for downburst occurrence. In contrast, the 20 November 
Kenton high wind event demonstrated the effectiveness of the TIBL product in quantifying the 
evolution of turbulence in a mature afternoon convective mixed layer.  Apparent in this study was a 
strong correlation between TKE index values and the magnitude of surface wind gusts (u') during 
the afternoon hours.  In a similar manner to the convective wind case, peak surface wind gusts were 
observed in close proximity to a TKE ridge.  Based on the favorable results highlighted in the case 
studies, the RUC TIBL product should have operational utility in assessing hazards to low-flying 
aircraft.  Further validation during the warm season will be necessary to optimize the capability of 
the TIBL product in the evaluation of turbulence risk to aviation. 
 
5.  References 
 
Brock, F. V., K. C. Crawford, R. L. Elliott, G. W. Cuperus, S. J. Stadler, H. L. Johnson and M. D. 
Eilts, 1995: The Oklahoma Mesonet: A technical overview. Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic 
Technology, 12, 5-19. 
 
Caracena, F., R.L. Holle, and C.A. Doswell, cited 2006: Microbursts-A handbook for visual 
identification. [Available online at http://www.cimms.ou.edu/~doswell/microbursts/Handbook.html.] 
 
Corfidi, S.F., D.A. Imy, S.J. Taylor, and A. Logan, 2004: A preliminary investigation of derecho-
producing MCSs in environments of very low dewpoints. Preprints, 22nd Conf. on Severe Local 
Storms, Hyannis, MA, Amer. Meteor. Soc. 
 
Ellrod, G. P., and D. I. Knapp, 1992: An objective clear-air turbulence forecasting technique: 
Verification and operational use. Wea. Forecasting, 7, 150-165. 
 
Knox, J. A., G. P. Ellrod and P. D. Williams, 2006: Improved clear air turbulence diagnostics based 
on adjustment dynamics.  Preprints, 12th Conference on Aviation Range and Aerospace 
Meteorology, Atlanta, GA, Amer. Meteor. Soc. 
 
Oklahoma Climatological Survey, cited 2006:  Climate of Oklahoma.  [Available online at 
http://climate.ocs.ou.edu/.] 
 

Pryor, K.L., and G.P. Ellrod, 2004: WMSI - A new index for forecasting wet microburst severity. 
National Weather Association Electronic Journal of Operational Meteorology, 2004-EJ3. 
 
Pryor, K.L., 2006: The GOES Hybrid Microburst Index. Preprints, 14th Conf. on Satellite 
Meteorology and Oceanography, Atlanta, GA, Amer. Meteor. Soc. 
 
Przybylinski, R.W., 1995: The bow echo. Observations, numerical simulations, and severe weather 
detection methods. Wea. Forecasting, 10, 203-218. 
 
Sorbjan, Z., 1989: Structure of the Atmospheric Boundary Layer. Prentice Hall, 317pp.  
 
Sorbjan, Z., 2003: Air-Pollution Meteorology. Chapter 4 of AIR QUALITY MODELING - 
Theories, Methodologies, Computational Techniques, and Available Databases and Software. Vol. I 
- Fundamentals. EnviroComp Institute (http://www.envirocomp.org/).  
 
Stull, R.B., 1988: An introduction to boundary layer meteorology. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Boston, 649 pp. 
 
Wakimoto, R.M., 1985: Forecasting dry microburst activity over the high plains. Mon. Wea. Rev., 
113, 1131-1143. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
 
Mesonet for the surface weather observation data used in this research effort. RUC model sounding 
profiles were provided by NOAA website rucsoundings.noaa.gov. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The author thanks Mr. Derek Arndt (Oklahoma Climatological Survey) and the Oklahoma 

 

 

 
Figure 1.  GOES HMI (top) and RUC TIBL (bottom) images at 2100 UTC 14 November 2006. 
 
 

 

 

 
Figure 2.  NEXRAD reflectivity at 2203 UTC (top) and 2223 UTC (bottom) 14 November 2006.  
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
Figure 3.  Oklahoma Mesonet meteograms at Kenton (top) and Boise City (bottom). 
 
 

 

 
Figure 4.  RUC-2 sounding at Kenton at 2100 UTC 14 November 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
Figure 5.  GOES HMI (top) and RUC TIBL (bottom) images at 2300 UTC 14 November 2006. 
 
 

 
Figure 6.  RUC TIBL image at 2100 UTC 20 November 2006. 
 

 

 
Figure 7. Oklahoma Mesonet meteogram at Kenton. 

 

 
Figure 8.  RUC-2 sounding at Kenton at 1800 UTC 20 November 2006. 

 

 
Figure 9. Surface analysis based on Oklahoma Mesonet observations at 2045 UTC 20 November 
2006. 

 

14 Nov 06 
WMSI to 
measured 
wind: 
HMI to 
measured 
wind: 
TKE to 
measured 
wind: 

 

 

 

 

 

 
WMSI to HMI:

 

0.46 

 
Mean HMI: 

 
0.64 

0.96 

0.48 

No. of events: 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Time 
 
22:10 
22:25 
23:45 
0:00 
 
 
 
 
 

Measured Wind 
Speed 
kt 
48 
63 
58 
50 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Location 
 
Kenton  
Boise City 
Goodwell 
Hooker 
 
 
 
 
 

GOES-12 
HMI 
 
24 
29 
26 
24 

4 

 

 

Mean WMSI: 

Mean Wind 
Speed: 

Mean TKE 

 
RUC TKE 
 
18 
18 
19 
14 
 
 
 
 
 

GOES-12 
WMSI 
 
-4 
0 
0 
0 
 
 
 
 
 

Table1.  Correlation statistics and observation data for 14 November 2006 downburst event. 
 

 
20 Nov 2006 

TKE to u': 
TKE to DD: 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

Time 
(UTC) 
18:00 
19:00 
20:00 
21:00 
 
 
 
 
 

RUC TKE 
 
16 
18 
19 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2.  Correlation statistics and observation data for 20 November 2006 high wind event. 

 
kt 
17.38 
22.59 
24.33 
21.72 
 
 
 
 
 

 
kt 
25.20 
31.28 
33.02 
33.02 
 
 
 
 
 

u' 
kt 
7.82 
8.69 
8.69 
11.30 
 
 
 
 
 

Gust 
mph 
29 
36 
38 
38 
 
 
 
 
 

 

0.92 
0.98 
 
Measured 
Wind 
Speed 
mph 
20 
26 
28 
25 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
DD(F) 
 
40 
43 
35 
32 
 
 
 
 
 

 
25.75 

-1 

55 

17 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

DD 
F 
28 
29 
30 
32 
 
 
 
 
 

