 

 

A New GEM-like Imaging Detector with 
Electrodes Coated with Resistive Layers 

A. Di Mauro, B. Lund-Jensen, P. Martinengo, E. Nappi, V. Peskov, L. Periale,P.Picchi, F. Pietropaolo, 
I.Rodionov 

 Abstract--We  have  developed  and  tested  several  prototypes  of 
GEM-like  detectors  with  electrodes  coated  with  resistive  layers: 
CuO or CrO. These detectors can operate stably at gains close to 
105 and they are very robust. We discovered that the cathodes of 
these  detectors  could  be  coated  by  CsI  layers  and  in  such  a  way 
the  detectors  gain  high  efficiency  for  the  UV  photons.  We  also 
demonstrated  that  such  detectors  can  operate  stably  in  the 
cascade mode and high overall gains (~106) are reachable.   This 
opens  applications  in  several  areas,  for  example  in  RICH  or  in 
noble  liquid  TPCs.  Results  from  the  first  applications  of  these 
devices  for  UV  photon  detection  at  room  and  cryogenic 
temperatures are given. 
 

I.   INTRODUCTION 

 

 
The  GEM  detector  has  several  unique  features,  for 
example,  it  can  operate  at  rather  high  gains  in  pure  noble 
gases,  can  be  combined  with  another  GEMs  and  operate  in 
cascade mode and so on [1]. 
However, the GEM is a rather fragile detector: it requires dust 
free conditions for its assembling and could be easily damaged 
by  sparks.  Unfortunately,  occasional  sparks  are  almost 
unavoidable at high gains of operation. Several groups tried to 
minimize  their  rate  and  damaging  effect  by  using  segmented 
GEMs [2], or many GEMs (up to 4 -5) in cascaded mode [3] 
or  by  identifying  the  optimal  combination  of  the  parameters 
(the  width  of  the  gaps  between  the  cascaded  GEMs,  their 

                                                           
Manuscript received November 17, 2006. 
A.  Di  Mauro  is  with  the  PH  Div.,  CERN,  Geneva-23  ,  Switzerland,  CH-

1211, e-mail: Antonio.Di.Mauro@cern.ch 

B.  Lund-Jensen  is  with  the  Physics  Dept.  of  the  Royal  Institute  of 

Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, SE-10691, e-mail: lund@particle.kth.se 
    P.  Martinengo  is  with  the  PH  Div.,  CERN,  Geneva-23  ,  Switzerland,  CH-
1211, e-mail: Paolo.Martinengo@cern.ch 

E. Nappi is with the Phys. Div. of Bari University and INFN Bari, Italy, I- 

70126,  e-mail: Eugenio.Nappi@cern.ch 

V. Peskov is with the PH div., CERN, Geneva-23 , Switzerland, CH-1211, 

e-mail: vladimir.peskov@cern.ch 

Luciano.Periale@cern.ch 

L. Periale is with the Astroph. Dept. of INAF, Turin, Italy  I-10025, e-mail: 

P. Picci is with the INFN Fracati, I-00044, e-mail: Pio.Picchi@cern.ch 
F.  Pietropolo 

  INFN  Padova,  Italy  I-35020,  e-mail: 

is  with 

the 
Francesco.Pietropaolo@cern.ch 

I. Rodionov is with the Reagent Research Center, Moscow,125190,  Russia, 

e-mail: i.rodionov@reagent-rdc.ru 

 
     

voltages  at  a  given  counting  rate  and  so),  which  ensure  the 
minimum  rate  of  sparks  at  the  given  overall  gain  and  by 
respecting this “safe zone” during the operation [4]. 
 Our group also tried to contribute to these efforts. 
Performed studies show that the maximum achievable gain of 
hole- type detectors increases with their thickness [5]. This is 
why our first attempt was to develop a thick GEM (TGEM) [6, 
7]. This was a metallized from both sides printed circuit board 
with drilled holes-see Fig. 1. This simple device allows one to 
achieve  the  maximum  gain  10  times  higher  than  with  the 
conventional  GEM  [7].  Later  we  modified  this  detector  by 
drilling  out  a  Cu  layer  around  each  hole;  this  allowed  one  to 
additionally increase the maximum achievable gain by a factor 
of  ~5.  A  systematic  study  of  this  device  was  performed  by 
Breskin’s  group:  they  confirmed  the  detector  is  very  robust 
and can operate at gains of ~105. Instead of drilling out the Cu 
around  the  edges  of  the  holes,  they  manufactured  the 
protective dielectric rims by a lithographic technology [8]. 
  

 

 
Fig.1. A photograph of a TGEM. 
 
 
Recently  we  have  developed  and  tested  a  thick  GEM  which 
electrodes  were  coated  by  a  thick  layer  of  graphite  paint  [9]. 
We  named  this  detector  a  Resistive  Electrode  Thick  GEM  or 
RETGEM. The RETGEMT could operate at gains of ~105; at 
higher gains it may transit to a streamer mode and continue to 
operate in this mode as a photon counter. In contrast to sparks 
in  conventional  GEMs  these  streamers  are  mild  (see  Fig.  2) 

 

and  do  not  damage  either  the  detector  or  the  front-end 
electronics. 
 
 
 

Note  that  these  detectors  were  very  different  from  our  first 
prototypes, described in [9], in which the Cu electrodes were  
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
Fig.2.  A  schematic  drawing  showing  the  difference  between  the  sparks  and 
‘streamers”:  in  the  case  of  the  spark  occurring  in  the  GEM  detector  (a)  all 
electrical energy stored in the detector’s capacity released in the spark; in the 
case of the restive coating the discharge current is restricted by the electrode’s 
resistivity  and  by  its  charging  up  effect  and  as  a  results  the  discharges 
(streamers) are very mild (b). 
 
Certainly  there  is  nothing  magic  in  the  graphite  coating  and 
many other resistive layers could be used to achieve the same 
protective  effect.  In  this  work  we  experimented  with  TGEMs 
coated with thin oxides layers: CuO or CrO. Due to their small 
thickness  of  these  coatings  they  do  not  restrict  the  spark’s 
energy  as  much  as  the  graphite  layer  used  in  [9],  but 
nevertheless they made the detector very robust.  
The aim of this work is to extensively test these detectors and 
use  them  for  UV  photon  detection  at  room  and  cryogenic 
temperatures.  
 
 

II.  RETGEMS WITH CUO OR CRO COATED ELECTRODES  

 
 
As in our previous work [9] RETGEMs for these studies were 
manufactured  by  coating  TGEMs  electrodes  with  resistive 
layers. The last one were produced from G-10 sheets (3x3, 5x5 
or  10x10cm2)  using  the  industrial  PCB  processing  of  precise 
drilling and etching. The TGEM used were 0.4 -1,5 mm thick 
with holes of 0.3 -1mm in diameter and with a pitch of 0.7-2.5 
mm, respectively. Their electrodes were made of Cu or Cr and 
in  all  detectors  the  electrodes  were  etched  around  the  hole 
edges in order to remove sharp edges and create dielectric rims 
of  0.1-0.15  mm  in  width.    For  the  sake  of  simplicity  for  this 
work,  the  resistive  coating  was  done  by  oxidation  of  the 
metallic  electrodes.  The  photograph  of  the  one  of  the 
prototypes of these detectors is presented in Fig. 3  

 
Fig. 3. A photo of the larger (10x10cm2) prototype of the RETGEM with CuO 
electrodes.  
 
 

 

 

 
Fig. 4 A schematic drawing of the experimental set up for comparative studies 
of the RETGEMs and the GEMs 
 
etched  until  they  become  very  thin  and  nonuniform  in 
structure,  then  they  were  coated  by  thick  graphite  layers  and 
the  edges  of  the  hole  were  then  additionally  drilled  out  to 
remove sharp edges. Thus it was not clear in advance if these 
new  designs  (with  CuO  or  CrO  layers)  would  provide  any 
spark protection. 
The experimental sent up for their study is shown in Fig.4. It 
contains  two  gas  chambers  connected  together  by  a  pipe  line 
and flushed by the same gas at a pressure of 1 atm. In one of 
the chambers a RETGEM was installed and in another one, a 
GEM,  which  we  used  for  comparative  studies.  Most  of  the 
GEMs  used  in  these  studies  were  had  sizes  of  10x10cm2  and 
were  manufactured  at  CERN.  However  in  some  studies  we 
also used GEMs manufactured in the USA [10]. As ionization 
sources  we  used  55Fe  or  241Am  radioactive  sources  placed 
inside the chambers. Signals from the detectors were recorded 
  by charge sensitive amplifiers Ortec142A or CANBERRA. 

 

Some  results  of  gain  vs.  voltage  measurements  are  presented 
in Fig. 5. The measurements were stopped at voltages at which 
the  first  signs  of  gain  instability  appeared.  One  can  see  from 
this data that the RETGEM operates stably in Ar at gains of 10 
times  higher  than  the  GEM.  At  gains  close  to  105  discharges 
may  appear  in  the  RETGEM.  Because  the  oxide  layers  were 
much  thinner  than  the  graphite  coating  we  used  in  the  earlier 
studies  [9]  the  discharges  in  the  present  version  of  the 
RETGEM  were  not  mild  streamers,  but  rather  sparks. 
However, the energy released in these sparks was less then in 
the case of the TGEMs and as a result the detector was more 
robust than the TGEM 
Fig.  6  shows  a  typical  oscillogramm  of  the  signal  from  the 
RETGEM  operating  in  Ar  at  gains  close  to  104.  One  can 
clearly see the fast component of the charge signal induced by 
avalanche electrons and the slow component due to the drift of 
positive  ions.  It  is  interesting  to  see  that  at  gains  of  close  to 
breakdown,  no  signs  of  ion  feedback  pulses  were  observed 
indicating  that  the  breakdown  occurs  via  the  space  charge 
mechanism [5]. 
Because RETGEMs operate at gains much higher than GEMs, 
it  was  attractive  to  use  them  for single electron detection and 
as  photodetectors.  First  results  obtained  in  this  direction  are 
presented in the next paragraph. 

1.00E+05

1.00E+04

n
i
a
G

1.00E+03

1.00E+02

1.00E+01

GEM in Ar

Ar

Ar+10%CO2

RETGEM

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

Voltage (V)

 
Fig.  5.  Gains  vs.  voltage  measured  for  the  GEM  operating  in  Ar  and  for  the 
RETGEM (1 mm thick) in Ar and Ar+10%CO2. 
 
 

 

III. TESTS OF RETGEM –BASED  PHOTODETECTORS 

 
Several  groups  (see  for  example  [11,  12]  demonstrated  that 
cascaded  GEMs  (3-4  GEMs  operating  in  tandem)  combined 
with semitransparent or reflective CsI photocathodes could be 
used  for  the  detection  of  UV  and  even  visible  photons  [12]. 
This  detector’s  configuration  offers  new  possibilities  in  some 
applications,  for  example  in  the  detection  of  the  Cherenkov 
light. Indeed GEMs with reflective photocathodes can operate 
and remain high sensitive to light at zero or even at the reverse 
drift  electric  field  being  in  such  a  way  a  “hadron  blind”  (see 
[13] for more details). Moreover, in some cases GEMs can be 
placed  and  be  operated  in  the  same  gas  as  a  Cherenkov 
radiator  so  that  no  separation  windows  are  needed  between 
them.  
Thus  is  will  be  interesting  to  evaluate  if  the  RETGEM  can 
offer a comparable or even better performance. 
Because the RETGEM has a dielectric coating it is not clear in 
advance  if  it  could  be  coated  with  an  CsI  film  or  any  other 
photosensitive  layers  and  if  these  layers  remain  stable  and 
have a high enough quantum efficiency. It was not evident as 
well that these detectors can operate stably in cascaded mode. 
To  answer  these  questions  and  investigate  other  potential 
problems  we  build  prototypes  of  cascaded  RETGEMs 
combined with CsI or SbSc photocathodes and performed their 
preliminary tests. 

A.  Tests oriented on RICH applications 

 
For  these  tests  we  slightly  modified  the  experimental  set  up 
shown  in  Fig.  4.  Inside  the  first  chamber  two  RETGEMs 
operating  in  cascade  mode  were  installed  (we  named  them 
‘double RETGEMs” and inside the other one –three cascaded 
GEMs  (“triple”  GEMs)  with  Cu  electrodes  manufactured  by 
Tech-Etch  Inc.  [10]-see  Fig.  7.The  cathode  of  the  first  (top) 
RETGEM  and  the  Cu  cathode  of  the  top  GEM  was  coated 
with  an  CsI  layer  0.4  mm  thick  (by  a  vacuum  deposition 
technique).  From  our  earlier  experience  we  know  that  the Cu 
substrate  may  cause  a  rather  fast  degradation  of  the  CsI 
quantum efficiency (QE), this is why 
  
 

 
 
Fig. 6. Typical oscillogramm of the signal produced by 5.9 keV photons in a 1 
mm thick RETGEM at gain of 5x103. 

 
Fig. 7. A schematic drawing of the experimental set up used for comparative 
studies of RETGEMs and GEMs 

  

 

 

 
it  was  very  important  not  only to measure the initial value of 
the QE immediately after the CsI evaporation but also monitor 
it in time. This was done with the help of a Hg lamp. The UV 
light  from  the  Hg  lamp  entered  the  detectors  via  the  CaF2 
windows  covered  with  narrow  band  filters  having  a  peak 
transmission  at  185  nm.  By  applying  the  negative  (reverse) 
voltage  between  the  top  GEM  electrode  with  the  CsI 
photocathode  and  the  drift  mesh,  the  photocurrent  was 
measured in various gases as a function of this voltage. In the 
case  of  the  mixtures  of  noble  gases  with  quenchers,  this 
photocurrent reaches a plateau at high voltages with a value of 
IGEM (see Fig. 8) which could be interpreted as “full” collection 
of the photoelectron from the photocathode:  

IGEM=kIGEMvac     (1), 
where  IGEMvac  is  the  current  from  the  GEM  photocathode 
measured  in  vacuum  and  the  k  is  the  coefficient  describing  a 
back diffusion effect [14]. Usually in quenched gases the value 
of k is close to one, whereas in noble gases k<1. 
To  evaluate  from  these  data  the  GEM’s  QE  we  used 
photodiodes R1259 and R1187 calibrated at Hamamatsu. The 
photocurrent  from  these  photodiodes  exhibited  a  very  clear 
plateau (with a value at the plateau IPD ) and by comparison the 
values of these photocurrents and taking into account the solid 
angles  at  which  the  UV  light  reached  the  detectors,    one  can 
calculate the QE of the GEM being 13.3%. Of course, for the 
evaluation of the  GEM’s quantum efficiency operating in the 
counting mode (Qpract) one have to take into consideration the 
photoelectron collection factor ε (see [3] for details) which 
 

)

A
n
(
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
C

20

15

10

5

0

We also tried to perform the same current measurements in the 
case of the RETGEM. Unfortunately, a rather strong charging 
up  effect  was  observed,  even  at  small  values  of  the 
photocurrent, so we did not consider these measurements to be 
reliable  for  further  interpretation.  To  compare  the  practical 
quantum  efficiency  of  the  GEM  and  the  RETGEM  we 
performed measurements in a counting mode. For this the UV 
light  from  the  Hg  lamp  was  very  strongly  attenuated  and  we 
measured  under  the  identical  conditions  the  counting  rates 
from  the  GEM  (nGEM)  and  the  RETGEM  (nRETGEM).  For  the 
same  overall  gains  of  104  and  the  same  electronics  threshold 
the  ratio  of  the  counting  was  nRETGEM/nGEM=  1,  73.  If  one 
assumes  that  ε~1  even  in  the  case  of  RETGEM,  than  the 
estimated QE for RETGEM will be Qpract~23%. Of course in 
the nearest feature we will measure the value of ε and this will 
allow us to estimate Qpract more accurately. However, in this 
first  stage  of  the  work  it  was  important  just  to  have  a  rough 
estimate of the Qpract order to be sure it has a reasonably high 
value even in the case of the CuO substrate and to monitor the 
photocathode’s  stability  in  time.  The  last  one  was  done  by 
regular measurements of counting rates from the GEM and the 
RETGEM  under  identical  conditions  over  a  period  of  three 
months.  No  big  changes  in  the  counting  rates  were  observed 
(the  variations  were  on  the  level  of  10%only)  either  for  the 
GEM  or  the  RETGEM  indicating  that  the  CsI  photocathodes 
remained stable for both detectors.  
We  also  performed  comparative  measurements  of  maximum 
gains  achievable  with  double  RETGEMs  and  triple  GEMs 
both coated with the CsI layers. Some results are presented in 
Figs  9  and  10.  The  measurements  were  stopped  at  voltages 
when first signs of discharges appeared. One can see from this 
data  that  in  the  case  of  Ne  and  Ar,  double  RETGEMs  offer 
much  higher  gains  than  triple  GEMs.  This  feature  makes  the 
RETGEM very attractive for RICH applications.  
The  next  set  of  experiments  were  performed  in  order  to 
investigate  if  another  photocathodes  (for  example  one  that  is 
sensitive to visible light) could be deposited on the top of the 
CuO substrate and if it could remain stable afterwards.  

0

1000

2000

3000

Voltage (V)

 
 Fig. 8. Current measured from a photodiode R1259 and from the CsI cathode 
of the top GEM. Note that at high voltages both currents reached plateau: IPD= 
12.2 nA and IGEM=15.9 nA. 
 
could  be  obtained  for  example,  from  the  measurements  of 
current  IA  from  the  anode  of  the  bottom  GEM(ε=IGEM/IA). 
However,  in  our  measurements  we  observed  that  the  IA 
steadily  increased  with  the  applied  voltages  (no  clear  plateau 
was  observed)  and  thus  these  simple  measurements  did  not 
provide  any  reliable  data  for  the  calculation  of  the  Qpract. 
Obviously, the measurements should be performed in counting 
mode  as  was  done  in  [3]  and  this  will  be  our  future  task. 
However,  coming  from  the  results  presented  in  [3],  one  can 
expect that ε~1at overall gains of triple GEM ~104. 

 

1.00E+05

Ne

Ar+20%CH4

1.00E+06

n
i
a
g
 
a
l
r
e
v
O

1.00E+04

1.00E+03

1.00E+02

Ar

Ar+10%CH4

500

1500

2500

3500

4500

Overal voltage (V)

 
Fig. 9. Gain vs. voltage for double RETGEM measured in various gases 
 
The  manufacturing  of  high  quality  photocathode  sensitive  to 
visible  light  is  a  quite  complicated  procedure  [15,  16]. 

 

 

However,  some 
low  efficiency  photocathodes  could  be 
produces  in  a  rather  simple  way  by  coating  the  selected 
substrate  by  Cs  release  from  the  “Cs  generator”  [17]  in  a 
vacuum  of  10-6Torr.  In  this  work,  we  used  this  simple 
technology. One of the surfaces of the RETGEM (size of 3x3 
cm2, 1.5 mm thick) was coated by an Sb layer 0,2 μm thick by 
a  vacuum  deposition  technique.  The  RETGEM  was  then 
extracted  from  the  evaporation  set  up  and  placed  inside  a 
quartz  tube  (the  inner  diameter  of  which  was  70  mm)  and 
which  had  several  electrical  feedthroughs  in  its  metallic 
flanges-see Fig. 11. The tube with the RETGEM was heated to 
~100°C and pumped to a vacuum of 10-6 Torr for several days. 
It  was  then  cooled  down  to  room  temperature  and  the  Cs 
generator was activated; Cs vapour released from the generator 
reacted with the Sb surface and finally formed SbCs.  
The  main  problem  associated  with  this  primitive  technique  is 
the excess of Cs remaining on the inner walls of the tube and 
on the surfaces of feedthroughs. Sometime there were cases of 
current  instabilities  during  the  measurements.  However,  we 
succeeded  to  move  the  Cs  depositions  out  from  the  chamber 
into the pumping system by local heating of the contaminated 
parts  of  the  tube  by  a  small  flame.  After  such  cleansing 
procedures  we  were  able  to  perform  measurements  of  the 
photocurrent  produced  by  a  lamp  and monitor the stability of 
the  photocathode  with  time.    Some  our  first  results  are 
presented  in  Fig.  12.  One  can  see  that  immediately  after  the 
photocathode’s manufacturing, the photocurrent dropped very 
steadily,  but  then  “stabilized”  and  began  to  degrade  quiet 
slowly  so  that  we  had  enough  time  for  the  measurements  the 
photocathode’s  QE  to  take  place.  For  this      the  tube  was 
attached  to  the  monochromator  (combined  with  a  Hg  or  H2 
lamp) and the photocurrent Id (λ) produced in the detector by 
the  light  from  the  monohromator  was  measured  as  a function 
of the wavelength. After these measurements were completed, 
the  quartz  tube  was  replaced  by  a  Hamamatsu  calibrated 
photodiode  R414  and  for  each  wavelength  we  measured  the 
photocurrent from the photodiode IPD(λ) produced by the light 
beam exiting the monohromator. From the known absolute QE 
of the photodiode R414 and the ratio Id(λ)/ IPD(λ) the QE of the 
RETGEM  was  calculated.  Some  our  fist  preliminary  results 
are shown in Fig. 13. One can see that the quantum efficiency 
achieved  by  such  a  manufacturing  technique  was  2-3  times 
lower  than  in  the  case  of  the  high  quality  photocathodes, 
however  we  consider  these  preliminary  results  as  rather 
encouraging,  because  we  believed  that  in  the  future  tests  we 
will  be  able  to  protect  the  SbCs  photocathodes  deposited  on 
the to of the RETGEMs by a thin (~20 nm) CsI layer.  
 

  

n
i
a
g

 
l
a
r
e
v
O

1.00E+04

1.00E+03

1.00E+02

1.00E+01

1.00E+00

N

Ar

0

1000

2000

3000

Overal voltage

 Fig.10. Gain vs. voltage for triple GEM measured in Ne and Ar. 
 

 
Fig.  11.  A  schematic  drawing  of  the  set  up  used  for  manufacturing  SbCs 
photocathode on the top of the RETGEM 

 

 

 
Fig.12. Photocurrent vs. time measured in vacuum between the cathode and the 
anode mesh after manufacturing the SbCs photocathode  
 
 
 

 

15-17  show  gain  vs.  voltage  curves  measured  at  room 
temperature  and  100K  for  RETGEMs  1  and  1,5  mm  thick 
respectively. One can see that gains of 104 could be achieved 
at 100K with double RETGEMs. Because of our test chamber 
was flushed with Ar we could, if necessary, liquefy Ar inside 
the chamber and investigate the operation of the RETGEM in 
the case when the LAr level was just 1-2 cm below the anode 
of  the  RETGEM  (see  Fig.  14).  Results  of gain measurements 
in  this  condition  are  shown  in  Fig.  16.  One  can  see  that 
compared  to  the  case  where  the  RETGEM  operated  in  Ar  at 
100K,  the  operating  voltage  of  the  RETGEM  placed  1-2  cm 
above the LAr level was higher, indicating that probably a thin 
layer of LAr was formed on the surface of the RETGEM. 
    
 
 

 
Fig. 14. A schematic drawing of the set up used for measurements with 
RETGEMs at cryogenic temperatures. 
 
The Qpract of the CsI photocathode at various temperatures can 
be estimated from the amplitude of the signal B from the  
 
 

i

n
a
g

 
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

1.00E+06

1.00E+05
1.00E+04

1.00E+03

1.00E+02
1.00E+01
1.00E+00

100K

300K

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

Overall voltage (V)

 
Fig.15.  Gain  vs.  voltage  for  a  single  (filled  symbols)  and  for  a  double  (open 
symbols) RETGEM (1mm thick) measured at room temperature and at 100 K 
in Ar at pressure of 1atm. 
 
 

 

 

 

thick  (100  nm)  CsI 

 
Fig.13.  Results  of  the  QE  measurements:  brown  curve-  SbCs  photocathode, 
green curve-SbCs photocathode covered by a CsI protective layer 
 
This  technique  was  first  described  in  [17]  and  later  it  was 
further developed by Breskin group (see for example [18] and 
reference therein).  
For  the  time  being  however,  we  coated  the  RETGEM  by  a 
very 
layer  using  a  conventional 
evaporation set up and the RETGEM was then extracted in air 
and placed inside the quartz tube which was then immediately 
evacuated. 
The results of the measurements the QE of such photocathode 
exposed for a few minutes to air are presents in Fig. 13. This 
photocathode  did  not  show  any  signs  of  degradation  during 
one  week  monitoring  of  its  QE  under  the  vacuum.  Certainly, 
more  tests  are  needed  to  demonstrate  that  RETGEMs  coated 
with SbCs or SbCs/CsI photocathodes could stably operate in 
gas conditions.  
 
B. Tests oriented on applications for noble liquid TPCs 
 
   In our recent work [19] we have demonstrated that TGEMs 
coated  with  CsI  photocathodes  can  operate  at  cryogenic 
temperatures  and  detect  the  scintillation  light  from  noble 
liquids (see also [20]). 
It  will  be  interesting  to  check  if  RETGEMs,  in  spite  of  their 
resistive  electrodes,  can  also  operate  stably  at  cryogenic 
temperatures especially in the case when they are coated by an 
CsI  layer.  To  verify  this,  we  have  performed  several  sets  of 
measurements  with  single  double  RETGEMs  cooled  to 
cryogenic temperatures.  
Our experiment set up was the same as in work [20] and it is 
shown schematically in Fig. 14. It consists of the cryostat with 
a 
the 
inside 
measurements either a single or a double RETGEMs (1mm or 
1,5mm)  thick)  with  the  top  electrode  coated  by  an  CsI  layer 
was  installed  inside  the  chamber  (see  Fig.  14)  as  well  as  a 
radioactive  source  55Fe  for  gas  gain  measurements.  In  some 
experiments a scintillation chamber (see [20] for more details) 
was attached to the test chamber; it contained an  241Am alpha 
source  inside    was  flushed  by Ar at a pressure of 1atm. Figs. 

test  chamber  placed 

it.  Depending  on 

 

n
i
a
g

 
l
l
a
r
e
v
O

1.00E+06

1.00E+05

1.00E+04

1.00E+03

1.00E+02

1.00E+01

1.00E+00

300K

LAr

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

Overall voltage (V)

 
 Fig. 16. Gain vs. voltage for a single (filled symbols) and for a double (open 
symbols)  RETGEM  (1  mm  thick)  measured  at  room  temperature  and  in  the 
case when the RETGEM was 1-2 cm above LAr level. 
 

    Certainly that RETGEMs described in this work and in the 
previous one [9] are just first prototypes and are far from being 
ideal. For example, one of the problems of the RETGEMs with 
the  CuO  or  CrO  layers  is  that  at  high  gains  they  transit  to 
sparks  rather  than  to  mild  streamers.  The  reason  for  this  is 
quite  clear:  the  key  parameter  for  the  spark  quenching  is  the 
amount of the surface charge from the incoming avalanche that 
is needed to substantially modify the field in the detector hole, 
diminishing the energy of the discharge, or in other words, the 
capacity per unit area. This will be high if the layer is thin or if 
the dielectric constant is high. This is why in order to strongly 
reduce  the  energy  of  the  sparks  one  has  to  use  rather  thick 
resistive electrodes. One of our successful prototypes is shown 
in Fig. 18. It is   a RETGEM, the top electrode of which (the 
cathode),  is  coated  by  the  CuO  layer  and  the  bottom  (the 
anode) is a 1-2 mm thick resistive plate made of Pestov glass  
or  any  other  high  resistivity  material.  This  detector  at  gains 
>104  operated  in  a  proportional  mode  and  at  gains  of  >105 
transited to a streamer mode. We are now investigating several 
other designs based on this principle. 

 
Fig.  17.  Gain  vs.  voltage  for  a  RETGEM  (1,5  mm  thick)  measured  in  Ar  at 
1atm at room temperature (blue curve) and 100K (rose curve). 
 
RETGEM  detecting  the  scintillation  light  produced  by  alpha 
particles: 

B=ANphΩQpract     (2), 
where  A  is  a  gas  gain,  Nph  is  the  number  of  UV  photons 
emitted  by  the  alpha  source,  Ω  is  a  solid  angle  at  which  the 
scintillation light reaches the CsI cathode.  
As was discussed earlier for the RETGEM 

Qpract=εQk    (3), 
where  Q  is  the  QE  measured  in  vacuum  (k<1  for  Ar). 
Assuming that 

Nph=E/W  (4), 
 (E  is  the  energy  of  alpha  particles  and  W  is  the  energy 
required  to  produce  a  UV  photon)  and  assuming  that    Nph  is 
independent  of  the  gas  density,  the  calculated  Qpract  was  then 
28% and 17% at room temperature and 100K, respectively. 
These  very  preliminary  results  demonstrate  that  RETGEMs 
could be an attractive alternative to PMTs or any other type of 
photodetectors for noble liquid TPCs. 
 

 
 
 

IV. NEW DEVELOPMENTS 

 

 
Fig. 18. A schematic drawing of the RETGEM the top electrode of which was 
coated by a CuO layer and the bottom electrode (the anode) was a thick high 
resistivity plate. 
 
 

 

 

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

 
   The  obtained  preliminary  results  demonstrate  the  potentials 
of  the  new  detector.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  at  high  gains  it 
transits  to  sparks  rather  than  to  a  streamer,  it  is  much  more 
robust  than  the  GEM  or  even  the  TEGEM.  The  other 
important discovery was that the RETGEM could be combined 
with photocathodes and can operate in cascade mode.   
    We  believe 
the  suggested  detectors  after  some 
improvements  will  open  new  possibilities  for  applications 
which  do  not  require  extremely  high  counting  rates  or  very 
good  position  resolutions,  for  example  in  RICH,  cryogenic 
TPCs or UV visualisation in daylight conditions [9].  

that 

IV.  REFERENCES 

 
[1]  S.  Bachmann,  A.  Bressan,  S.  Kappler  et  al.,  “Development  and 
applications of the gas electron multiplier” Nucl. Instr. Meth., vol. A471, 
pp. 115-119, 2001 

 

[3] 

[2]  C.  Altunbas,  M.  Capeans,  K.  Dehmelt  et  al.,    “Construction,  test  and 
comissioning of triple-GEM tracking deetctor for Compass” Nucl. Instr. 
Meth., vol. A490, pp. 177-203, 2002.  
 D.  Mormann,  A.  Breskin,  R.  Chechik    et  al.,”Operation  principles  and 
properties  of  the  multi-GEM  gaseous  photomultiplier  with  reflective 
photocathode”, Nucl. Instr. Meth., vol. A530,  pp. 258-274, 2004.   
[4]  M.  Wallmarkt,  A.  Brahme,  M.  Danielsson  et  al.,  ”Operating  range  of  a 
gas electron multiplier for portal imaging”, Nucl. Instr. Meth., vol. A471,  
pp. 151-155, 2001.  
 V. Peskov, P. Fonte, M. Danielsson  et al., “The study and optimization 
of new micropattern gaseosu detectors for high-rate applications”, IEEE 
Trans.  Nucl. Sci, vol. 48 (4), pp.1070-1074, Aug. 2001. 

[5] 

[6]  L.  Periale,  V.  Peskov,  P.  Carlson  et  al,  “Detectin  of  the  primary 
scintillation  light  from  dense  Ar,  Kr  and  Xe  with  novel  photosensitive 
gaseous detectors, ”  Nucl. Instr. Meth., vol. A478,  pp. 377-383, 2002. 
J.  Ostling,  A.  Brahme,  M.  Danilesson    et  al.,  „Study  of  hole-tyep  gas 
multiplication  structures  for  portal  imaging  and  other  high  count  rate 
applications“,  IEEE  Trans.    Nucl.  Sci,  vol.  50  (4),  pp.809-819,  Aug. 
2003. 

[7] 

[8]  C. Shalem, R. Chechik, A. Breskin et al.,”Advances in Thick GEM-like 
gaseous  electron  multiplier-ParI:  atmospheric pressure operation”, Nucl. 
Instr. Meth., vol. A558,  pp. 475-489, 2006. 
I.  Rodionov,  J-M.  Bidault,  I.  Crotty  et  al,”Advanced  gaseous 
photodetectors  for  hyperspectroscopy  and  other  applications,”  IEEE  
Nucl. Sci. Conference Record, vol. 5 , pp.3045-3049, Oct. 2005. 

[9] 

[10]  Tech-Etch. Inc., MA, USA 
[11]  F. Sauli., “Novel Cherenkov photon detectors”  Nucl. Instr. Meth., vol. 

A533,  pp. 18-24, 2005. 

[12]  A. Breskin, M. Balcerzyk, R. Chechik et al.,”Recent advances in gaseous 
imaging  photomultipliers, ”  Nucl.  Instr.  Meth.,  vol.  A513,  pp.  250-255, 
2003. 

[13]  Z. Fraenkel, A. Kozlov, M. Naglis et al, “A hadron blind detector for the 
PHENIX  experiment  at  RHIC,“  Nucl.  Instr.  Meth.,  vol.  A546,  pp.  466-
480, 2005. 

[14]  V.  Peskov,  “Secondary  processes  in  gas-filled  counters.  II”  Sov.  Phys. 

Tech . Phys., vol. 22 (3), pp.335-338, March.1977. 

[15]  S. Giunji, V. Peskov, H. Sakurai et al., “Micro capillary glass plates as a 
gaseous detector of photons and particles”, Nucl. Instr. Meth., vol. A477,  
pp. 8-12, 2002. 

[16]   M.  Balcerzyk,  D.  Mormann,  A.  Breskin  et  al.,  “Method  of  preparation 
and results of sealed gas photomultipliers for visible light, “IEEE Trans.  
Nucl. Sci, vol. 50 (4), pp.847-854, Aug. 2003. 

[17]  A. Borovik-Romanov, V. Peskov, “Cs based photocathodes for gaseous 

detectors”,  Nucl. Instr. Meth., vol. A348,  pp. 269-274, 1994. 

[18]  E. Shefer, A. Breskin, R. Chechik et al” Coated photocathodes for visible 
photon  imaging  with  gaseous  photomultipliers,”  Nucl.  Instr.  Meth.,  vol. 
A433,  pp. 502-506, 1999.   

[19]  L.  Periale,  V.  Peskov,  C.  Iacobaeus  et  al.,”  A  study  of  the  opration  of 
especially  designed  photsensitive  gaeous  detectors  at  cryogenic 
temperatures,” Nucl. Instr. Meth., vol. A567, pp. 381-385, 2006.   
[20]  L.  Periale,  V.  Peskov,  C.  Iacobaeus  et  al.,”The  succesful  operation  of 
hole-type  gaseousss  detectors  at  cryogenic  tempertures”,  IEEE  Trans.  
Nucl. Sci, vol. 52 (4), pp.927-931, Aug. 2005. 

