Acoustic Measurement of Potato Cannon Velocity

Michael Courtney and Amy Courtney

This  article  describes  measurement  of  potato  cannon  velocity  with  a  digitized 
microphone signal.  A microphone is attached to the potato cannon muzzle and a potato is 
fired at an aluminum target about 10 m away.  The potato’s flight time can be determined 
from the acoustic waveform by subtracting  the time in  the barrel and time for sound  to 
return  from  the  target.    The  potato  velocity is  simply the  flight  distance  divided  by the 
flight time. 

A potato cannon1 is a simple device constructed from PVC pipe and a lantern sparker that 
uses aerosol hairspray as a propellant to launch potatoes 200 m or more.  The principle of 
operation is similar to that of pistons in an engine and projectiles in a firearm.  A spark 
ignites the fuel-air mixture that burns rapidly to produce hot expanding gases that propel 
the potato out of the barrel.  

There  are  a  number  of  treatments  of  potato  cannons  and  similar  pressure  operated 
devices.2    A  lot  of  physics  can  be  demonstrated  with  these  devices,  but  it  would  be 
advantageous to have an independent determination of projectile velocity to confirm the 
mechanics  presented.    Velocity  estimates  can  be  inferred  from  range,  but  these  usually 
depend  on  neglecting  air  resistance.    This  approach  is  no  more  accurate  for  a  potato 
whose  range  is  100-200m  than  it  is  for  a  home-run  baseball.    We  present  an  acoustic 
method for determination of potato velocity that should be accurate to better than 5%.3

A  microphone  is  attached  to  the  end  of  the  barrel.    An  aluminum  target  is  placed  at  a 
carefully measured distance roughly 10 m away.   Targets with resonating sounds like a 
gong work better than targets with non-resonant, “clink” type of sounds.  It works well to 
use a 6 mm thick aluminum sheet with its base corners resting on two blocks of wood and 
one point on a vertical edge leaning against a saw horse.

The sound waveform can be captured using a Vernier LabPro with microphone or a PC 
soundcard with software (such as Audacity4) that allows viewing the sound waveform to 
determine the time difference between the ignition of the propellant and the target sound.  
The total time from the sound of the propellant ignition to the sound of the target strike is 
the  sum  of  the  barrel  time  (tbarrel),  the  flight  time  (tflight),  and  the  time  for  the  sound  to 
return from the target to microphone (tsound):

The time  for sound  to  travel  back  from the target  to  the microphone is  the  distance  (d) 
divided by the velocity of sound (Vsound),

ttotal = tbarrel + tflight +  tsound.

tsound = d / Vsound.

Vsound  is roughly 331 m/s, but it varies with temperature approximately according to 

1

Vsound= 331 m/s + 0.6 (m/s°C) T,

where  T  is  the  temperature  in  Celsius.    In  addition  to  having  an  accurate  distance 
measurement, one needs the ambient temperature within 1°C.

The time in the barrel is the barrel length (l) divided by average velocity in the barrel.   If 
the  potato  accelerated  at  a  constant  rate  in  the  barrel,  this  would  be  exactly  half  of  the 
potato flight velocity (Vpotato).  Acceleration in the barrel is not constant, but increases as 
the propellant burns and then decreases slightly after the propellant has been consumed.  
Vpotato /3 is a reasonable estimate of the average velocity in the barrel so that the total time 
of flight can be written as

t

total



l
3

d



V

potato

V

potato



t

.

sound

Solving for Vpotato  yields

V

potato



3
dl

t


t

total

.

sound

potato leaves barrel, t = 0.035 s

)
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
a
(
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
 
d
n
u
o
s

 4

 3

 2

 1

 0

-1

-2

potato striking target, t = 0.23952 s

 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15

 0.2

 0.25

 0.3

time (seconds)

Figure  2  shows  a  sound  waveform  for  the  potato  cannon  fired  at  the  aluminum  target.  
The data acquisition was set to trigger on the propellant ignition, so this occurs at t = 0 s.  
The time of the target strike is ttotal = 0.23952s.  

The  speed  of  sound  at  the  ambient  temperature  of  6°C  is  334.6  m/s.  Consequently, the 
time for the sound to return from target to microphone over the distance d = 10.13 m is

2

tsound = 10.13 m/(334.6 m/s) = 0.03027 s,

so that the time between ignition and target strike is 0.20925 s.  

Using the barrel length of 0.775m and substituting into the  equation for  potato velocity 
gives Vpotato   = 59.52 m/s.  Note that this potato flight velocity implies an average barrel 
velocity of Vbarrel=19.84 m/s suggesting a barrel time of tbarrel =  0.0391 s which is in fair 
agreement  with  the  time  assigned  by  identifying  the  gap  of  time  when  the  pressure  is 
pegged high in Figure 2.  (When the potato leaves the barrel, the microphone is hit with 
the high pressure gasses escaping from the barrel.)  

This  validates our approximation  that the average velocity of the potato  in  the barrel is 
one  third  of  the  flight  velocity,  Vpotato  /3.    Alternatively,  if  we  use  the  time  when  the 
microphone  signal  is  saturated  by  the  escaping  gases  as  the  time  the  potato  leaves  the 
barrel, we obtain a flight velocity of Vpotato     = 58.13 m/s, which is 2.3% lower than the 
value obtained estimating the barrel velocity as 1/3 of the flight velocity.

In  summary,  a  potato  cannon  and  a  digitized  microphone  system  allow  for  the 
measurement of potato flight velocity.

 References:
                                                
1. Gurstelle, William, Backyard Ballistics, Chicago Review Press, Chicago, 2001.  Also see 
www.backyard-ballistics.com.

2. Eric Ayars and Louis Bucholtz, “Analysis of the vacuum cannon, “ Am J. Phys. 72, 961-963 (July 

2004).  Brett Taylor, “Recoil experiments using a compressed air cannon,” Phys. Teach. 44, 582-584. 
(Dec. 2006)

3. A similar method can be used to measure the velocity of rifle bullets with a confirmed accuracy of 1%.  
See http://arxiv.org/ftp/physics/papers/0601/0601102.pdf

4. Audacity software available at http://audacity.sourceforge.net   This is a free audio capture, analysis, and 
editing program covered by GNU General Public License.

PACS Codes: 43.90.+v, 45.20D-

About the Authors:

Michael  Courtney    earned  a  PhD  in  Atomic,  Molecular,  and  Optical  Physics  from  MIT,  worked  for  7 
years as an RF test engineer for Cisco Systems, and has taught college physics and forensic science for five 
years.  He currently serves as the Director of the Forensic Science Program at Western Carolina University.  
Western Carolina University, Cullowhee, NC 28723;  Michael_Courtney@alum.mit.edu  

Amy Courtney  earned a PhD  in Medical Engineering/Medical Physics  from Harvard University and  has 
worked as a research scientist for Reebok, Intl. and the Cleveland Clinic.  She is a founding member of the 
Ballistics  Testing  Group,  which  is  developing  new  methods  in  terminal  ballistics  and  in  the  acoustic 
reconstruction  of  shooting  events.    Ballistics  Testing  Group,  P.O.  Box  3103,  Cullowhee,  NC  28723.  
Amy_Courtney@post.harvard.edu

3

