Identifying Nanotechnology in Society1 
Charles Tahan 
Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, 
JJ Thomson Ave, Cambridge, CB3 0HE, UK 
charlie@tahan.com 
(2006) 

 
 
Abstract 
 
Manufacturing materials and systems with components thousands of times 
smaller than the width of a human hair promises vast and sometimes 
unimaginable advances in technology. Yet the term nanotechnology has formed 
as much from people’s expectations as from scientific reality. Understanding the 
creation and context of this social construction can help us appreciate and guide 
what may be a burgeoning revolution. This chapter considers what different 
groups are referring to when they say nanotechnology, how this relates to the 
science involved, and how the various definitions of this broad field of endeavor 
might be improved. The ramifications and implications of these seemingly 
innocuous naming choices are also discussed. Although in many respects 
nanotechnology has served as cover justification for increased spending in the 
physical sciences, at present it is the most hopeful route to some of the planet’s 
greatest problems. 
 
 
Table of Contents 
1. Introduction 

1.1 The scope of nanotechnology 
1.2 Threats and futures and politics 
1.3 What’s in a name? 

3.1 Cold or hot, quantum or not 
3.2 The nano in nanoparticles 
3.3 Not nanotechnology 

2. Definitions ad infinitum 
3. Perspectives from science 
 
 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
 
1. 
 
When Norio Taniguchi first referred to his work as “nano-technology” (Taniguchi, 
1974), it's doubtful he imagined that scholars might one day be pondering the 
word and considering its implications on humanity, even on the fate of humanity. 
But this year research on the societal implications of nanotechnology accounts 

Introduction 

                                                 
1 Preprint of chapter to appear in Advances in Computers, Marvin Zelkowitz, ed. (2007).  

for nearly 10% of direct federal funding on nanotechnology in the United States: 
80% of that on environmental and toxicological effects and the remaining on 
broader sociological studies. (Roco, 2003b) That’s not pocket change out of a 
budget of over $1 billion USD. But how can you study the societal impact of 
nanotechnology when the the term itself has not been clearly defined? In many 
ways, the label “nanotech” has been thrust on science and engineering 
externally, formed by society before solidifying as a field in its own right. This 
timing mismatch has interesting consequences for the shape of progress in 
nano-related fields and enterprises.   
 
A nanometer is one billionth of a meter or roughly equal to 10 hydrogen atoms 
laid side-by-side. Many systems, from biological to chemical to quantum, exhibit 
fundamentally new behavior at this length regime, often for completely 
coincidental reasons. For example, the blood-brain barrier often fails to filter 
particles of nanometer size, while being very selective about larger objects. The 
nanometer regime also happens to be where the quantum properties of electrons 
start to dominate in miniaturized circuits. The two have no connection in cause, 
but they are both considered “new nanoscale phenomena.” This reality of 
nanotechnology contrasts with the vision of nanotechnology promoted in recent 
decades by futurists, science fiction writers, and doomsayers, as well as actual 
scientists. But the reality and the vision of nanotechnology have become 
entwined culturally despite their almost extreme differences. 
 
Growing excitement in the field often traces back to two people: physicist Richard 
P. Feynman and researcher K. Eric Drexler. Physicists often justify their work by 
bowing to a past physics god, of which Feynman is one of the most famous. In 
his 1959 talk There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom: An Invitation to Enter a New 
Field of Physics (Feynman, 1959), Feynman laid out the vision of what would one 
day be called nanotechnology. Simultaneously simplistic and prescient, Feynman 
explored the vast technical applications that mastering matter on a small scale 
would create. He gave crude but surprisingly insightful suggestions about how to 
access and take advantage of all the room “at the bottom.” Although one must be 
careful of fulfilling Matthew’s Law (automatically attributing good ideas in a field 
to the most famous person in that field), 2 Feynman’s talk anticipated 
manufacturing techniques such as the focused ion-beam etching Taniguchi was 
later to work on (and which is only now becoming mainstream in university labs), 
miniaturization in information storage, computation and machines, electron spin 
electronics (or spintronics), and even hinted at quantum computing. 
 
Drexler is no physics god. But he deserves substantial credit for popularizing and 
motivating nanotechnology with his 1987 book Engines of Creation: The Coming 

                                                 
2 The Gospel of Matthew (5-7) is where you find the recounting of the Sermon on the 
Mount. Matthew’s Law is a bit of physics oral tradition; it refers to the tendency of the 
most well known person in a field to get credit for the best ideas in that field whether or 
not he had anything to do with it.  

Era of Nanotechnology (Drexler, 1987) and later contributions. He falls squarely 
under the vision category of nanotechnology. The vision of nanotechnology could 
be described as atomic level systems engineering. Atoms, like so many Lego 
blocks, can be arranged one-by-one to build microscopic analogues of 
macroscopic machines or indeed anything one could imagine, from scratch. This 
is the life analog, the construction block view of both Feynman and Drexler, 
whom the latter calls machine-phase nanotechnology. From drugs designed from 
the bottom up to artificial nano-machines that could flow through and oxygenate 
blood on demand, the vision is dramatic. Drexler imagines assemblers, i.e. 
nanomachines that build other nanomachines, able to tackle problems from the 
size of the body to the globe. Take wood, an undisputedly useful building 
material “grown” by nanoscale/microscale machines. What else could be “grown” 
if we design the life that grows it? The implications, like those of biotechnology, 
can be scary. Fortunately, the vision is hard, and the reason this is so is because 
reality starts to intrude. The novel physics, surface science, and chemistry that 
begin to emerge in the nanoscale regime makes the construction block 
paradigms fall apart. The reality is actually much more interesting. Feynman 
himself pointed out that quantum effects and the complex behavior of many 
interacting particles – be they electrons, atoms, or molecules – would make this 
building block strategy difficult. In essence, that difficulty is nanotechnology 
today. But even he couldn’t have imagined how big and how interesting those 
complications would be…and more importantly, how useful. 
 
Let us pause for a brief moment to discuss bias and definitions. Many scientists 
could claim the authority to explain nanotechnology – biologists, chemists, 
materials scientists, and physicists. And all would necessarily do an incomplete 
job, a factor this chapter too will suffer from. Our bias is that of condensed matter 
and materials physics, the fields from which the transistor, solid-state laser, and 
silicon integrated circuit were born. Complex terms and definitions, unfortunately, 
will be commonplace in such a broad discussion of new technologies and their 
categorization.  Get used to being ignorant in this field. Brief definitions will be 
provided where possible (see the Appendix) but understand that scientists can 
use one word – say “spintronics” – to represent thousands of technical papers 
that may cover multiple sub-fields and have subtle meanings. Part of our 
challenge is that the forward line of the advancement of human knowledge has 
become so long. With so many individual innovators, complete categorization 
becomes impossible. You are encouraged to sleuth on your own when you 
encounter a cool sounding word you don’t understand. Call it the joy of finding 
things out. 
 
 
1.1 
 
There are many reports of varying quality that describe examples and 
applications of nanotechnology, from the perspectives of length-scale, medicine, 
environment, risk, society, and public policy. We especially recommend (SciAm, 

The scope of nanotechnology 

2002) and (Amato, 2000). This chapter will describe the social construction of 
this term without becoming encyclopedic. 
 
If the social construct of nanotechnology encompasses both the vision and the 
reality, one must consider the scope of both. Oddly, the vision of nanotechnology 
includes both the fantastic almost science-fiction visions of nano-assemblers and 
artificial life but also very non-nano visions including small machines and 
devices. Compared to a nanometer biological “machines” can be relatively huge; 
a red blood corpuscle is approximately 7000 nm while bacteria is 1000 nm and a 
virus is typically 60-100 nm. And key body dimensions are downright enormous. 
Swallowing a millimeter-sized pill that can take pictures of your insides, though it 
might be called nanotechnology, may have no nano-fabricated components 
whatsoever. This imprecision is present in both perspectives. In many ways the 
reality of what’s going on in nanotechnology today – as presently named – is 
broader than even the vision. 
 
At a recent conference on quantum nanoscience in Australia, a physics professor 
stood up and said something representative of many scientists’ viewpoint: “Can’t 
we just call it novel-technology?” Maybe we should. In the policy-technology 
world nanotechnology has become a catchall for all advanced materials 
technologies, from bio-integration to molecular transistors to quantum 
mesoscopics. The USA National Nanotechnology Initiative is an example of this, 
as its proponents seek to make nanotechnology a unifying theme across many of 
the sciences that deal with fabrication and manipulation of matter at small-scales. 
 
Despite these facts-on-the-ground, some have claimed that atomic and 
molecular engineering alone is nanotechnology (Joachim, 2005). It’s simply too 
late for this narrow and somewhat boring definition. Additionally, there are 
convincing reasons to lump larger systems under the nanotechnology roof. All 
the knowledge gained through the study of mesoscopic physics and complex 
systems might one day help the atomic-level construction technology. The 
science and technology community has to deal with putting these systems 
together and with the complex emergent behavior that implies. What quantum 
mesoscopics, for example, gives us is a physical window on nature’s immense 
complication.  
 
It would also be easy to say that the vision or molecular assembly view, as 
theorized by Drexler’s so-called machine-phase nanotechnology, is the “true” 
nanotechnology and stop right here. But most of the money being spent on 
nanotechnology and most of the people who believe they are working on 
nanotechnology are in the reality camp. The glow that the term nanotechnology 
exudes not only attracts new students to science but also attracts scientists to 
adopt the term and become “nanotechnologists.” And it helps with funding. Will 
nanotechnology just become a rallying cry or does it have any real meaning 
anymore? 
 

From a societal standpoint, the consequences of this emerging collection of new 
artifacts, both directly as threats to the environment and our health, and indirectly 
via the transformative properties of life-changing technologies, have 
unquestionable importance. But there are limits to the extent of nanotechnology’s 
embrace. In some situations, e.g. federal funding or patent decisions, more 
precise categorization can become necessary. For example the patent office 
makes a distinction that a new invention just can’t be smaller to be patentable – 
there has to be something new there (like a fundamentally new manufacturing 
process). Many of the suggestions Feynman made just took advantage of 
making things smaller and were not necessarily based on new phenomena at 
that length scale. In the research world some inventions or lines of discovery, 
though they might coincidentally take place at the nanoscale, are better classified 
in a different scientific context. These are often one of disparate yet specific 
subfields. Specific examples will be presented in Section 3. 
 
The reality of nanotechnology has matured at its own rate as technological 
manufacturing and measurement techniques have steadily improved over the 
last 50 years, putting fabrication and control of the nano realm within reach 
starting some 15 years ago (Eigler and Schweizer, 1990). It’s easy to realize that 
“seeing” was the key to progress. Indeed, improvements in microscopes such as 
the electron microscope to the creation of new classes of devices such as atomic 
force microscopes (AFMs) and many other techniques contributed to advances in 
small science. Much of this is just the natural progress of science and 
technology, driven by human curiosity, economic interests like the semiconductor 
or drug industries, and luck. 
 
The construction block view of nanotechnology is divorced from the daily 
interests of most scientists and so far away as to be utterly ignorable. In some 
sense it is a very simplistic idea. “Hey! Let’s design things from the ground up!” 
Let’s just make the nanoscopic equivalent of a macroscopic device. Replace the 
surgeon and scalpel with the mini-robot. It might be more difficult to do, for 
various reasons, but you are not necessarily using any new science to do it. Well, 
not so fast. 
 
Complexity is an inherent problem in fields from computer science to biology to 
physics. It is the problem of the next one thousand years. Nanotechnology is not 
like building the first bridge. While it is clearly too soon for the vision of 
nanotechnology to be a wholly engineering endeavor, the beginnings are upon 
us. Nanoparticles like quantum dots and carbon nanotubes are the quintessential 
reality of nanotechnology today. They can exhibit new nanoscale phenomena in 
physics, chemical, or biological manifestations. Even if our theories of quantum 
physics, chemistry, and biology are complete, how they manifest themselves in 
complex situations is not. Progress in the nanoscience of mesoscopic and 
biological-materials systems will be the foundation of larger artificial small 
systems. 
 

 
 
Table 1: Nanotechnology circa 2006, vision versus reality, a pragmatic 
definition 

The vision: From the fantastic to the mundane the vision of nanotechnology 
began over 40 years ago and encompasses the building block view of building 
matter and machines, and artificial life. Programmable machines you can’t see. 

Examples: atom-by-atom or molecule-by-molecule construction of everything 
from drugs to tiny robots; not necessarily nanometer-sized but also just small 
(e.g. cameras or surgical machines that can be swallowed); self-replicating 
nano-machines (or assemblers). 

Threats: unknown, but greatly imagined: prolonging human life 
indefinitely; uncontrollable, replicating nano-assemblers 
turning the world into grey goo. 

Biggest questions: Is this a joke? How will modifying or 
extending the human body change civilization? What about 
being able to “grow” anything cheaply with minimal materials? 

The reality: The science and technology behind nanotechnology today 
predominately defined as new phenomena that emerge in the nanometer length 
regime in physical, chemical, and biological systems. 

Examples: nanoparticles that are 1) many times more reactive than 
microparticles, 2) have changing properties – like color – with small size 
changes due to quantum confinement effects, or 3) have unknown biological 
effects like increased absorption in the body; advanced materials technology; 
quantum “mesoscopic” physics; everything and anything. 

Threats: possible environmental hazard as nanoparticles can be much more 
reactive than larger particles and may linger longer; potential risk to human and 
animal health due to unknown effects on the body. 

Biggest questions: How do we regulate these materials? How do we classify 
them and determine their risk? 

Nano-enabling technologies: Fabrication and measurement techniques that 
aid in the realization of the above two definitions but do not fall within their 
purview. The reliable manufacturing of devices and structures with at least two 
dimensions at the nanoscale. 

 
 
 
 

Threats and futures and politics 

 
 
1.2 
 
Fear as much as hope has popularized nanotechnology, from the hysterical 
visions of “grey goo” to the quite realistic fears of human toxicity. The image of 
machines invisible to the naked eye wreaking havoc has certainly captured the 
public’s imagination (Crichton, 2003; Joy, 2000). But aren’t self-replicating robots 
that take over the world bad at any scale? In truth, many of the fears of robotics 
and artificial intelligence that have been around for decades have just been 
transferred to the invisible realm of nanotechnology, adding another dimension of 
fear. In any case, we already have replicating killer machines – they’re called 
viruses, and bacteria, and humans. Redoing these with non-biological matter – 
almost the essence of the vision of nanotechnology – may well be more 
dangerous, or not, but will certainly be more difficult. We have to deal with those 
implications now in a plenty frightening way in biotechnology and genetic 
engineering. We’re not sure what purpose calling what some biologists are 
already doing “nanotechnology” serves, except to say that it expands it to non-
carbon based approaches. 
 
Some of the new phenomena that nanoscale systems exhibit can be just as 
profoundly harmful as useful (Colvin, 2003; Hood, 2004). Particularly relevant are 
the chemical and biological effects. The same reactivity that makes nanoparticles 
powerful in military-grade explosives can also have dramatic impact on 
environmental systems. And nanotoxicity is an even more serious concern. 
Nanoparticle transmission and accumulation through the body is largely 
unknown. So investment into the study of environmental and health impact is 
necessary.  
 
The real issue is why there has been so much funding for the societal 
implications of nanotechnology. The initial reason is to deal with the vision – but 
the fears of the vision are ridiculous at this early point in time. A reputable 
scientist would find it laughable. Seriously, where are the nanomachines? Stuck 
on a chip in a refrigerator in the basement of some university department? 
Funding the study of futures like this doesn’t seem responsible. Biology today is 
much more scary. The possible societal harm of nanotechnology pales in 
comparison to the prospect of an avian flu epidemic, designer babies, or 
proliferating suitcase nukes. Even so, the funding of bioethics is currently minimal 
and of questionable value.  
 
We believe the truth is more indirect. Industry is desperate not to repeat the 
fiascos of genetically modified organisms (GMO) in food – now banned in Europe 
– and to a lesser extent nuclear energy. What better way to “educate” the public 
then to fund a mass of public affairs and ethics professors to study the societal 
effects of nanotechnology? People tend to be more positive toward ideas when 
financially dependent on them.  

 
Let’s be clear, many of the fears disseminated to the public via science fiction 
and overzealous technology pundits or “futurists” are irrational; here education is 
important and worthwhile. Nor are professors and thinkers doing anything 
untoward. But it is interesting to note that the calls for all-out moratoriums on 
nanotechnology, ridiculous though they are, come exclusively from independent 
non-profit groups. So is the government’s largesse enlightened or subtle 
propaganda? We can’t know, but a prominent political theorist, Landon Winner, 
has called on the United States Congress not to create a nano-ethicist full 
employment act [Winn03]. What are important in nanotechnology are science, 
the progress, and the serious considerations of how to manage the 
environmental and social changes it creates as it develops. 
 
When it comes down to it, saying no to nanotechnology may be like saying no to 
tackling the biggest problems of our time. We are faced with epic shortfalls in 
energy and clean water, and environmental pollution. Nanotechnology related 
advances in our understanding of ever-interconnected physical, material, 
chemical, and biological systems are our greatest hope for beating these huge 
problems. We must not stop science and technology.  
 
 
1.3  What’s in a name? 
 
When asked about nanotechnology in an interview for the San Francisco 
Chronicle in 2004 former Intel CEO Craig Barrett made some illustrative remarks 
that are worth repeating: 
 

“Nanotechnology is a buzzword that you in the press have popularized, and 
the government popularizes it. The formal definition of nanotechnology is 
anything below 100 nanometers. Every transistor that we make is below 
100 nanometers. So, if you want to know the investment that we're making 
in nanotechnology, it's the total investment that Intel is making. ... We don't 
happen to be the nanotechnology that you popularize with carbon nano-
tubes and quantum dots and organic molecules that are going to replace 
CMOS transistors. Most of that is an esoteric and populist impression of 
what nanotechnology is. The bulk of nanotechnology is what companies like 
Intel and Texas Instruments and others do today.” 
 

Is Intel really the largest nanotechnology company on earth? Is everything 
smaller than 100 nm nanotechnology? Or is this just CEO spin? Certainly under 
our bipolar transition of nanotechnology above – the combination of vision and 
reality – Intel’s latest and greatest CMOS transistor evolution is not 
nanotechnology. It’s just the logical progression of microtechnology. First of all, 
companies like Intel are not taking advantage of any new nanoscale phenomena. 
In fact, quantum effects (like leakage via electron tunneling) are a major problem 
in the most advanced integrated-circuit design. Nor are they building transistors 

from the ground up atom-by-atom with molecules. It may be that as the biggest 
dimension of Intel’s transistors fall below the 10 nm length scale they will have to 
make use of quantum size effects or switch to another paradigm – then maybe 
they can claim the title. 
 
Definitions matter in contexts relevant to nanotechnology, including patenting, 
risk analysis, proper funding allocation, and education. Like it or not, 
nanotechnology is largely perceived by the public in two ways. One, as Star Trek 
and most science fiction conveys it: “machines you can’t see” – the more 
fantastic vision perspective. Nanotechnology has become what we imagine it to 
be. From the self-cleaning walls, to the nanites of Star Trek, to the grow anything 
future of The Diamond Age (Stephenson, 1995). Second, the public sees the 
toxicology issue – dangerous particles in food and cosmetic products. This is 
exaggerated by the wide promotion of the term as marketing tool whether 
justified or not. The Woodrow Wilson Center has compiled a database of all 
products that claim to use nanotechnology (WWC, 2005). But the companies that 
are actually using the nanotechnology of today – nanoparticles – in situations 
that may be hazardous (such as in cosmetics) do not advertise this fact. 
 
Nanotechnology has clearly caught the public’s imagination, but they are missing 
the great stuff – the reality. There is a complete disconnect between what the 
public perceives and fears and what government agencies are defining as 
nanotechnology. Is the public seeing more than the toxicology or nano-robot 
issues? The last century taught us that chemicals could do truly awful things. 
Can nanotoxicity really be all that worse or is it just a scary name for more of the 
same? Meanwhile, governments and corporations around the world are funding 
nanotechnology for the promise of the next big thing and as a unifying theme in 
materials science development. Understanding how society – through the policy 
makers, thinkers, scientists, engineers, speakers – are defining and shaping the 
umbrella that is nanotechnology is our goal. 
 
 
2. 
 
Definitions for nanotechnology abound from government program managers and 
institutions, corporate entities, individual researchers, and non-profits. Let us 
collect and analyze some of them here. Since these are the institutions that are 
driving the debate and/or funding the evolution of nanotechnology, this is a 
worthy goal (though somewhat tedious). 
 
The strongest shaper of the direction of nanotechnology is the United States 
federal government acting through its research funding agencies, primarily the 
National Science Foundation and various military equivalents (DARPA, ARDA, 
ARO, NRO, etc.). Mihail Roco, current head of the National Nanotechnology 
Initiative (NNI) and cheerleader for it even before its inception under President 
Clinton has given a number of definitions of nanotechnology that are often 

Definitions ad infinitum (and more politics) 

quoted. Since the NNI is shaping the future of nanotechnology by the power of 
federal grants, this is a good place to start. Roco’s definitions are: 
 

“Nanotechnology is the creation of functional materials, devices, and 
systems through control of matter on the nanometer length scale, 
exploiting novel phenomena and properties (physical, chemical, biological) 
present only at that length scale.” (Roco, 2000) 
 

There is an alternate definition as well: 
 

“The field of nanotechnology deals with materials and systems having 
these key properties: they have at least one dimension of about one to 
100 nanometers, they are designed through processes that exhibit 
fundamental control over the physical and chemical attributes of 
molecular-scale structures, and they can be combined to form larger 
structures.” (SciAm, 2002) 
 
And another: 
 

“Nanotechnology is the ability to understand, control, and manipulate matter 
at the level of individual atoms and molecules, as well as at the 
“supramolecular” level involving clusters of molecules. Its goal is to create 
materials, devices, and systems with essentially new properties and 
functions because of their small structure.” (Roco, 2004) 
 

According to Roco, the NNI definition encourages new contributions that were 
not possible before: 
 

•  “novel phenomena, properties and functions at nanoscale, which are non-

scalable outside of the nanometer domain; 

•  the ability to measure / control / manipulate matter at  the nanoscale in 

order to change those properties and functions; 
integration along length scales, and fields of application.” 

• 

 
Obviously Roco is firmly in the reality camp of nanotechnology, as are most of 
the definitions to be described. Before we analyze it further let’s look at some 
similar definitions. The United Kingdom, which has been ahead of the game in 
considering the implications and risks of nanotechnology, put together a widely 
cited report in 2004. The Royal Society of London report defines nanotechnology 
as: 
 

“Nanoscience is the study of phenomena and manipulation of materials at 
atomic, molecular, and macromolecular scales, where properties differ 
significantly from those at a larger scale.” (Royal Society, 2004) 
 

This definition is often quoted outside of the United States. 

 
Roco is seeking to ignite a new “man-on-the-moon” scale investment in science 
and technology in this country. He is looking at nanotechnology as a unifying 
theme to advance all advanced technologies, which are based largely on 
increased understanding of the sciences made in the past century. His definition 
is very biased and broad to encourage these opportunities. Business as well has 
a motivation to make nanotechnology widely used, at least for now, because 
“cool” sells. 
 

Table 2: Four Generations of Nanotechnology according to NNI: Timeline for 
beginning of industrial prototyping and technology commercialization (Roco, 
2004) 
1st: Passive nanostructures. Example: coatings, nanoparticles, nanostructured 
metals, polymers, ceramics 
2nd: Active nanostructures. Example: transistors, amplifiers, targeted drugs, 
actuators, adaptive structures 
3rd: Systems of nanosystems. Example: guided assembling, 3D networking and 
new hierarchical architectures, robotics, evolutionary 
4th: Molecular nanosystems. Example: molecular devices ‘by design’, atomic 
design, emerging functions 

Table 3: Nature Nanotechnology sub-fields suitable for submission (NN, 
2005) 

•  Nanomaterials and nanoparticles 
•  Carbon nanotubes and fullerenes 
•  Organic-inorganic nanostructures 
•  Structural properties 
•  Electronic properties and devices 
•  Nanomagnetism and spintronics 
•  Photonic structures and devices 
•  Quantum information 
•  Molecular self-assembly 
•  Molecular machines and nanoelectromechanical devices (NEMS) 
•  Surface patterning and imaging 
•  Nanofluidics, nanosensors and other devices 
•  Nanobiotechnology and nanomedicine 
•  Computational nanotechnology 
•  Nanometrology and instrumentation 
•  Synthesis and processing 

 
 

 
 
 

Recently, the elite academic publisher Nature (London) spun off a new journal 
called Nature Nanotechnology. It’s illustrative to find out what they consider 
acceptable for submission. In Nature’s words, Nature Nanotechnology “is a 
multidisciplinary journal that publishes papers of the highest quality and 
significance in all areas of nanoscience and nanotechnology. The journal covers 
research into the design, characterization and production of structures, devices 
and systems that involve the manipulation and control of materials and 
phenomena at atomic, molecular and macromolecular scales. Both bottom-up 
and top-down approaches - and combinations of the two – are covered.” The 
topics included are listed in Table 3. 
 
Meanwhile, the USA Patent and Trademark Office, trying to reorganize to deal 
with nanotechnology patents and simplify nanotech investment, has it’s own 
definition: 
 

“Nanotechnology is related to research and technology development at 
the atomic, molecular or macromolecular levels, in the length of scale of 
approximately 1-100 nanometer range in at least one dimension; that 
provide a fundamental understanding of phenomena and materials at the 
nanoscale; and to create and use structures, devices and systems that 
have novel properties and functions because of their small and/or 
intermediate size.” (USPTO, 2006) 
 

 The FDA, concerned with human exposure, takes a similar approach.  
 

“The FDA defines "nanotechnology" as research and technology or 
development of products regulated by the FDA that involve all of the 
following:  
 
1)  the existence of materials or products at the atomic, molecular or 

macromolecular levels, where at least one dimension that affects the 
functional behavior of the drug/device product is in the length scale 
range of approximately 1-100 nanometers;  

2)  the creation and use of structures, devices and systems that have 
novel properties and functions because of their small size; and,  
3)  the ability to control or manipulate the product on the atomic scale.” 

(FDA, 2006) 

 
We see a lot of similarities in all of the above definitions. We also see where 
Craig Barrett’s confusion comes from. These definitions are so broad as to 
encompass virtually all developments in materials science and biotechnology. 
For example, although most of them make a point of requiring a “new” property to 
be considered, what is new? 
  
It’s not clear whether simply making something small (even in only one 
dimension) is enough to be considered nanotechnology. Consider two additional  

contrarian definitions. Two of the most vocal non-profits critical of unfettered 
nanotechnology investment are Greenpeace and ETC Group. Greenpeace’s 
definition is: 
 

“The most common definition of nanotechnology is that of manipulation, 
observation and measurement at a scale of less than 100 nanometers 
(one nanometer is one millionth of a millimeter). However, the emergence 
of a multi-disciplinary field called ‘nanotechnology’ arises from new 
instrumentation only recently available, and a flow of public money into a 
great number of techniques and relevant academic disciplines in what has 
been described as an ‘arms race’ between governments. Nanotechnology 
is really a convenient label for a variety of scientific disciplines which 
serves as a way of getting money from Government budgets.” (Huw 
Arnall, 2003) 
 

The ETC Group definition: 
 

“Nanotechnology refers to the manipulation of living and non-living matter 
at the level of the nanometer (nm), one billionth of a meter. It is at this 
scale that quantum physics takes over from classical physics and the 
properties of elements change character in novel and unpredictable 
ways.” (ETC, 2003) 
 

The ETC Group definition is focused only on the quantum nature of some 
nanoscale phenomena, accounting for only a part of the reality side of 
nanotechnology. The Greenpeace definition is very politically astute. It’s 
interesting though that neither include in their definition anything about risk. 
 
It will prove interesting to check the longevity of these definitions a decade from 
now. They are evidence of the shotgun approach the professional community is 
taking toward nanotechnology. There has been some backlash to this from some 
of the scientific community. One example is a recent Nature commentary by 
French nanoscientist Christian Joachim. He suggests defining nano as: 
 

“Nanoscience should be reserved solely for the study of a single atom or a 
single molecule, that is, of one entity at a time, not for groups of such 
entities where statistics or interactions between them come into play.” 
(Joachim, 2005) 
 

This too narrow definition has good intentions. The ambiguity of the term 
nanotechnology sometimes attracts students with misperceptions about what 
they are getting into. Joachim suggests that a student might find themselves in a 
“physics of microelectronic devices” class instead of one on imagined nano-
machines. Of course, one could argue that attracting students to take a physics 
class is good, misperception or not. 
 

Perspectives from science 

We will give a more targeted definition of what nanotechnology is today in the 
Conclusions of this chapter. 
 
 
3. 
 
Most nanotechnology definitions are cast in the language of application. This is 
good, since we are trying to describe a technology that does have applications 
now and in the future. Indeed, the language of application may be what unites all 
the subfields that make up nanotech and makes it a viable societal construct, 
though not necessarily a scientific one. Nevertheless, there are serious reasons 
not to lump too broad an array of advanced technologies under one banner. 
Education is one example. Patenting is another. Labeling inventions 
“nanotechnologies” sounds like a good idea for promoting interest and 
investment in a new and promising arena, but divorcing a patent from the specific 
field or principle it derives from may be devastating to the patent process. 
Adequately judging prior work, quality, and worthiness may depend crucially on 
expertise in a specific field. There exist no experts in nanotechnology, nor will 
there, as society has defined the term. 
 
Here we want to comment on the “new”-ness of “new nanoscale phenomena”, 
which is central to so many of the definitions of nanotech above. We also want to 
provide some context for the scientific sub-fields that nanotechnology is starting 
to claim, and show for a few examples where this is and is not worthwhile. 
 
Condensed matter (CM) physics, formerly known as solid-state physics, is the 
largest subfield of physics, the modern six being astrophysics, atomic physics, 
biophysics, condensed matter or solid state physics, high energy physics, and 
nuclear physics. CM physics deals with the study of matter that is condensed, 
including the physics of metals, semiconductors, liquids, and emergent 
phenomena in many particle systems (such as superconductivity and the 
fractional quantum hall effect, atomic gases, as well as “soft” systems as in 
polymer physics). CM seeks to understand the non-classical behavior of 
everything, solid and liquid, that’s cold (as compared to the sun) from the scale of 
a few atoms to something you can hold in your hand. So its purview is quite 
broad and overlaps very much with materials science and physical chemistry. In 
the CM community there is very little change of behavior due to the introduction 
of the word nanotechnology except indirectly via funding programs. Here, 
emphasis on applied and interdisciplinary work has become more prevalent in 
recent years. 
 
CM physics has ridden (and driven) the trend in the electronics industry towards 
miniaturization to interesting discoveries at the nanoscale, including quantization 
of electrical and thermal conductance and coulomb blockade in lateral quantum 
dots, though often at extremely low temperatures. When CM physicists consider 
nanotechnology or nanoscience they usually think of one of three things: 1) 

quantum size effects that emerge at the nanoscale, 2) new surface 
physics/energetics/mechanics in nanoscale structures due to the increased 
surface to volume ratio, and 3) quantum coherent transport effects through 
mesoscale systems. Largely these occur in metallic and crystallographic 
systems, the most common of the latter being silicon, gallium arsenide, and 
carbon.  
 
There is also a history of studying extremely small life – “nanno-biology” – but 
this history has been largely forgotten. The nano-bio-technology we see today in 
electrical engineering labs that are going “wet” is really a merger of hard 
inorganic device (CM) physics being applied to biological matter. 
 
 
3.1  Cold or hot, quantum or not 
 
One could easily fill an office with books on only one topic: silicon. Probably the 
most economically important and well-studied material on earth, it has taken 
almost 100 years (starting with the discovery of quantum mechanics) to almost 
fully understand this simple periodic structure. (If it has taken this long to master 
what’s basically a simpler version of sand, how long will it take to understand 
biological systems?) Consider an atom of silicon. It has discrete energy levels or 
“shells” where electrons can exist. As the atoms come together to form a crystal, 
the energy levels become energy bands, continuous as a function of the 
electron’s position within the crystal lattice. Since silicon is a semiconductor, its 
optical properties are largely governed by a band-gap that separates the valence 
(or core) electron bands from the conduction bands, where the electrons are 
much more mobile. Semiconductor technology is quantum, in some sense, as it 
requires a quantum mechanical description of matter to explain. The progression 
of a block of silicon crystal from the macroscopic scale down is a great way to 
understand some of the key manifestations of new nanoscale phenomena, but 
we could use many systems. 
 
Nanotechnology proponents often bring up new quantum behavior that emerges 
at the nanoscale. There is nothing new, per se, about this phenomenon – being 
governed by well-known quantum physics – but only recently could matter be 
controlled well enough to reach this scale. There are two ways in general to see 
quantum effects: make a material colder or make it smaller. This is because the 
properties of materials, from atoms to molecules to metals and crystals, are 
usually governed by the interaction of electrons. And the properties of electrons 
are governed by the energy levels where they are allowed to exist. Crudely 
speaking, temperature blurs these energy levels so that electrons can hop from 
one level to another more easily. Here is the key point: if we make a material 
small enough, these energy levels will move farther apart, making this hopping 
due to temperature much more difficult. So, in some sense, making an object 
very small makes it “colder.” Other new properties appear as well, such as a 
change in the optical excitation response – as this is defined by the spacing of 

The nano in nanoparticles 
 

these energy levels as well. This phenomena, which happens to take place 
around the nano-scale (say 10 nm for silicon) is what is often referred to as 
“quantum size effects.”  
 
 
3.2 
 
Consider nanoparticles, the nanotechnology of the present. These include 
nanocrystals (also called colloidal quantum dots in some cases) made of either 
metal or semiconductor as well as the carbon fullerene family, including 
buckyballs and nanotubes (the two other isotopes of carbon). Nanowires are 
classified under nanocrystals since they are solid objects as opposed to hollow 
nanotubes. All nanoparticles have at least two dimensions in the nanoscale 
regime, 1-100 nm. They have new properties that appear because of their size 
that would disappear in the micron regime. These “new properties” can be 
different in origin and even coincidental. We categorize them broadly into three 
bins: 1) new quantum effects which appear due to confinement, which are often 
called quantum size effects; 2) new surface physics or much increased reactivity, 
usually attributed to increased surface to volume ratios – this might also include 
structural changes from adding nanoparticles to a material (like rubber) to make it 
stronger; and 3) new biological properties which are largely a coincidence of 
scale, as the body is not attuned to defend against nanosized particles in many 
situations. 
 
It would be easy to argue that nanoparticles or quantum dots are the only 
nanotechnology at this point in time. They certainly constitute most of the risk. 
Nanoparticles have large surface-to-volume ratios making them extremely 
reactive. They also are able to penetrate sensitive areas of the body and 
accumulate there. They can be embedded in larger substrates such as polymer 
systems or fabrics, which may decay over time and release these nanoparticles 
into the environment. They are also found in sunscreens and cosmetics. 
Nanoparticles and (eventually) active nanomachines bridge the materials to 
biology gap. Evolution in biomarkers for medical imaging and cancer treatment 
has tracked well with nanoparticle technology. But not all quantum dots are 
dangerous. For example, lateral quantum dots built in quantum well structures 
are no more toxic than the crystal they are in (gallium arsenide or silicon, as 
examples).  
 
 
3.3  Not nanotechnology 
 
Technologies are often organized by scientific principle or concept, whereas 
nanotech can incorporate these just because of a coincidence in scales. 
Take the case of photonic band gap materials, which apply the theories 
historically developed for electronic waves in semiconductors to photon waves 
(light) traveling in periodic index of refraction materials – sometimes called meta-

materials. Visible light photonic band gap materials will likely require nanoscale-
manufactured devices (<100 nm 3D structures) but work as well at microwave 
frequencies in order 1 cm sized structures. The physics doesn’t change whether 
the features are 1 nm or 1 cm.  So the only thing “nano” about some photonic 
meta-materials may be the fabrication process.  Is there any point calling it 
nanotechnology? Would you send this patent application to be reviewed by the 
“nanotechnology” patent clerk or the physical optics patent clerk? It should be a 
no-brainer (the latter). 
 
In our opinion, devices or structures with only one dimension at the nanometer 
length scale are in general not nanotechnology. Quantum wells are a good 
example. To make a quantum well you sandwich a thin semiconductor layer 
between two bigger semiconductor layers of a different type. This allows you to 
trap electrons in the inner layer. Physically this is not much different from 
inversion layers, where one material is grown on the other and an electric field 
traps electrons at the interface. These kinds of semiconductor devices are well 
known. Electrons in these 2D sheets exhibit many new and interesting 
phenomena, often attributed to the nanoscale. But, new nano phenomena in this 
context could just as easily be called new quantum phenomena or new many-
body phenomena. Superconductivity, quantum wells and electron gasses, giant 
magneto-resistance (GMR) are all examples of quantum behavior 
misappropriated to the nano-field. This also explains some of the ridiculous 
money expenditure estimates – in the tens of billions of dollars some of them – 
which have been touted as nano-investment. If you include all the investment in 
GMR hard drive technology, you get big numbers.  
 
 
4 
 
Much of nanotechnology is just the natural progression of scientific and technical 
trends began long ago. Whether it constitutes a real paradigm shift in how we 
approach the manipulation and utilization of nature is still an open question. We 
have taken a pragmatic approach by considering the social shaping of the term 
as it presently stands, introducing the vision and reality viewpoints of 
nanotechnology. From the perspective of the scientific community, the label 
nanotechnology doesn’t seem to be doing any harm. Funding via this route has 
been relatively sane, perhaps better than it would have been otherwise. Certainly 
investment in the cross-disciplinary developments of the fundamental science in 
physics, chemistry, materials science, and biology has great promise. It may 
even be that there is some over-investment occurring. Many states and 
universities across the country are building nanotechnology centers without 
enough qualified people to fill them. 
 
We are left with two basic questions to ponder. How should proponents – 
predominately government and industry – want nanotechnology to be understood 
by the public? And how should we define the term in the proper sense for risk 

Conclusions 

assessment? In the sole context of risk, we should immediately define a very 
clear definition of nanotechnology: 
 

Nanotechnology, at present, is nanoparticles and nanomaterials that 
contain nanoparticles. Nanoparticles are defined as objects or 
devices with at least two dimensions in the nanoscale regime 
(typically under 10 nm) that exhibit new properties, physical, 
chemical, or biological, or change the properties of a bulk material, 
due to their size. Nanotechnology of the future will include atom-by-
atom or molecule-by-molecule built active devices. 
 

It should be evident from the rest of our analysis that this definition is incomplete 
as compared to society’s definition of the word. (Also note that we explicitly 
enforce two dimensions being in the nanoscale regime.) But it has the salience of 
being rigorous and relevant to the questions of nanotechnology most directly 
impacting the public. It might be beneficial from a public policy perspective to 
leave the science and technical communities alone with their developments – 
with their new transistors and quantum dots and so on – instead redefining 
nanotechnology separately, in the context only of direct and novel environmental 
and human impact. This would have the benefit of isolating truly worrying 
nanotechnology-based products from the bulk of nano-science research, which is 
completely innocuous. With recent calls for a moratorium on all nanotechnology 
by groups such as ETC, such a redefinition might have real value.  
 
While the breadth of phenomena that lie within the nanoscale regime points to 
the ridiculousness of categorizing technologies based on size, the term 
nanotechnology has become embedded in our society, which gives it meaning 
explicitly. Microtechnology, as an historical counterpoint, has referred generally 
to a specific set of techniques and processes with little ambiguity. But what is 
defined as nanotechnology today may not be nanotechnology tomorrow. 
Taniguchi was considering precision manufacturing: separation, addition, or 
removal of materials at the atomic/molecular scale. Indeed, the mechanical 
systems that lead Taniguchi to coin the term are now called MEMS, micro-
electro-mechanical systems, and are considered by many today not to be 
nanotechnology at all. 
 
 
Appendix: List of some technical terms 
 
Spintronics: Devices that use the electron spin instead of the electron charge for 
electronics. The spin is a purely quantum property of the electron with two 
possible states that may be used to encode information (up = 1, down = 0). 
 
Mesoscopics: In physics and chemistry, the mesoscopic scale refers to the 
length scale at which one can reasonably discuss the properties of a material or 
phenomenon without having to discuss the behavior of individual atoms. For 

solids and liquids this is typically a few to ten nanometers, and involves 
averaging over a few thousand atoms or molecules. Hence, the mesoscopic 
scale is roughly identical to the nanoscopic or nanotechnology scale for most 
solids. This region often exhibits interesting quantum many-body phenomena, 
especially at cold temperatures. 
 
Quantum Computer: A proposed computer that would exploit the quantum 
mechanical nature of particles, such as electrons or atomic nuclei, to manipulate 
information as quantum bits, or qubits. Whereas an ordinary bit has at any time a 
value of either 0 or 1, a qubit can also take on both values at once. Many qubits 
can be “entangled” (the non-local property of quantum physics) for extended 
interactions. Because a quantum computer can act on these multiple states 
simultaneously in an exponential way, it is potentially many times as powerful as 
a conventional computer if a proper quantum algorithm is performed. 
 
Quantum Well: A quantum well is a potential well that confines particles in one 
dimension, forcing them to occupy a planar region, usually less than ten 
nanometers. 
 
Quantum Wire: In material science, a quantum wire is an electrically conducting 
wire, in which quantum transport effects are important. Typically, this is due to 
the small diameter (typically of the order of nanometers) of the wires. Nanowires 
are a particular example of a quantum wire. 
 
‘Lateral’ Quantum Dot: A 0-dimensional trap formed inside a semiconductor 
structure, the natural progression of removing another dimension of electron 
movement from a quantum wire. Quantum dots can exhibit properties 
characteristic of atoms – electron energy shells for example – and are often 
referred to as artificial atoms. 
 
Meta-material: In electromagnetism (covering areas like optics and photonics), a 
meta material (or metamaterial) is an object that gains its (electromagnetic) 
material properties from its structure rather than inheriting them directly from the 
materials it is composed of. This term is particularly used when the resulting 
material has properties not found in naturally formed substances. 
 
Photonic band-gap material: A meta-material with alternating regions of dielectric 
constant which can modify, trap, or guide the transport of light. 
 
Superconductivity: Property of particular metals at extremely low temperatures. 
The electrical resistance of a conductor becomes zero, so that an electric current 
can flow without loss. The superfluid is an analogous quantum many-body 
phenomena where the friction in a liquid goes to zero. 
 
Transistor: A three terminal amplifying device, the fundamental component of 
most active electronic circuits, including digital electronics.   

  
Leakage: In the context of semiconductor electronics, leakage refers to the 
tunneling of electrons outside of the barriers that define a transistor for example. 
The result is usually heat and increased inefficiency. 
 
‘Colloidal’ quantum dot or nanocrystal: Since the term emphasizes the quantum 
confinement effect it typically refers to the sub-class of nanocrystals that are 
small enough to exist in the quantum confinement regime, and more typically 
refers to fluorescent nanocrystals in the quantum confined size range. 
 
Nanoparticles: Particles with controlled dimensions on the order of nanometres. 
Examples include colloidal gold, magnetite particles, and luminescent 
semiconductor aggregates that are also known as 'quantum dots'. 
 
Carbon fullerenes and nanotubes: Any of various cagelike, hollow molecules 
composed of hexagonal and pentagonal groups of atoms, and especially those 
formed from carbon, that constitute the third form of carbon after diamond and 
graphite. Concentric shells of graphite formed by one sheet of conventional 
graphite rolled up into a cylinder. The lattice of carbon atoms remains continuous 
around the circumference. The nanotubes are designed to be very small in order 
to store hydrogen. 
 
Photonics: The technology of transmission, control, and detection of light 
(photons). This is also known as fiber optics and optoelectronics. 
 
Electrons, photons, phonons, magnons, plasmons, polaritons, …: Examples of 
fundamental excitations of nature some which are actual particles and some of 
which are quasi-particles (particles that represent the excitations of a sea of more 
fundamental particles). 
 
MEMS: Tiny mechanical devices that are built onto semiconductor chips and are 
measured in micrometers. They are used to make pressure, temperature, 
chemical and vibration sensors, light reflectors and switches as well as 
accelerometers for airbags, vehicle control, pacemakers and games.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The author would like to thank Wendy Crone, Clark Miller, the other members of 
the Wisconsin Nanotechnology and Society Initiative, and the students of his 
course at the University of Wisconsin-Madison (Tahan, 2006a-b) for useful 
conversations. The author is supported by a USA National Science Foundation 
Math and Physical Sciences Distinguished International Postdoctoral Research 
Fellowship.  
 
 

References 
 
Amato, I. (2000). Nanotechnology: Shaping the world atom by atom, National 
Science and Technology Council, USA 
 
Colvin, V.L. (2003). The Potential Environmental Impact of Engineered 
Nanomaterials. Nature Biotechnology 21(10): 1166-1170. 
 
Crichton, W. (2003), Prey, Avon  
 
Drexler, K. Eric (1987). Engines of Creation, Doubleday 
 
ETC (2003). The Big Down, January, ETC Group 
 
Eigler, D. and Schweizer, R. (1990). Nature 344, 524–527 
 
FDA, 2006. Available at http://www.fda.gov/nanotechnology/. Accessed on Aug. 
1, 2006 
 
Feynman, R. P. (1959). There's plenty of room at the bottom: An invitation to 
enter a new field of physics, Dec. 29, 1959, APS Meeting 
 
Hood, E. (2004). Nanotechnology: Looking As We Leap, Environmental Health 
Perspectives, v112 
 
Huw Arnall, A. (2003). Future Technologies, Today’s Choices: Nanotechnology, 
Artificial Intelligence and Robotics; A technical, political and institutional map of 
emerging technologies. July 2003, Department of Environmental Science and 
Technology, Environmental Policy and Management Group, Faculty of Life 
Sciences, Imperial College London, University of London, commissioned by 
Greenpeace 
 
Joachim, C. (2005) To be or not to be nano, Nature Materials, Vol. 4, p.107, Feb. 
 
Joy, B. (2000). Why the Future Doesn’t Need Us, Wired April, 8(4). 
 
Masciangioli, T. and Zhang, W. (2003), Environmental Technologies at the 
Nanoscale, Env Sci & Tech, March 1: 102A-108A. 
 
National Research Council (2006). A Matter of Size:  Triennial Review of the 
National Nanotechnology Initiative  Committee to Review the National 
Nanotechnology Initiative, National Research Council, 
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/11752.html 
 
National Science Foundation (2001). Societal Implications of Nanoscience and 
Nanotechnology, USA National Science Foundation 

 
NN (2005). Nature Nanotechnology, About the Journal, 
http://www.nature.com/nnano/about/index.html 
 
Roco, M. C. (2000). Available at http://www.nano.gov/omb_nifty50.htm. 
Accessed April 1, 2005 
 
Roco, M. C. (2003a). Broader Societal Implications of Nanotechnology, Journal 
of Nanoparticle Research 5, 181-189 
 
Roco, M. C. (2003b). The US National Nanotechnology Initiative After 3 Years, 
Journal of Nanoparticle Research 6, 1-10 
 
Roco, M. (2004). AIChE Journal, Vol. 50 (5) 
 
Royal Society, London (2004). Nanoscience and Nanotechnology: Opportunities 
and Uncertainties. Document 19/04. Available at 
http://www.nanotec.org.uk/finalReport.htm. Accessed 2006 27 Sep.  
 
Scientific American editors (2002). Understanding Nanotechnology, Warner 
Books, New York. 
 
Stephenson, N. (1995). The Diamond Age or, A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer, 
Bantam Books, New York.  
 
Tahan, C. (2006a). Science and Technology Studies 201: Nanotechnology and 
Society, URL http://www.tahan.com/charlie/nanosociety/course201/  
 
Tahan. C., et al. (2006b). Charles Tahan, Ricky Leung, G. M. Zenner, K. D. 
Ellison, W. C. Crone, and Clark A. Miller, Nanotechnology and Society: A 
discussion-based undergraduate course, Am. J. Phys. 74, 4, April 
 
Tahan, C. (2007). The Nanotechnology R(evolution). In Fritz Allhoff, Patrick Lin, 
James Moor, and John Weckert, editors. Nanoethics: Examining the Societal 
Impact of Nanotechnology, John Wiley & Sons 
 
Taniguchi, N. (1974). Proc. Int. Congress Prod. Eng. Part 2, 18 (JSPE, Tokyo) 
 
USPTO (2006). Class 977/Dig.1 Nanotechnology. Available at 
http://www.uspto.gov/web/patents/biochempharm/crossref.htm. Accessed Aug. 1, 
2006 
 
Warheit, D. (2004). Nanoparticles: Health Impacts?, Materials Today Feb.: 32-35. 
 
Winner, L. (2003). Testimony to Congress, Wed. April 9 
 

WWC (2005). Woodrow Wilson Center’s Project on Emerging Nanotechnologies 
Consumer Product Inventory, http://www.nanotechproject.org/consumerproducts/ 
 
 

