Who is the customer in higher education?

Michael Courtney, PhD
Forensic Science Program, Western Carolina University, Cullowhee, NC 28723
Michael_Courtney@alum.mit.edu

Amy Courtney, PhD
Department of Biology, Southwestern Community College, Sylva, NC 28779
Amy_Courtney@post.harvard.edu

Abstract:
As education systems move toward business models of operation, there is a strong tendency to misidentify the student 
as the customer.  Rather than being the customer in a business model, the student enters as the raw material and leaves 
as  a value-added product.  Misidentifying the student as the customer leads to interpretation of the course credit or 
degree as the product.  The true product is the additional knowledge, skill, and ability that course credit and degree 
should represent.  Consequences are potentially disastrous, because the notion that “the customer is always right” can 
lead to the perceived product (course credit or degree) meeting the desires of the misidentified “customer” (student) 
rather than the real product (value added to student) meeting the standards of the properly identified customers (future 
employers and taxpayers).
12 December 2006

Introduction

I.
A  college  education  is  now  seen  as  a  necessary  part  of 
fulfilling the American dream.  More students are going 
to college, and the bulk of the financial burden is falling 
on  taxpayers  through  governmental  support  of  public 
institutions  and  government  supported  financial  aid  to 
students  at  both  public  and  private  institutions.    This 
support is often justified by the value and necessity of an 
educated workforce in the current and future economy.

To improve accountability and efficiency of educational 
institutions,  there  is  a  trend  toward  operating  like 
businesses  rather  than  the  more  traditional  education 
management  styles. 
is  easily 
measured  as  the  number  of  graduates  per  dollar  spent.  
Financial resources are often distributed from the state to 
the institution based on the number of enrolled students.   

  Cost  effectiveness 

Thus  institutions  face  the  temptation  of  viewing  the 
student  as  the  customer  because  the  student  controls  a 
much larger dollar amount than personally invested.  In 
contrast, the real customers in education are those paying 
for  it  (taxpayers)  and  those  depending  on  a  quality 
product (future employers).

teachers 

toward  students  also 
Empathy  of  most 
contributes  to  misidentifying  the  student  as  customer.  
Every teacher has experienced challenging college level 
life  circumstances  or  demanding 
courses  where 

instructors made a course difficult beyond their comfort 
level.  In contrast, few teachers have had the experience 
of  being  an  employer  and  suffering with  poorly trained 
employees,  bearing  the  expense  of  their  incompetence 
until  finally  bearing  the  costs  of  termination  and 
replacement.1   Likewise, few teachers have experienced 
first  hand  the  dismal  failure  of  science  and  math 
education  to  prepare  jurors  to  rationally  evaluate  the 
merits  of  a  criminal  case,  especially  if  it  involves  non-
trivial analysis of forensic evidence.2  All teachers have 
been  students.    Few  have  been  employers  or  even 
worked in technical fields outside of education.  

II.

Real Business Examples
A. Engineering 

One  of  us  (MC)  worked  as  a  test  engineer  at  a  large 
internet  hardware  company.    The  job  was  to  design  an 
automated test system to assure the wireless networking 
                                                
1  We’ve  known  a  number  of  engineers  who  slipped  through 
the  quality  control  cracks  of  their  educational  programs  and 
performed poorly.  Most ended up performing tasks equivalent 
to  non-degreed  technicians  until  the  employer  recognized  the 
situation and  they were transferred or fired.  Correcting these 
hiring  mistakes  is  very  expensive,  yet  they  are  hard  to  avoid 
because a degree is often considered certification of ability.
2  A  catastrophe  is  brewing  here.    When  juries  lack  the 
competence to evaluate forensic testimony on the merits, they 
tend to pick an expert  witness they like better, turning justice 
into a popularity contest.

1

products  met  the  company’s  standards,  which  in  turn 
were  designed  to  make  sure  our  customers  would  be 
happy with product quality.  

This automated test system was deployed on the factory 
floor  of  subcontractors  who  actually  manufactured  the 
wireless networking products.  Units that met the testing 
standards  were  shipped directly to  customers,  and  units 
that  failed  were  re-routed  for  repair  or  disposal.    The 
subcontractor was paid based on the amount of  product 
that met the standards and shipped.

Subcontractors often complained about the unfairness of 
the test system, especially early in a product cycle when 
they  were  still  working  out  manufacturing  kinks  and 
product  yield  percentages  were  low.    The  company’s  
insistence on only paying for quality product was costing 
the  subcontractors  money.    Had  the  subcontractors 
determined  their  own  quality  standards,  field  failure 
rates  would  have  been  much  higher,  and  customers 
would have been unhappy with product quality.

B. Raising Cattle 

We  owned  and  operated  a  direct-market  small  farm 
business where beef was our primary product.  Our farm 
was highly regarded for both its quality food and also for 
setting a positive business example.  We raised beef on 
pasture  and  believed  that  good  beef  comes  from  happy 
cattle.  To the best of our abilities, our cattle were well 
fed, well treated, and lived relatively good lives.  

Misidentifying  students  as  the  customer  in  education  is 
analogous  to  identifying  cattle  as  the  customers  in  the 
beef  operation.    Happiness  is  an  important  goal,  but  if 
overemphasized, it becomes impossible to meet the real 
goals of the operation (profitability) and the needs of the 
real customer (affordable beef).

Student Realities

III.
The stated expectation of most educators is that college 
students  should  spend  2-3  hours  in  preparation  each 
week for each class hour.3  This equates to a 45-60 hour 
weekly work load for a 15 credit hour schedule.  Many 
students  are  simply  unwilling  or  unable  to  expend  this 
level  of  time and  effort and will  take shortcuts on  their 

                                                
3  This  is  stated  explicitly  in  many  course  descriptions  and 
syllabi,  but  given  the  rarity  of  instances  where  it  is  accurate, 
one  wonders  whether  this  comment  is  more  for  accrediting 
bodies than students.

academic  work  when  they  convince  themselves  that  it 
won’t hurt their grade.  

the  student  as  customer 

Viewing 
is  particularly 
damaging here.  Would it make sense to let army recruits 
decide how hard they should be working in their military 
training (boot camp)?  Would it make sense to let police 
recruits decide how hard they should  be working in the 
police academy?  

The real benefits of higher education for a given student 
are roughly proportional to student effort averaged over 
time.    On  average, if  one  student  spends  about  half the 
effort  of  another  for  four  years  in  college,  the  student 
making  half  the  effort  will  unavoidably  graduate  with 
only half the added value.

Does  it  make  sense  to  let  engineering  students  dictate 
how  hard  they  should  be  working  in  school?    Does  it 
make  sense  for  future  chemists  and  forensic  scientists 
decide how hard they need to work in school?

Given  the  time  pressures,  students  will  seldom  work 
much  harder  than  they  think  is  needed  to  achieve  their 
grade goals.  Most students are one of two kinds: 





Students  who  start  a  course  at  full  throttle,  and 
then scale back efforts if early feedback suggests 
it would not compromise achieving grade goals.
Students who start a course with mediocre effort 
and  try  later  to  increase  efforts  to  the  level 
perceived as necessary to achieve grade goals.

Few students maintain a level of effort far above what is 
necessary to achieve their grade goal in a course.

The  quality  of  wireless  networking  products  depends 
more on the standards of the automated test system than 
on  the  manufacturing  process.   Likewise, the  quality of 
our  beef  cattle  depended  more  on  only  slaughtering 
cattle  that  were  properly  finished  and  well-marbled, 
rather than our farming skills or production efficiency.4
Similarly, the abilities of graduates depend more on the 
level of academic rigor (how hard it is to reach a grade 
goal) than on the pedagogical prowess of the teacher.  

Customer Interests

IV.
Properly  identifying  the  customer  is  key,  because 
internal standards and assessment methods should focus 
                                                
4  From  the  viewpoint  of  production  efficiency,  we  were 
mediocre farmers at best.  Product quality and marketing were 
the strengths that allowed the business to succeed.

2

on whether the product is meeting the expressed interests 
of  the  customer.        Engineering  and  technology  based 
businesses  express  customer 
technical 
specifications  and  performance  parameters  of  their 
  Our  farm  business  expressed  customer 
products. 
interests  in  our  standards  for  high  quality  food.    As  a 
direct  market  farm  business,  we  had  almost  no  margin 
for error in delivering quality food week to week.  

interests 

in 

Taxpayer  and  employer  interests  are  expressed  in 
education  by  the  careful  development  of  curricula  and 
standards  designed  to  produce  graduates  that  will  be 
productive  and  capable  members  of  society  and  the 
workforce.    In  contrast,  misapplication  of  the  business 
model overemphasizes student happiness, retention, and 
ability to graduate in four years.  

farm 

the  direct-market 

The  customer  of  a  wireless  networking  device  doesn’t 
care  if  it  takes  20%  more  time  to  produce  the  product; 
they  care  only  that  the  product  meets  expectations.  
is 
Likewise, 
unimpressed  by  production  efficiency,  they  only  care 
about quality and taste.5  Employers don’t care whether   
a  graduate  was  happy  in  school  or  graduates  in  four 
years,  they  care  about  the  abilities,  maturity,  and  work 
ethic  of  the  employee  they  hire.    Employers  want  a 
graduate  who  has  lived  up  to  some  tough  academic 
expectations  so  that  they  will  live  up  to  the  tough 
expectations of the employer.

customer 

Viewing the taxpayer and employer as customer stresses 
course  outcomes  and  valid  assessments  of  student 
learning.        Viewing  the  student  as  customer  stresses 
teacher evaluations and retention (to keep the headcount 
high  for  the  following  semester).    These  views  are  at 
odds,  because  the  student  who  sees  himself  as  the 
customer will demand to be taught in a way pleasing to 
him rather than meeting future employer expectations.

In  the  same  way  that  a  computer  network  company  
needed  to  provide  an  automated  test  system  to  assure 
subcontractor  quality,  educational  institutions  should 
have  assessment  methods  for  independently  verifying 
educational  quality.    If  student  evaluations  and  the 
number  of  students  passing  a  course  is  the  primary 
indicator  of  instructor  quality,  it  becomes  too  tempting 
for the teacher to lower standards. 

                                                
5 There is an interest that livestock are treated well, but not to 
the point of changing the animals’ ultimate demise.

Consequences  of  Misidentifying  Student 

V.
as Customer 
The  business rule that  the  customer  is  always right  and 
the  common  expectation  that  the  customer  has  the 
authority in business relationships are at the heart of the 
negative  consequences  of  misidentifying  the  student  as 
customer.  Student evaluations of teachers are given the 
importance of customer satisfaction surveys and take on 
tenure,  promotion,  and 
in 
a  disproportionate  role 
reappointment processes.  

The real customer in any situation actually has authority 
in their ability to dictate details to the producer, or take 
their business elsewhere.  Should the student really have 
authority  over  the  teacher  in  the  classroom?    The 
business  model  fails  miserably  here,  because  education 
is  a  kind  of  apprenticeship  or  mentorship.    To  be 
successful, teachers need to set and apply the standards.  
Does  it  make  sense  that  the  student  is  setting  and 
applying their standards to the teacher?

long-term 

Viewing  the  student  as  customer  elevates  short-term 
student  happiness  over 
in 
abilities.    Satisfaction  comes  later  when  the  benefits  of 
the difficult training are realized.  How many successful 
college  coaches  would  fare  well  in  a  survey  of  player 
satisfaction  before  ample  opportunity  to  understand  the 
benefits of the rigor? 

improvement 

Viewing the student as the customer shifts teacher focus 
exclusively  to  a  pedagogical  role.    The  teacher  is  no 
longer  an  empowered  gatekeeper  with  control  over 
academic  rigor  and  learning  quality.    It’s  analogous  to 
removing  the  automated  test  system  from  the  factory 
floor.  This  is the heart of grade inflation.  This  is why 
Johnny can’t read.  This  is why more college graduates 
will lack the expected skills.  Motivation is limited to the 
carrot; the stick is not available

Motivating students requires both selling the beauty and 
benefits  of  knowledge  and  abilities  in  an  area  (the 
carrot),  and  awareness  of  potential  failure  with  the 
attendant  consequences  (the  stick).    Misidentifying 
students  as  customers  removes  the  motivation  of  the 
stick, because students shift the blame for failure to the 
instructor. 
  In  their  minds,  they  paid  for  quality 
instruction.    If  they  fail,  the  customer  model  inclines 
them to  believe they are not getting what they paid for.  
Thus  under-performing  students  are  deprived  of  the 
opportunity for proper introspection.

3

with  the  real  customer.    We  like  to  see  ourselves  as 
future  patients  of  students  in  health  care  programs,  as 
business  owners  hiring  an  engineer,  as  parents  of  an 
aspiring  teacher’s  future  students,  or  as  a  crime  victim 
depending on the training of a forensic scientist to solve 
a  serious  crime.        As  taxpayers,  we  realize  that  the 
thoroughly trained and competent employees will bear a 
growing  proportion  of  the  tax  burden  if  the  number  of 
properly educated employees continues to decline.  

When  faced  with  the  temptation  to  give  passing  grades 
to  students  who  demonstrate  substandard  performance, 
empathy  for  the  consequences  for  the  real  customer 
gives  us  strength  to  properly  maintain  standards.    It  is 
not sufficient to bring students as far as possible with the 
effort they are willing to expend.  Students must meet a 
rigid and carefully considered standard.  Teachers have a 
duty as gatekeepers not to pass them until they do.

to  better  understand  employer’s  needs 

Educators  need  to  make  both  personal  and  institutional 
in 
efforts 
graduates.    How  many  science  and  math  teachers  get 
regular  feedback  on  the  quality  of  students  ultimately 
hired by engineering firms?  How many take the time to 
listen  to  the  horror  stories  of  employers  regarding 
inadequately trained graduates and the time and expense 
involved  in  rectification?    Empathy  for  the  customer  is 
empathy for the future employer, and success in business 
demands proper understanding of customer needs.

About the Authors
Michael  Courtney  earned  a  PhD  in  Physics  from  the 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  and  currently 
serves  as  Director  of  the  Forensic  Science  program  at 
Western  Carolina  University.    As  a  Physics  Professor, 
Michael has taught college level Physics, Statistics, and 
Forensic Science.  He also worked for seven years as an 
engineer for Cisco Systems.

Amy  Courtney  earned  a  MS  in  Biomedical  Engineering 
from  Harvard  and  a  PhD  in  Medical  Engineering  and 
Medical  Physics  from  a  joint  Harvard/MIT  program.  
She  was  a  research  scientist  for  Reebok,  Inc.,  and  the 
Cleveland  Clinic,  as  well  as  on 
the  Biomedical 
Engineering faculty of Ohio State University.    

After  a  poor  exam  performance,  we  often  encourage 
students to prepare more thoroughly  by pointing to the 
obvious  futility  of  repeating  the  same  thing  over  and 
over and expecting a different result.  However, for the 
customer student, the more likely application is to shop 
for  a  different  instructor.    The  stick  is  an  ineffective 
motivator for the student who thinks, “If you won’t pass 
me, I’ll find an instructor who will.”

Discussion

VI.
Taken  to  an  absurd  extreme,  the  business  model  of 
higher  education  can  lead  to  quotas  as  legislatures 
pressure  educational  systems  to  produce  the  maximum 
numbers  of  graduates  per  dollar.    If  there  is  a  de-facto 
quota  for  the  number  of  students  that  pass  a  given 
course, the level of effort and rigor required to pass is in 
the hands of the students.  This ridiculous possibility can 
only  be  countered  by  establishing  and  maintaining 
standards  based  on  the  needs  of  the  real  customers 
(future employers  and taxpayers).   Wireless networking 
rigidly  maintaining 
product  quality  depends  on 
established  standards  regardless  of  yield.    Likewise, 
academic  quality  demands  maintaining  academic 
standards regardless of how many students pass or fail.

Students who view themselves as customers will have a 
difficult  time  identifying  their  employers  as 
their 
customers  in  the  working  world. 
  Four  years  of 
internalizing the message that they can dictate standards 
to  their  teachers  will  skew  their  idea  of  who  the  boss 
really is in the working world.  These students will be ill 
prepared 
imposed 
standards that exist in most of the professional world.

real,  objective,  externally 

for 

than 

The time scale of real customer feedback is much longer 
in  education 
technology  or  food  based 
businesses.    Therefore,  an  educational  business  model 
needs  effective  ways  to  ensure  product  quality  long 
before employers can express their dissatisfaction.  

in 

The  path  of  least  resistance  is  to  pay  attention  to  the 
squeaky  wheels  (students  who  pressure  for  lower 
standards,6  and  short-sighted  legislatures  who  want 
higher graduation rates).  Improvement requires empathy 

                                                
6 Can I  earn  extra credit?  Will this be  on the test?  It  would 
only  be  fair  to  curve  our  grades.    Can  we  have  a  multiple 
choice  exam?    I  hate  essay  questions!    You  should  drop  the 
lowest  exam grade.    Other classes  let  us  skip  the  final exam. 
Why not allow a formula sheet?  That’s not fair!   

4

