Direct observation of free excitons  

in luminescence spectra of xenon clusters 

O.G. Danylchenko, Yu.S. Doronin, S.I. Kovalenko,  
M.Yu. Libin, V.N. Samovarov*, V.L. Vakula 

B. Verkin Institute for Low Temperature Physics and Engineering  
of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 
47 Lenin Ave., Kharkiv 61103, Ukraine 
 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

Luminescence of surface and free bulk excitons is detected in xenon for the first time for substrate-

free rare-gas clusters. Xenon clusters were produced by the method of gas condensation in a supersonic jet 

emitted into vacuum. Optical study was accompanied by electron diffraction measurements to determine the 

structure of clusters. 

 

 

 

 

1. Free  and  self-trapped  excitons  are  fundamental  electronic  excitations  in  bulk 

rare-gas cryocrystals and make the main subject of the optical study of these materials. The 

spectrum  of  free  excitons  has  been  registered 

in  absorption  and 

luminescence 

measurements on bulk cryocrystals [1]. In substrate-free rare-gas clusters, the existence of 

excitonic  levels  has  been  confirmed  by  measuring  absorption  spectra  which  are  formed 

within  the  characteristic  time  of  10-14-10-15 s  [2].  The  lifetime  of  a  free-exciton  is 

significantly higher (≈10-9 s), therefore it can efficiently dump its energy while interacting 

with admixtures, defects, crystal surface, as well as self-trapping into atomic and molecular 

excited centres. Observation of free-exciton luminescence in bulk xenon crystals required 

perfect defect-free samples. 

                                                 
* e-mail: samovarov@ilt.kharkov.ua 
 

1

Until the present paper, there have been no reports of observation of luminescence 

from bulk and surface excitons in substrate-free rare-gas clusters, including xenon. At the 

same  time,  detection  of  excitonic  luminescence  is  of  interest  not  only  to  the  physics  of 

cryocrystals,  but  opens  wide  prospective  on  the  study  of  new  quantum  effects,  including 

quantum  dots  based  on  van  der  Waals  clusters.  Recently,  quantum-confinement  effects 

have  been  widely  studied  mostly  on  semiconductor  clusters  and  nanocrystallites,  e.g.,  by 

luminescence spectra of free excitons in CdS and similar systems [3].  

 

2. We used the method of gas condensation in a supersonic jet flowing into vacuum 

[4]. Mixtures of argon and xenon were studied, the xenon concentration C in the original 

gas mixtures was varied from 1 through 6.5% (for concentrations less than 1% see Ref. 4). 

The pressure p0 and temperature T0 at the nozzle inlet were controlled in the range from 0.5 

through  2.5 atm  and  from  240  through  160 K,  respectively.  Electron  diffraction 

experiments  combined  with  optical  measurements  have  shown  that  for  various  values  of 

concentration, temperature, and pressure the supersonic jet can consist mainly of: (i) mixed 

argon-xenon  clusters  having  a  xenon  icosahedral  (quasicrystalline)  core;  (ii)  pure  xenon 

icosahedral  clusters;  (iii)  mixed  argon-xenon  clusters  with  a  crystalline  xenon  core; 

(iv) pure crystalline xenon clusters; (v) mixed clusters having a crystalline xenon core and 

an amorphous argon shell. In mixed argon-xenon clusters there is a sharp interface between 

the xenon core and the argon shell. In a beam composed of pure xenon clusters (cases (ii) 

and (iv)), the argon serves as carrier gas. The cluster temperature was 35-40 K for all the 

cases mentioned above. The radiation spectra in the region of 8.1-8.5 eV were excited by a 

1 keV electronic beam. 

3. Depending  on  the  initial  set  of  parameters,  we  could  observe  rich  spectra  from 

bulk  and  surface  excitons.  Here  we  report  one  of  them  corresponding  to  the  case  with 

C = 3%,  p0 = 1 atm,  T0 = 165 K.  Fig. 1  shows  the  electron  diffraction  pattern  (a)  and  the 

luminescence  spectrum  (b).  The  diffraction  pattern  displays  only  the  peaks  which  are 

related  to  the  crystalline  xenon  (in  particular,  there  are  no  peaks  (311)  at  the  diffraction 

 

2

vector value s=3.75 Å-1 and (200) at 2.37 Å-1 which are characteristic of argon). According 

to the estimations based on diffraction maxima halfwidths, the size of xenon clusters was 

no  less  than  1500  atoms  (the  cluster  diameter  being  about  55 Å,  which  corresponds  to 

nearly 7 occupied Mackay spheres). 

The  excitonic  bands  are  red-shifted  with  respect  to  the  atomic  line  3P1  (8.44 eV), 

which corresponds to the radiation of atoms desorbed from clusters. It should be noted that 

the  desorption  of  these  excited  atoms  was  not  observed  in  bulk  xenon  [5].  The  8.35 eV 

band  was  assigned  to  the  radiation  of  free  excitons  from  the  cluster  volume  (in  bulk 

cryocrystals  this  band  was  observed  repeatedly  at  such  energies).  At  lower  frequencies 

there is a wide non-elementary feature composed of three bands at 8.31, 8.29, and 8.26 eV. 

We  could  observe  one,  two,  or  three  of  the  components  with  various  intensity  ratio 

between  them  depending  on  the  initial  set  of  the  experimental  parameters.  The  8.31  and 

8.25 eV peaks were observed earlier in bulk xenon [6] and assigned to the Xe n=1 surface 

exciton components due to the crystal field splitting.  

Fig. 2  demonstrates  another  situation  which  takes  place  for  p0=2 atm,  T0=170 K, 

C=6.5%.  As  can  be  seen  from  the  electron  diffraction  pattern  (Fig. 2а),  the  xenon 

diffraction maxima are accompanied by the argon peak (311) at s=3.75 Å-1. The maximum 

at s=2.00 Å-1 is very prominent due to the overlapping argon and xenon diffraction peaks. 

This  pattern  corresponds  to  crystalline  xenon  clusters  covered  with  a  thin  argon  shell. 

Fig. 2b  shows  that  the  luminescence  spectrum  lacks  the  bulk  free  exciton  band  and  the 

central peak at 8.29 eV of the surface exciton maximum. The other surface exciton peaks 

at  8.25  and  8.31 eV  are  rather  intensive.  It  can  be  concluded  that  the  thin  argon  shell 

suppresses the bulk excitons. 

In qualitative approximation, the observed spectra can be explained as follows. As 

is known, the bulk exciton with n=1 has a radius of 3.2 Å in bulk xenon, which is smaller 

than  the  Xe  nearest-neighbour  distance  (4.3 Å).  The  mean  free  path  of  the  exciton  is 

several hundreds Ångströms and exceeds noticeably the cluster size. There are following 

 

3

channels of inelastic scattering for a free exciton: (i) formation of a two-centre state Xe2

with a self-trapping barrier (we observed the radiation from both bulk excitons and Xe2

* 

* at 

≈7.1 eV);  (ii)  transformation  of  a  bulk  exciton  into  surface  modes;  (iii)  energy  dumping 

accompanied by desorption of excited and neutral atoms. The observation of bulk excitons 

provides evidence for an elastic scattering channel at the interface with vacuum during the 

excitonic  lifetimes  of  10-9 s  with  rather  high  probability  of  exciton  reflection  from  the 

interface. For the case of the xenon-argon interface, an inelastic scattering of bulk excitons 

takes place resulting in an almost complete conversion of energy into luminescence centres 

of another nature. 

The  complete  set  of  our  experimental  results  as  well  as  their  analysis  will  be 

published in Low Temperature Physics (2007) and elsewhere. 

 

4

References 

 

p. 37. 

95, 235 (2001). 

Letters 84, 324 (2006). 

[1] G. Zimmerer,  Creation,  motion,  decay  of  excitons  in  rare-gas  solids,  In  book: 

Excited-state  spectroscopy  in  solids,  Holland  Publish.  Comp.,  Amsterdam  (1987), 

[2] M. Joppien, R. Müller, J. Wörmer, T. Möller, Phys. Rev. B47, 12984 (1993). 

[3] Y. Kanemitsu,  M. Ando,  D. Matsuura,  T. Kushida,  C.W. White,  J.  Lumin.  94-

[4] O.G. Danylchenko,  Yu.S. Doronin,  S.I. Kovalenko,  V.N. Samovarov,  JETP 

[5] A. Mann, G. Leclerc, L. Sanche, Phys. Rev. B 46, 9683 (1992). 

[6] G. Zimmerer, J. Low Temp. Phys. 111, 629 (1998). 

 

5

 

 

 

 

Fig. 1. Electron  diffraction  pattern  (а)  and  cathodoluminescence  spectrum  (b)  of 

substrate-free xenon clusters in gaseous argon. 

 

6

 

 

 

 

7

Fig. 2. Electron  diffraction  pattern  (а)  and  cathodoluminescence  spectrum  (b)  of 

substrate-free xenon clusters covered with a thin argon shell. 

 

