THE OSCILLATING CLIMATE   
AND   
THE PHENOMENON OF THE GREAT SEASONS 
 
Ahmed BOUCENNA 
Département de Physique, Faculté des Sciences 
Université Ferhat Abbas, 19000 Sétif, Algeria 
aboucenna@wissal.dz 

 
Résume 
Les variations de la conductibilité thermique des eaux des océans en fonction de leur 
concentration  en  sel  (NaCl)  conduisent  à  suggérer,  pour  la  terre,  l’hypothèse  d’un 
climat oscillant entre deux positions extrêmes : un maximum de températures chaudes 
et  un  minimum  de  températures  froides.  Le  cycle  de  la  fonte  et  la  régénération  des 
glaciers    entraînent  le  phénomène  des  quatre  Grandes  Saisons  nécessaire  à  la 
régénération des ressources en eaux douces de notre planète. 
 
Abstract 
Variations  of  ocean  water  thermal  conductibility  according  to  their  salt  (NaCl) 
concentration  leads  to  suggest,  for  the  earth,  an  oscillating  climate  between  two 
extreme positions : maximum hot temperatures and minimum cold ones. The cycle of 
melting and the regeneration of the glaciers lead to the phenomenon of the four Great 
Seasons necessary to the regenerations of resources in fresh waters of our planet. 
 
1. Introduction 
Is the earth continually getting warmer ? The future of life on our planet depends on 
the answer given to this very interesting question. 
Variations  of  ocean  water  thermal  conductibility  according  to  their  salt  (NaCl) 
concentration  leads  to  think  about  an  oscillating  climate  between  two  extreme 
positions : maximum hot temperatures and minimum cold ones. 
We  know  that  the  earth  is  subject  to  various  climatic  oscillations  of  relatively  short 
periods such as : the twenty four hour climatic oscillation period, behind the existence 
of  days  and  nights,  the  one-year  climatic  oscillation  period,  behind  the  existence  of 
the four seasons : Spring, Summer, Winter and Autumn/Fall. 
The  other  oscillation  that  we  hypothesize  to  exist  has  a  longer  period,  behind  the 
passages of the planet through hot, mild, and cold eras. So, our planet lives four Great 
seasons  :  Great  Spring,  Great  Summer,  Great  Winter  and  Great  Autumn/Fall, 
constituting a Great Year in which our four small classical seasons and our classical 
year are enveloped. 
 
2. Causes of the Great Season climatic oscillations  
Hot streams appear in hot regions of the planet and come to raise the temperatures of  
cold region climate, in particular the poles. This heat movement through ocean waters 
is possible due to a sufficiently important concentration of salt (NaCl) in these waters. 
The higher the concentration of salt in water the stronger is  its thermal conductibility 
and vice versa, that is, the lower the concentration of salt in water, the weaker is its 
thermal conductibility. 
The  formation  of  glaciers  in  poles  increases  salt  concentration  in  ocean  water.  Its 
thermal  conductibility  increases.  Hot  streams  accelerate  to  the  poles.  A  more  and 

 

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

more milder climate progressively settles in the poles causing the gradual melting of 
the glaciers. 
The  melting  of  the  glaciers  decreases  progressively  the  concentration  of  salt  in  the 
ocean  water  decreasing  thus  its  thermal  conductibility.  The  hot  streams  to  the  poles 
are progressively slowed or even stopped. A more and more cold climate settles to the 
poles  leading  a  progressive  regeneration  of  the  glaciers.  The  salt  concentration  in 
ocean water increases again progressively. A better thermal conductibility is obtained. 
The hot streams to the poles accelerate again and the following cycle continues : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Weak salt (NaCl) concentration in ocean waters
Weaker thermal conductibility
Slowing and stop of the hot streams to he poles
Colder climate in poles, regeneration of glaciers

    
 

    

    

 

Increase of the salt (NaCl) concentration in the ocean waters

    

    

Strong salt concentration in ocean waters
Stronger thermal conductibility
    
Acceleration of the hot streams to the poles
 
Hotter climate in poles, melting of the glaciers

 
 
 

Decreasing of the salt (NaCl) concentration in the ocean waters 

 
This  phenomenon  of  oscillating  climate  or  of  the  great  seasons  is  a  natural 
phenomenon,  proper  to  our  planet.  It  is  due  to  the  presence  of  salted  waters  in  the 
oceans of the earth. 
 
3. Period of the cycle of the oscillating climate 
If we assume that the heat transfer to pole problem is stationary, that is not the case, 
the law of thermal conduction shows that the heat transferred by time unit  Q = dq/dt, 
between  a  hot  region  and  a  cold  one  of  a  environment,  is  proportional  to  the 
environment  thermal  conductibility  K  and  to  the  temperature  gradient  G  =  dT/dr 
between these two regions 1).    

  Q   ∝ K  G   
Water  is  a  poor  thermal  conductor,  its  approximate  thermal  conductibility  is    0.6 
W/m.°Ks. The thermal conductibility of salt (NaCl) is higher.    
To determine with precision the period of the oscillating climate or the length of the 
great seasons it is indispensable to know : 
 
a - The variation of the water thermal conductibility K according to its concentration  
      in salt (NaCl) : 

 
       Where c the concentration of salt of this water.   

K = F(c) 

 

2

b - The precise movement of the hot streams of the planet.   
c - The speed of melting of the glaciers.   
d - The speed of regeneration of the glaciers.   
e - The influence of the other factors such as the concentration of the CO2 gas in the  
      atmosphere and the bounded phenomena.   
Without  having  all  data  necessary  to  the  exact  determination  of  the  period  of  these 
climatic  oscillations  generating  the  great  seasons,  and  while  basing  on  historic 
observations I estimate this period to eight centuries (T = 800 years). The length of a 
great season is two centuries (200 years).  
The maxima of heat, the culminating points of the Great Summers, would be situated 
around the years 2000 ± 800 k, where k is an integer number: 
 

-5200, -4400, -3600, -2800, -2000, -1200, -400, 400,1200, 2000, 2800, 3600, … 

 
The maxima of cold weather, the culminating points of the Great Winters, would be 
situated around the years 2400 ± 800 k, where k is an integer number: 
 

-4000, -3200, -2400, -1600, -800, 1, 800,1600, 2400, 3200, 4000, … 

 
The last Great Winter confounds itself with the mini icy age that Europe crossed and 
of which testify writers at that  time and now, we cross a Great Summer. 
 
4. Consequences 
The  passage  by  the  Great  Winter  permits  to  the  earth  to  regenerate  its  resources  in 
fresh  water.  The  abundant  snows  that  fall  during  the  Great  Winter  permit  the 
regeneration  of  the  underground  expanses  of  water.  So  the  reserves  of  the  regions 
poor  enough  in  water  such  as  the  Maghreb  and  the  Middle  East,  reconstitute 
themselves.    The  rivers,  dry  during  the  last  part  of  the  Great  Summer,  start  flowing 
again. The forests regenerate their population in trees and other. 
The  relocation  of  the  centers  known  to  be  hot  and  cold  of  the  planet  provokes 
particular and unaccustomed climatic perturbations.    
The habitants of the North cross difficult periods during the coldest part of the Great 
Winter  and  those  of  the arid  regions  cross  their  difficult  moments  during  the  hottest 
part of the Great Summer with the drought and the lack of water for the men and for 
the animals. Some species can disappear.   
History, sociology and  migration flux of the peoples and nations are also influenced 
by these climatic oscillations. 
 
5. Conclusion  
The variations of the thermal conductibility of the ocean waters according to their  salt 
(NaCl) concentration govern the hot streams to the poles of the earth and generate an 
oscillating  climate  between  two  extreme  positions  :  a  maximum  of  hot  temperature 
and  a  minimum  of  cold  temperature  leading  to  the  phenomenon  of  the  four  Great 
Seasons  necessary  to  the  regenerations  of  water  resources  of  our  planet.  This 
phenomenon  can  be  accelerated  by  the  effects  of  the  concentration  in  CO2  of  the 
atmosphere due to the pollution. 
 
Reference 
1)  R  A  Serway  and  J.  W.  Jewett,  Physics  for  Scientists  and  Engineers,  Thomson 
Brooks/Cole Editions, 6th Edition, 2004, p. 624. 

 

3

