Holographic Equilibrium on Particle and Astronomical Scales
Scott Funkhouser
Dept. of Physics, The Citadel, 171 Moultrie St., Charleston, SC 29409

ABSTRACT

The  condition  of  “holographic  equilibrium”  is  defined  to  be  satisfied  if  the  mass  of  a  system  is
equal to the maximum number of bits allowed in the system multiplied by the minimum mass per bit, being
the Wesson mass.  That definition is based on the basic considerations of the holographic principle applied
to a de Sitter space.   On the scale of particles the condition of holographic equilibrium leads naturally to a
mass scale of order near the nucleon mass, consistent with an independently proposed scaling law for the
cosmological constant.   On the astronomical scale, the typical parameters of clusters of galaxies, galaxies,
dwarf galaxies and globular clusters roughly satisfy holographic equilibrium, which naturally explains the
characteristic, fundamental acceleration exhibited by those systems.

I. Defining holographic equilibrium

According to the thermodynamics of black holes the maximum number N(R) of

bits of information that may be associated with a horizon R is

N(R) ~

R2
2
lP

where lP is the Planck length.  In this epoch the vacuum energy density, perhaps due to a
cosmological constant Λ, is of order the density associated with matter.  Henceforth, as
the universe becomes increasingly well modeled by a de Sitter space, the cosmic particle
RΛ ~ c / Λ, where c is the speed of light in a vacuum and [Λ]=s-2.
horizon approaches 
The number of bits NΛ allowed in the space bound by that horizon is, from Eq. (1),

€ 

(2)
where h is the Planck constant and G is the Newtonian gravitational coupling.  With the
energy  content  of  the  Universe  increasingly  dominated  by  the  putative  cosmological
constant, the total energy content in the observable universe approaches

NΛ ~ c 5 /(GhΛ) ,

€ 

€ 

c 2
G
The energy E1 per allowed bit thus approaches

E(RΛ) ~

ΛRΛ

3 ~

c 5
G Λ

.

E1 ~ h Λ,
and the mass-equivalent m1 of the energy in Eq. (4) is
€ 
h Λ
c 2

m1 ~

,

€ 

which is Wesson mass [1].  The presumably perpetual, eventual state of the Universe can
thus be described by the simple relation

(6)
E(RΛ) ~ N(RΛ)E1.
In  holographic  terms,  Eq.  (6)  represents  the  equilibrium  state  of  the  Universe.   The
relation in Eq. (6) does not represent any new physics, but in this letter it is interpreted
more broadly to form the hypothesis of a more general application.

€ 

The  holographic  bound  may  be  used  to  represent  the  maximum  amount  of
information  that  could  possibly  be  contained  in  an  arbitrary  region  of  space  [2].
According to Eq. (6), the observable universe is approaching a state in which the energy
h Λ.   The behavior of the cosmos, expressed in those terms, is the
per allowed bit is ~
motivation for the following hypothesis: Nature tends to distribute matter into systems

€ 

(1)

(3)

(4)

(5)

€ 

that minimize the mass-energy per bit of allowed information.  A system of mass M(R)
contained within a sphere of radius R is defined to be in holographic  equilibrium if the
mass M(R) is equal to the maximum number N(R) of bits allowed in that region times the
minimum mass per bit m1:

M(R) ~ N(R)m1 ~

R2
2 m1.
lP

(7)

The condition in Eq. (7) does not amount to the system saturating the holographic bound
and the hypothesis does not specify the number of bits of information actually registered
by the system.  However, holographic equilibrium would mean that the allowed bits per
€ 
mass unit is maximized, which is consistent with the tendency of systems to maximize
entropy, in a certain sense.

If the hypothesis concerning holographic equilibrium is meaningful then nature
should preferentially distribute matter into systems that satisfy Eq. (7).  In the following
sections empirical support for the hypothesis is found on prominent physical scales.  The
condition of holographic equilibrium is not necessarily meant to suggest some new force
of nature but rather may represent a condition that naturally emerges from known laws.
It is reasonable to expect any significance in Eq. (7) to manifest primarily in systems that
have reached stable, long-term states.  Also, since the scales being investigated vary over
many orders of magnitudes, and the proposed scaling in Eq. (7) is only proposed within
the  accuracy  of  a  few  orders  of  magnitude,  agreement  within  one  or  two  orders  of
magnitude is considered to be meaningful.

II. Holographic equilibrium on the scale of particles

For any particle δ of mass mδ the associated Compton wavelength 

lδ = h /(mδc) is
  
the  fundamental  limit  to  the  determination  of  the  spatial  extent  of  the  particle.   It  is
natural then to employ the Compton wavelength to represent the radius of an associated
sphere whose area determines the characteristic maximum number of bits that could be
registered by the particle. Substituting the Compton wavelength for the horizon in Eq.
(1),  the  maximum  number  Nδ  of  bits  of  information  that  could  be  associated  with  a
particle δ would be

€ 

(8)
where mP is the Planck mass.  In the context of the condition in Eq. (7) it is interesting to
investigate the particle mass mx that satisfies holographic equilibrium.  That mass is given
by

Nδ ~ lδ

2 /lP

2 ~ mP

2 /mδ

2

€ 

mx ~

2 m1,

2
mP
mx

(9)

which leads to

(10)
The mass scale in Eq. (10) is of order 10-28kg, which is of order near the nucleon mass.
Given that the nucleon is the most massive, stable baryon it is sensible to identify the
nucleon as the particle that exists near the point of holographic equilibrium.

mx ~ (m1mP

€ 

2)1/ 3.

There is another, distinct motivation for identifying the mass mx in Eq. (10) as the
nucleon mass.  With the mass m1 expressed explicitly and mx~mn, Eq. (10) is equivalent
to a scaling relation for the cosmological constant

€ 

Λ ~

6

G 2c 2mn
h 4

.

(11)

Eq. (11) is the same scaling law that has been proposed independently by several authors
based  on  a  variety  of  physical  considerations  [3],  [4],  [5].   The  scaling  m x~mn  also
accounts for the Eddington-Weinberg relation, which follows from Eq. (11).

€ 

III. Holographic equilibrium on astronomical scales

Before  exploring  systems  on  the  astronomical  scale  that  satisfy  holographic
equilibrium it is useful to state an equivalent but more practicable expression of Eq. (7).
The  condition  of  holographic  equilibrium  can  be  stated  in  terms  of  the  characteristic
gravitational acceleration of the system:
GM(R)
R2

Gm1
2 ~ c Λ.
lP
In  other  words,  any  system  that  satisfies  holographic  equilibrium  should  be  exhibit  a
universal, characteristic scale of gravitational acceleration of order near the fundamental
c Λ is also of order the
acceleration 
Hubble acceleration 
a0 ≡ H0c  in this epoch, where H0 is the current value of the Hubble
parameter.

c Λ~10-10ms-2.   Due to the cosmic coincidence, 

(12)

€ 

~

€ 

€ 

€ 

The  scale  of  acceleration  in  Eq.  (12)  has  figured  prominently  in  modern
astrophysics  precisely  because  so  many  astrophysical  systems  exhibit  characteristic
c Λ.   Clusters  of  galaxies,  individual  galaxies,  dwarf
accelerations  of  order  near 
galaxies  and  globular  clusters  all  typically  exhibit  characteristic  gravitational
accelerations  of  order  near  10-10ms-2.   The  bulk  of  those  systems  have  characteristic
accelerations  ranging  from  10-11ms-2  to  10-9ms-2.   The  fact  that  such  a  wide  range  of
physical  systems,  whose  masses  span  roughly  eight  orders  of  magnitude,  feature
accelerations that range only over one or two orders of magnitude has posed a sort of
coincidence problem that has partly inspired theories such as MOND [6].  Furthermore,
the  fact  that  the  characteristic  acceleration  of  those  systems  is  near  the  fundamental
c Λ poses a distinct riddle.  Both of those issues are explained naturally by
acceleration 
the hypothesis in this present work as a signature of holographic equilibrium.

€ 

€ 

References:
[1] Wesson, P.S., Mod. Phys. Lett. A19 (2004) 19952000, gr-qc/0309100
[2] Bousso, R., Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 825-874, (2002), hep-th/0203101
[3] Zel’dovich, Ya.B., Pisma ZhETF 6 (1967) 883
[4] Mena Marugan, G.A, and Carneiro, S., Phys. Rev. D 65, 087303 (2002)
[5] Funkhouser, S., Proc. Roy. Soc. A 462 (2006) 2076
[6] Milgrom M., 1983, ApJ, 270,  371

