Article Antarctic final after Olaf 6 9 06

Antarctica: A Southern Hemisphere Windpower 
Station? 

Alexander A. Bolonkin
C & R, 1310 Avenue R, Suite 6-F
Brooklyn, New York 11229, USA
aBolonkin@juno.com, 

Richard B. Cathcart
Geographos
1300 West Olive Avenue, Suite M
Burbank, California 91506. USA

ABSTRACT

The  International  Polar  Year  commences  in  2007.  We  offer  a  macroproject  plan  to 

generate  a  large  amount  of  electricity  on  the  continent  of  Antarctica  by  using  sail-like 

wind  dams  incorporating  air  turbines.  Electricity  can  be  used  to  make  exploration  and 

exploitation  efforts  on  Antarctica  easier.  We  offer  the  technical  specifications  for  the 

Fabric Aerial Dam and indicate some of the geographical facts underpinning our macro-

engineering proposal.

------------------  
 Corresponding Author

INTRODUCTION

Including all air flows within a 1 km layer above the planet’s solid surface, a technically 

possible wind energy resource base would likely be about 6 TW; probably less than 10% 

of  that  flux  initially  energized  by  the  Sun  could  actually  now  be  converted  directly  to 

                                                

1

power-line distributed electricity without causing major detrimental changes to the Earth-

atmosphere (Smil, 2003).  Scientific computer modeling has shown that the extraction of 

kinetic  energy  from  wind  would  alter  Earth’s  “…turbulent  transport in  the  atmospheric 

boundary layer” (Keith et al., 2004).

Nevertheless,  wind  is  a  clean  source  of  energy  that  has  been  utilized  by  humans  for 

centuries  to  grind  grains,  pump  water,  propel  sailing  craft,  and  to  perform  other  work.  

Artists  such  as  Tal  Streeter,  Howard  Woody  and  Tsutomu  Hiroi  have  flown  kite-like 

sculptures  and  Jose  M.  Yturralde  flew  geometrical  structures;  Otto  Piene’s  “Olympic 

Rainbow” consisted of five 600 m-long helium-filled polyethylene tubes displayed at the 

20th  Olympiad  in  Munich,  Germany,  during  1972.    Piene  coined  the  descriptive  term 

“Sky  Art”  in  1969.    “Wind  farm”  is  the  popular  term  used  for  an  aggregation  of  wind 

turbines  clustered  at  a  site  with  persistent  favorable  air  fluxes  (Hayes,  2005).  

Unfortunately,  existing  wind  energy  systems  have  deficiencies  that 

limit  their 

commercial applications:  (1) wind energy is unevenly distributed geographically and has 

relatively  low  energy  density.    A  single  huge  wind  turbine  cannot  be  placed  on  the 

ground.    Instead,  numerous  small  wind  turbines  must  be  used;  (2)  wind  power  is  a 

function  of  the  cube  of  wind  velocity.    At  ground  level,  wind  speed  is  low  and  rarely 

steady; (3) wind power system productivity is entirely dependent on prevailing weather, 

making  it  nearly  impossible  for  productivity  to  be  scheduled;  (4)  wind  turbines  of 

conventional design produce noise and are aesthetically unattractive.

2. DESCRIPTION

2

It was not until circa 1840 that Antarctica was established to be an isolated continent.  Its 

coastline is about 18,000 km. Dry katabatic (gravity-driven) winds blow coastward from 

the high interior icecap.  The windiest place in  Earth close to sea level is Cape Denison 

(67.020 S, 142.580 E) in Commonwealth Bay, Antarctica, where winds exceeding 50 m/s 

have  been  recorded  regularly  (Parish,  1981).  Of  all  the  continents,  only  on  Antarctica 

does a single meteorological element (wind) have such an overwhelming influence on the 

climate. The dry katabatic winds blow with great constancy in direction, often moving at 

20-40 m/s over the smoothest icecap surface for hundreds of kilometers. As the katabatic 

winds leave the South Pole and approach to within  about 100 km of the  coastline, they 

tend  to  decrease  in  speed  owing  to  drag  over  a  rougher  ice  surface.  Thereafter, 

Antarctica's  winds  generally  blow  off  the  continent's  coastal  escarpment  toward  the 

Antarctic Circle (Fig.1).

  Worldwide, there are many macroproject R&D programs for the development of wind 

energy systems but most of them are ground or tower based; Australian macroengineers 

have proposed Earth-stratosphere deployed kite-like electricity generators tethered to the 

ground by strongly anchored cables.  We propose an innovative wind energy harnessing 

system,  the  Fabric  Aerial  Dam  (FAD),  which  can  operate  successfully  up  to  the  lower 

boundary of the Earth’s stratosphere; our defining challenge is to manage the transfer of 

the energy obtained to the consuming ground-based infrastructure.  We propose that the 

first  installation  be  made  on  the  continent  of  Antarctica  because  electrical  power  is 

needed  and  because  the  wind  energy  harvesting  system  we  propose  can  cause  a 

3

“windbreak” or “shelterbelt” effect downwind that would be inappropriate for a densely 

populated region. 

Fig. 1.  Map of annual mean direction of
surface wind over ice.
   

In 1997, the first truly accurate map of Antarctica was produced by the Canadian Space 

Agency using its Radarsat-1 Earth-orbiting satellite (Murray, 2005).  Antarctica’s winter 

starts in April and ends during September; at the South Pole (elevation 2835 m), the sun 

rises on September 21 and sets on March 21.  Antarctica has no indigenous human 

population; about 1,000 persons over-winter and 20,000 persons may work during 

summer on the icy continent.  The lowest temperature ever measured was recorded in 

4

1983 at Russia’s Vostok Station (elevation of 3744 m) in East Antarctica—minus 890 C.  

Started in 2002, and virtually completed by 2006, Antarctic-1 is the continent’s only “ice 

highway”, connecting McMurdo on the coast to the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Base 

(George, 2004); Antarctic-1 was anticipated by an artist, the sculptor Rachel Weiss, more 

than twenty years ago (Weiss, 1984)!  FAD, the Fabric Aerial Dam can be used as a 

beautifying decoration, as a projection screen for nighttime motion pictures (outdoor 

cinema), as a nighttime solar reflector and as a daytime partly focused heater for targeted 

small regions on the continent of Antarctica.

    The Fabric Aerial Dam (FAD) is diagramed in Fig. 2.

                 

Fig. 2. Fabric Aerial Dam and Wind Turbine Station. (a) side-view, (b) front-view, (c) wind 
engine.  Notation: 1-flexible film aerial dam, 2-tethering cables, 3-air channel, 4-air turbine 
(propeller), 5-electricity generator, 6-support cable spool, 7-wind, 8-spool motor, 9-film cable.  H
- deployed elevation of FAD.

The  FAD  embodies a  thin,  possibly transparent,  film  1,  support  cables 2,  conic  tunnels 

(3)  funneling  naturally  flowing  air  to  the  turbines  4,  electric  generator  5,  spool  6  for 

support cable, spool motor 8, film cable 9.  The FAD will be installed perpendicular to 

5

the average main direction of the site’s wind at an altitude where the wind is more than 1 

m/s most days of the year.  The FAD shields the downwind territory from extreme wind 

impacts  and  it  can  help  to  cause  orographic  precipitation.    If  storm  a  wind  blows  in 

opposed direction, the spools (6) can reel in the cable (2) and settle the flexible film aerial 

dam  material  safely  on  the  ground  for  temporary  storage.   The  same technique  may  be 

used when repairs to the FAD are found to be necessary.  

If the wind is less than 1m/s, the FAD will tend to fall to ground but with a stronger wind 

the  FAD  will  billow,  taking  off  from  the  ground;  if  the  wind  is  excessively  strong, 

however,  it  may  irreparably  damage  the  FAD.    We  can  calculate  the  minimum  and 

maximum  admissible  (safe)  wind  billowing  a  FAD.    Our  purpose  in  doing  so  is  to 

estimate the time (% or actual days in a year) when the FAD can operate properly.  We 

assume the average wind speed at an altitude of  H0 = 10 m and 50 m is approximately V0

= 8 and 12.7 m/s respectively. 

The change of wind via altitude approximately is described by equation

V
V
0







H
H

0






 ,

(1)

where V0 is the wind speed at the original height, V the speed at the new height,  H0 the 

original height, H the new height, and  the surface roughness exponent.

 We assume the surface roughness exponent, , over Antarctica’s ice is 0.10. 

The result of our computations is shown in Fig. 3 below.

6

    

Fig.3. Relative wind speed via altitude
and Earth Surface. For ice   = 0.1.

Annual speed distributions vary widely from one site to another, reflecting climatic and 

geographic  conditions.  Meteorologists  have  found  that  the  Weibull  probability  function 

best  approximates  the  distribution  of  wind  speeds  over  time  at  sites  around  the  world 

where actual distributions of wind speeds are unavailable. The Rayleigh distribution is a 

special case of the Weibull function, requiring only the average speed to define the shape 

of the distribution.  

  Equation of Rayleigh distribution is

           

f x

)(
x



exp



x
2







1
2





x






2






,

x



,0

(
XE

)





,

Var

(

X

)



2



,

  (2)


2






2


2




where  is new parameter.

7

These data gives possibility to easy calculate the amount (percent) days (time) when air 

dam can operate in year (fig.4). It is very important value for the estimation efficiency of 

offered devices. 

Fig. 4. Probability of wind via wind speed and average wind speed in given place.

  Let us compute two examples:

1)  Assume, the air dam has minimum admissible wind speed 3 m/s, the average annual 

speed in given region is 6 m/s. From fig.4, Eq. (2) , we can get the probability wind less 3 

m/sec is 15%. The same way we can compute the probability of a storm wind speed. 

2)  Assume, the average annual speed in given region is 6 m/s, the maximum admissible 

wind speed is 7 m/s. The probability that a wind speed will be less then 7 m/s is 55%, less 

then 8 m/s is 65% (fig.4).

3. Theory of Fabric Aerial Dams (FAD)

1. Dynamic pressure P of motion air (wind) can be computed by equation:

8

P



2V

2

,

(3)

here P is wind dynamic pressure, N/m2;  = 1.225 kg/m3 (standard value) is air density; 

V is wind speed, m/s. Result of computation is presented in Fig. 5.

Fig. 5.Wind dynamic pressure via wind speed

2. The wind power can be computed by

N





3AV
2

,

(4)

where N is power, W;  is coefficient efficiency of air turbine,  = 0.3  0.5; A is turbine 

area, m2; a conical entry into turbine 4 is shown in Fig. 2 can increase the effective area 

sometimes.

   The annual average wind speed near latitude 600 S is 12.7 m/s at height 50 m.  If FAD 

has an off-the-ice cap height of 50 m and is 1,000 km long, a coefficient efficiency of 0.5, 

9

the total power of FAD wind turbines may be more than 30 GW.  In other words, a ring-

shaped FAD ‘enclosing’ Antarctica theoretically might generate 450 GW of electricity.”

3. Annual energy E received from wind turbine is

E = 8.33N       [kWh] .

(5)

Computation of this equation is presented in fig. 6.

Fig. 6. Annual wind energy via wind velocity and turbine area S.

4. Requisite film thickness  is





T
2

,

T



PH

,

(6)

where T is wind force in 1 m width of the film, N/m; H is dam height, m (fig. 2);   is 

safety tensile stress, N/m2.  Computational result for different values of  are presented in 

fig. 7-8. Multiplier 1/2 accounts the force T is kept in two points (top and bottom).

10

Fig. 7. Film force active in one meter film width versus wind velocity and height of dam H.

Fig. 8. Film thickness via film force and safety film stress 

 = 10, 15, 25, 50, 75, 100 kg/mm2.

5. The requisite diameter d of support cable  is

11

    

S



lT


,2

d



4
S


,

(7)

where S is cross-section area of cable [m2]; l2 is distance between cables, m. Results of 

computation for distance 10 m are presented in fig. 9. If distance between support cables 

is different from 10 m, the cross-section cable area must be changed in proportion.

Fig. 9. Cable diameter for 10 m film width via film force and safety cable tensile stress.

6. Weight Wf  of 1 m width film is

W f

2.1

H

, 

(8)

here  is specific density of the film (conventionally, for the most artificial fiber  = 1800 

kg/m3). Factor 1.2 take into curve form of film. Result of computation is in fig. 10.

12

Fig. 10. Film weight of width 1 m via dam height and film thickness.

7. The weight Wc of the single cable for angle 30o to horizon is 

where  is specific density of the cable (conventionally, for the most artificial fiber  = 

Wc

2

HS

,

(9)

1800 kg/m3).

Results of computation are shown in fig. 11.

13

Fig. 11. Weight of film support cable versus dam height and cable diameter for cable 
density 1800 kg/m3.

4. ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES

All of the anchor points for the FAD tie-down cables will be in thick ice.  We propose the 

use of “ice-anchors” that are implanted using a simple heated water drill far smaller than 

the device currently being used to reach a deep lake beneath Antarctica.  These anchor 

points can be removed and reset without environmental consequence.

Isolated Antarctica, which surrounds the South Pole, has no native land-based vertebrates 

save flightless penguins.  Since 2003, penguins have lived in close proximity with big 

wind turbines at the Australian Mawson Research Station; neither the tall metal tower 

structure nor the whirring of the large-diameter propellers seems to disturb their normal 

activities.  Located on the coast, the Mawson Research Station is already harnessing the 

katabatic winds we intend to harness further inland.  Other seabirds, such as the 

14

Wandering Albatross, the Grey Headed albatross, Antarctic Fulmers, Cormorants, 

Antarctic and Giant Petrels will not be affected by FAD mainly because these flying birds 

do not range inland very far.  FAD will carefully be sited beyond their normal ocean 

feeding movements and nesting activities.

5. CONCLUSION

We have shown conclusively that Aerial Dams that include air turbines generating 

electricity can be successfully deployed and operated almost continuously on the 

continent of Antarctica. Construction of our macroproject would open vast territories to 

exploration and exploitation. The FAD, resembling the sails of watercraft, can be laced 

with conductive wires to heat slightly, which would amplify the Teflon-coated textile's 

capacity to shed snow and ice. Electric land vehicles could travel on safe paths, such as 

the Antarctic-1 highway, while drawing their motive power from battery-recharge 

stations fed by FAD. It seems reasonable to anticipate the use of battery-powered vehicle

"Land Trains" such as an adaptation R.G. LeTourneau, Inc.'s 1955 SNO-FREIGHTER 

(Model VC-22), perhaps traveling periodically on an Antarctic-2 highway encircling 

Antarctica approximately 100 km inland from the coastline to maintain the FAD. Various 

industrial activities, such as mining remote ore bodies or petroleum deposits, will also be 

enhanced made more economic and convenient by the ready availability of large amounts 

of clean energy (Green electricity) derived from wind-power.  

At present, the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which came 

into force on 14 January 1998, precludes all extraction of minerals except for scientific 

study.  However, with the increase of the world's population, new geopolitical pressures 

15

may soon arise that will initiate a major change of the Antarctic Treaty to accommodate 

the globalized needs of humanity.  

Therefore, we anticipate an early-21st Century reopening of the worldwide debate 

on the Convention on Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities that 

terminated in 1988.  

We anticipate that Antarctica will, eventually, produce an excess of electricity and we, 

therefore, expect that such excess will be exported via super-conductive undersea electric 

power cables to South America.  Also, we forecast that FAD can be used to power the 

directed movement of Antarctica's  gigantic tabular icebergs to freshwater-short arid 

lands such as Australia (Husseinv, 1978). In additional to ground wind the Antarctic has 

strong high atmospheric flows. They also can be utilized (Bolonkin, 2004).

Cited References

Bolonkin, A.A. (2004) Utilization of Wind Energy at High Altitude, Presented at 
International Energy Conversion Engineering Conference at Providence, RI, 16-19 
August 2004, AIAA-2004-5705.

George, A. (17 February 2004) The highway at the end of the world, New Scientist, 181, 
28-29.

Hayes, B. (2005) Infrastructure: A Field Guide to the Industrial Landscape, Norton, pages 
215-221.

Husseiny, A.A., (1978) Iceberg Utilization, Pergamon, 760 pages.

Keith, D.W. (2004) The Influence of large-scale wind power on global climate, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science [US], 101, 16115-16120.

Murray, C. (2005) Mapping Terra Incognita, Polar Record, 41, 103-112.

Parish, T.R. (1981) The katabatic winds of Cape Denison and Port Martin, Polar Record, 
20, 525-532.

Smil, V. (2003) Energy at the Crossroads: Global Perspectives and Uncertainties, MIT, 
pages 274-275.

16

Weiss, R. (1984) Antarctica and Concepts of Order: Two Installations, Leonardo, 17, 97-
99.

17

