Droplet beams for serial crystallography of proteins

U Weierstall1, R  B Doak1, J C  H Spence1, D Starodub1, D  Shapiro2, P Kennedy1, J 
Warner1, G G Hembree1, P Fromme3 and H Chapman4

1 Department of Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
2 Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
3  Department  of  Chemistry  and  Biochemistry,  Arizona  State  University,  Tempe,  AZ 
85287, USA
4 University of California, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 7000 East Ave., 
Livermore, CA 94550, USA

email: weier@asu.edu

Abstract. Serial diffraction of  proteins requires an injection method to deliver protein molecules - 
preferably  uncharged,  fully  hydrated,  spatially  oriented,  and  with  high  flux  -  into  the  crossed 
beams of  an alignment laser and  a focused  probe beam of  electrons or  X-rays of  typically  only  a 
few tens of  microns diameter. The aim of  this work has been to examine several potential droplet 
sources  as  to  their  suitability  for  this  task. We  compare  Rayleigh  droplet  sources, electrospray 
sources, nebulizers and  aerojet-focused droplet sources using time-resolved optical images of  the 
droplet beams.   Shrinkage of  droplets  by evaporation  as a  means of  removing  most of  the  water 
surrounding the proteins is discussed. Experimental measurements of  droplet size, conformation of 
proteins after  passing through a Rayleigh jet, and triboelectric charging are presented and conclu-
sions  are  drawn  about  the  source  configuration  for  serial  diffraction. First  experimental  X-ray 
diffraction patterns from Rayleigh droplet beams doped with 100nm gold balls are shown. 

PACS: 42.25.Fx, 47.54.Fj, 47.54.De, 47.55.D-, 47.61.-k, 87.15.-v, 87.64.Bx, 07.85.Qe

1. Introduction
Electron  or  X-ray  diffraction  from  a  beam  of 
laser  aligned  molecules  has  recently  been  pro-
posed  as  an approach to structure  determination 
of proteins, particularly those that  are difficult to 
crystallize  and  are too  large for structure  deter-
mination by NMR  [1].  Currently, the  structures 
of  ≈  38,000  proteins  have  been determined  by 
X-ray  diffraction  or  NMR.  However  structures 
of several  important classes  of  proteins  such as 
multi-protein  complexes  or  membrane  proteins 
are still  rare. For  example,  less  than  120  struc-
tures  of different membrane  proteins  have  been 
determined  so  far.  This  lack  of  knowledge  of 
these  classes  of  proteins  is  in  contrast  to  their 
biological and medical importance, since 30% of 
human proteins are membrane proteins and  they 
represent 60%  of all  drug  targets.  Similar small 

numbers  of  known  structures  exist  for  the 
physiological 
important  multi-protein  com-
plexes.   

For most large  proteins  and  membrane  pro-
tein  complexes,  X-ray  crystallography  is  cur-
rently the main method  for protein structure  de-
termination.  However,  structure  determination 
by X-ray  crystallography  depends  on  the  diffi-
cult  process  of  protein  crystallization.  Cryo-
electron-diffraction  has  also  been  successfully 
used  for  structure  determination  of  proteins. 
Structure  determination  with  NMR  avoids  the 
crystallization process; however the applicability 
of NMR  is  limited  due to  the  need  for  isotope 
labeling,  the  very  high  protein  concentrations 
that  have  to  be  used,  the  long  data  collection 
time at room  temperature as  well as  limitations 
concerning  the  size  of  the  protein.  Thus  struc-

1

tural  biology  is  in  urgent   need  of  a  high-
throughput  method  for  protein  structure  deter-
mination.

In our  method,  a beam  of  hydrated  proteins 
(or  possibly  microscopic  protein  crystals)  is 
injected  into  an  interaction  region  at  the  inter-
section  of  two  crossed  beams:  a  diffracting 
probe beam (continuous electron or X-ray beam) 
and  an alignment beam (continuous polarized  IR 
laser).   The  interaction region will  usually be in 
a high vacuum environment  to allow  for evapo-
rative  cooling  of the droplet  beam and  to mini-
mize scattering of the diffracting beam by resid-
ual  gas  molecules.  In the  interaction region the 
proteins  are  aligned  via  torque  exerted  on  the 
molecule  by  the  electric  field  E  of  the  laser 
beam,  acting  on an  E-field  induced  dipole  mo-
ment  of  the  molecule.    If  N  identical  aligned 
molecules  are  in  the  interaction  region  at   any 
instant and  if  the  coherence  patch of  the  probe 
beam  is  not   appreciably  larger  than  the  target 
molecule,  then  the  probe  beam produces  a  dif-
fraction pattern  having  N  times  the intensity of 
that  from  a  single  molecule.  If  the  coherence 
width  is  larger  than  the  molecule,  interference 
between two or more molecules in the beam will 
average  out  over  all  the  molecules  in  the 
exposure.     In  many  X-ray  beamlines  one  can 
trade coherence for flux and for this method  we 
would  operate  at the  lowest possible  coherence 
and  highest  possible  flux.  Since  the  molecules 
are  constantly  replenished  (transit   time  across 
the  interaction region  ~200ns),  a  serial  diffrac-
tion  scheme  of  this  sort  allows  much  longer 
exposure  times  than  with  a  static  N-molecule 
crystal.    Moreover  each  molecule  receives  a 
dose far below  the critical dose that would cause 
damage  at  atomic  resolution.   A  transmission 
diffraction pattern  for  one  orientation  builds  up 
at the  detector  as  scattered  intensity  from  suc-
cessive identical single proteins is recorded. Af-
ter  a  useable  diffraction  pattern  has  been  accu-
mulated,  the detector is  read  out, the  alignment 
laser polarization rotated, and  a new  diffraction 
pattern  is  recorded  for  a  different  molecular 
orientation. In this way a 3-D diffraction dataset 
can  be  recorded.  From  this  dataset  the  charge 
density  of  the  molecule  can  be  reconstructed 
with an iterative Gerchberg-Saxton-Fienup algo-
rithm.   Alternatively,  serial  diffraction  from  a 
beam of unaligned microcrystallites  would  yield 
powder  diffraction  data,  which  can  also  be  in-
verted  by iterative  algorithms  [2].   Hence  if the 
protein of interest  can be grown into microcrys-

tals, diffraction data can be obtained even if the 
crystallites  are much too small for conventional 
X-ray crystallography.  

A protein  must fold  into a specific  structure 
in order  to become biologically active. It is  the 
tertiary  structure  of  the  biologically  active, 
folded, native protein that is  of  primary interest 
(or  the  quaternary  structure  for  multi-subunit 
protein complexes) and  care  must  be taken  not 
to  alter  this  configuration  (“denature”  the  pro-
tein) during structure determination.  In general, 
it is assumed  that water soluble proteins  display 
their  native  conformation  only  when  hydrated, 
but the  necessary  degree  of  hydration (gram of 
water per  gram of  protein)  is  unclear. A hydra-
tion of 0.2 h, i.e. 0.2 gram of water per gram of 
protein,  is  generally  accepted  as  the  threshold 
value  for  biological  activity,  but   recent  meas-
urements  have demonstrated  enzyme  activity of 
lyophilized  enzymes  at  hydrations  as low  as 3% 
[3,  4].   It is  known from cryo-electron micros-
copy of proteins  that a jacket of vitreous ice can 
also  maintain  the  native  protein  conformation 
[5].   Crystalline  ice is  to be avoided,  though, as 
its  formation  disrupts  protein  structure.   “Cryo-
protectants” can be added to the protein solution 
to  suppress  formation of  crystalline  ice.   Elec-
tron  diffraction from  a  beam of  crystalline  ice-
balls  in  vacuum  has  been  reported  [6].    Mem-
brane proteins  are  often solubilized  intact in de-
tergent  micelles,  which  faithfully  mimic  the 
native  lipid  bilayer  and  preserve  the  tertiary 
structure.   The serial diffraction method  outlined 
above  is  equally  applicable  to  a  solution  of 
micelle-encased  membrane  proteins  as  it is  to a 
solution  of  water-soluble  proteins. 
  Indeed, 
membrane proteins  are a  subject  of  primary in-
terest, given the  difficulty  in  probing  the  struc-
ture of these proteins by conventional means.  

Transfer of proteins from liquid solution into 
vacuum  without  denaturing  them  is  a  critical 
step  for the  whole  method.   Not only does  this 
step require that  an adequate coating of water or 
non-crystalline  ice  be  maintained  around  each 
individual protein molecule at  all times, but also 
that  the  injection  process  not  cause  thermal  or 
mechanical  stress  in any  degree  that would  de-
nature the  protein [7,  8].   Several  droplet beam 
sources, atomizers, and  nebulizers are capable of 
producing microscopic water droplets containing 
embedded  proteins  and  injecting  these  droplets 
into  vacuum  without  altering  the  protein  con-
formation.   Very  few  are  capable  of  producing 
droplets  in  the  quantity  and  density  required.  

2

The  number  of  molecules  in  the  diffraction 
probe  beam  at any  instant is  determined  by the 
size  of  the  interaction  region (as  set  by the  fo-
cused widths of the probe and  alignment beams) 
and  by  the  density of molecules  in this  interac-
tion  region.   To  keep  exposure  times  manage-
able,  it  is  imperative  that  the  flux  of  analyte 
molecules  into the interaction region be as  large 
as  possible,  corresponding  to  a  high  droplet 
beam brightness.  Accordingly the protein-doped 
droplets  emitted  from  the  molecular  injection 
source should  be collimated  (preferably a single 
file train) and unidirectional. 

to 

is  due 

At optical frequencies  (e.g. the near-IR laser 
frequency  used  for  molecular  alignment),  ex-
perimental  measurements  of  refractive  index 
have shown that  biomolecules  can be  described 
as  homogeneous  bodies  with dielectric  constant 
of 2  –  2.3  [9,  10]   This  being  the  case,  the in-
duced dipole moment  of a protein is mostly due 
to the shape anisotropy of the molecule.   At low 
the  re-
frequency,  polarization 
orientation  of  polar  molecules.  The  interior  of 
proteins  can be  treated  as  homogeneous  with  a 
low  dielectric  constant, but  a  large  polarization 
arises on the highly inhomogeneous surface due 
to  the  side-chain  re-orientation  [11].  Moreover 
in a DC field, permanent dipole moments (which 
cancel  out  in  AC  fields)  can  produce  large 
alignment forces. Therefore  strong  electrostatic 
[12] and magnetic fields [13] may be used alone 
or in combination with CW laser fields for mo-
lecular  alignment.  Flow  alignment  due  to shear 
is  also  possible,  as  used  in  studies  of  electric 
birefringence,  and  this  may  well  occur  in  the 
Poiseuille-like  flow  expected  in  the  droplet 
beam nozzle.  

The  electrical  polarizabilities  of  water  (or 
ice) and  proteins  are  similar at optical frequen-
cies.   Embedding the proteins in spherical water 
droplets  therefore  reduces  the  shape  anisotropy 
of the  whole and  compromises  the efficiency of 
laser alignment.   Accordingly, an ideal injection 
system would  remove  almost all water from the 
protein-doped  water  droplets,  leaving  a  hydra-
tion jacket only  a  few  monolayers  thick.   This 

jacket will  quickly  freeze  to ice as  the droplets 
enter  the vacuum chamber, whereafter sublima-
tion proceeds only very slowly.  The water vapor 
load  on  the  vacuum  system  is  therefore  easily 
manageable.  

To  achieve  adequate  molecular  alignment 
with either electric  or magnetic fields, the  ther-
mal  population of higher rotational  states  has to 
be  minimized,  i.e.  the  molecules  have  to  be 
cooled  to  cryogenic  temperatures.  This  can  be 
achieved,  e.g.,  by  free-jet  expansion  into  vac-
uum of target  molecules  mixed  into helium gas 
or by evaporative cooling  augmented by quench 
cooling in co-flowing 4K helium gas. 

In  summary,  serial  diffraction  requires  an 
injection method  to deliver protein molecules or 
microcrystals  -  preferably  uncharged,  fully  hy-
drated  (in  detergent  micelles  if  membrane  pro-
teins),  spatially  oriented,  and  with  high  flux  - 
into a focused probe beam of electrons or x- rays 
of typically only a few  tens of microns diameter. 
The  aim of this  work has  been to examine sev-
eral potential droplet  sources as to their suitabil-
ity for this task. In doing  so we have discovered 
new  aspects  of these droplet beams.   This paper 
presents  the  experimental  measurements, draws 
conclusions  about  serial  diffraction source  con-
figuration,  and  discusses  the  interesting  droplet 
beam  phenomena  that  have  emerged  along  the 
way.  

2. Imaging of Droplets
In order to image the droplets produced  by vari-
ous  droplet  sources,  a  simple  and  inexpensive 
nanosecond  flash  illumination  system  was  de-
veloped,  which  can  work  in  both  stroboscopic 
and  single  exposure  mode  with  exposure  times 
≤10ns. The droplets  produced  by a  periodically 
triggered  Rayleigh droplet  beam (see  below  for 
details) can be  imaged  with  a  light  optical  mi-
croscope  and  stroboscopic  illumination,  where 
the illumination frequency is  synchronized  with 
the breakup frequency of the droplet source. Our 
experimental  setup  is  shown  schematically  in 
Figure 1.

3

Figure 1: Experimental setup for stroboscopic and single shot droplet imaging using a microscope (Nikon measuring 
microscope, magnification x200) and pulsed illumination.  

We  have  used  fused  silica  and  glass  capillary 
tips  from  New  Objective  as  nozzles  for  the 
Rayleigh  jets,  as  well  as  fused  silica  nozzles 
"pulled" in our lab  using  a Sutter P-2000 puller 
[14].   Droplet beams  have  been  formed  to date 
of  HPLC  water,  methanol,  aqueous  solutions 
with  100nm  gold  balls,  aqueous  solutions  with 
e-coli  bacteria  and  protein  solutions. The  liquid 
of interest is  pressurized in a PEEK  or stainless 
steel reservoir to ≤400 psi. This reservoir is con-
nected  to the  nozzle via  1/8”  PEEK  tubing  and 
the liquid  passes  through a 0.5 µm PEEK filter 
before  reaching  the  nozzle. A  multilayer piezo-
actuator  (PL022.31  from  Physik  Instrumente) 
with a resonance  frequency of about 300 kHz is 
attached  with a clip to the side of the glass noz-
zle.  The  actuator  generates  the  periodic  distur-
bance necessary to trigger the Rayleigh breakup 
of the liquid jet into mono-dispersed droplets. 
The  piezo-actuator  is  driven  with  a  sinusoidal 
voltage  from  a  function  generator  (Wavetek  2 
MHz  model  20),  amplified  by  a  custom,  high 
frequency,  high voltage amplifier   (built  around 
an APEX PA85, which has  a power response up 
to 2MHz). The function generator also triggers a 
pulse  generator  (Tektronix  PG501A),  which 
drives a fast LED (IF-E99 from Industrial Fiber 
Optics, 3 ns rise time) with 10 - 100ns wide, 5V 
pulses. A  series  resistor  (not shown)  limits  the 

4

current through  the  LED  to  the  maximum  cur-
rent allowed. A resistor in parallel with the cur-
rent limiting resistor and  the LED produces  a 50 
Ohm termination of the transmission line to pre-
vent  degradation  of  fast   pulses  due  to  reflec-
tions.  Since  the  LED  voltage  is  synchronized 
with the  breakup  frequency  of the  droplets, the 
LED  light   acts  as  stroboscopic  illumination, 
providing  a  stable  image  of  the  droplets  over 
even  hundreds  of  LED  flashes  [15,  16].  The 
droplets  were observed with a Nikon Measuring 
Microscope  MM20  with  bright   field  illumina-
tion  and  x200  magnification.  Images  are  re-
corded  with a Princeton 1024x1024 liquid nitro-
gen cooled CCD camera. 

Fast  imaging  of  nonperiodic  events  (e.g.  an 
untriggered  Rayleigh  droplet breakup)  is  possi-
ble  by  replacing  the  LED  with  a  laser  diode 
(Sharp GH06550B2B1, 50mW, 
) and 
using  the  function  generator  in  single  pulse 
mode  [17].  Due  to  the  higher  power  require-
ments of the laser diode, a high speed pulse am-
plifier  was  built  [18].  This  amplifier  also  en-
abled overdriving of the laser diode to gain more 
light  output,  which  is  possible  for  short  pulse 
durations  without   damaging  the  diode.  The 
higher power of the laser diode together with the 
low  noise  of  the  liquid  nitrogen  cooled  CCD 

€ λ=656nmcamera  makes  single  shot  imaging  with  20-
100ns exposure times possible. The laser illumi-
nation  produces  a  strong  coherent  scattering 
background  (speckle), which makes  background 
subtraction mandatory. This is done by recording 
and  then  subtracting  a  second  image,  in  which 
the droplet beam has been moved out  of the field 
of view. 

3. Rayleigh droplet beams
If  a  liquid  is  pressurized  and  forced  through  a 
small  orifice  into  vacuum  or  stagnant   air,  the 
liquid  emerges  as  a single, contiguous, cylindri-
cal liquid beam.  The overall surface free energy 
of the cylindrical  beam is  higher  that that  of an 
equivalent   flow  of  spherical  droplets.  Conse-
quently,  the  cylindrical  jet breaks  up  spontane-
ously at  a certain critical distance downstream of 
the source  aperture, forming  a  line  of  spherical 
droplets  [19, 20].  This instability was first ana-
lyzed  in  the  late  1800’s,  notably  by  Rayleigh 
[21],  whose  name  it  now  bears.  The  instability 
can be triggered by perturbing  the source condi-
tions (temperature, pressure, etc.) at a frequency 
near the intrinsic instability frequency.   Laminar 
liquid  flow  through  an  aperture  into  vacuum, 
triggered  in this  fashion, yields a unidirectional, 
monodisperse  beam of spherical  droplets  that  is 
locked  in phase to an  external  signal.  Rayleigh 
breakup is labeled either "spontaneous" or "trig-
gered," respectively, depending  on whether it  is 
induced  by  random  acoustic  fluctuations  or  by 
an  intentionally  applied  excitation.    In  either 
case, the nozzle diameter D sets the basic droplet 
size.   Spontaneous  breakup yields  a narrow  but 
not  monodisperse  size  distribution  of  droplets, 
centered  on  1.90D  droplet  diameter  and  4.55D 
spacing  on centers.   Periodic triggering delivers, 
as  shown  in  Figure  4,  a  stream  of  identical 
droplets  that  is  highly  periodic,  monodisperse, 
monoenergetic,  and  phase-locked  to  the  excita-
tion  signal  (Within  the  ink-jet   printer  commu-
nity,  this  form of  droplet beam is  generally re-
ferred  to  as  a  "continuous  ink  jet"  (see,  e.g. 

[22])).  By  varying  the  trigger  frequency,  the 
droplet diameter of a triggered  Rayleigh droplet 
beam can be fine-tuned from below 2.0D to over 
2.5D,  with  corresponding  spacing  of  5.3D  to 
10.4D  on  centers,  respectively.    The  requisite 
trigger frequency is ƒ = v/ξ, where v is the beam 
velocity and  ξ the breakup segmentation length.  
Beam velocities from well under 10 m/s to over 
100 m/s are readily achievable. 

Vacuum  experimentation  on filamentary liq-
uid  jets  dates  at least to Siegbahn in 1973 [23].  
Research  on  and  with  such  jets  has  been  con-
ducted  by many  groups,  including  Keller  [24], 
Faubel  [25-30],  Mafuné  and  Kondow  [31,  32], 
Buntine  [33],  and  Saykally  [34]. 
  Rayleigh 
droplet beams have been employed as targets for 
nuclear  physics  [35]  and  x-ray  generation  [36-
41] and as  possible fuel sources for fusion reac-
tors  [42, 43].   All of these applications require a 
moderately  good  vacuum,  typically  10-4  –  10-5 
Torr  or less. All  of  the  above  liquid  jet  experi-
ments  have  employed  nozzles  of  5µm diameter 
or larger, generally much larger. 

We  use  commercially  available  electrospray 
tips,  which  are  available  in diameters  down  to 
1µm [44] as  nozzles  for  generation of Rayleigh 
jets.  We also pull nozzles  ourselves  from  fused 
capillary  tubing  using  a  Sutter  P-2000  puller 
[14]. The nozzle is connected with PEEK tubing 
and  PEEK fittings (HPCL components [45]) to a 
PEEK  liquid  reservoir  (or  alternatively  with 
Swagelok fittings  to a stainless  steel  reservoir). 
Immediately upstream  of  the nozzle  is  a  0.5µm 
PEEK inline  filter (Upchurch). A photograph of 
one version of our droplet beam source is shown 
in  Figure  2  (here  with  stainless  steel  fittings). 
Our  experiments  have  shown  that  nozzle  clog-
ging  is  the  most serious  problem with Rayleigh 
jets from nozzles of diameter smaller than 8 µm, 
regardless  of filter size. We clean the whole  as-
sembly  (in  line  PEEK  filter,  liquid  reservoir, 
PEEK tubing, fittings  and  ferrules) in Micro 90, 
filtered methanol and filtered HPLC water. 

5

Figure 2: Source assembly. Six inch ruler shown for scale. 

Reliable  Rayleigh  jets  can  be  obtained  using 
online  fused  silica  Picotips®  with  50µm ID  at 
the distal  end  and  8µm  diameter  at the  tip  end 
and  with  a  0.5µm PEEK  filter  in line  with the 
nozzle.  Using  the  same  nozzle  with  a  100nm 
gold  ball  solution  (Ted  Pella)  also  results  in  a 
reliable  jet.  Using  the  nozzle  with  detergent 
buffer used  for the  membrane protein photosys-
tem  I,  a  protein  complex  which  catalyzes  the 
light-induced  charge  separation in photosynthe-
sis  [46], resulted  in a very low  success  rate  be-
cause  the  nozzles  tended  to  clog  after  a  few 
minutes. It  is at the moment unclear if this clog-
ging  results  from clumping  of microparticles  in 
the buffer or from the physical  action of the de-
tergent on remaining  dirt particles located in the 
volume  between  the  filter  and  the  nozzle.  The 
detergent   buffer  could  remove  particles  from 
surfaces,  which  would  stay attached  to the  sur-
face  if other liquids  were  used.  These  particles 
would  then  be  flushed  to  the  nozzle  end  and 
would  clog  the nozzle.  Using  an aqueous  solu-
tion  containing  a  high  concentration  of  100nm 
latex  spheres  [47]  resulted  in  clogging  due  to 
particle  agglomeration, since  these  particles  are 
hydrophobic  by nature  and  will  always  tend  to 
agglomerate, especially at high concentration. In 
this case the jet became weaker and  weaker in a 
few  minutes (observed  in an optical microscope 
at mag  200x) and showed a slow  buildup of par-
ticles  at  the tip end. Using  smaller nozzle  sizes, 
e.g. 4µm offline glass  Picotips  (New  Objective) 

6

resulted  generally  in  lower  success  rate  and 
higher  clogging  rate. Again pure  water  showed 
the  highest  success  rate,  followed  by  gold  ball 
solutions and methanol. The larger nozzles could 
occasionally be cleaned (de-clogged) by reverse 
pressurizing  with  water  at  400psi  from  the  tip 
end. In order to determine the nature  of the ob-
served  clogs, X-ray analysis  can be used. Figure 
3 shows a Scanning  Electron Microscope (SEM) 
image taken "head-on" of a clogged nozzle.  The 
nozzle  was  a  4µm  diameter  commercial 
borosilicate  glass  nozzle  that ran  for  4-5 hours 
with  a  water  jet  before  clogging.    The  clog 
formed  somewhat  upstream  of  the  nozzle  exit.  
By  breaking  off  the  tip of  the  nozzle,  the  clog 
could  be exposed  for SEM  imaging and  Energy 
Dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy.  A 0.5µm 
pore inline PEEK filter just upstream of the noz-
zle should  remove  particles of this  size, indicat-
ing  that the  clog  material  originated  within the 
nozzle  tube  itself.  An  EDX  spectrum  taken  on 
the  clog  (small  circle  in  Figure  3,  left  image) 
shows  only Si   (light elements, oxygen and  be-
low,  would  not  appear  in  this  EDX  spectrum).  
By moving the electron probe to the glass wall, a 
completely  different  spectrum  was  obtained. 
EDX  on  the  glass  wall  of  the  nozzle  is  domi-
nated by an Al peak with only a much smaller Si 
peak  present.  The  clog  material  is  therefore 
chemically different from the  wall  material  and 
does not  consist of a PEEK particle either, since 
PEEK contains only C, H, and O.

  

Figure 3: SEM image (left) and EDS spectrum (right) of  silicate blockage in a borosilicate glass nozzle.

Figure 4 shows  a stroboscopic  image of a Ray-
leigh  jet   from  a  4µm  diameter  glass  nozzle 
where  the  droplet  breakup  is  triggered  at  1.2 
MHz. The  monodispersivity  of  the droplets  has 
also been confirmed  by laser diffraction from a 
triggered  Rayleigh beam  as  shown  in  Figure  5 
(left).  Here,  the  green laser is  focused  onto the 
droplet beam  resulting  in a Airy’s  disk  diffrac-
tion pattern from  the  droplets  which  is  equiva-

lent to the  pattern,  that  would  be  obtained  from 
one droplet (the high speed  movement  only ap-
pears  as  a  phase  factor  in  the  diffracted  wave 
and  cancels out  when recording  the intensity on 
a  screen).  On  the  right,  the  laser  was  slightly 
defocused,  which  results  in  two  droplets  being 
illuminated  at  any  instant,  producing  Young’s 
fringes  from  interference  between  the  waves 
scattered from two droplets. 

Figure 4: Triggered  Rayleigh water  jet in air. The  droplet diameter is 8  µm  (4µm nozzle). A piezo is vibrating  the 
nozzle at 1.2 MHz, triggering the breakup into monodispersed droplets. Water pressure: 200psi. The  image was ob-
tained with 100ns stroboscopic flashes (LED) synchronized to the piezo frequency. (Mag: 200)

7

Figure 5: Laser  diffraction pattern obtained from a stream of  triggered single-file  monodispersed  droplets of  water 
(8µm diameter) showing an Airy’s disk pattern. On the  right: Interference fringes between neighboring droplets pro-
duce additional Young’s fringes. 

As  shown  above,  periodic, monodispersed,  lin-
ear droplet  beams  can be  readily  produced,  but 
nozzle  clogging  problems  limit  the  minimum 
size  of  droplets.  Droplets  of 16µm diameter are 
easily  produced,  droplets  of  8µm  diameter  are 
reasonably straightforward (50% success rate), 4 
and  2  µm  diameter  droplets  are  very  difficult 
(although  the  variance  in  the  success  rate  is 
large),  and  one  micrometer  or  sub-micrometer 
droplets  are  not  possible  at  present.  Since  our 
aim is  to remove  most of the water surrounding 
the  molecules  before  injecting  them  into  vac-
uum,  it  is  desirable  to  start  with  the  smallest 
initial droplet  size possible. 

4. Droplet evaporation
Reduction  of  the  cooled  droplet   size  due  to 
evaporation in vacuum is a small  effect. This is 
due to evaporative cooling, since the evaporative 
flux  from a  liquid  scales  with surface  area  and 
vapor pressure, and the latter decreases dramati-
cally with temperature. As  a  result, evaporative 
cooling  of a liquid jet  in vacuum limits the over-
all evaporative flux from the beam, provided the 
initial surface area of the jet is sufficiently small 
[27, 30] (i.e. for nozzle sizes of a few  microme-
ters for water). 

The  rate  of evaporative  cooling  can  be  esti-
mated  assuming:  (1)  free-molecular  flow  away 
from  the  droplet  surface,  (2)  uniform  tempera-
ture  within the  droplet,  (3)  liquid  loss  from the 

droplets  by  evaporation  from the  surface  at the 
rate determined  by equilibrium vapor pressure at 
the  momentary  droplet   temperature,  and  (4) 
evaporative  cooling  of  the  droplet via the latent 
heat associated  with this  evaporative  flux  [30]. 
The  resulting  equations  for  droplet temperature 
T  and  radius  r  as  a  function  of  the  distance  z 
from a nozzle tip along the jet direction are

     (1)

 

    (2)

where  Λ  is  the  heat   of  vaporization,  cp  is  the 
specific  heat capacity,  m is  the mass  of a water 
molecule,  ρ  is  density of water, v  is  the droplet 
velocity,  and  kB  is  the  Boltzmann  constant. 
Equation (1) describes  the heat transfer balance 
for a spherical  droplet,  and  Equation (2) relates 
the rate  of the  droplet size  change to the  vapor 
flux  from  the  droplet   surface.  Neglecting  the 
effect  of droplet curvature,  the  temperature  de-
pendence of  saturation vapor  pressure  over liq-
uid  water  at  temperatures  below  273  K  is  de-
scribed  by  the  empirical  Goff-Gratch  equation 

  

8

€ dT(z)dz=−3Λcpr(z)⋅dr(z)dz€ dr(z)dz=−PT(z)[]vρ⋅m2πkBT(z)[48]. The results  of calculations  for water drop-
lets  of  several  initial  diameters,  traveling  at  37 
m/s  through  perfect   vacuum,  are  presented  in 
Figure  6  and  Figure  7.  Even  a  large  droplet of 
20µm  diameter  has  super-cooled  to almost 230 
K only 10 cm downstream of its  injection point 
and, as  a result, has largely stopped  evaporating 
and  shrinking.  Experimental  measurements  ver-
ify these predictions  [30, 34], indicating  cooling 
rates  for water droplets of up to 106  K/s  and su-
per  cooling  to  droplet   temperatures  as  low  as 
207  K.  Due  to  the  extremely  fast  evaporative 
cooling  immediately after droplet injection  into 
vacuum,  the  dependence  of  the  droplet  tem-
perature  on  the  liquid  temperature  inside  the 
nozzle becomes negligible after the droplet trav-
els only a few  centimeters.

 

Figure 6:  Evaporative  cooling of  water  droplets with 
different  diameters  (20, 2,  and  0.2  µm), traveling  at 
37 m/s in vacuum. 

Given  this  self-limiting  evaporation,  the overall 
change  in  size  of  a  droplet  traveling  through 
vacuum  is  relatively  minor, as  shown in Figure 
7.  A  2µm  water  droplet  supercooled  by  50  K 
shrinks only about  5% in diameter. To shrink the 
water jacket of protein-doped  water  droplets,  it 
will therefore be necessary that most of the wa-
ter be  removed  before injection  into vacuum or 
that the initial droplet size is comparable to that 
of the embedded molecule or microcrystal.

 

Figure 7: Relative change of  droplet size by evapora-
tion in vacuum for the same droplet sizes as in Fig. 6. 
Due to rapid super-cooling of  the droplets (see Figure 
6), the droplet size changes only by a few percent.

For a  Rayleigh droplet jet injected  directly  into 
vacuum (as in our first  X-ray experiments shown 
below),  the  evaporative  gas  load  from  a  com-
plete  droplet  beam  is  easily predicted  by  sum-
ming  the evaporative flux along  a train of drop-
lets.   Within our simple  modeling  and  ignoring 
re-capture  of  gas  molecules  by  neighboring 
droplets,  the  dependence  of  the  resulting  pres-
sure  in the vacuum chamber on nozzle diameter 
is  shown  in  Figure  8.    The  droplet  size  and 
spacing  are  taken to be the  most probable Ray-
leigh  breakup  values.  This  plot  shows  that  the 
evaporative  gas  load  and  accordingly  the  pres-
sure  scale  as  approximately  the  square  of  the 
nozzle diameter. For a nozzle diameter of 1 mi-
crometer a very modest  600 l/s vacuum pumping 
speed is  predicted to deliver about  10-5 Torr wa-
ter  pressure.  This  corresponds  to  a  mean-free-
path length of 0.6 m for water molecules, or well 
into the rarefied gas regime for any normal-sized 
vacuum chamber. Because most  of the evapora-
tion occurs  in the vicinity of the nozzle  tip, the 
pressure  in  the  vacuum  chamber  can  be  easily 
reduced  further  by  using  differential  pumping 
stages. These calculations are in accordance with 
actual experimental observations [30, 31, 34]and 
our own observations  with a nozzle system in a 
soft-X-ray diffraction camera (see below).

9

droplets  shrink by evaporation without cooling.  
If  charged,  they  eventually  reach  the  Rayleigh 
electrostatic  limit  [19]  and  undergo  "Coulomb 
explosion,"  disintegrating  into  a  multitude  of 
smaller  charged  droplets.  Slowing  of  the  drop-
lets  via  drag  forces further enhances  Coulombic 
dispersal  of  the  beam.   This  dispersal  is  very 
much evident  in the  photograph of  Figure 9.   It 
bears  similarities  to the  electrospray  disintegra-
tion process [50] but  is purely triboelectric, since 
there is  no electric  potential applied  to the noz-
zle  as  in  electrospray.  A  current   measurement 
between  the  source  assembly  and  a  plate  elec-
trode in the liquid  jet shows a streaming  current 
of a few  tens of  nanoamperes.   This current  in-
creases  with  nozzle  pressure,  namely  with  in-
creasing  flow  rate of  liquid  through  the nozzle. 
The  current depends  on ph,  according  to which 
the sign of the current may be reversed.  Electro-
static  deflection  measurements  verify  that   the 
droplets of Figure 9 are charged  (16 µm droplets 
charged  to 106e), even in the complete  absence 
of any electric potential applied to the nozzle. 

Although of great potential interest for mass 
spectrometry  of  proteins,  triboelectric  droplet 
charging and Coulombic dispersal is  detrimental 
to protein diffraction studies since it may destroy 
the  droplet  beam  collimation  and  the  charging 
may  change  the  protein  conformation.  Triboe-
lectric  charging  can  always  be  minimized  by 
operating  at  sufficiently low  flow  velocities, or 
by  using  a  ring  electrode  downstream  of  the 
nozzle  as  used  in continuous  ink jet printers  to 
charge  the droplets  [51].  When a  voltage is  ap-
plied  to the ring  electrode with respect to the jet, 
polarization  charges  are  induced  on  the  jet.  
When  the  end  of  the  polarized  liquid  column 
detaches  to form a  droplet, a  net charge  is  car-
ried  downstream.   Consequently, the voltage  on 
the  ring  electrode  and  the  value  of  the  capaci-
tance  formed  between the  jet and  the  electrode 
determines  the  current  carried  by  the  droplet 
beam.  By controlling this voltage via a feedback 
loop  based  on  the  droplet   beam  current,  the 
beam  current  can  be  locked  in  to  any  desired 
value,  including  zero  current.   Control  of  the 
droplet charge is easily observed  experimentally 
since  uncharged  droplets  have  a  much  longer 
collimated  beam  range  in  air  than  do  charged 
ones.

Figure 8: Calculated vacuum chamber pressure at 600 
l/s pumping speed for water droplet beams as a func-
tion of  nozzle  diameter  d, shown at two  droplet ve-
locities. 

5. Triboelectric charging
Triboelectric charging of a fluid flowing through 
a  channel  is  a  phenomenon  well  known  to  the 
chemical  industry [49].   Also called  "electroki-
netic" charging, it results in general when both a 
velocity gradient  and  spatially  dissimilar distri-
butions  of positive and  negative  charge  carriers 
are present  in a liquid. Charging can even occur 
in pure water, where the charge carriers are sim-
ply  dissociated  H+  and  OH-  ions.    A  non-
uniform charge distribution always  arises  spon-
taneously in a polar fluid near a solid wall due to 
formation  of  an  electrochemical  bilayer  at  the 
fluid-wall  interface    [33].   It  is  exactly in  this 
near-wall  region  where  the  velocity  gradient is 
largest,  leading  to  very  effective  triboelectric 
charging.    The  charging  increases  with  fluid 
flow  velocity [49].   That  such charging  persists 
to microscale fluid  flows  is  known  from meas-
urements  by  Faubel  with  water  jets  [28]  and 
Buntine with methanol  jets  [33].   Indeed, being 
an  interfacial  phenomenon  and  therefore  de-
pendent   on  the  surface-to-volume  ratio  of  the 
fluid  stream, it  is  expected to be relatively more 
important  the smaller the diameter of the stream. 
 Charging and spatial dispersion are immediately 
evident when  a  Rayleigh  droplet  beam  of 4µm 
diameter  water  or  methanol  droplets  is  passed 
through  ambient  air  (room  temperature  and  1 
atm).  With heat supplied  by the ambient air, the 

10

Figure 9: Extended exposure (ca. 1/6 s)  of  an  untriggered Rayleigh droplet beam of  methanol issuing (slightly off-
axis) from a 2µm diameter glass nozzle into room temperature air.  It abruptly disperses about 1 cm downstream of 
the nozzle due to triboelectric charging resulting in Coulomb explosion and Coulomb repulsion.  There is no electric 
potential applied to the nozzle.  Similar effects are seen with water.

6. Coaxial Gas flow source
While  pursuing  solutions  to  the  clogging  prob-
lem for small  diameter nozzles, we also consid-
ered  the  possible  use of larger nozzle diameters 
(~8  µm)  to  produce  large  (~16  µm)  protein-
containing  water  droplets  that  must  then  be 
shrunk down via evaporation in an ambient gas 
before  they  are  injected  into  vacuum.   As  we 
have seen above, this evaporation and  shrinkage 
must take  place in an  ambient  gas, since  water 
droplets injected directly into vacuum super cool 
so rapidly that  they shed  very little mass  before 
they  either  cease  to  evaporate  significantly  or 
actually freeze. 

The challenge is therefore to pass the droplet 
beam through a  high pressure, high temperature 
ambient  gas  without  disrupting  the  single-file, 
unidirectional  form  of  the  water  droplet  beam.  

In particular,  our  measurements  on water  drop-
lets  injected  into  ambient  air  verify  (as  antici-
pated  theoretically) that micrometer-sized  drop-
lets  rapidly  decelerate  under  these  conditions.  
As  the  droplet speed  approaches  zero,  the  mo-
tion of the droplets  is increasingly influenced  by 
diffusion and convection, and the desired  single-
file, unidirectional and monodisperse beam form 
is  lost.   The  loss  of monodispersivity due  to air 
drag  can  be  seen  in  Figure  10,  which  shows  a 
single  shot  image  (100ns  exposure  time)  of  a 
triggered Rayleigh droplet beam in air, at several 
different  positions in the beam. Just downstream 
of the  nozzle,  the  droplets  are  perfectly  mono-
disperse and  equidistant, but due to deceleration 
in  air  and  wake effects,  the  droplets  lose those 
attributes.

11

Figure 10: Loss of  monodispersivity of  a triggered Rayleigh jet in ambient air. Nozzle diameter: 8 µm. Trigger  fre-
quency: 1.6MHz, single shot images with 100ns exposure time (a) droplet breakup at the nozzle. (b)  0.5 cm down-
stream of  nozzle.  (c)  1  cm downstream  of  the  nozzle. Due  to  wake  effects  and  air  drag  some  droplets have  coa-
lesced, and a slight angular spread is already observable.

If  the  droplets  are  charged,  either  intentionally 
for electrically forced extraction from the nozzle 
(electrospray, see  below) or by intrinsic electro-
kinetic (triboelectric) charging  of the liquid  as  it 
passes  through the  nozzle,  this  dispersal  is  ac-
celerated  due to electrostatic  repulsion (see  e.g. 
Figure 15). In particular, a line of charges of the 
same sign is unstable with respect to an undula-
tory perturbation.

If  the  ambient  gas  were  moving  with  the 
droplets,  and  if  the  gas  motion  were  uniform, 
laminar, and unidirectional, it  is possible that  the 
desired  linear  beam  form  could  be  preserved 
long  enough  for  the  droplets  (at   least   neutral 
droplets)  to shrink and  be  injected  into vacuum 
while still maintaining the desired linear beam.   
On the basis of symmetry, one can argue that 
the most  beneficial geometry for the ambient gas 
flow  is  one  that  has  the  same  cylindrical  sym-
metry  as  the  water  jet itself,  namely  a  coaxial 
flow.  Flows of one liquid stream within a coaxi-
ally flowing  sheath of a second  liquid  are fairly 
common within  the fluid  dynamics  community. 
If  the  velocities  of  the  two  liquids  are  not  too 

disparate,  the  flow  remains  laminar.   The  two 
liquids then can flow  downstream with a distinct 
inner  jet  of  one  fluid  surrounded  by  a  coaxial 
sheath of the  other.   The radius  of  the  inner  jet 
can  be  manipulated  by  adjusting  the  overall 
radius of the flow  tube and  the relative speed of 
the coaxial  sheath.   If  the flow  accelerates,  the 
inner jet  must narrow in diameter (a simple con-
sequence  of  conservation  of mass),  which  may 
eventually  be  useful  for  generating  small  jet 
diameters.   

With  the  above  in  mind,  we  have  initiated 
work  to investigate  the  effects  of  a  coaxial  gas 
flow  co-moving with the droplet  beam.  The size 
distribution,  directionality,  and  speed  of  the 
droplets  will  be  measured  as  a  function  of  the 
speed and species of the ambient  gas.  A drawing 
and  a  photo  of  the  source  for  our  coaxially 
shrouded  water droplet  beam are shown in Fig-
ure  11.  The  analyte  liquid  enters  at  the  upper 
rear of the main body of Figure 11, and  supplies 
a capillary nozzle of exactly the same variety as 
we currently employ. 

12

Figure 11: ASU Droplet Beam Source with Coaxial Gas Flow.

The analyte liquid  is  forced  (by a  syringe  pump 
or  pressurizing  gas)  out  through  this  capillary 
nozzle  to  form  the  protein-containing  droplet 
beam  (our  standard  way  of  generating  a  Ray-
leigh droplet  beam).   New  to this variant, is the 
coaxial shroud gas that enters through the lower 
connection at  the  end  of  the  main body  and  is 
directed  into a annular plenum near the front of 
the body, whence  it passes  through a set of nar-
row  linear channels  (for  flow  straightening  and 
uniformity)  into  a  fused  silica  shroud.    This 
shroud  has  a 15 mm ID  at the rear  end  and  re-
duces  to  a  much  smaller  (1-3  mm)  ID  at  the 

front  exit.   It  can  be  translated  back  and  forth 
along  the  axis  of  the  main  body  to  adjust  the 
position of the shroud exit relative to the exit of 
the capillary nozzle.  Any desired shroud gas can 
be used  and  the flow  velocity is set by choice of 
inlet  pressure.    Helium  is  of  particular  interest, 
since  (1)  it  is  completely  inert;  (2)  it  has  very 
low  mass  and  therefore  high  diffusivity  and 
thermal conductivity; (3) helium cools extremely 
effectively  during  a  supersonic  expansion  into 
vacuum, and may provide significant  cooling of 
the  protein/droplets  as  they  are  injected  into  a 
vacuum chamber (not shown) downstream of the 

13

shroud exit. This shrouded capillary of Figure 11 
is  being  tested  to  determine  the  utility  of  the 
coaxial flow as a means of drying (evaporatively 
shrinking) water droplets while still maintaining 
a linear beam.  It is worth noting that  gas flow is 
accompanied  by  a  pressure  decrease  (Venturi 
effect).   As the coaxial gas flow  passes  the cap-
illary  nozzle  at  large  speeds,  it  will  therefore 
help  to draw  the  analyte  fluid  from  the  nozzle 
(as in the Gañán-Calvo source [52, 53],  see  be-
low).   
We  are  not  aware  of  coaxial  gas  flows  having 
ever been employed  for the purpose  of drying  a 
Rayleigh  droplet   beam  while  maintaining  its 
linear form.  There are related prior applications, 
however.    Yang,  et  al.  [54]  employed  a  con-
verging  flow  of gas  to  promote gentle evapora-
tion  in  electrospray  ionization  of  proteins,  and 
suggested  that  such gas  flow  improves desolva-
tion  by  generating  smaller  droplets  which  pro-
motes  retention  of  folded  protein  structures.  
Their  capillaries  were  much  larger  (100µm  ID 
and  160µm  OD)  than  those  of  interest  here.  
Also,  they  apparently  investigated  only  very 
high speed flows, at which fragmentation of the 
liquid  is  the  likely  outcome.    Electrospray,  of 
course, neither  needs  nor attempts  to produce  a 
single-file, unidirectional, monodisperse droplet 
beam  (although  under  certain  conditions  it can 
produce mono-disperse droplets which are unidi-
rectional  close  to  the nozzle,  see below). A  co-
axial shroud flow of CO2  around an electrospray 
nozzle  is  often  used  to  suppress  corona  dis-
charge from an electrospray capillary.  The work 
by Chen,  et  al.  [55]  is  typical.    Those  authors 
infer  a  monodisperse  droplet  distribution  from 
their  source  (arguing  that the  residue of droplet 
solutes  after  evaporation  is  monodisperse,  and 
therefore  the  parent  droplets  must   also  be).  
Again, however, the droplet beam was certainly 
not single-file  or  unidirectional  and  no  attempt 
was made to influence evaporation by adjusting 
the  shroud  flow  parameters.    Supersonic  flows 
of liquid  jets, both with and  without coaxial gas 
flows,  have  been  investigated  thoroughly  as  a 
means  of atomizing  liquids  [56].   Experimental 
work by Mates et al [57] and Issac, et al [58] are 
typical. 
  Supersonic  atomization  nozzles  are 
generally much larger (5-10 mm ID) than those 
of  interest  here,  and  the  flow  velocities  very 
much  higher.    The  intent   of  any  atomizer  is 

clearly  to  avoid  a  unidirectional  beam.    Many 
commercial  atomizers  employ  a  shroud  gas  of 
some  sort.   (e.g.  "MCS  Accu  Mist"  ultrasonic 
nozzle of Sono-Tek Corp  [59]).

7. Protein Conformation in Rayleigh droplet 
beams
It  is  important  to  establish  that  the  passage  of 
proteins  through a Rayleigh  droplet beam does 
not damage them. The shear stress and  pressure 
acting  on the liquid  during  the  ejection  process 
is  of concern and  could  cause  pressure-induced 
denaturing  of fragile  biological  molecules. This 
is  also  of  concern  when  inkjet   technology  is 
used  to generate microrarrays  of droplets  doped 
with  biomolecules. Shear  stress  during  printing 
of a  DNA microarray  with  a  bubble  jet printer 
(thermally  generated  pressure  pulse)  has  been 
shown to not cause any damage [60]. The loss in 
activity  of  an  enzyme,  peroxidase,  has  been 
measured  by printing  an aqueous  solution using 
a  piezoceramic  actuated  inkjet printer  at  differ-
ent  compression  ratios  [8].  Significant damage 
to peroxidase has been found even when printing 
at low  compression rates. The damage could  be 
reduced  by  the  addition  of  trehalose/glucose. 
Our model  system for damage studies  was pho-
tosystem  I  (PSI),  a  light  absorbing  transmem-
brane protein complex involved  in photosynthe-
sis.  Optical  absorption  spectra  from  PSI  both 
before  and  after  its  passage  through  a  4µm 
borosilicate  glass  nozzle  in  a  Rayleigh  droplet 
beam  at   two  different  pressures  have  been  re-
corded. Both measurements are shown in Figure 
12. No damage is  evident, since the two spectra 
are  virtually  identical.  However  this  does  not 
prove that there were no conformational changes 
during  the flight  of the droplets, since the meas-
urement was  done  on the  collected  liquid  from 
the  Rayleigh  jet,  i.e.  the  proteins  could  have 
undergone conformational changes during flight. 
However  this  is  very  unlikely,  as  this  complex 
system  cannot  self-assemble  when  it  has  been 
disrupted.  Further  studies,  which  can  probe 
structural  changes  during  flight   are  necessary 
(e.g. spectroscopy during  flight, see [61]).  Ulti-
mately  the  serial  diffraction  experiment   itself 
will be the best indicator.

14

Figure 12: Optical absorption spectra from photosystem I protein complex before (control) and after passing through 
a 4µm borosilicate glass nozzle in a Rayleigh droplet beam at two different pressures.

8. X-ray experiments
We have used direct  injection of Rayleigh drop-
lets beams into vacuum as a first test  for a serial 
diffraction  chamber,  which  uses  soft  x-rays  as 
the  diffracting  radiation.  A  schematic  of  the 
chamber  is  shown  in Figure  13.  The  x-rays  are 
focused  and  monochromatized  by  a  zone  plate 
segment  [62]. The size of the x-ray beam at  the 
interaction area  is  10  µm.  The  alignment  laser 
will  also be  focused  to this  size,  but it  has  not 
been installed yet. Figure 14 shows a diffraction 
pattern obtained  with this  setup from an untrig-
gered Rayleigh droplet beam doped with 100nm 
gold balls. The x-ray energy was 530 eV, i.e. the 
wavelength was 2.34 nm, and the nozzle diame-
ter  was  4  µm  with  a  backpressure  of  200  psi 
(liquid  flow  rate  50  microliter/min).  The  gold 
ball  concentration  in  solution  was  4.5x1010  
particles/ml, which results in about 12 gold balls 

in  the  beam  at   any  time  (assuming  one  8µm 
droplet  in  the  10µm-sized  X-ray  beam  at   any 
time).  An  Airy’s  disk  pattern  of  the  predicted 
size  from  the  gold  balls  can  be  clearly  seen 
(similar to Figure 5, but with different scale due 
to the different ball  size and X-ray wavelength). 
The  Airy’s  disk  generated  by  the  much  bigger 
water droplets  is  not visible;  it is  undersampled 
because  of  the  experimental  geometry  and  pri-
marily obscured  behind  the beam stop. Diffrac-
the 
tion  patterns  from  solutions  containing 
membrane  protein  photosystem  I  in  detergent 
micelles  have  also  been  obtained  (from  una-
ligned  molecules  similar to SAX  measurements 
[62]).  However,  in  this  experiment  the  protein 
concentration  was  too  low  and  problems  with 
nozzle clogging  due to the detergent buffer used 
will  have  to  be  solved  before  further  measure-
ments with this protein can be conducted. 

15

Figure 13: General arrangement of apparatus for Serial Crystallography.
(1) Vacuum Chamber outline, (2) Laser for molecular alignment, (3) Positioning device for alignment of  laser beam, 
laser window and quarter  wave  plate polarizer  (4) LN2 cooled beam dump for droplet beam helps keep the vacuum 
<10-4 Torr, (5)  LN2  feedthrough for  cryoshield. (6)  CCD  camera,   (7)  Protein injection  device, (8)  Laser beam for 
molecular  alignment,  (9)  protein  beam,  (10)  X-ray  beam, (11)  In  vacuum  lens  with  positioning  motors  to  focus 
alignment laser  onto protein  beam, (12)  Motors for alignment of  x-ray beam defining apertures, (13)  Observation 
port  for  visible  alignment  laser,  (14)  Water-cooled  infra-red  laser  beam  dump,  (15)  )  Electrical  and  fluid 
feedthroughs for CCD and motors.

16

Figure  14:  Soft  X-ray  (530eV,  2.34nm)  diffraction  pattern  from  untriggered  Rayleigh  droplet  beam  containing 
100nm  gold  balls  (possibly  within ice, producing radial  streaks). A weak Airy's disk  pattern  originating  from  the 
gold balls is visible. Some  detector saturation and blooming is visible as horizontal bright streak. The black lines are 
beam stops for the central beam. The gold ball concentration in the  suspension was 4.5x1010 particles/ml; the nozzle 
diameter was 4 µm.  (the spatial frequency at the  edge  of  the detector  is 0.071 nm-1 which corresponds to a resolu-
tion of  14nm)

9. Electrospray
Proteins  are  routinely injected  into  vacuum via 
electrospray ionization (ESI) [50] (see [63] for a 
recent  review), which is a “soft” ionization tech-
nique (one  that largely  avoids  fragmentation of 
the  protein  during  ionization)  and  is  therefore 
ideally  suited  for  mass  spectrometry  of  large, 
complex molecules. In ESI, the analyte solution 
is  pumped  through a capillary at very low  flow 
rate (0.1  – 10 µl/min). A high voltage (positive 
or  negative)  is  applied  to  the  capillary.  The 
electric-field  gradient  at   the  tip  produces  a 
charge separation at  the surface of the liquid. As 
a  result,  the  liquid  protrudes  from  the  tip  in  a 
“Taylor cone” [64]. Upon reaching the Rayleigh 
limit  [65,  66]  (when  the  Coulomb  repulsion of 
the surface charge is equal to the surface tension 
of the solution), droplets  with an excess  charge 
detach  from  its  tip.  In  ESI-Mass  spectroscopy 
(ESI-MS),  these  droplets  move  through  atmos-
pheric  pressure  gas  and  generate  vapor  phase 

analyte ions. The  two mechanisms  proposed  for 
ion  formation  from  charged  droplets  are  cou-
lomb  fission  [67]  or  alternatively  ion  evapora-
tion [68].  The  continuous  flow  of  charge  from 
the HV  power supply through the  metal  contact 
to the liquid  occurs  via an electrochemical reac-
tion at  the  contact, i.e. oxidation in positive  ion 
mode and  reduction in negative  ion mode.  The 
analyte  ions  are  transferred  from  the  atmos-
pheric  pressure  region  into  the  vacuum  of  the 
Mass  Spectrometer  via  differential  pumping 
stages  (see  chapter  3  of  [69]  ).  Formation  of 
cluster  ions  by  condensation  of  polar  neutrals 
(water  and  solvent)  on  the  analyte  ions  during 
the free-jet expansion into vacuum is  prevented 
by counter  current  flow  of  nitrogen gas  before 
the  ions  enter  the  vacuum.  The  gas  flow  ex-
cludes  neutrals  and  water  vapor  from  entering 
the  vacuum  system,  whereas  the  ions  are  at-
tracted  by  an  electric  field.  The  gas  flow  also 
helps in ion desolvation.

17

Initial  ESI-MS  experiments  with proteins  in the 
late  1980s  and  early 1990s  were  carried  out in 
high proportions  of acidified organic solvents to 
aid the spray formation and desolvation process. 
Consequently, the mass spectra recorded were of 
proteins  already denatured  in solution.  The  ad-
vent of nano-electrospray enabled  ESI-MS  from 
aqueous solutions with smaller droplet sizes and 
lower  charge  states  [70]. Since then it  has  been 
shown  that   proteins  and  even  macromolecular 
complexes  like the  ribosome  [71] (for  a  review 
see  [72]) as  well as  whole  viruses  [73,  74] can 
be transferred  into the gas phase via electrospray 
without   fragmentation.  A  number  of  protein 
systems  have  been  investigated  using  ESI-MS 
[75-78], and  it  has  been suggested  that  changes 
in  protein  tertiary  structures  in solution can be 
monitored  using  ESI-MS.  Depending  on  ex-
perimental  conditions,  multi-subunit  proteins 
have  been  shown  to  stay  partially  intact  and 
could  be  selectively  dissociated 
into  their 
subunits [79]. 

A potential  disadvantage  of  the  electrospray 
approach is that, as the liquid evaporates in these 
highly charged  droplets, the electric field around 
the particle  intensifies.  This  field  may interfere 
with  the  protein  conformation,  since  the  3-D 
structure of proteins is stabilized by electrostatic 
interactions, which are disrupted by charging the 
protein.  Therefore  high  charge  leads  to unfold-
ing  and  loss  of  biological  activity,  well  before 
even  more dramatic  effects,  such as  fragmenta-
tion,  occur.  The  charge  states  and  the  width of 
the  distribution  of  charge  states  are  commonly 
used as indications of the degree of unfolding of 
proteins [80, 81] 

To  show  that  proteins  are  not   irreversibly 
damaged  after transferring them as  ions  into the 
gas  phase, the activity of insulin has been tested 
after  passage  through a mass  spectrometer  [82]. 
Direct measurements  of gas  phase  protein con-
formations  during  flight  include  infrared  spec-
troscopy  [61]  and  ion  mobility  measurements 
[83,  84].  Infrared  spectroscopy  has  shown  that 
the spectra obtained from ESI gas phase proteins 
(bovine  cytochrome  c)  in low  charge  states  are 
similar to those in solution, suggesting  a similar 
conformational  distribution 
[61],  although 
changes  in  secondary  structure  could  not  be 
ruled  out. Ruotolo et  al . [84] have shown that  a 
small  fraction  of  very  stable  proteins  in  their 
lower  ionization  states  may  maintain  their  3-D 
structure,  however  even  in  these  experiments, 
more than 80% of the protein was denatured. 

Under  certain  conditions  of  pressure  and 
voltage,  electrospray  can  produce  monodis-
persed  droplets  [55].  Usually  electrospray  is 
used  with little  or no  additional  (other  than at-
mospheric) pressure  on the liquid  (for  a  review 
of  electrospray  modes  see  [85]).  The  droplets 
generated  by  electrospray  are  in  general  much 
smaller  than  the  diameter  of  the  nozzle.  The 
droplet size  in electrospray depends  on the  size 
of the zone at  the  tip  of  the Taylor  cone  where 
the droplets are emitted. This emission radius in 
turn is proportional to the 2/3 power of the flow 
rate dV/dt [86]. Therefore the droplets  produced 
with  conventional  electrospray  sources  with 
nozzle sizes  of 20-100 micrometer diameter and 
flow  rates  of  1-10ul/min  [87]  have  an  initial 
diameter of 1 - 2 µm whereas droplets  produced 
by  nano-electrospray  with  1-10µm  diameter 
nozzles and  low flow  rates of 20 - 40nl/min [88] 
can be  less  than  200  nm  in diameter.  We  have 
done  experiments  with  nano-electrospray  noz-
zles  (1 – 8µm diameter) at high liquid  pressure 
(20-70  psi)  where  larger  flow  rate  produces 
larger (micrometer sized) droplets, which can be 
observed  with an optical microscope. For initial 
X-ray  experiments  the  goal  was  to  create  1  – 
2µm  diameter  droplets  by  direct  injection  into 
vacuum. A Rayleigh droplet beam from a 0.5 – 
1µm nozzle  at 400  psi  would  deliver  the  same 
droplet  size  but  clogging  problems  with  Ray-
leigh  beams  are  much  more  serious.  A  special 
vacuum flange with the nozzle situated  between 
two windows has been built to allow observation 
of  the  electrospray  source  in  vacuum  with  an 
optical microscope. A radiative heater consisting 
of a tungsten wire loop was mounted close to the 
nozzle to prevent  ice formation [89]. 

Droplets generated by the electrospray source 
have been imaged with exposure times of 100 ns 
produced  by pulsing  a  laser diode  as  described 
above  (see  [90]  for  a  similar  image  of  elec-
trospray  droplets  from  a  larger  nozzle).  Figure 
15 shows  electrospray droplets originating  from 
a 1µm diameter capillary where the  liquid  (wa-
ter) was  pressurized  at  15 psi. This  pressure  is 
too low  for  the  spontaneous  start of  a  laminar 
(Rayleigh) jet, but it  is  higher than usually used 
in  ES.  The  flow  rate  in  our  experiment   was 
about 500 nl/min. The droplets produced  at this 
high  flow  rate  from a  1µm  nozzle  are  about 1 
µm  diameter  as  seen in  Figure  15.  Initially the 
droplets  appear  monodispersed  and  unidirec-
tional, and  then they slow  down due to air drag 
and Coulomb forces, which disperse the droplets 

18

to a mist. In vacuum the droplets keep their uni-
directionality for longer as shown in Figure 16.

 A comparison of electrospray droplets  and a 
Rayleigh  droplet beam  from  the  same  8µm di-
ameter nozzle  is  shown in Figure  17. It is obvi-
ous that small droplets  can be produced  in elec-
trospray mode (from a large nozzle) without the 
clogging  problems  associated  with  the  genera-
tion of  an equally sized  Rayleigh droplet  beam. 
Figure  18  shows  a  comparison  of  electrospray 
droplets  with  different  liquid  pressure  (flow 
rate).  Since  the  Taylor  cone  emission  radius, 

which  determines  the  droplets  size,  is  propor-
tional  to the  2/3  power  of the  flow  rate  dV/dt, 
the  droplet  size  can  be  varied  by  varying  the 
flow  rate. 

ESI experiments  with photosystem I protein 
in detergent  buffer were not  successful, since no 
stable spray could  be established. This is  proba-
bly due to the differences in surface tension and 
electrolyte  concentration.  Therefore  Rayleigh 
droplet  beams  where  used  instead  for  our  first 
X-ray experiments. 

Figure 15: Single shot exposure (100ns exposure time) of electrospray droplets from 1µm diameter nozzle into stag-
nant air. Dispersion starts about 200 µm downstream of nozzle due to deceleration in air and coulomb repulsion. 
Droplets appear initially monodispersed, unidirectional and equidistant. Pressure: 15 psi; High voltage: 1.3 kV.

19

Figure 16: 
Top: electrospray of  water into stagnant air. Dispersion of  the jet is due to slowdown caused by air drag and coulomb 
forces between drops. Drops in the  dispersion region are  much slower than at the nozzle. This can be visualized by 
using a long time exposure time  (~700 ns). Then the droplets close to the nozzle  were washed out to an apparent jet, 
but the  droplets in the breakup region could still be resolved. Nozzle diameter 1 µm, 2 kV, 70 psi. Single shot expo-
sure 100 ns with laser diode. 
Bottom: ES in vacuum, p = 10-3 Torr, same nozzle, 2 kV, 70 psi.  To start the electrospray, the  nozzle  was heated in 
vacuum with a tungsten filament close to the nozzle (to thaw the ice generated by evaporative cooling).  The HV has 
to be  turned  off  during  pumpdown to prevent discharges in the  low vacuum corona discharge  region. The  droplets 
stay unidirectional at least up to the extraction electrode  (about 2 mm). The laser diode light (50 mW) was focused 
into the vacuum chamber just below the droplet stream by a lens. 

20

Figure 17: 

Top: Electrospray of  water  from 8µm diameter nozzle at 2.6 kV and 40 psi water pressure (water pressure  was too 
low to start a jet without voltage). Droplets are in focus at the nozzle and out of  focus further downstream. 

Bottom: Triggered Rayleigh Droplet  Beam  from same  8µm  nozzle  at  100  psi and  600kHz  trigger  frequency  (no 
voltage applied). Diameter of  jet: 8 µm, Droplet diameter ~16 µm. Both images are single shot with 100ns exposure 
time.

21

Figure 18: Electrospray from 1µm diameter nozzle at 1 kV in air, pressure from top to bottom: 10, 20, 40, 50, 70 psi. 
Droplet spacing increases and droplets become larger at higher  flow rates (exposure  time 100 ns, background is due 
to coherent speckle pattern of  laser illumination).

10. Nebulizer
Another  way  to  avoid  clogging  problems  with 
small  Rayleigh  nozzles  while  still  obtaining 
small  droplets  is  the  use  of  a  nebulizer  [91]. 
These  are  straight-bore  capillary tubes  within  a 
rapidly converging concentric glass shroud.  The 
capillary extends  either right up to  or  to  within 
~0.5  mm  of  the  end  of  the  concentric  shroud, 
with  only  a  very  small  annular  gap  (~20  µm) 
between the two. The fluid  is  drawn out  by suc-
tion (aspiration) alone at liquid flow  rates  of 10-
1000 micro-liter/s.

The  smallest  droplets  generated  by  these 
nebulizers can be of the order of 1µm diameter, 
but the  droplets  are not  unidirectional  or mono-
dispersed.  However,  since  it   produces  small 
droplets  with  relatively  large  nozzle  sizes,  it 
does  avoid  the clogging  problem.  If the  shroud 
gas is helium, these droplets could be effectively 
cooled  by  expansion  through  a  skimmer  into 
vacuum. Figure 19 shows an image of the drop-
let  breakup  from  a  commercial  nebulizer  [92] 
with a  capillary diameter of 150 µm taken with 
100ns exposure time. 

Figure 19: Fast exposure (100  ns)  of  droplet breakup 
with  a  nebulizer.  Droplet  diameters  between  20  µm 
and  4  µm. Dimensions  of  the  nebulizer: ID and  OD 
of  capillary  (containing  the  liquid)  are  150  µm  and 
180  µm respectively. ID  of  coaxial  gas  shroud:  230 
µm.  Gas  pressure:  80  psi,  liquid  pressure:  170  psi 
through 0.5µm filter.

22

11. Nozzle Cleaning and Filtering
All  techniques of liquid  jet generation based  on 
nozzles  run  afoul  of  clogging  at   small  nozzle 
diameters.  This is particularly true of techniques 
that require large volumes of liquid  to be driven 
through  a  converging  nozzle  by  hydrostatic 
pressure.  In such applications a nozzle diameter 
of 10 µm or even larger is  often accepted  as the 
minimum  working  size.   Although still  smaller 
converging  nozzles  are often employed  as  elec-
trospray emitters, the driving force in that case is 
an electrostatic force ("pulling" the liquid  out of 
the nozzle from the front) rather than hydrostatic 
pressure ("pushing" the liquid  out from the rear). 
 Indeed, we  have  found  that nozzles  will  often 
run  in  electrospray  mode  even  after  they  have 
clogged  in  the  pressure-driven  Rayleigh  jet 
mode.   Electrospray volumes  are also miniscule, 
often in the picoliter range for "offline" applica-
tions,  so that  even  a  short working  time  before 
clogging  may  suffice  to  carry  out  an  experi-
mental measurement.  

For 

the  protein  structure  determination 
scheme  outlined  above,  the  diffracting  beam 
clearly should  not suffer appreciable attenuation 
in passing  through the droplet.  Hence the pene-
tration  depth  of  the  probe  beam  through  the 
droplet  liquid  places  an  upper  limit  on droplet 
  For  x-ray  and  electron  transmission 
size: 
through  water  at  the  energies  of  interest,  the 
maximum droplet  diameter is roughly 1  µm and 
100 nm, respectively.   Calculations of nanoscale 
liquid  jet behavior [93] show  Rayleigh break-up 
of a  liquid  jet  to persist  down to nozzle diame-
ters  of  only  a  few  nanometers,  indicating  that 
there is no physical barrier  to forming  Rayleigh 
droplet beams of very small droplets.  There is a 
technical  barrier  to  droplet   size,  however,  im-
posed  by  nozzle  clogging.    Small  aerosol  par-
ticulates are ubiquitously abundant  in the atmos-
phere,  in  concentrations  that  increase  dramati-
cally with  decreasing  particle  diameter below  1 
µm.  Average US  atmospheric concentrations for 
particulates  of  under  2.5µm  diameter  (PM2.5) 
and  under  10 µm  (PM10) [94]  are about 13 µg/
m2  and  23  µg/m2,  respectively.    PM2.5  particu-
lates  are  readily  suspended  in  air,  carried  and 
traveling  like  gaseous  species.    The  numbers 
above  give  upper estimates  on ambient  particu-
late  concentrations  of  about  10-2,  10,  and  104 
particles/cm3 for particles of diameter 10, 1, and 
0.1  µm,  respectively  (computed  for  monodis-

perse distributions of aerosol matter having den-
sity 1.5 g/cm3).   These  limits  suggest that clog-
ging  of  10µm  nozzles  by  ambient  particulates 
should  be  easily  avoided  whereas  the  cleaning 
and  filtering  needed  to avoid clogging of 0.1µm 
nozzles  will  present  significant  technical  chal-
lenges.  It is worth noting, however, that current 
integrated  circuit  linewidths  are  considerable 
less than that 0.1 µm.  Hence the microelectron-
ics industry routinely prevents contamination by 
particles of this size.  

Given  ambient  concentrations  for  1µm  di-
ameter  particulates  of  a  few  particles/cm3  or 
less, it  would  seem  entirely  feasible  to  develop 
cleaning  and  filtering  techniques  that  would 
allow  reliable generation of liquid jets from 1µm 
nozzles, which would  be a  factor of ten smaller 
than  the  usual  working  limit.   Accordingly,  we 
have  devoted  considerable  effort  to  developing 
and  testing  such  techniques.  That  work  is  de-
scribed  in  detail  elsewhere  [95].  Stainless  steel 
nozzle tubes were investigated, as were borosili-
cate  glass  and  fused  silica  nozzles.   PEEK  fit-
tings  were  exclusively  employed  to  mount  and 
connect  the  glass  and  silica  nozzles,  including 
both commercial  fittings  [45]  and  custom-made 
parts.   The  operative  assumption  was  that noz-
zles,  once  cleaned  and  protected  by  a  filter  on 
the  upstream  side,  could  be  stored  and  then 
eventually used  with no further risk of contami-
nation.   This  presupposes that (1) all particulates 
smaller than the nozzle diameter can be removed 
from the  nozzle  tube  by an  initial  cleaning  and 
flushing, (2) the filter element can be attached to 
the nozzle  without introducing  new  particulates 
into the nozzle tube, and  (3) the  filter does  not 
itself pass  or shed  contaminant  particles.   In ad-
dition,  it  is  necessary  when  operating  with  a 
biological  solution  that  (4)  the  working  fluid 
(which  may  be  a  complex  chemical  solution, 
possibly containing  detergents  and  other chemi-
cally active species) does not clean contaminants 
from  the  nozzle  wall  and  (5)  that  the  proteins 
within the solution do not clump or coagulate in 
sizes large enough to clog the nozzle.  

Equipment and techniques were developed  to 
flush nozzles from both the distal end and the tip 
end.  Numerous cleaning  solutions were investi-
gated,  both  with  and  without  ultrasonic  excita-
tion.   HPLC  water  and  research  grade  solvents 
were  used  in  this  cleaning  and  all  liquids  were 
filtered  multiple 
through  commercial 
0.5µm  sintered  PEEK  filters.   Plasma  cleaning 

times 

23

of  nozzles  was  explored.   Fire  polishing  tech-
niques  were  developed  to  remove  sharp  edges 
from the distal ends of nozzle tubes and from the 
front of the fiber optic capillaries  used for back-
flushing.    Cleaning  and  flushing  of  capillaries 
prior to  "pulling" of the nozzle was  tried.   Sol-
gel  techniques  were  employed  to  grow  silicate 
frit filters within the nozzle tube just upstream of 
the nozzle.   Many of these techniques  did bring 
about improvements in performance, but even in 
their  aggregate they did  not provide  the  desired 
reliable operation desired in the sub-4 µm range 
of nozzles.   Nozzles  of  4  µm would  "turn  on" 
fairly reliably a first time, even with only mod-
erately careful  preparation.   Attempts  to  re-start 
such nozzles  after the supply reservoir had  been 
emptied  and  re-filled, however, were successful 
only  about  10%  of  the  time.   Nozzles  of  8µm 
diameter,  in  contrast,  would  run  indefinitely 
without  clogging.   It  is  apparent that  even with 
considerable care  in  cleaning  and  filtering  -  al-
beit in a  standard  laboratory setting  and  not  un-
der  clean  room  conditions  -  dependable  opera-
tion of nozzles  below  4µm diameter (despite the 
use  of  much  smaller filters)  remains  extremely 
challenging.  Many-particle  interactions  may  be 
responsible.

12. Aerojet focused source
Given  the  technical  challenges  of  cleaning  and 
filtering  micrometer-sized  nozzles,  it  is  worth 
investigating alternative approaches in which the 
converging end of a solid nozzle is replaced by a 
converging  aerodynamic  flow.    One  promising 
approach is  that  described  by Gañán-Calvo [52, 
53,  96],  which  uses  fluid  dynamical  means  to 
generate a liquid cone and small droplets from a 

large  capillary. The  liquid  is  injected  through  a 
capillary needle inside a sealed driving  chamber. 
A  hole  in  the  driving  chamber  is  located  just 
opposite  the  needle’s  end.  Gas,  in this  case  he-
lium,  is  forced  through  the  hole  by  the  extra 
pressure existing  in the chamber. Due to suction 
forces  a meniscus  develops  (similar  to a Taylor 
cone)  from  whose  vertex  a  very  thin  jet is  is-
sued.  The  jet size  can be  adjusted  by adjusting 
the gas  pressure  and  liquid  pressure. This  tech-
nique avoids clogging  problems (like ESI) while 
producing  a (presumably uncharged) collimated 
beam  of droplets  much smaller than the  nozzle 
diameter.  We  are  currently  investigating  these 
sources for their possibilities as protein injection 
sources. Figure 20 shows a close-up view  of our 
prototype source  in operation. The water menis-
cus  formed  at  the end  of  the  glass  capillary  by 
the gas flow is clearly visible and a jet is ejected, 
which then breaks up into droplets with diameter 
about 10 times smaller than the capillary ID (see 
Figure 21). The droplet breakup in these jets can 
be triggered  by an external piezo transducer, by 
analogy  with  the  Rayleigh  droplet  sources, 
which leads to monodispersed droplets as shown 
in  Figure  22.  A  current  measurement  between 
the source assembly and  an electrode in the liq-
uid  shows  a  streaming  current about  a  hundred 
times smaller than measured  with Rayleigh jets, 
i.e. the droplets  produced are almost uncharged. 
Preliminary experiments with detergent buffer as 
used  for  membrane  proteins  showed  the  same 
reliability  of  the  droplet  formation  process  as 
with  pure  water. By  adjusting  the  experimental 
conditions  (aperture  sizes,  pressures)  we  have 
recently  suceeded 
in  producing  collimated 
droplet  jets  of  micrometer  or  submicrometer 
diameter without the clogging  problems  associ-
ated with the production of Rayleigh jets.

24

Figure 20: Closeup view of  our prototype aerojet focused source. A glass capillary (500µm ID) extends from the left 
and terminates close to a 500µm ID aperture. Water in the glass capillary is pressurized and helium is forced through 
the aperture  by the  extra  pressure  existing inside the chamber to the left. Due to suction forces a meniscus develops 
(visible at the end of  the capillary) and a fine jet exits to the right. 

Figure 21: Fast exposure (100 ns) of  water droplet jet ejected from aerojet focused source. The source is on the right. 
The  dimensions of  the  apertures are  smaller  than in  Figure  20: The  capillary  supplying the  water  has an ID of  50 
µm. The  diameter  of  the  jet before  breakup is about 5 µm, i.e. a reduction by a  factor  of  10. The gasflow aperture 
has a diameter of  100 µm. The droplet diameter is about 10 µm. Water pressure 20 psi, gas pressure 6 psi (measured 
at  the  gas supply bottles, the  water pressure  at the  nozzle  is reduced due  to  the  use  of  a  0.5µm filter  in the  water 
line). By reducing the water pressure, i.e. the flow rate, the droplet diameter could be reduced to about 5 µm.

Figure 22: Untriggered (top) versus triggered (bottom) droplet breakup from an aerojet focused source. The source is 
on the  right. Exposure  time:  200 ns, water pressure: 25 psi, gas pressure:  5 psi, piezo trigger frequency:  405 kHz, 
droplet diameter 10 µm. Source dimensions are the same as in Figure 21.

25

13. Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NSF award IDBR 0555845 and ARO award DAAD190010500.

14. References

[1] 
[2]  Wu J S, Leinenweber K, Spence J C H and O'Keeffe M 2006 Ab initio phasing of x-ray powder 

Spence J C H and Doak R B 2004 Single molecule diffraction Physical Review Letters 92 198102

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

diffraction patterns by charge flipping Nature Materials 5 647-52
Kurkal V, Daniel R M, Finney J L, Tehei M, Dunn R V and Smith J C 2005 Enzyme activity and 
flexibility at very low hydration Biophysical Journal 89 1282-7
Dunn R V and Daniel R M 2004 The use of gas-phase substrates to study enzyme catalysis at low 
hydration Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sci-
ences 359 1309-20
Henderson R 2004 Realizing the potential of electron cryo-microscopy Quarterly Reviews of 
Biophysics 37 3-13
Bartell L S and Huang J F 1994 Supercooling of water below the anomalous range near 226 k 
Journal of Physical Chemistry 98 7455-7
Howard E I and Cachau R E 2002 Ink-jet printer heads for ultra-small-drop protein crystallogra-
phy Biotechniques 33 1302
Nishioka G M, Markey A A and Holloway C K 2004 Protein damage in drop-on-demand printers 
Journal of the American Chemical Society 126 16320-1
Arakawa E T, Tuminello P S, Khare B N and Milham M E 2001 Optical properties of ovalbumin 
in 0.130-2.50 mu m spectral region Biopolymers 62 122-8

[10]  Arakawa E T, Tuminello P S, Khare B N and Milham M E 1997 Optical properties of horseradish 

[11] 

peroxidase from 0.13 to 2.5 mu m Biospectroscopy 3 73-80
Simonson T 2003 Electrostatics and dynamics of proteins Reports on Progress in Physics 66 737-
87

[12]  Koch M H J, Dorrington E, Klaring R, Michon A M, Sayers Z, Marquet R and Houssier C 1988 
Electric-field x-ray-scattering measurements on tobacco mosaic-virus Science 240 194-6
[13]  Bras W, Diakun G P, Diaz J F, Maret G, Kramer H, Bordas J and Medrano F J 1998 The suscepti-
bility of pure tubulin to high magnetic fields: A magnetic birefringence and x-ray fiber diffraction 
study Biophysical Journal 74 1509-21
Sutter P-2000, see http://www.sutter.com/products/product_sheets/p2000.html. 

[14] 
[15]  Hager D B, Dovichi N J, Klassen J and Kebarle P 1994 Droplet electrospray mass-spectrometry 

Analytical Chemistry 66 3944-9

[16]  Hager D B and Dovichi N J 1994 Behavior of microscopic liquid droplets near a strong 

electrostatic-field - droplet electrospray Analytical Chemistry 66 1593-4

[17]  Hemberg O, Hansson B A M, Berglund M and Hertz H M 2000 Stability of droplet-target laser-

plasma soft x-ray sources Journal of Applied Physics 88 5421-5

[18]  Chudobiak M J 1995 High-speed, medium voltage pulse-amplifier for diode reverse transient 

measurements Review of Scientific Instruments 66 5352-4
[19] 
Frohn A and Roth N 2000 Dynamics of droplets. (Berlin: Springer)
[20]  Middleman S 1998 An introduction to fluid dynamics. (New York: Wiley)
[21]  Rayleigh L 1878 On the instability of jets Proc London Math Soc 10 4-13
[22]  Hanson E 1999 Recent progress in ink jet technologies ii. (Springfield, VA Society for Imaging 

Science and Technology)
[23] 
Siegbahn H and Siegbahn K 1973 Esca applied to liquids J Electron Spectr Rel Phenom 2 319-25
[24]  Keller W, Morgner H and Muller W A 1986 Probing the outermost layer of a free liquid surface - 
electron-spectroscopy of formamide under he(2(3)s) impact Molecular Physics 57 623-36

26

[25] 

[26] 

[27] 

[28] 

[29] 

[30] 

Faubel M, Steiner B and Toennies J P 1998 Measurement of he i photoelectron spectra of liquid 
water, formamide and ethylene glycol in fast-flowing microjets Journal of Electron Spectroscopy 
and Related Phenomena 95 159-69
Faubel M, Steiner B and Toennies J P 1997 Photoelectron spectroscopy of liquid water, some al-
cohols, and pure nonane in free micro jets Journal of Chemical Physics 106 9013-31
Faubel M, Steiner B and Toennies J P 1997 The static and dynamic surface composition of 
formamide-benzyl alcohol and water-formamide liquid mixtures studied by means of hei photoe-
lectron spectroscopy Molecular Physics 90 327-44
Faubel M and Steiner B 1992 Strong bipolar electrokinetic charging of thin liquid jets emerging 
from 10 mu-m ptir nozzles Berichte Der Bunsen-Gesellschaft-Physical Chemistry Chemical Phys-
ics 96 1167-72
Faubel M and Kisters T 1989 Non-equilibrium molecular evaporation of carboxylic-acid dimers 
Nature 339 527-9
Faubel M, Schlemmer S and Toennies J P 1988 A molecular-beam study of the evaporation of 
water from a liquid jet Zeitschrift Fur Physik D-Atoms Molecules and Clusters 10 269-77

[31]  Kondow T and Mafune F 2000 Structures and dynamics of molecules on liquid beam surfaces 

Annual Review of Physical Chemistry 51 731-61

[32]  Mafune F, Takeda Y, Nagata T and Kondow T 1992 Formation and ejection of cluster ions from a 

liquid beam of aniline ethanol solution by laser photoionization Chemical Physics Letters 199 
615-20

[33]  Holstein W L, Hayes L J, Robinson E M C, Laurence G S and Buntine M A 1999 Aspects of elec-

trokinetic charging in liquid microjets Journal of Physical Chemistry B 103 3035-42
[34]  Wilson K R, Rude B S, Smith J, Cappa C, Co D T, Schaller R D, Larsson M, Catalano T and 

[35] 

Saykally R J 2004 Investigation of volatile liquid surfaces by synchrotron x-ray spectroscopy of 
liquid microjets Review of Scientific Instruments 75 725-36
Trostell B 1995 Vacuum injection of hydrogen micro-sphere beams Nuclear Instruments & Meth-
ods in Physics Research Section a-Accelerators Spectrometers Detectors and Associated Equip-
ment 362 41-52

[36]  Rymell L and Hertz H M 1995 Debris elimination in a droplet-target laser-plasma soft-x-ray 

source Review of Scientific Instruments 66 4916-20

[37]  Rymell L, Berglund M and Hertz H M 1995 Debris-free single-line laser-plasma x-ray source for 

[38]  Rymell L and Hertz H M 1993 Droplet target for low-debris laser-plasma soft-x-ray generation 

microscopy Applied Physics Letters 66 2625-7

Optics Communications 103 105-10

[39]  Berglund M, Rymell L, Hertz H M and Wilhein T 1998 Cryogenic liquid-jet target for debris-free 

laser-plasma soft x-ray generation Review of Scientific Instruments 69 2361-4

[40]  Berglund M, Rymell L and Hertz H M 1996 Ultraviolet prepulse for enhanced x-ray emission and 

brightness from droplet-target laser plasmas Applied Physics Letters 69 1683-5

[41]  Malmqvist L, Rymell L and Hertz H M 1996 Droplet-target laser-plasma source for proximity x-

[42] 

[43] 

[44] 
[45] 
[46] 

ray lithography Applied Physics Letters 68 2627-9
Foster C A, Kim K, Turnbull R J and Hendricks C D 1977 Apparatus for producing uniform solid 
spheres of hydrogen Review of Scientific Instruments 48 625-31
Foster C A, Hendricks C D and Turnbull R J 1975 Hollow hydrogen spheres for laser-fusion tar-
gets Applied Physics Letters 26 580-1
http://www.newobjective.com/products/tips_index.html 
http://www.upchurch.com  
Fromme P, Yu H Q, DeRuyter Y S, Jolley C, Chauhan D K, Melkozernov A and Grotjohann I 
2006 Structure of photosystems i and ii Comptes Rendus Chimie 9 188-200

[47]  www.polysciences.com  
[48]  Goff J A and Gratch S 1946 Low-pressure properties of water from -160 to 212 f  52nd annual 

meeting of the American society of heating and ventilating engineers New York  p. 95-122.

[49]  Klinkenberg A, van der Minne J L 1958 Electrostatics in the petroleum industry. (Amsterdam: 

Elsevier)

27

[50] 

Fenn J B, Mann M, Meng C K, Wong S F and Whitehouse C M 1989 Electrospray ionization for 
mass-spectrometry of large biomolecules Science 246 64-71

[51]  Nilsson J and Palm L 2001 Charging current measurements and charging synchronization in con-

tinuous jets Review of Scientific Instruments 72 1574-9

[52]  Martin-Banderas L, Flores-Mosquera M, Riesco-Chueca P, Rodriguez-Gil A, Cebolla A, Chavez 
S and Ganan-Calvo A M 2005 Flow focusing: A versatile technology to produce size-controlled 
and specific-morphology microparticles Small 1 688-92

[53]  Gañán-Calvo A M and Barrero A 1999 A novel pneumatic technique to generate steady capillary 

microjets Journal of Aerosol Science 30 117-25

[54]  Yang P X, Cooks R G, Ouyang Z, Hawkridge A M and Muddiman D C 2005 Gentle protein ioni-

zation assisted by high-velocity gas flow Analytical Chemistry 77 6174-83

[55]  Chen D R, Pui D Y H and Kaufman S L 1995 Electrospraying of conducting liquids for monodis-
perse aerosol generation in the 4 nm to 1.8 mu-m diameter range Journal of Aerosol Science 26 
963-77

[56]  McCarthy M J and Molloy N A 1974 Review of stability of liquid jets and the influence of nozzle 

design The Chemical Engineering Journal 7 1-20

[57]  Mates S P and Settles G S 2005 A study of liquid metal atomization using close-coupled nozzles, 

[58] 

part 2: Atomization behavior Atomization and Sprays 15 41-59
Issac K, Missoum A, Drallmeier J and Johnston A 1994 Atomization experiments in a coaxial co-
flowing mach 1.5 flow AIAA Journal 32 1640-6
http://www.sono-tek.com/accumist/accumist.html  

[59] 
[60]  Okamoto T, Suzuki T and Yamamoto N 2000 Microarray fabrication with covalent attachment of 

DNA using bubble jet technology Nature Biotechnology 18 438-41

[61]  Oomens J, Polfer N, Moore D T, van der Meer L, Marshall A G, Eyler J R, Meijer G and von 

Helden G 2005 Charge-state resolved mid-infrared spectroscopy of a gas-phase protein Physical 
Chemistry Chemical Physics 7 1345-8

[62]  Niemann B, Guttmann P, Hambach D, Schneider G, Weiss D and Schmahl G 2001 A rotating 
condenser and off-axis zone plate monochromator for the txm at the undulator u41 at bessy ii 
Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section a-Accelerators Spectrometers De-
tectors and Associated Equipment 467 857-60

[63]  Cech N B and Enke C G 2001 Practical implications of some recent studies in electrospray ioni-

[64] 

[65] 

zation fundamentals Mass Spectrometry Reviews 20 362-87
Taylor G 1964 Disintegration of water drops in electric field Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London Series a-Mathematical and Physical Sciences 280 383-97
Taflin D C, Ward T L and Davis E J 1989 Electrified droplet fission and the rayleigh limit Lang-
muir 5 376-84

[66]  Rayleigh L 1882 Philosophical Magazine 14 184
[67]  Dole M, Mack L L and Hines R L 1968 Molecular beams of macroions Journal of Chemical 

[68] 

Physics 49 2240-9
Iribarne J V and Thomson B A 1976 Evaporation of small ions from charged droplets Journal of 
Chemical Physics 64 2287-94

[69]  Cole R B 1997 Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry : Fundamentals, instrumentation, and 

applications. (New York: Wiley)

[70]  Korner R, Wilm M, Morand K, Schubert M and Mann M 1996 Nano electrospray combined with 

a quadrupole ion trap for the analysis of peptides and protein digests Journal of the American 
Society for Mass Spectrometry 7 150-6

[72] 

[71]  Rostom A A, Fucini P, Benjamin D R, Juenemann R, Nierhaus K H, Hartl F U, Dobson C M and 
Robinson C V 2000 Detection and selective dissociation of intact ribosomes in a mass spectrome-
ter Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 97 5185-90
Loo J A 1997 Studying noncovalent protein complexes by electrospray ionization mass spec-
trometry Mass Spectrometry Reviews 16 1-23
Fuerstenau S D, Benner W H, Thomas J J, Brugidou C, Bothner B and Siuzdak G 2001 Mass 
spectrometry of an intact virus Angewandte Chemie-International Edition 40 542-4
Siuzdak G 1998 Probing viruses with mass spectrometry Journal of Mass Spectrometry 33 203-11

[74] 

[73] 

28

[75]  Katta V and Chait B T 1991 Observation of the heme globin complex in native myoglobin by 

[76] 

electrospray-ionization mass-spectrometry Journal of the American Chemical Society 113 8534-5
Loo J A, Loo R R O, Udseth H R, Edmonds C G and Smith R D 1991 Solvent-induced 
conformational-changes of polypeptides probed by electrospray-ionization mass-spectrometry 
Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry 5 101-5

[77]  Mirza U A, Cohen S L and Chait B T 1993 Heat-induced conformational-changes in proteins 

studied by electrospray ionization mass-spectrometry Analytical Chemistry 65 1-6
[78]  Wagner D S and Anderegg R J 1994 Conformation or cytochrome-c studied by deuterium-

exchange electrospray-ionization mass-spectrometry Analytical Chemistry 66 706-11
Sobott F, McCammon M G, Hernandez H and Robinson C V 2005 The flight of macromolecular 
complexes in a mass spectrometer Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 
Series a-Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences 363 379-89

[80]  Verkerk U H, Peschke M and Kebarle P 2003 Effect of buffer cations and of h3o+ on the charge 

states of native proteins. Significance to determinations of stability constants of protein com-
plexes Journal of Mass Spectrometry 38 618-31
Peschke M, Blades A and Kebarle P 2002 Charged states of proteins. Reactions of doubly proto-
nated alkyldiamines with nh3: Solvation or deprotonation. Extension of two proton cases to mul-
tiply protonated globular proteins observed in the gas phase Journal of the American Chemical 
Society 124 11519-30

[79] 

[81] 

[82]  Gomez A, Bingham D, de Juan L and Tang K 1998 Production of protein nanoparticles by elec-

[83] 

trospray drying Journal of Aerosol Science 29 561-74
Jarrold M F 1999 Unfolding, refolding, and hydration of proteins in the gas phase Accounts of 
Chemical Research 32 360-7

[84]  Ruotolo B T, Giles K, Campuzano I, Sandercock A M, Bateman R H and Robinson C V 2005 
Evidence for macromolecular protein rings in the absence of bulk water Science 310 1658-61

[85]  Cloupeau M and Prunetfoch B 1994 Electrohydrodynamic spraying functioning modes - a 

critical-review Journal of Aerosol Science 25 1021-36

[86]  Wilm M S and Mann M 1994 Electrospray and taylor-cone theory, doles beam of macromole-
cules at last International Journal of Mass Spectrometry and Ion Processes 136 167-80

[87]  Bruins A P, Covey T R and Henion J D 1987 Ion spray interface for combined liquid 

chromatography/atmospheric pressure ionization mass-spectrometry Analytical Chemistry 59 
2642-6

[88]  Wilm M and Mann M 1996 Analytical properties of the nanoelectrospray ion source Analytical 

Chemistry 68 1-8

[89]  Aksyonov S A and Williams P 2001 Impact desolvation of electrosprayed microdroplets - a new 
ionization method for mass spectrometry of large biomolecules Rapid Communications in Mass 
Spectrometry 15 2001-6

[90]  Kozhenkov V I, Kirsh A A and Fuks N A 1974 Investigation of monodisperse aerosol formation 

by electrostatic atomization of liquids Colloid Journal of the USSR 36 1061-3

[91]  McLean J A, Huff R A and Montaser A 1999 Fundamental properties of aerosols produced in 

helium by a direct injection nebulizer Applied Spectroscopy 53 1331-40

[92]  www.meinhard.com  
[93]  Moseler M and Landman U 2000 Formation, stability, and breakup of nanojets Science 289 

1165-9

[94]  Air Quality Criteria for Particulate Matter, Volumes I, see 

http://oaspub.epa.gov/eims/eimscomm.getfile?p_download_id=435945  

[95]  Warner J, Weierstall U, D. Starodub, Hunter M, Spence J C H and Doak R B To be published  
[96]  Gañán-Calvo A M 1998 Generation of steady liquid microthreads and micron-sized monodisperse 

sprays in gas streams Physical Review Letters 80 285-8

29

