 

A 3D biomechanical vocal tract model to study speech 
production control: How to take into account the gravity? 

Stéphanie Buchaillard1,2*, Pascal Perrier1*& Yohan Payan2*

1ICP – UMR CNRS 5009, INPG & Univ. Stendhal, Grenoble, France. 

2TIMC – UMR CNRS 5525, Univ. Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France 

buchail@icp.inpg.fr, perrier@icp.inpg.fr, Yohan.Payan@imag.fr   

Abstract.  This  paper  presents  a  modeling  study  of  the  way  speech  motor 
control  can  deal  with  gravity  to  achieve  steady-state  tongue  positions.  It  is 
based  on  simulations  carried  out  with  the  3D  biomechanical  tongue  model 
developed  at  ICP,  which  is  now  controlled  with  the λ  model  (Equilibrium-
¨Point  Hypothesis).  The  influence  of  short-delay  orosensory  feedback  on 
posture  stability  is  assessed  by  testing  different  muscle  force/muscle  length 
relationships 
(Invariant  Characteristics).  Muscle  activation  patterns 
necessary  to  maintain  the  tongue  in  a  schwa  position  are  proposed,  and  the 
relations of head position, tongue shape and muscle activations are analyzed. 

1. Introduction 

The  characteristics  of  speech  production  (articulatory  and  acoustic)  signals  that  carry 
the  linguistic  information  are  the  results  of  a  combination  of  influences  related  to  the 
properties of the human motor control system, the physical mechanisms underlying the 
generation  of  articulatory  gestures  and  sounds,  the  properties  of  the  human  speech 
perception system, and the constraints of the phonological systems. There are a number 
of findings supporting the hypothesis that these factors of different kinds interact which 
each other to determine the "common currency" (Goldstein & Fowler, 2003) shared in 
perception and production of speech. In this framework we have been now working for 
many  years  on  a  model  of  speech  production  called  GEPPETO1  in  order  to 
quantitatively  assess  the  respective  influences  of  target  based  optimal  motor  control 
strategies and of biomechanical properties of the vocal tract articulators. 

In the control model defined in GEPPETO (Perrier et al., 2005), movement targets are 
determined by perceptual constraints: they correspond to regions of the formant space in 
which  sounds  are  perceptually  strictly  equivalent.  Motor  control  variables  are  muscle 
recruitment  thresholds,  as  suggested  by  the  λ  model  (Equilibrium-Point  Hypothesis, 
Feldman, 1986). These variables specify the equilibrium state of the articulators. For a 
given phoneme sequence, the choice of the motor control variables associated with each 

                                                 
*This  project  is  supported  by  the  EMERGENCE  Program  of  the  Région  Rhône-Alpes  and  by  the  P2R 

Program funded by the CNRS and the French Foreign Office (POPAART Project) 

1  GEPPETO  holds  for  "GEstures  shaped  by  the  Physics  and  by  a  PErceptually  Oriented  Targets 

Optimization". 

 

 

phoneme  is  determined  by  an  optimal  planning  that  selects  the  target  motor  control 
variables  ensuring  that  the  desired  target  regions  of  the  formant  space  are  reached, 
while  minimizing  a  speaker-oriented  criterion  (currently  the  length  of  the  path  in  the 
motor  control  space).  Speech  transitions  between  successive  elementary  sounds  are 
generated  by  the  shift  of  the  motor  control  variables  at  a  constant  rate  between 
successive  target  commands.  The  physical  modeling  currently  proposed  in GEPPETO 
includes  2D  (Payan  &  Perrier,  1997)  and  3D  (Gérard  et  al.,  2006)  biomechanical 
models of the tongue, as well as an acoustic analog of the vocal tract. In this model, the 
actual  movements  of  the  tongue,  and  then  the  temporal  characteristics  of  the  acoustic 
signal are the result of the combination of the effects of the time variation of the control 
variables and of the biomechanical properties of the tongue. 

With  GEPPETO,  using  the  2D  biomechanical  model  of  the  tongue,  it  was  possible  to 
show  that  complex  kinematic  patterns,  such  as  multi-peaks  velocity  profile  (Payan  & 
Perrier,  1997)  and  loops-like  articulatory  paths  (Perrier  et  al.,  2003)  could  be  largely 
due  to  biomechanical  influences,  including  muscle  anatomy,  soft  tissues  deformation 
and  tongue  palate  interaction.  In  this  paper  a  study  of  the  impact  of  the  gravity  on 
tongue  positioning  is  proposed  on  the  basis  of  simulations  carried  out  with  the  3D 
biomechanical model of the tongue. Consequences on the adjustment of motor control 
variables  are  considered.  The  importance  of  the  gravity  in  speech  articulators 
positioning has been demonstrated by different studies (e.g. Shiller et al., 1999; Tiede et 
al.,  2000).  It  has  in  particular  applications for the analysis of speech production using 
MRI anatomical images of the vocal tract.  

First, the recent improvements of the 3D biomechanical tongue model are presented. In 
addition  to  the  integration  of  the  gravitational  field,  these  improvements  include 
changes  in  elastic  characteristics  of  tongue  tissues,  the  account  of  contacts  between 
tongue and palate and teeth, a modeling of the links between hyoid bone and other bony 
structures,  and  the  implementation  of  the  λ  model.  Using  this  model  the  potential 
impact of the gravity on tongue shape in the absence of muscle activation is evaluated, 
and  the  importance  of  a  proper  account  of  short-delay  sensory  feedback  is  shown,  in 
order to counteract the effect of gravity. Basic muscle activation patterns are proposed 
that permit to maintain a schwa position when the head is in vertical position.  

2. The 3D tongue model and related bony structures 

2.1  Geometrical modeling  
The  3D  vocal  tract  model  was  originally  developed  by  Gerard  et  al.  (2003,  2006).  It 
included biomechanical models of the jaw, the teeth, the palate, the pharynx, the tongue 
and the hyoid bone. The geometries of these models were extracted from data collected 
on a human speaker (plaster cast of the palate optically scanned, MRI images and CT 
scans).  The  tongue  and  the  hyoid  bone  were  represented  by  volumes  discretized  with 
3D  elements  while  the  other  structures  were  modeled  by  surfaces  discretized  with  2D 
elements. The arrangement of the 3D elements inside the tongue volume was designed 
in  order  to  identify  muscular  structures.  Eleven  muscles  were  therefore  modeled 
through  individual  sets  of  adjacent  elements.  Insertions  on  the  hyoid  bone  of  tongue 
muscles and of four external muscles were modeled. External muscles are represented 
by a set of springs.  

 

2.2  Mechanical modelling  

2.2.1 Tongue biomechanics 

The  tongue  was  modeled  as  a  soft  tissue  attached  to  the  hyoid  bone,  the  jaw  and  the 
styloid process, in interaction through soft contacts with the anterior part of the palate 
and  with  the  lower  teeth.  It  consists  of  a  3D  Finite  Element  model  assuming  a  large 
deformation framework with a non-linear hyper-elastic constitutive law (Gérard et al., 
2005, 2006). Arguing the fact that the constitutive law (i.e. the stress-strain relationship) 
proposed  by  Gérard  et  al.  (2005)  was  extracted  from  data  collected  on  tongue  tissues 
removed  from a  fresh cadaver, our group  proposed to adapt this original law to try to 
distinguish between passive tissues and tissues that belong to active muscles. Therefore, 
two  different  constitutive  equations  were  introduced:  one  describing  the  passive 
behavior of the tongue tissues and another one modeling the stiffness of the tissues as 
an increasing function of tongue muscles activations. For a given element of the model, 
the passive (respectively the active) constitutive law is used if the element belongs to a 
region that is supposed to be passive (respectively active). The passive constitutive law 
was  directly  derived  from  the  non-linear  law  proposed  by  Gerard  et  al.  (2005). 
However,  as  the  stiffness  of  passive  tissues  removed  from  a  cadaver  is  known  to  be 
lower  than  the  one  measured  on  in  vivo  tissues,  it  was  decided  to  modify  the 
constitutive law originally proposed in our tongue model. To our knowledge, one of the 
most  relevant  in  vivo  measurements  provided  in  the  literature  for  human  muscle 
stiffness is the one proposed by Duck (1990). This work provided a value of 6.2kPa for 
a human muscle in its rest position, and a value of 110kPa for the same muscle when it 
was contracted. As the original constitutive law of Gérard et al. (2006) provided a value 
of 1.15kPa for the stiffness at the origin (i.e. the Young modulus value at low strains), it 
was decided to multiply by a factor of 5 this original constitutive law, in order to reach 
the  6.2kPa  value  at  the  origin  while  maintaining  the  overall  non-linear  shape  of  the 
passive constitutive law. Figure 1 plots the corresponding law. 

 

Figure  1.  Stress/Strain  constitutive  law  for  passive  tissues  (Yeoh  second  order 
material with C10=1037Pa and C20=486Pa). The curve’s tangent for a deformation rate 
equals to 1 gives the Young modulus at low strains. 

As concerns the constitutive law that describes the mechanical behavior of an element 
belonging  to  an  active  muscular  region,  it  was  decided  to  arbitrarily  multiply  the 
passive  constitutive  law  by  a  factor  that  is  a  function  of  the  muscle  activation.  The 
underlying idea is that an activation of the muscle leads to an increase of its stiffness. 
The  multiplying  factor  was  chosen  in  order  to  maintain  the  stiffness  value  below 
110kPa when maximal muscle activation is simulated. 
The  tongue  mass  density  was  chosen  equal  to  1000kg/m3.  With  the  proposed  finite 
element mesh the tongue mass was calculated equal to 92g. The damping was defined 

 

by specifying mass and stiffness Rayleigh damping constants that were set respectively 
to 10 and 0.7.   

2.2.2 Hyoid bone biomechanics 

The  hyoid  bone  is  represented  by  4-nodes  3D  tetrahedral  elements.  Its  mass 
approximates  5g.  Its  body  gives  insertion  to  the  mylohyoid,  the  geniohyoid  and  the 
posterior part of the genioglossus, and the greater cornua to the hyoglossus. Nodes on 
the tongue mesh corresponding to muscle insertions were selected as insertion nodes. A 
set of 10 springs emerging from the hyoid bone were used to represent the anterior part 
of the digastric, its posterior part, as well as the sternohyoid, omohyoid and thyrohyoid 
muscles. The spring’s stiffness was set to 25N.m-1. The insertions nodes and the hyoid 
bone define a rigid region to ensure a realistic coupling between the hyoid bone and the 
surrounding muscles. 

2.2.3 Contacts between tongue and hard structures 

Three contact regions were determined to represent the contact between the tongue and 
1)  the  hard  palate,  2)  the  soft  palate,  3)  the  lower  teeth  and  the  inner  face  of  the 
mandible. For each region, a group of elements belonging to the tongue surface, called 
the contact surface, and to the second region of interest, called the target surface, were 
selected. At each step of the resolution, collisions and contacts were detected for every 
surface/target  pair  and  resolved  using  an  augmented  Lagrangian  contact  algorithm 
(iterative  penalty  method).  We  used  a  contact  stiffness  factor  of  0.10  (Ansys  FKN 
parameter) for the different pairs, and an allowable penetration (FTOLN parameters) of 
0.2mm for the first two pairs (contact with the palate), and 0.3mm for the last one. 

3.  Muscle force generation mechanisms based on the λ model 

3.1 

Implementation of the λ model 

Each tongue muscle was represented by a set of adjacent elements inside the mesh. A 
main  fiber  direction  was  defined  for  each  muscle  within  the  corresponding  set  of 
elements.  For  each  muscle;  its  activation  was  functionally  modeled  by  an  external 
generator (based on the Equilibrium Point Hypothesis, see below) applying distributed 
forces  along  macro-fibers  joining  the  nodes  of  the  corresponding  finite  elements  set 
along the main fiber direction. Several macro-fibers were defined for each muscle. For 
more  details  about  the  distribution  of  the  force  along  the  macro-fibers,  see  Payan  & 
Perrier (1997). 

Force generation mechanisms are modeled with the λ model (Feldman, 1986), in which 
muscle  activation  A  depends  both  on  central  commands  (λ's)  and  on  feedback 
l
information  concerning  the  muscle  length  and  its  variation  rate  l ,  according  to  the 
equation: 

&

[
l
+−=

]+
&µλ
l

A

 

 

 

 with 

µ =

0.01s

       

 

(1) 

 

~
The active muscle force  M
 

associated with this activation is modeled as 
)
 
 

~
[
M ρ
exp
=
where  ρ  is  a  parameter  accounting  for  the  force  generation  capability  of  the  muscle. 
This capability is linked to the cross-sectional area of the muscle and it was fixed to the 
values given in Table 1, on the basis of Payan & Perrier (1997) and Van Eijden et al. 

(
cA

 (2) 

]1

−

 

 

 

 

 

(1997). The c parameter was adjusted specifically for the 3D model, as will be explain 
below in section 3.2. 

A unique central λ command is defined for each muscle. However, given the model of 
force  distribution  over  macro-fibers,  it  is  necessary  to  infer  from  the  main  central 
command λ,  a motor command λi adapted specifically for each macro-fiber. To do so, 
the  lengths  of  the  macro-fibers  were  calculated  in  the  rest  position,  and  the  λi  values 
were calculated with each muscle on the basis of these lengths. For the longest fiber, λi 
was fixed to the central command λ, and for the other macro-fibers λi was calculated as 
(wi*λ), where wi is the ratio of the length of the macro-fiber divided by the length of the 
longest  macro-fiber  of  he  muscle  (wi  <1).  This  approach  was  chosen,  in  order  to 
distribute  the  force  evenly  over  the  macro-fibers of a same muscle, when tongue is at 
rest. The values wi are constant values independently of tongue position. 

GGp  GGm  GGa  Stylo..  GenioH..

Hyo  Vert  Trans 

IL 

SL 

Mylohyoi
d 

29 

26 

12 

24 

18 

39 

65 

30 

45 

19 

14 

Table 1. ρ factor specifying muscle force generation capabilities of each muscle described 
in the tongue model. 

Following  Laboissière  et  al.  (1996)  approach,  and  in  agreement  with  Payan  &  Perrier 
(1997),  a  model  of  the  dependence  of  muscle force  on  muscle  variation  rate  was  also 
taken into account. According to this model, muscle force decreases dramatically, when 
length variation rate becomes too large. 

3.2 

Choice of feedback gain and delay 

Figure  2:  Variation  of  normalized  muscle  activation  with  respect  to  the  ratio  of  the 
central  command  λ  and  the  fiber  length  l
,  for  different  muscles.  Top  panel:  with 
c=112m ; bottom panel : c=40m

-1 

fib

-1

Our first attempt to implement the λ model in our 3D tongue model is based on a value 
of 112m-1 for the c parameter in Equation 2. This value was proposed by Laboissière et 

 

 

 

al.  (1996)  for  their  2D  biomechanical  jaw  model.  It  was  also  used  in  the  2D  tongue 
models of Payan & Perrier (1997) and Perrier et al. (2003). Interestingly while these 2D 
biomechanical models of the tongue were all stable, strong instabilities were observed 
in the 3D model with and without central muscle activation. The top panel of Figure 2 
provides  an  explanation  for  this  instability.  This  figure  plots  the  normalized  muscle 
activation with respect to the ratio of the central command λ and the fiber length lfib, for 
different muscles. It can be observed that a small variation in the muscle activation can 
lead to dramatic changes in the muscular activation level. Therefore, the value of the c 
parameter  was  decreased  down  to  40  m-1,  which  corresponds  to  a  fair  compromise 
between the level of reflex activation and stability (bottom panel).  

Different  tests were also made  with the duration  of the feedback delay ∆ necessary to 
take  into  account  the  muscle  length  and  its  variation  rate.  A  delay  in  the  range  10  to 
20ms does not generate any instability. 

4 

Influence of orosensory feedback on posture stability  

4.1 

Influence of the Gravity in absence of feedback  

The tongue models originally provided by our group (Payan & Perrier, 1997; Perrier et 
al.,  2003;  Gerard  et  al.,  2003,  2006)  did  not  include  the  gravity  since  this  was  not 
straightforward  at  all.  Indeed,  one  must  be  aware  that  the  tongue  geometry  extracted 
from  medical  images  of  the  speaker  (CT  scans  and  MRI  images)  measures  the  rest 
position of the tongue with the gravity. Since this geometry is usually taken as an input 
for the initial shape of the tongue mesh, this mesh should be “pre-stressed”, i.e. should 
already include the internal stresses that are only due to the gravity. To our knowledge, 
most  of  the  tongue  models  published  in  the  literature  do  not  model  this  pre-stress. 
Therefore,  this  study  aims  at  investigating  more  in  details  the  way  the  control  model 
implemented in GEPPETO accounts for the gravity, in normal conditions (i.e. with the 
head in the vertical plane) and in disturbed ones (the head in the horizontal plane). 

Figure  3.  Influence  of  gravity  without  the  control 
model implemented in GEPPETO. The contours are 
represented  in  the  midsagittal  plane  after  1s  of 
simulation.  The  solid,  dotted  and  dashed  contours 
correspond 
tongue 
position, the final position for a standing subject and 
the final position a lying subject. Units of the X- and 
Y-axis are m 

respectively 

initial 

the 

to 

 

 

Influence  of  gravity  with 

Figure  4. 
reflex 
activation  (λ model)  and  without  any  centrally 
specified  muscle  activation.  The  solid  contour 
corresponds to the initial tongue position and the 
dotted  contour  to  the  final  position  for  a  1s 
simulation. Units of the X- and Y-axis are m 

 

As  a  first  step,  tongue  movement  was  simulated during one  second, in the  absence of 
any feedback and of any centrally controlled muscle activation. In this aim, the λ model 
was  deactivated  and  two  conditions  were  tested:  one  with  head  in  vertical  position 
comparable  to  the  head  of  a  person  sitting  or  standing,  and  one  with  the  head  in  the 
horizontal plane similar to the head position when subjects are lying. 

Figure 3 plots the tongue midsagittal contours for both simulations: a standing subject 
(dotted contour) and a lying subject (dashed contour). In the standing condition, tongue 
is deformed in the backward and downward direction towards the larynx, leading to an 
rest  lingual  shape,  which  tends  to  obstruct  the  lower  part  of  the  pharynx.  In  the  lying 
condition, the displacement is even larger towards the back of the mouth, with a tongue 
that is also going to obstruct the pharyngeal tract. It is here interesting to note that this 
fall down towards the larynx is often observed by surgeons with anaesthetized patients 
(i.e. deprived from any controlled muscular activity) lying on the operating table. 

5 

Muscle activations patterns in schwa position 

In  order  to  stabilize  the  initial  tongue  position,  defined  as  the  schwa  position  in  our 
model, the reflex activation alone in absence of specific muscle recruitment was found 
to be insufficient (see Figure 4). As shown in Figure 5, the combined activation of the 
mylohyoid  (MH),  which  stiffens  the  floor of the  mouth and  consequently elevates the 
tongue body, and of the posterior genioglossus (GGP), which pulls the tongue forward, 
seems  to  be  satisfactory  to  maintain  the  initial  position  for  a  standing  subject  (dotted 
contour). The λ command for GGP was set to 97% of the GGP rest length, and for the 
MH it was set to 90% of the GGP rest length. However, for a lying subject, the same 
activation pattern is not able to fully counteract the influence of gravity. The maximum 
force  levels  reached  during  the  simulation  (sum  of  the  forces  applied  on  the  different 
fibers) equaled 1.06N for the GGP and 2.99N for the MH for a standing position, and 
1.33N for the GGP and 2.66N for the MH for a lying position. 

 

 

Figure  5.  Influence  of  gravity  with  reflex  activation 
(λ model)  and  without 
the  centrally  specified 
activation  of  GGP  and  MH  (see  text).  The  solid 
contour  corresponds  to  the  initial  tongue  position 
and the dotted contour to the final position for a 1s 
simulation.  The  contours  are  represented  in  the 
midsagittal  plane  after  500ms  of  simulation.  The 
solid,  dotted  and  dashed  contours  correspond 
respectively  to  the  initial  tongue  position,  the  final 
position for a standing subject and the final position 
a lying subject. Units of the X- and Y-axis are m. 

6 

Conclusions 

The potential influence of gravity on articulatory movements and on their control during 
speech  production  has  not  been  much  studied  yet,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  MRI  data 
provide  evidence  that  the  tongue  shape  can  be  influenced  by  changes  in  the  speaker's 
head orientation. The modeling framework proposed in GEPPETO, including a realistic 
3D biomechanical model of the tongue and a control model based on the Equilibrium-
Point Hypothesis, has permitted to quantitatively assess (1) how the integration of short-

 

 

delay orosensory feedback helps to counteract the effect of gravity, (2) to which extent 
muscle  recruitments  learned  to  control  a  tongue  posture  in  a  given  head  position  are 
adapted to the control of the posture in another head orientation. It gives the possibility 
to  study  in  future  works  to  which  extent  the  speech  motor  control  system  has  to 
integrate the gravity to achieve speech movements with enough accuracy. 

7. References 
Duck  F.A.  (1990)  Physical  Properties  of  Tissues:  A  Comprehensive  Reference  Book. 

Academic Press, London. 

Feldman  A.G.,  Once  more  on  the  Equilibrium-Point  hypothesis  (λ  model)  for  motor 

control. Journal of Motor Behavior, Vol. 18, 1, 17-54, 1986 

Gérard  J.M.,  Wilhelms-Tricarico  R.,  Perrier  P.  &  Payan  Y.  A  3D  dynamical 
biomechanical  tongue  model  to  study  speech  motor  control.  Recent  Research 
Developments in Biomechanics, 1, 49-64, Transworld Research Network, 2003 

Gérard,  J.-M.,  Ohayon,  J.,  Luboz,  V.,  Perrier,  P.  &  Payan,  Y..  Non  linear  elastic 
properties  of  the  lingual  and  facial  tissues  assessed  by  indentation  technique. 
Application  to  the  biomechanics  of  speech  production.  Medical  Engineering  & 
Physics, 27, 884–892, 2005 

Gérard,  J.M.,  Perrier,  P.  &  Payan,  Y.  3D  biomechanical  tongue  modelling  to  study 
speech production  In J. Harrington & M. Tabain (eds), Speech Production: Models, 
Phonetic  Processes,  and  Techniques  (pp.  85-102).  Psychology  Press:  New-York, 
USA, 2006 

Goldstein, L. & Fowler, C.A. Articulatory phonology: A phonology for public language 
use. In N.O. Schiller & A.S. Meyer, Editors, Phonetics and Phonology in Language 
Comprehension and Production. Differences and Similarities , pages 159-207, 2003. 
Laboissière  R.,  Ostry  D.J.  &  Feldman  A.G.  The  Control  ofmulti-muscle  systems: 

human jaw and hyoid movements. Biological Cybernetics, 74, 373-384, 1996. 

Payan  Y.  &  Perrier  P.  (1997).  Synthesis  of  V-V  Sequences  with  a  2D  biomechanical 
the  Equilibrium  Point  Hypothesis.  Speech 

tongue  model  controlled  by 
Communication, 22 (2/3), 185-205. 

Perrier P., Payan Y., Zandipour M. & Perkell J. Influences of tongue biomechanics on 
speech  movements  during  the  production  of  velar  stop  consonants:  A  modeling 
study. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 114(3), 1582-1599, 2003. 

Perrier,  P.,  Ma,  L.  &  Payan,  Y..  Modeling  the  production  of  VCV  sequences  via  the 
inversion of a biomechanical model of the tongue. Proceedings of Interspeech 2005 
(pp. 1041 – 1044), International Speech Communication Association, 2005 

Shiller,  D.M.,  Ostry,  D.J.  &  Gribble,  P.L..  Effects  of  gravitational  load  on  jaw 

movements in speech. Journal of Neuroscience, 19(20, 9073-9080, 1999 

Tiede,  M.K.,  Masaki,  S.  &  Vatikiotis-Bateson,  E.  Contrasts  in  speech  articulation 
observed  in  sitting  and  supine  conditions.  In  Proceedings  of  the  5th  Seminar  on 
Speech  Production:  Models  and  Data  -  CREST  Workshop  on  Models  of  Speech 
Production: Motor Planning and Articulatory Modelling (pp. 25–28), Kloster Seeon, 
Germany, 2000 

Van Eijden, T.M.G.J., Korfage J.A.M and Brugman P., Architecture of the human jaw-
closing and jaw-opening muscles.  The anatomical record, 248(3): 464-474, 1997.   

