Panda_NuPECC05, submitted to Nucl. Phys. News, 20 December 2005

Exploring the Mysteries of Strong Interactions –

The PANDA Experiment

KAI-THOMAS BRINKMANN1, PAOLA GIANOTTI2, AND INTI LEHMANN3
1Institut für Kern- und Teilchenphysik, Technische Universität Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, Germany
2INFN-Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Via E. Fermi 40, I-00044 Frascati, Italy
3Department of Radiation Sciences, Uppsala University, Box 535, SE-75121 Uppsala, Sweden

investigate  in-medium  properties  of  hadrons  and  to
produce hypernuclei, even those containing more than
one strange quark, copiously.

Introduction

The physics of strong interactions is undoubtedly
one of the most challenging areas of modern science.
Quantum  Chromo  Dynamics  (QCD)  is  reproducing
the physics phenomena only at distances much shorter
than  the  size  of  the  nucleon,  where  perturbation
theory  can  be  used  yielding  results  of  high  precision
and  predictive  power.  As  the  coupling  constant  rises
steeply  at  nuclear  scales  (see  Figure  1)  perturbative
expansions  diverge  and  a  different  theoretical
approach is required. However, the strong interaction
keeps  providing  new  experimental  observations,
which were not predicted by “effective” theories. The
latter retain the fundamental symmetries of QCD, but
have  problems  in  describing  all  the  observed
phenomena simultaneously.

The physics of strange and charmed quarks holds
the  potential  to  connect  the  two  different  energy
domains  interpolating  between  the  limiting  scales  of
QCD. In this regime only scarce experimental data is
available,  most  of  which  has  been  obtained  with
electromagnetic probes.
One  possible  single  issue  that  may  greatly  advance
our  understanding  of  hadronic  structure  is  the
predicted  existence  of  states  outside  of  the  two-  and
three-quark  classifications,  which  for  example  could
arise  from  the  excitation  of  gluonic  degrees  of
freedom.  Recent  findings  from  running  experiments
at  B-factories  [2]  show  that,  indeed,  unexpected
narrow  states  unaccounted  for  in  the  naïve  quark
models  exist.  Experiments  focussed  on  the  abundant
production  and  systematic  studies  of  these  states  are
needed.  Preferably,  these  should  be  performed  using
hadronic  probes  because  the  cross  sections  are
expected to be very large in such systems. Results of
high statistical precision are a decisive element to be
able  to  identify  and  extract  features  of  these  exotic
states. Hadronic probes are advantageous also for the
production  of  hadrons  with  non-exotic  quantum
numbers,  as  these  can  be  formed  directly  with  high
cross  sections.  Phase  space  cooling  of  the  antiproton
beam 
furthermore  allows  high  precision
determination  of  the  mass  and  width  of  such  states.
Using  heavier  nuclei  as  targets  enables  us  to

Figure  1.  Coupling  constant  of  the  strong
interaction as a function of distance. The data points
represent  experimental  values  [1].  For  distances
between  quarks  comparable  to  the  nucleon  size  the
interaction  becomes  so  strong  that  quarks  cannot  be
further  separated  (confinement)  and  hadrons  are
formed. PANDA will investigate the properties of the
strong  interaction  in  this  key  region  for  the
understanding of matter.

The  PANDA  (antiProton  ANnnihilation  at
DArmstadt)  experiment  (see  Ref.  [3]  for  a  more
detailed  description),  which  will  be  installed  at  the
High  Energy  Storage  Ring  for  antiprotons  of  the
upcoming  Facility  for  Antiproton  and  Ion  Research
(FAIR), features a scientific programme devoted to:

charmonium spectroscopy,

• 
•  gluonic excitations (hybrids, glueballs),
•  open and hidden charm in nuclei,
• 
(cid:1)-ray spectroscopy of hypernuclei,

and selected other topics, which will be studied with
unprecedented accuracy.

Burning Physics Questions

“Exotic  objects”  which,  in  their  quantum
numbers,  cannot  be  described  by  configurations  of
two or three quarks, are an important consequence of

QCD.  Such  states  would  either  include  additional
valence quarks or valence-glue content. To date only
hints  of  such  states  were  observed,  but  unambiguous
evidence  is  missing.  To  a  large  extent,  our  under-
standing  of  hadron  structure  is  based  on  the
constituent  quark  model  where  mesons  are  quark-
antiquark pairs, and baryons are made of three quarks.
This may change if, indeed, other configurations were
proven to exist.

The relation between the world of hadrons and the
world of quarks (and gluons) is not fully understood.
Only a few percent of the mass and part of the spin of
a  nucleon  can  be 
to  valence  quark
linked 
contributions.  The  rest  has  to  be  attributed  to  a
dynamical  generation  process  which,  to  date,  cannot
be predicted concurrently by model calculations.

FAIR  will  allow  to  efficiently  produce  hypernuclei
even with more than one strange hadron, opening new
perspectives  for  nuclear  structure  studies.  The
accessible set of hyperon states is not restricted in the
population  of  nuclear  states.  This  offers  new  and
exciting perspectives for nuclear spectroscopy and the
possibility  to  study  the  forces  between  hyperons  and
nucleons.

Experimental Approach

Conventional  as  well  as  exotic  hadrons  can  be
produced by a range of different experimental means.
Among these, hadronic annihilation processes, and in
particular  antiproton-nucleon  and  antiproton-nucleus
annihilations, have proven to possess all the necessary
ingredients for fruitful harvests in the hadron field.

•  Hadron  annihilations  produce  a  gluon-rich
environment,  a  fundamental  prerequisite  to
copiously produce gluonic excitations.

( f o r m a t i o n  

•  The  use  of  antiprotons  permits  to  directly
form  all  states  with  non-exotic  quantum
n u m b e r s  
e x p e r i m e n t s ) .
Ambiguities in the reconstruction are reduced
and  cross  sections  are  considerably  higher
compared to producing additional particles in
the  final  state  (production  experiments).  The
appearance  of  states  in  production  but  not  in
formation is a clear sign of exotic physics.
•  Narrow  resonances,  such  as  charmonium
states,  can  be  scanned  with  high  precision  in
formation experiments using the small energy
spread  available  with  antiproton  beams
(cooled to (cid:1)p/p(cid:1)10-5).

•  Since  exotic  systems  will  appear  only  in
production  experiments  the  physics  analysis
of  Dalitz  plots  becomes  important.  This
requires  high-statistics  data  samples.  Thus,
high  luminosity  is  a  key  requirement.  This
can  be  achieved  using  an  internal  target  of
high density, large numbers of projectiles and
a  high  count-rate  capability  of  the  detector.
The latter is mandatory since the overall cross
sections of hadronic reactions are large while
the  cross  sections  of  reaction  channels  of
interest may be quite small.

•  As  reaction  products  are  peaked  around
angles  of  0º  a  fixed-target  experiment  with  a
magnetic  spectrometer  is  the  ideal  tool.  The
physics  topics  as  summarised  in  Figure  2
imply  that  the  momentum  range  of  the
antiproton  beam  should  extend  up  to  15
GeV/c  with  luminosities  in  the  order  of  1032
cm-2s-1.

Figure  2.  Mass  range  of  hadrons  that  will  be
accessible  at  PANDA.  The  upper  scale  indicates  the
corresponding  antiproton  momenta  required  in  a
fixed-target  experiment.  The  HESR  will  provide  1.5
to  15  GeV/c  antiprotons,  which  will  allow
charmonium  spectroscopy,  the  search  for  charmed
hybrids  and  glueballs,  the  production  of  D  meson
pairs  and  the  production  of  (cid:2)  baryon  pairs  for
hypernuclear studies.

Chiral  symmetry  is  one  of  the  fundamental
symmetries  of  QCD  in  the  limit  of  massless  quarks.
This  symmetry  has  to  be  broken  to  generate  the
hadrons, but it  is predicted to be partially restored in
nuclear matter [4]. To investigate the modification of
hadron properties, when those are produced inside the
nuclear  medium,  is  of  paramount  importance  to
understand  this  mechanism.  Some  experimental
evidence  of  mass  shifts  of  light  mesons  has  already
been  observed.  It  is,  however,  of  utter  importance  to
extend these studies to charmed mesons, as only then
a complete picture could be drawn.

The strong interaction can be studied by replacing
an  up  or  down  quark  inside  a  nucleus  by  a  strange
quark.  This  introduces  a  new  flavour,  leading  to  the
formation  of  a  hypernucleus.  Antiproton  beams  at

Figure  3.  Sketch  of  the  PANDA  detector.  Antiprotons  from  the  HESR  enter  from  the  left  and  meet  clusters  or
pellets of hydrogen at the interaction point, which is surrounded by detectors contained in a solenoid. Angles up
to 10° are covered by a magnetic forward spectrometer. For hypernuclear studies the beam up-stream endcap of
the solenoid will be replaced with an array of Ge detectors and a dedicated target system. Details are described
in the text and Ref [1].

The PANDA Apparatus

Following  the  above  considerations,  the  PANDA
detector  has  been  designed  as  a  4(cid:1)  internal  fixed-
target  detector  at  the  High-Energy  Storage  Ring
(HESR)  for  antiprotons,  which  is  part  of  the  FAIR
facility.

29 GeV protons from the SIS 100 will be used to
produce  antiprotons,  which  are  collected  and  cooled,
and  then  injected  into  the  HESR,  where  they  are
accelerated,  cooled  and  stored  at  momenta  between
1.5  and  15(cid:2)GeV/c.  In  normal  operation,  the  HESR
will  hold  1011  circulating  antiprotons.  At  a  length  of
about  500(cid:2)m,  the  HESR  will  be  equipped  with  an
electron  cooler  as  well  as  stochastic  cooling  to
counterbalance  the  beam  heating  due  to  the  internal
target  of  PANDA.  Stable  operation  will  be
accomplished  with  luminosities  of  2x1032  cm-2s-1  at
relative  momentum  spreads  of  about  10-4.  For
experiments  that  need  optimum  momentum  resolu-
tion,  a  second  mode  is  foreseen  where  lower  beam
currents  allow  relative  momentum  spreads  of  about
10-5  at  luminosities  of  2x1031  cm-2s-1.  Details  on  the
FAIR accelerator complex   can be found in a separate
contribution to this journal.

Figure  3  shows  a  sketch  of  the  multi-purpose
detector  PANDA.  Its  magnet  layout  will  combine  a

forward  dipole  spectrometer  with  a  solenoid  field
region  around  the  target.  Despite  the  strong  forward
boost  of  a  fixed-target  experiment,  coverage  in  both
forward  and  backward  direction  is  crucial  for
reactions where low-energy pions, kaons, and photons
are emitted in 4(cid:1).

Angles  below  5°  and  10°,  in  vertical  and
horizontal direction respectively, will be covered by a
2 Tm dipole spectrometer with a large gap, which will
be  equipped  with  drift  chamber  tracking,  particle-
identification  layers  as  well  as  electromagnetic  and
hadronic calorimeters.

The central superconducting solenoid surrounding
the  target  has  a  maximum  field  of  2(cid:2)T.  Photons  and
electrons  will  be  measured  in  an  electromagnetic
calorimeter  of  high  granularity.  Due  to  the  operation
inside the coil and the instrumented flux return yoke,
avalanche-photo  diode  readout  is  foreseen  for  the
19,000  crystals  of  the  calorimeter.  A  Cherenkov
detector  of  DIRC  type  [5]  in  the  barrel  structure,
augmented by disk DIRC and a forward ring-imaging
Cherenkov  detector  (RICH),  will  allow  efficient
particle identification down to momenta of about 750
MeV/c.

For the outer part of the tracking section a barrel
of  straw  detectors  is  being  designed.  Alternatively,  a
time  projection  chamber  (TPC)  is  considered  as  a

challenging but advantageous option. The lightweight
design of the tracking section and the self-supporting
structure is chosen to minimize straggling and photon
conversion. A micro-vertex detector will be operated
inside  the  tracking  detector.  In  order  to  get  an
accurate  image  of  the  particle  tracks,  its  innermost
active layer will be placed at a distance of 1 cm from
the interaction point only.

Experiments on the proton require a target, which
provides densities of hydrogen in the order of several
times  1015 atoms/cm2  at  the  interaction  point  without
disturbing  the  ultra-high  vacuum  of  the  storage  ring.
This  is  especially  challenging,  as  detectors  are  to
cover a large solid angle very close to the interaction
point. Thus, feed tubes and vacuum pipes may occupy
only  very  limited  space.  Both  cluster-jet  and  pellet
targets  are  under  development  and  seem  capable  to
fulfil  those  conditions  with  advantages  concerning
homogeneity  and  vertex  definition,  respectively.  For
experiments on heavy ions, heavy gases may be used
in these systems or fibre targets may be employed. An
additional  set-up  (not  shown  in  Figure  1)  will  allow
high-resolution spectroscopy of excited hypernuclei at
PANDA.  It  includes  primary  and  secondary  targets,
an array of high-resolution germanium detectors, and
a  dedicated  tracking  system,  which  will  replace  the
upstream  endcap  of  the  calorimeter  and  the  micro-
vertex detector.

Summary

Our knowledge of the behaviour of QCD at large
distances  is  still  rather  scarce.  Spectroscopy
experiments  within  hadron  physics  are  the  tool  to
investigate  both  the  dynamics  governing  the
interaction of fundamental particles and the existence
of  new  forms  of  matter.  The  latter  could  consist  of
states  with  gluonic  degrees  of  freedom,  such  as
glueballs  and  hybrids,  previously  undiscovered
charmonium states, the extension of the nuclear chart
into the strangeness dimension, or particles produced
inside nuclear matter. Only if we are able to predict,
confirm, and explain the physical states of the theory,
we  may  claim  to  understand  the  strong  interaction.
The  deep  understanding  might  have  further  far-
reaching implications in nuclear and particle physics.

The PANDA collaboration is prepared to address
these  topics  with  a  general-purpose  internal-target
experiment  utilising  the  antiprotons  provided  at  the
upcoming FAIR facility. Within the growing PANDA
collaboration  of  currently  350  physicists  from  15
countries,  an  extensive  R&D  programme  is  under
way, which comprises already a detailed design of the
detector.  PANDA  gratefully  acknowledges  the
support  of  the  respective  national  research  agencies
and the European Union funds (see Ref. [3]).

References
1. PDG, Review of Particle Physics, Phys. Lett. B 592
(2004) 1.
2. see e.g.: D. Acosta et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93
(2004) 072001; S.K. Choi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 91
(2003) 262001.
3. PANDA Collaboration, Technical Progress Report,
Darmstadt, 2005,
http://www.ep1.rub.de/~panda/archive/public/panda_t
pr.pdf ; and Refs. therein.
4. G.E. Brown and M. Rho, Phys.Lett. B 338 (1994)
301-307.
5. B. Aubert et al., Nucl. Inst. Meth. A 479 (2002) 1;
V. Re et al., Nucl. Inst. Meth. A 511 (2003) 1.

KAI-THOMAS BRINKMANN
TU Dresden

PAOLA GIANOTTI
INFN Frascati

INTI LEHMANN
Uppsala University

