Article Gas Water Pipeline 9 1 06

1

A Low-Cost Natural Gas/Freshwater Aerial Pipeline
Alexander A. Bolonkin
C & R
1310 Avenue R, Suite 6-F
Brooklyn, New York 11229, USA
aBolonkin@juno.com

Richard B. Cathcart
Geographos
1300 West Olive Avenue, Suite M
Burbank, California 91506, USA

ABSTRACT

Offered  is  a  new  type  of  low-cost  aerial  pipeline  for  delivery  of  natural  gas,  an  important  industrial  and 
residential fuel, and freshwater as well as other payloads over long distances.  The offered pipeline dramatically 
decreases the construction and operation costs and the time necessary for pipeline construction.  A dual-use type 
of  freight  pipeline  can  improve  an  arid  rural  environment  landscape  and  provide  a  reliable  energy supply  for 
cities.  Our  aerial  pipeline  is  a  large,  self-lofting  flexible  tube  disposed  at  high  altitude.  Presently,  the  term 
“natural gas” lacks a precise  technical  definition, but the  main components  of natural gas are methane, which 
has a specific weight less than air. A lift force of one cubic meter of methane equals approximately 0.5 kg. The 
lightweight film flexible pipeline can be located in the Earth-atmosphere at high altitude and poses no threat to 
airplanes or the local environment. The authors also suggest using lift force of this pipeline in tandem with wing 
devices for cheap shipment of a various payloads (oil, coal and water) over long distances.  The article contains 
a computed macroproject in northwest China for delivery of 24 billion cubic meter of gas and 23 millions tonnes 
of water annually.  

Key words: self-lofting aerial pipeline, dual use pipeline, long-distance freight transport.

Introduction

Natural gas is a mixture of flammable gases, mainly the hydrocarbons methane (CH4) and ethane that 
found  in  bulk  beneath  the  Earth’s  surface.  Helium  is  also  found  in  relatively  high  concentrations  in 
natural  gas. Natural  gas  usually  occurs  in  close  association  with  petroleum.    Although  many  natural 
gases can be used directly  from the well  without treatment, some must be  processed to  remove such 
undesirable constituents as carbon dioxide, poisonous hydrogen sulfide, and other sulfur components.

Methods of pipeline transportation that were developed in the 1920s marked a significant stage in the 
use of gas. After World War II there occurred a period of tremendous expansion that has continued into 
the  21st  Century.    Increasingly,  this  expansion  relies  on  the  use  of  pipeline  transportation  of  gas.  
Among the largest accumulations of natural gas are those of Urengoy in Siberia, the Texas Panhandle 
in the United States, Slochteren-Groningen area in The Netherlands, and Hassi RMel in Algeria. Gas 
accumulations are mostly encountered in the deeper parts of sedimentary basins.  Natural gas fields are 
often located far from the  major centers of  consumption.  Consequently, the  gas must be transported.  

                                                
 Corresponding author.

2

Transportation  of  natural  gas  depends  upon  its  form.  In  a  gaseous  form  it  is  transported  by  pipeline 
under high pressure, and in a liquid form it is transported by tanker ship [1].
  
Large  gas  pipelines  enable  gas  to  be  transported  over  great  distances.  Examples  are  the  North 
American  pipelines,  which  extend  from  Texas  and  Louisiana  to  the  Northeast  coast,  and  from  the 
Alberta fields to the Atlantic seaboard.  Transportation pressure is  generally 70 kilograms per square 
centimeter (up to 200 atm) because transportation costs are lowest for pressures in this range. Natural 
gas pipeline diameters for such long-distance transportation have tended to increase from an average of 
about  60  to  70  centimeters  in  1960  to  about  1.20  meters  nowadays.  Some  macroprojects  involve 
diameters of more than 2 meters. Because of pressure losses, the pressure is boosted every 80 or 100 
kilometers to keep a constant rate of flow.
  
Petroleum prospecting has revealed the presence of large gas fields in Africa, the Middle East, Alaska, 
and China. Gas is transported from developed regions by special LNG ships. The gas is liquefied to –
160  C  and  transported  in  tankers  with  insulated  containers.    Since  1965  the  capacity  of  tankers  has 
risen to as much as 120,000 cubic meters, which enables some tankers to convey as much as 70 million 
cubic meters of gas per voyage.  Land or sea-based storage of low-temperature liquefied gas requires 
double-walled  tanks  with  special  insulation.  Such  tanks  may  hold  as  much  as  50,000  cubic  meters. 
Even  larger  storage  facilities  have  been  created  by  using  depleted  subsurface  oil  or  gas  geological 
reservoirs  near  consumption  centers  or  by  the  creation  of  artificial  gas  fields  in  aquifer  layers.  The 
latter  technique  developed  rapidly,  and  the  number  of  storage  facilities  of  this  type  in  the  USA 
increased tremendously during the late 20th Century. There are also such underground storage areas in 
France and Germany.
  
Residential and commercial use consumes the largest proportion of natural gas in North America and 
Western  Europe,  while  industry  consumes  the  next  largest  amount  and  electric-power  generation  is 
third  in  worldwide  natural-gas  consumption.  By  far  the  major  use  of  natural  gas  is  as  fuel,  though 
increasing  amounts  are  used  by  the  chemical  industry  for  raw  material.  Among  the  industries  that 
consume  large  volumes  are  food,  paper,  chemicals,  petroleum  refining,  and  primary  metals.  In  the 
USA, a large amount fuels household heaters; in Russia a considerable volume goes for electric-power 
generation and to generate export revenue.  Exportation and importation of natural gas involves some 
aspects of geopolitical assessment [2]
  
Most  materials  that  can  be  moved  in  large  quantities  in  the  form  of  liquids,  gases,  or  slurries  (fine 
particles suspended in liquid) are generally moved through freight pipelines [3]. Pipelines are lines of 
pipe  equipped  with  pumps,  valves,  and  other  control  devices  for  transporting  materials  from  their 
remote  sources  to  storage  tanks  or  refineries  and  in  turn  to  distribution  facilities; pipelines  may  also 
convey industrial waste and sewage to processing plants for treatment before disposal.

Pipelines vary in diameter from tiny pipes up to lines 9 meters across used in high-volume freshwater 
distribution and sewage collection networks. Pipelines usually consist of sections of pipe made of steel, 
cast iron, or aluminum, though some are constructed of concrete, fired clay products, and occasionally 
plastics.  The  sections  are  joined  together  and,  in  most  cases,  installed  underground.    Because  great 
quantities  of  often  expensive  and  sometimes  environmentally  harmful  materials  are  carried  by 
pipelines, it is essential that the systems be well constructed and monitored in order to ensure that they 
will operate smoothly, efficiently, and safely. Pipes are often covered with a protective coating of coal-
tar  enamel,  asphalt,  or  plastic;  sometimes  these  coatings  may  be  reinforced  or  supplemented  by  an 
additional  sheath  of  asbestos  felt,  fiberglass  or  polyurethane.  The  materials  used  depend  on  the 
substance  to  be  carried  and  its  chemical  activity  and  possible  corrosive  action  on  the  pipe.  Pipeline 

3

designers must also consider such factors as the capacity of the pipeline, internal and external pressures 
affecting  the  pipeline,  water-  and  air-tightness,  and  construction  and  operating  costs.    Generally  the 
first step in construction is to clear the ground and dig a trench deep enough to allow for approximately 
51  centimeters  of  soil  overburden  to  cover  the  pipe.  Sections  of  pipe  are  then  held  over  the  trench, 
where they are joined together by welding, riveting or mechanical coupling, covered with a protective 
coating, and lowered into position.  Pipelines of some water-supply systems may follow the slope of 
the land, winding through  irregular landscapes like low-gradient railroads  and highways do, and  rely 
on gravity to keep the water flowing through them. If necessary, the gravity flow is supplemented by
pumping.  Most pipelines,  however,  are operated  under pressure  to  overcome  friction within  the  pipe 
and  differences  in  elevation.  Such  systems  have  a  series  of  pumping  stations  that  are  located  at 
intervals of from 80 to 320 kilometers.  Many pipelines are equipped with a system of valves that may 
be shut in the event of a breach in the line. Nevertheless, a short-period breach could still result in a 
spill of oil or escapes of gas. Vigilant ground and air inspection crews help to avert such damaging and 
costly  accidents by checking  periodically  the  pipeline for  obvious  weaknesses and  stresses.   Various 
methods are used to control corrosion in metallic pipelines.  It is worth noting that metallic pipelines, 
especially those located on the Earth’s surface, are subject to Space Weather, just like electric power 
grids  [4].    In  cathodic  protection,  a  negative  electrical  charge  is  maintained  throughout  the  pipe  to 
inhibit  the  electrochemical  process  of  corrosion.  In  other  cases  the  interior  is  lined  with  paints  and 
coatings  of  plastic  and  rubber  or  wrappings  of  fiberglass,  asphalt,  or  felt.  Sometimes  corrosion-
inhibiting chemicals are injected into the cargo.  Pipelines are also cleaned by passing devices called 
pigs; a pig may be a ball of the same diameter as the pipe; this kind of pig works by scraping clean the 
pipe's  interior  as  it  is  propelled  along  by  the  flowing  cargo.  It  may  also  be  a  complex  scrubbing 
machine  that  is  inserted  into  the  pipe  through  a  special  opening.    One  of  the  longest  metallic  gas 
pipelines  in  the  world  is  the  Northern  Lights  pipeline,  which  is  5,470  kilometers  long  and  links  the 
West Siberian gas fields on the Arctic Circle with locations in Eastern Europe; in China, the recently 
completed “West Gas  Supplying To  East Project”,  yearly conveys  12 trillion cubic meters of natural 
gas from Xijiang Province gas fields to Beijing, the capital, in a 4,000 kilometer-long metallic pipeline.

The main differences of suggested Gas Transportation Method and Installation from modern metallic 
pipelines are:
1.  The tubes are made from a lightweight flexible thin film (no steel or solid rigid hard material).
2.  The gas pressure in tube equals an atmospheric pressure of 1- 2 atm.  (Some current gas pipelines 

have pressure of 70 atm.).

3.  Most of the filmic pipeline [except compressor (pumping) and driver stations] is located in the 
Earth-atmosphere at a high altitude (0.1-6 km) and does not have a rigid support (pillar, pylon, 
tower). All operating pipelines are located on the ground surface, underground or underwater.

4.  The transported natural gas supports the air pipeline in the air above the route selected. 
5.  Additional aerial support may be made by employment of attached winged devices. 
6.  The natural gas pipeline can be used as an air transport system for oil and solid payloads with a 

maximum speed up of 250 m/sec.

7.  The natural gas pipeline can be used as a transfer of a mechanical energy.
  The suggested Method and Installation have remarkable cost-benefit advantages in comparison with 
all existing natural gas pipelines. 

  A gas and payload delivery gas/load pipeline is shown on figs. 1 - 5.
  Fig.1 shows the gas/load delivery installation by air pipeline. 

Description of innovation

4

         
Fig.1. General view of aerial pipeline between two compression (pump) stations. (a) Side view, (b) front view.  

Notations: 1 - pipeline in atmosphere, 2 - compression station, 3 - tensile stress element, 4 - supportive 
wing device,  5 - night light, 6 - load (container) monorail, 7 - winch.

The  installation  works  in  the  following  manner:  The  compressor  station  pumps  natural  gas  from 
storage into the tube (pipeline). The tube is made from light strong flexible gas-impermeable fireproof 
material  (film),  for  example,  from  composed  material  (fibers,  whiskers,  nanotubes,  etc.).  A  gas 
pressure is  a less than  an atmospheric  pressure  (up  1-2  atm). A natural  (fuel)  gas has  methane  as  its 
main  component  with  a  specific  density  about  0.72  kg/m3.  Air  has  a  specific  density  about  1.225 
kg/cubic meter. That means that every cubic meter of gas (methane) or a gas mixture has a lift force 
approximately 0.5 kg. The linear (one meter) weight of a tube is less than a linear lift force of gas into 
the  tube  and  the  pipeline,  therefore,  has  a  lift  force.  The  pipeline  rises  up  and  steadies  at  a  given 
altitude  (0.1  -  6  km),  held  fast  by  the  tensile  elements  3.  The  altitude  of  the  aerial  pipeline  can  be 
changed by the use of common winches 7. The compressor station is located on the ground surface and 
moves natural gas to the next compressor station that is ordinarily located at the distance 70 - 250 km 
from previous compressor station. Inside of the aerial pipeline there are valves (fig.4) dedicated to lock 
the  tube  tightly  in  case  of  it  is  punctured,  ruptured  or  otherwise  damaged.  The  pipeline  has  also  the 
warning light indicator 5 for aircraft.  The route selected for our example—see below—is well north of 
IATA-1,  the  new  International  Air  Transport  Association-approved  flight-path  for  airliners  coming 
from, or going to Europe via Hong Kong or Shanghai.  Only international flights arriving or departing 
Beijing might come close  to  the selected example.   Even if  hit  by an  airliner,  if the  aircraft speed  is 
greater than about 3% of the stress wave velocity, or greater than about 150 m/sec, the airplane’s speed 
causes an immediate fracture that is independent of cable diameter, although the force on the vehicle’s 
wing certainly  is not!    Fig.2  shows  the  gross-section  of the  gas  pipeline  and support ring.  The  light 
rigid  tube  ring  keeps  the  lift  force  from  gas  tube,  wing  support  devices,  from  monorail  and  load 
container.

                          
Fig.2. Gross-section and support ring of aerial natural gas pipeline. (a) front view, (b) side view. Notations: 9 -
double casing, 10 -rigid ring, 11 - monorail, 12 - wing load container, 13 - rollers of a load container, 14 -
thrust cable of container, 15 - container wing. Other notations are same fig.1.

5

                                  

figs.1-2.

Fig, 2a. Front view of the winged load container, monorail, and suspension bracket. Other notations are same 

 Fig.3 shows the compressor (pumping) station. The station is located on the ground and works in the 
following way. The engine 32 rotates compressor 31. That may be propellers located into rigid bogy 
connected to the flexible tubes of installation 1. The tubes are located at atmosphere. The propellers 
move the gas in given direction.
                         

                                       
Fig.3. Compression (pump) station. Notations: 31 - compressor (propeller), 32 - engine. Other notations are 

same figs.1-3.

  Fig.4 shows two variants a gas valve. The fist valve version is an inflatable boll. The ball fill out and 
closed the gas way. The second version is con conventional light flat choker in a form of circle. 
  The valve works in the following way. When the tube section is damaged, the pressure decreases in a 
section. The control devices measure it and, subsequently, the valves close the pipeline. The valve 
control devices have a connection with a central dispatcher, who can close or open any sub-section of 
the very long proposed natural gas pipeline.
  Fig.4a shows the spherical valve (a ball) in a packed form. Fig.4b shows the spherical valve (a ball) in 
an open form.
  The tubes of pipeline have a double wall (films) and gas streak between them. If the walls damage the 
streak gas flows out and the second film closes the hole in the first film and save a tube gas. 

6

                                          
Fig. 4. Gas valve. (a)-(b) Inflatable valve, (c)-(d)  Flat valve. Notations: 40 - inflatable valve in compact 
position, 41 - inflatable valve in fill out position, 42 - gas flow, 43 - gas pressure, 44 - flat choker. 

The winged device 4  is  a special  automatic wing  feature.  When there  is  windy weather  and  the side 
wind produces a strong side force, the winged devices produce a strong lift force and support pipeline
in fixed vertical position.
The winged device works in the following way: when there is a side wind the tube has the wing drag 
and  the  winged  device  creates  needed  additional  lift  force.  All  forces  (lifts,  drags,  weights) are  in 
equilibrium. The distance between the tensile elements 3 is such that the tube can resist the maximum 
storm  wind  speed.  The  system  can  have  a  compensation  ring.  The  compensation  ring  includes  ring, 
elastic element, and cover. The ring compensates the temperature’s change of the tube and decreases a 
stress from a wind.
  
The suggested gas pipeline has big advantages over the conventional steel gas pipeline:  
1.  The suggested natural gas pipeline is to be made from a thin film that is hundreds of times less 

expensive than current gas pipelines currently made from steel tubes.

2.  Construction time might be decreased from years to a few months.
3.  There is no need to compress a gas, a huge saving of energy and expenditures for high-maintenance 

pumps. 

4.  No need for expensive ground surface and environmental damage during either the building or 

exploitation phases of the macroproject. 

5.  No environmental damage in case of pipeline’s damage during use.
6.  Easy to repair.
7.  Decreasing energy for delivery.
8.  Additional possibility of payload delivery in both directions.
9. 

If the aerial natural gas pipeline is situated at high altitude, it is more difficult for successful 
terrorist attacks and for gas thefts.

10.  The suggested transportation system may be also used for a transfer of mechanical energy from one 

driver station to another. 

More detail description of innovation the reader finds in publication.  See [5]-[8].

Below, the authors have computed a macroproject suitable for Beijing region and the desert located in 
China’s  northwest  territory.  In  addition,  the  authors  have  also  solved  additional  problems,  which 
appear in this and other macroprojects and which can appear as difficult as the proposed pipeline and 
transportation system itself. (The  authors are  prepared to discuss the technical problems with serious
organizations that are interested in researching and developing these ideas and related macroprojects.)

7

Methods of the estimation of the altitude gas pipeline

1.  Gas delivery capability is

G = D2V/4  [m3/sec],

   where: D is diameter of tube [m];

    V is average gas speed [m/sec].

2. Increment pressure [n/m2] is

P = LV2/2D  ,

  where:  is dimensionless factor depending on the wall roughness, 
     the fluid properties, on the velocity, and pipe diameter (= 0.01 - 0.06);

L is the length [m];
 is fluid density [kg/m3].

3.  The dimensionless factor can be taken from graph [5, p.624]. It is

 = f(R,)  ,

   where: R = VD/  is Reynolds number, is fluid viscosity;
    is measure of the absolute roughness of tube wall.

3.  Lift force F of the one meter length of pipeline is
F = (a - m)v   ,

  where: a = 1.225 kg/m3 is air density for standard atmosphere;

   m = 0.72 kg/m3 is methane density;
   v = D2/4 is volume of one meter length of pipeline.

4.  Needed thickness of tube wall is

   where: P is pressure [see Eq.(2)];

 = PD/2  ,

      is safety stress. That is equals 100 - 200 kg/mm2 for matter from current artificial fiber. 

5.  Weight of one meter pipeline is

(6)
   where: is specific weight of tube matter (film, cover). That equals about 0.9 - 2.2 kg/m3
   for matter from artificial fiber.
6.  Air drag D of pipeline from side wind is

W = D   ,

D = CdV2S/2  ,

   where: Cd  is drag coefficient;

    S is logistical pipeline area between tensile elements;
   is air density.
7.  Needed power for delivery is

   where: 0.9 is a efficiency coefficient of a compressor station. 

Load transportation system under pipeline

1.  Load delivery capability by wingless container is

N = PG/  ,

Gp = kFVp ,

  where: k is load coefficient  (k 0.5 < 1);

   Vp is speed of container (load).

2.  Friction force of wingless containers (rollers) is

  where: f0.03 - 0.05 is coefficient of roller friction;  

Wc is weight of container between driver stations.

3.  Air drug of container is

Fc = fWc  ,

(10)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

8

Dc = CcV2Sc/2  ,

  where: Cc is drug friction coefficient related to Sc;
Sc  is cross-section area of container.

4.  The lift force of a wing container is

L
c



qSC
L

cw



C

L

2
V
a
2

S

cw

,

   where: CL  1  1.5 is coefficient of lift force; 
   Scw is wing area of container, m2.
5.  The drug of wing container may be computed by equation

2/2V

a

q

 is air dynamic pressure, N/m2;

D
C



qSC
L

cw

/

CK


L

S

cw

,

where

K



2
V
a
K
2

C
C

L

D

,

    where K10  20 is coefficient of aerodynamic efficiency; CD is air drag coefficient of wing 
   container. If lift force of wing container equals the container weight, the friction force F is 
   absent and not necessary in monorail.
6. The delivery (load) capacity of the wing container is

G
c

TVW
1
c
d

,

    where W1 is weight of one container, kg; Vc = 30  200 m/s is container speed, m/s; T is time, 
  s; d is distance between two containers, m.
7. The lift and drag of the wing device may be computed by Equations (12)-(13). The power needs for 

transportation system of wing container is

gWV
c
K
    where W is total weight of containers, kg; g = 9.81 m/s2 if Earth gravity; Kc 10  20  is 

P 
c

,

c

(15)

aerodynamic efficiency coefficient of container and thrust cable; 

8. The stability of the pipeline against a side storm wind may be estimated by inequality 
gW

T
/
KL
d

L
d
D
T

gW
S




tan

    



L
T

A









0

,

d

(16)

   where LT is lift force of given part of pipe line (conventionally it is distance between the tensile 
element, N; Ld is lift force of wing device, N; WT is a weight of pipeline of given part, kg; Ws is 
weight of the given part suspending system (containers, monorail, thrust cable, tensile element, rigid 
ring, etc.), kg; DT is drag of the given part of pipeline, N; Ld is the lift force of the wing device, N; Kd
is an aerodynamic efficiency coefficient of wing device;  is angle between tensile element and 
ground surface.

China Gas/Water Aerial Pipeline Macroproject 
(Tube diameter equals D = 10 m, gas pipeline has the suspension load transport system, the project is 
suitable for Beijing region –Gobi Desert)

   Let us take the distance between the compressor-driver stations 100 km and a gas speed V = 10 
m/sec.
  Gas delivery capacity is (Eq. (1))

G = D2V/4  = 800 m3/s = 24 billions m3 per year. 

For the Reynolds number R =107 value  is 0.015, P = 0.18 atm (Eq. (2)-(3)). We can take V = 20 m/s 
and decrease delivery capacity by two (or more) times.
  Lift force (Eq.4) of one meter pipeline’s length equals F = 39 kg. 
  We take the thickness of wall as 0.15 mm for = 200 kg/sq. mm.

9

  The cover weight of one-meter pipeline’s length is 7 kg. The needed power of the compressor station 
(located at distance 100 km) equals N = 10,890 kW for = 0.9.

Load transportation System
  Let us take the speed of delivery equals V = 30 m/sec, payload capability is 20 - 25 kg per one meter 
of pipeline in one direction. Then the delivery capability for non-wing containers is 750 kg/s or 23 
millions tons per year.
  That is more than gas delivery (18 million tons per year). The total load weight suspended under the 
pipeline of length L = 100 km equals 2500 tons. If a friction coefficient is f = 0.03, the needed trust is 
75 tons and needed power from only a friction roller drug is N1 = 22,500 kW (Eq. (10)). 
  If the air drag coefficient Cd = 0.1, cross section container area Sc = 0.2 m2, the air drag of a one 
container equals Dc1 = 2.2 kg, and total drag 20,000 container of length 100 km is Dc = 44 tons. The 
need driver power is N2 = 13,200 kW. The total power of transportation system is N = 22500 + 13200 = 
35,700 kW. The total trust force is 77 + 44 = 121 tons. 
 If = 200 kg/sq. mm, the cable diameter equals 30 mm. 
 The suggested delivery system can delivery a weight units (non-wing container) up to 100 kg if a 
selected length of container is 5 - 7.5 m. 
   The pipeline and container delivery capability may be increased at tens of times if winged containers 
are utilized. In this case we are not limited in load capability. Winged container needs a very 
lightweight monorail (or without it) and only in closed-loop thrust cable. That can be used for delivery 
water, oil or payload in containers. For example, if our system deliveries 4 m3/second that is equivalent 
of a normal river (or a water irrigation canal) having a cross-section area equal to 202 m and water 
flowing speed 0.1 m/s.  In other words, northwest China’s planted desert dust suppression 
macroproject—the Great Green Wall [9]—can be fostered by delivery of irrigation water to the 
vegetation that may become available in AD 2008, just as the Olympic Games are played in Beijing, 
from the East Route of the “South-North Water Transfer Scheme” [10]. 
   This particular macroproject system can transfer mechanical energy, we can transfer 35,700 kW for 
the cable speed at 30 m/sec, and 8 times more by the same cable having a speed 250 m/sec.
  If the  < 60o and wing of winged device has a width of 6 m, the system is stable against a side-
thrusting storm wind of 30 - 40 m/second.
  

References
1. Craig Hooper, “The Peril of Power: Navigating the Natural Gas Infrastructure”, Proceedings of the US Naval Academy 

2. David G. Victor, A.M. Jaffe and M.H. Hayes, Natural Gas and Geopolitics: From 1970 to 2040 (Cambridge University 

3.  Mohammad Najafi (Ed.) Pipelines 2003: New Pipeline Technologies, Security, and Safety: International Conference on 

Pipeline Engineering and Construction 2003, 13-16 July 2003, 

 Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 

4.   John G. Kappenman, “The Evolving Vulnerability of Electric Power Grids”, Space Weather Quarterly 2: 10-12 (Spring  

5    A.A. Bolonkin, Patent Application "Method for Gas and Payload Transportation at Long Distance and Installations for 

132: 40-44 (June 2006). 

Press, NY, 2006) 487 pages.

2004).

It", USPTO  # 09/978,507.

6  A.A. Bolonkin, Patent Application "Method Transportation of Vehicles and Installations for It", USPTO  # 09/893,060.

7  A.A. Bolonkin, Air Cable Transport System, Journal of Aircraft 30: 265-269 (March-April 2003)

8  A..A. Bolonkin, Non-Rocket Space Launch and Flight (Elsevier, London, 2006), 488 pages. 

9. Caroline Williams, “A land turned to dust”, New Scientist 186: 38-41 (4 June 2005).

10.  Richard Stone and Hawk Jia, “Going Against the Flow”, Science 313: 1034-1037 (25 August 2006).

10

