Comment on “Wavelet Analysis and scaling properties of time series” 
R.B. Govindan 
Graduate Institute of Technology, University of Arkansas at Little Rock, AR 72204 

 
 
In a recent work Manimaran et al. [Manimaran et al., Phys. Rev. E 72, 046120 (2005)] 

propose  to  use  multiresolution  Daubechies  (DB)  wavelets  to  (detrend)  remove  the  low 

frequency trends and subsequently to quantify the multifractal  structure  in a given time 

series.  In this comment, by applying DB wavelets to the long range correlated data we 

show that in the presence of linear trends, the wavelets could not able to distinguish the 

correlations  from  trends.  As  the  DB  wavelets  based  detrending  will  not  be  able  to 

quantify the correlations masked by trends, its multifractal extension can not always yield 

a correct estimate of the multifractal spectrum of the given data.    

 
PACS number (s):89.65.Gh, 05.45.Df, 5.45.Tp 
 
 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

 
 
Detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) is one of the commonly used methods to quantify 

the  correlations  in  a  given  data1.  In  this  method,  a  profile  function  is  obtained  by 

integrating a zero mean data. The profile function is then divided in to disjoint segments 

of size  s  and the data inside each window are fitted by an 

thm −

 order polynomial

mp .  

To this end the fluctuation function 

)(sF

(at scale s ) is obtained as the root mean square 

deviation  of  the  profile  from  the  best  fits.  In  order  to  get  the  relation  between 

)(sF

and s the  analysis  is  repeated  for  different  values  of s .    For  long  range  correlated 

data 

)(sF

 follow a power-law234: 

sF

~)(

αs

, where α is called the fluctuation exponent.  

This simple scaling relation indicates that the fluctuations at the small and large s values 

scale to the same extent (i.e.) αs . This is valid only for monofractal data and is difficult to 

infer the signatures of multifractality from this simple scaling relation.  For this purpose, 

a  new  method  mf-DFA  is  proposed  by  considering  the  higher  order  moments  of  the 

deviations of the profile from the best fits5. 

 

In DFA, the trends captured by the local polynomials at scale s correspond to the low pass 

filter  of  the  profile  with  filter  cut  off  being

sf /

s

,  where 

sf −

Hz

  is  the  sampling 

frequency of the time series (

sf

1=

Hz

for interval data). Thus, any alternative approach 

to remove the low frequency components of the profile can be used to replace the job of 

local  polynomials.  One  of  the  possible  approaches  is  attempted  by  Manimaran  et  al.6 

using Daubechies (DB) wavelets7. In this approach the given data of length  N (usually in 

power of 2) sampled at a frequency of 

Hz

are decomposed into a set of approximate 

sf −

(low-pass)  and  detailed  (high  pass)  coefficients  corresponding  to  the  frequency  (or 

window  size s )  dictated  by  the  level  of  decomposition.  For  instance, 

thm −   level  of 

decomposition will result in 

mN 2/

number of approximate coefficients and same number 

of detailed coefficients with  m2  being the window size s .  The approximate coefficients 

at  the 

thm −

  level  is  equivalent  to  down  sampling  the  data  into 

mN 2/

  samples  or 

sf

m −2

Hz

or

sf

−

s

Hz

.  Thus,  at 

thm −

  level  of  decomposition,  the  reconstructed 

series  using  the  approximate  coefficients  will  correspond  to  the  low  pass  filter  of  the 

profile with the filter cut off being

sf

Hz

.  To this end the fluctuation function 

)(sF

 

−/
s

is  obtained  as  the  mean  of  the  magnitude  of  deviation  of  the  profile  from  the 

reconstructed series6. To capture the multifractal behavior, higher order moments of the 

magnitude of the deviations of the profile from the reconstructed series are considered6. 

Though the idea of employing wavelets to capture the low frequency components of the 

profile  is  correct,  here  we  show  that  in  the  presence  of  trends,  it  is  not  possible  to 

characterize  the  correlations  correctly  using  DB  wavelets.  As  the  wavelets  based 

detrending  already  has  problems  in  quantifying  the  correlations  (monofractality)  in  the 

time  series  masked  by  trends,  we  conclude  that  it’s  multifractal  variant  as  proposed  in 

Ref. [6] will not be able to correctly capture the higher order moments of the given time 

series. 

 

 
 
 

II. ANALYSIS 

FIG. 1.  Long range correlated data with exponent 
c (see text for details) of linear trends.  (a) 
 (b) 

0=c

9.0=α
3=c

 (c) 

 masked by different amount 

10=c

and (d) 

15=c

.  

 

 
As  we  do  not  have  access  to  the  datasets  used  by  Manimaran  et  al.  we  work  with  the 

numerically  simulated  long  range  correlated  data.  To  emphasize  the  problems  with 

wavelet  based  detrending  approach  we  consider  here  the  long  range  correlated  data 

superimposed by linear trends.  The three time series shown in Fig. 2 of Ref. [6] look like 

containing linear trend and hence we consider the effect of linear trends on the long range 

correlated data. The results of the raw data without any trend will serve as control in all 

the cases considered here. 

 
For the present study we computed the fluctuation exponent from Fig. 4 of Manimaran et 

al6  as  0.9.  We  generated  long  range  correlated  data 

ix   with 

9.0=α

  using  Fourier 

filtering technique8. To this data we added linear trend as follows: 

y

i

=

x

i

⋅+

Nic
/

. We 

consider 

iy  for four different values of  c as shown in Fig. 1. Sampling frequency of all 

the data is assumed to be Hz−1

.  The slope of 

iy  shown in Fig. 1 (b-d) increases with 

increase  in  the  magnitude  of c .  It  is  worth  to  mention  that  DFA  with  second  order 

polynomial  detrending  would  completely  remove  this  linear  trend9.  The  fluctuation 

functions obtained from 8-th order DB wavelets for the four different datasets shown in 

Fig. 1(a-d) are  given in  Fig. 2. To  avoid the edge effects introduced by the wavelets at 

longer  time  scales6,  we  applied  the  wavelet  based  detrending  from  beginning  to  end  of 

the profile and repeated the same from the reverse side of the profile10 and computed the 

average of the fluctuations obtained in either directions. To see the effect the trends we 

scale  the  fluctuation  functions  by  the  expected  scaling  behavior  of

9.0s

and  we  use  this 

convention  throughout  the  manuscript.  If  the  employed  wavelet  correctly  distinguishes 

the  correlations  from  trends,  the  scaled  fluctuation  functions  should  be  parallel  to 

abscissa. 

 
The  scaled  fluctuation  function  for 

0=c

  is  parallel  to  abscissa  indicating  that  the 

wavelet correctly captures the correlations in the dataset. However, for large time scales, 

there  is  a  slight  deviation  for 

3=c

  (

310>s

)  and  marked  deviations  for 

10=c

and  15 

>s

(

200

)  from  the  expected  scaling  behavior.  Thus,  the  wavelets  could  not  able  to 

clearly distinguish the correlations from linear trends.  

FIG. 2 Log-Log representation of the fluctuation functions obtained using DB8 wavelets 
for  the  datasets  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The  fluctuation  functions  are  scaled  by  the  expected 
scaling behavior of

9.0s

.  

 

 

 
 

In  order  to  check  whether  the  higher  order  wavelets  could  resolve  this  problem  we 

computed  the  fluctuation  functions  for  the  same  four  data  sets  shown  in  Fig.  1  using  4 

different  higher  order  wavelets  viz.  DB16,  DB24,  DB32  and  DB40.  These  results  are 

given in Fig. 3.  The results obtained using higher order wavelets are qualitatively similar 

to  those  obtained  using  DB8  wavelets  (Fig.  2).  For  larger  time  scale 

>s

300

the 

deviations from the expected scaling behavior are analogous to those observed with the 

DB8 wavelets (see Fig. 2) though there is a slight shift in the cross-over from 

=s

300

 to 

=s

400

  for  DB32  and  DB40  (see  Fig.  3  (c)  and  (d)).  These  results  clearly  show  that 

wavelet based detrending might not yield correct quantification of underlying correlations 

when the data are masked by linear trends.  

 

 

FIG.  3  The  fluctuation  functions  obtained  using  different  higher  orders  of  wavelets  (a) 
DB16 (b) DB24 (c) DB32 and (d) DB40 for the datasets shown in Fig. 1. The fluctuation 
functions are scaled by the expected scaling behavior of
.   Different symbols have the 
same meaning as in Fig. 2. 

9.0s

 

III. DISCUSSION 
 
 
In  wavelet  analysis,  the  approximate  and  detailed  coefficients  are  obtained  as  the 

weighted averages (low-pass) and differences (high-pass) of the given dataset (which is 

profile in the present case). Reconstructing the profile from the approximate coefficients 

of a particular level, though expected to remove the trends of certain nature (to which the 

chosen order of DB wavelet is presumed to be orthogonal), the way by which the trends 

are removed by the wavelets is not straight forward. In the multifractal formalism, if the 

profile is not detrended properly, the spurious crossover in the fluctuation function due to 

trends will be further magnified when the higher positive moments are considered. This 

crossover  will  mislead  to  a  slightly  broader  multifractal  spectrum  even  for  monofractal 

data with trends. For example, consider the three time series shown in Fig. 2 in Ref. [6].  

All of them contain a clear linear trend.  Though their magnitude is not as same as used in 

the  present  study,  this  type  of  trend,  because  of  the  problems  with  the  wavelets  in 

distinguishing correlations from trends, can not be removed completely by the wavelets. 

The  variation  of  scaling  exponents 

)(qτ as  a  function  of  different  moment  q (Fig.  4  in 

Ref. [6]) is nonlinear indicating the presence of the multifractal signatures for the datasets 

considered.  This  nonlinear  relation  between 

)(qτ and  q   might  as  well  be  due  to  the  in 

capability  of  the  wavelets  in  detrending  the  data.  However,  the  same  datasets,  with  the 

improved approach are revisited in Ref. [10]. One can clearly see a cross over in Fig. 4 in 

Ref.  [10]  caused  by  the  effect  of  the  trends.  Since  the  same  datasets  were  used  for  the 

both studies Ref [610], the nonlinear variation of 

)(qτ in Fig. 4 of Ref. [6] can be very 

well due to the effect of trends. 

 

IV. CONCLUSION 
 
By  applying  different  higher  orders  of  wavelets  to  numerically  simulated  long  range 

correlated data we have shown that wavelet based detrending might not perform well in 

the presence of the linear trends. In real life data one does not know a priori the nature of 

the  trends  present  in  the  data  and  hence  the  approach  as  taken  in  Ref.  [6]  can  not  be 

reliably applied to them.  

                                                 
1 C.K. Peng, S.V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, M. Simons, H.E. Stanley and A.L. Goldberger, 

 

Phys. Rev. E 49, 1685 (1994). 

2 B.B. Mandelbrot and J.W. van Ness, SIAM Rev 10, 422 (1968); B.B. Mandelbrot, 

Fractal and scaling Finance Discontinuity, Concentration, Risk (Springer-Verlag, New 

York, 1997). 

3 J. Feder, Fractals (Plenum, New York, 1998). 

4 A. Bunde and S. Havlin, Fractals in Science (Springer, New York, 1995). 

5 J.W. Kantelhardt, S.A. Zschiegner, E. Koscielny-Bunde, S. Havlin, A. Bunde, H.E. 

Stanley, Physica A 316, 87 (2002). 

6 P. Manimaran, P.K. Panigrahi, J.C. Parikh, Phys. Rev. E 72, 046120 (2005).  

7 I. Daubechies, Ten lectures on Wavelets (SIAM, Philadelphia, 1992). 

8 J. Timmer and M. König, Astron. Atrophys. 300, 707 (1995). 

9 K. Hu, P. Ch. Ivanov, Z. Chen, P. Carpena and H.E. Stanley, Phys. Rev. E 64, 011114  

(2001). 

                                                                                                                                                 
10 P. Manimaran, P.K. Panigrahi and J.C. Parikh, e-print:arXiv.nlin.CD/0601065. 

