Ocean Terracing

Richard B. Cathcart
Geographos
1300 West Olive Avenue, Suite M
Burbank, California 91506, USA
rbcathcart@charter.net

Alexander A. Bolonkin
C & R
1310 Avenue R, Suite 6-F
Brooklyn, NY 11229, USA
aBolonkin@juno.com

ABSTRACT

Artworks can improve humanity’s ability to apply macro-engineering principles which skirt or correct 
oceanographic problems impairing the economic usefulness of coastal land, the overhead airshed, and 
seawater’s temperature and salinity stability.  A new form of Art, “Ocean Art”, is here proposed which 
centers  on  deliberate  terracing  of  appropriate  regions  of  our  world’s  ocean;  a  proposed  example  of 
macro-engineered  useful  “Ocean  Art”  is  the  technically  possible  21st  Century  terracing  of  the 
Mediterranean Sea.  “Ocean Art” is applicable worldwide to places that might be practically improved 
by  its  judicious  employment.    Such  “Ocean  Art”  may  constitute  an  entirely  unique  category  of 
solutions to coastal disaster prevention planning.  

1. INTRODUCTION

Space Art proponents opt to construct various symbolic artifacts in Outer Space visible from Earth’s 
surface  (Bureaud,  2005).    With  plastic  film  and  textile  envelopes,  Air  Art  advocates  exploit  the 
possibilities of compressed air or naturally generated atmospheric wind (Cathcart and Cirkovic, 2006).  
Land Art results from different human interpretations of the significance of natural and anthropogenic 
sub-aerial 
stresses: 
“Grammatically…the ‘Mediterranean’ denotes  a  quality, rather  than an object,  an indicator of place, 
rather  than  the  place  itself”  because  the  OXFORD  ENGLISH  DICTIONARY’s  editors  consider  the 
word primarily an adjective.

  As  Constanze  Guthenke 

(Tiberghien,  1995). 

landscapes 

(2006) 

Famed  artist  Christo  installed  11  flamingo-pink  floating  plastic  collar-mats  covering  approximately 
600,000  m2  of  a  saltwater  lagoon  surface  in  Miami,  Florida’s  Biscayne  Bay  for  his  temporary 
“Surrounded  Islands  Project”  artwork  of  1983.      During  1969,  Peter  Hutchinson  and  Dennis 
Oppenheim  installed  artworks  in  the  coastal  waters  off  Tobago  in  the  West  Indies.   “Wave  Organ”, 
constructed by Peter Richards and George Gonzales, and the seashore artworks of Andy Goldsworthy 
are  also  examples  of  what  is,  charitably,  labeled  Oceanographic  Art  since  they  are  essentially 
decorative.  However, Ocean Art is a form of seawater sculpting by aquatic terracing focused on the 
70%  of  Earth’s  surface  that  is  oceanic;  the  modern-day  originator  of  geographically  large-scale 
intentional Ocean Art is the German architect Frei  Otto, who first contemplated the concept in 1953 
(Nerdinger, 2005).  Ocean Art has a practical, commercially useful aspect that Oceanographic Art does 
not and, therefore, is of interest to 21st Century adherents of Ocean Macro-engineering.

1

2. INADVERTANT OCEAN TERRACING 

About  5,000  years  ago,  the  Earth-atmosphere’s  methane  concentration  began  to  increase.    Its 
generation  source  was  human  cultivation  of rice  in  flatland  paddies;  about  2,000  years  ago,  humans 
commenced growing rice in watery paddies on terraced hillsides.  Methane is a greenhouse gas and the 
anthropogenic  contribution  to  the  Earth-atmosphere  causes  global  warming  and  a  rise  worldwide  of 
sea level (Ruddiman, 2005).  Perhaps half of all living humans eat rice and the microorganisms living 
in anoxic rice field soils  contribute between 10%  and 25% of annual  global methane emissions  (Lu, 
2005);  by  2030,  there  might  be  five  billion  human  consumers  of  rice  (Khush,  2005).    Artificial 
wetlands emplaced on shaped hillsides have in the past, and continue in the present, to contribute to 
the  global  ocean’s  sea  level  instability  (Cheng,  2006).    Catastrophic  methane  releases,  caused  by 
submarine slumping during which submarine sliding of bottom material results in hydrate dissociation 
triggered by depressurization (sea level fall), have occurred in the Mediterranean Sea Basin (Maslin et 
al.  2004).  An  anthropogenically-induced maintenance  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea’s  level  at  one  meter 
below  the  prevailing  future  World-Ocean  level  is  unlikely,  even  with  a  possible  contributory 
permanent  seawater-warming  steric  phenomenon  (Garcia,  2006),  to  trigger  a  large  methane  release 
from the seafloor during the 21st Century.

Especially  subsequent  to  the  Industrial  Revolution,  dams  on  rivers  were  constructed  that  have  the 
effect of retaining freshwater in large volumes.  There are probably 45,000 dams exceeding 15 m high 
that, in the aggregate, can store more than 6,500 km3 of freshwater (Nilsson, 2005).  (The Netherlands’ 
famous Ijsselmeer did not directly terrace the ocean, but simply replaced a segment of seawater with 
an  equal  volume  of  freshwater;  France’s  La  Rance  Tidal  Barrage  merely  harnesses  the  daily  tides.)  
Absent  these  on-land  reservoirs,  the  ocean  would  be  higher  than  today.    Anthropogenic  global 
warming of the atmosphere caused, in part, by a measured build-up of carbon dioxide gas during the 
past two centuries, is plausibly suggested to also cause a global sea level rise, which will initially be 
regionally differentiated (Raper and Braithwaite, 2006; Khilyuk and Chilingar, 2006).  Evidently, and 
prospectively,  it  is  Homo  sapiens’  intention  to  occupy  the  land  and  the  ocean  with  various 
infrastructures; per contra, humans can still only use the Earth’s air.

3. OCEAN TERRACING FACTORS

By 2100, the world’s ocean could rise by 0.5 - 1.0 m relative to its present-day level thereby directly 
affecting the world’s coastline (Crossland, 2005).   Humanity’s activities (to make and earn a living) 
will “globalize” the Mediterranean Sea—its seawater, organic and inorganic contents, and coast.  All 
coastal  nations  should  now  be  planning  for  0.5 - 1.0  m  rise  in  sea  level  during  the  21st  Century. 
Nations  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea  Basin  have  several  old  and  expensive  ameliorative  macroprojects 
options available (Cathcart, 2006).  However, recent R&D and newer products derived from advanced 
material technologies—particularly, technical textiles exhibiting high-performance, purely functional, 
and precisely woven or non-woven fabrics—offers the prospect of cheap regional sea level rise control 
macroprojects (Cullen, 2005; Brownell, 2006).

Commercial  shipping  interests  and  mass  tourism  organizers  and  related  industries  (Mosedale,  2004) 
are  the  most  obvious  pro-amelioration  macroproject  constituencies  examining  the  impacts  of  future 
sea level rise in the Basin in addition to the ecologically sustainable fisheries (Goren and Galil, 2005), 
recreational boating and yachting, harbor maintenance and the military communities.

The  Mediterranean  Sea  Basin,  renowned  for  its  beautiful  beaches  and  healthful  climate,  exhibits 
boundary layer air pollution originating mostly from other regions of the world because the Basin lies 
at the “crossroads” of global wind currents and receives an inordinate amount of industrial pollutants 

2

(Lelieveld et al., 2002).  Ship emissions contribute substantially to air pollution over the summertime 
Basin,  which  also  modifies  the  region’s  cloud  properties  affecting  the  region’s  climate  radiation 
budget  through  sulfate  aerosol  forcing  (Marmer  and  Langmann,  2005).    Nowadays,  seawater  in  the 
Mediterranean  Sea  has  visibly  and  measurably  different  characteristics  than  in  the  recorded  past.  
Remarkable  shifts  in  the  thermohaline  circulation  and  water  mass  characteristics  have  occurred 
because of mankind’s activities on land, including large freshwater reservoir construction (Skliris and 
Lascaratos, 2004) and the widespread regulation of river sediment deposition (Liquete et al., 2004).

Peak evaporation from the Mediterranean Sea, driven by energy released from seawater, takes places 
during the wintertime (Fenoglio-Marc, 2006).  The Mediterranean Sea measurably warmed during the 
20th  Century;  the  causes  and  potential  effects  of  the  elevated  seawater  temperature  on  pelagic  food 
webs  and  the  Basin’s  present-day  and  future  climate  are  not  well  known.    The  Earth-atmosphere’s 
response to an idealized 2 K cooling of the Mediterranean Sea has been estimated, but not the reverse, 
a  warming  (Li,  2006).    Unmonitored  Basin  seafloor  volcanoes,  which  have  in  the  past  created  new 
land for a short period (Graham Island in 1831) and may create new land in the future (possibly at the 
Marsili seamount north of Sicily), are indicative of significant seafloor geothermal heating (Mullarney. 
2006).  Standard scientific explanations for imposed seawater warming in the Basin rely mostly on the 
alleged  enhanced  atmospheric  global  warming  theory.    During  the  21st  Century,  Mediterranean  Sea 
Basin hurricanes possibly may become slightly more intense owing to seawater’s steric warming, with 
higher boundary layer wind speeds, and increased vertical mixing of seawater masses.  A Basin-wide 
sea level higher by 1 m  may also  lead to  higher  wintertime storm  surges affecting the Basin’s coast 
and its costly-to-repair/replace infrastructure (Emanuel, 2005).  

4. BRIDGE AND BARRAGE MACROPROJECTS

The  Strait  of  Gibraltar  connects  the  North  Atlantic  Ocean  and  the  Mediterranean  Sea.    Long-span 
bridges are becoming longer because the use of supercomputers permits  macro-engineers to usefully 
calculate  the  physical  forces  impinging—such  as  flutter  stability  (Astiz,  1998)—these  long-span 
structures  with  greater  accuracy  and  because  of  modern  construction  techniques  that  can  isolate 
suspension  bridge  tower  bases  from  earthquakes.    Macro-engineers  mostly  must  meet  managerial 
challenges such as financing and resource accumulation.  Technical challenges remain, of course, but 
new  materials—such  as  carbon  fibers  embedded  in  composite  materials  (Meier,  1987;  Noistering, 
2000)—are being developed as practical solutions to such impending macro-problems.

Three-dimensional, supercomputer-generated bathymetric maps and high-resolution geologic sections 
(based on sparker profiles and sea-bottom drill cores) are already available that generally illustrate the 
Strait  of  Gibraltar’s  geologic  framework  today  and  during  past  periods  of  Geological  Time.  
Anticipation  of  a  Punta  Malabata,  Morocco  to  Punta  Paloma,  Spain  Gibraltar  Strait  Tunnel,  with 
construction tentatively slated to commence in 2008, has provoked all macroproject site investigation 
efforts  so  far.    Additional  pre-planning  site  studies  may  be  required  if  our  proposed  Gibraltar  Strait 
Textile Barrage (GSTB) textile/plastic macroproject proposal is seriously considered.  GSTB will be 
judiciously draped on a general alignment between Tarifa (360 01’ North by 50 36’ West) in Spain and 
Ksar  e’  Sghir  (350  50’  North  by  50  32’  West)  in  Morocco  (Cerda,  2004),  creating  an  aerial  and 
submarine  artwork  somewhat  imitative  of  Christo’s  “Valley  Curtain,  Rifle,  Colorado,  1970-1972” 
(Vaizey, 1990).  GOTO: http://www.christojeanneclaude.net/vc.html; it will bow or “billow” like a 
ship’s sail eastwards from the selected 20 km alignment because of marine (difference in sea level on a 
two-sided  bottom-anchored  membrane  and  natural  currents  such  as  tidal  solitons  coming  from  the 
North Atlantic Ocean) and aerial (seasonal winds) pressures acting directly upon the GSTB.  [Ernest 
C.  Harris  (1915-98)  macro-engineered  “Valley  Curtain”.]    Planners  of  the  GSTB  macroproject  will 
draw  on  the  installation  experience  with  heavy  wire  nets,  floatation  systems  and  their  moorings 

3

derived from World War II anti-submarine net installations in strategic harbors and that documented 
experience offered by the 100 km-long World War I anti-submarine Otranto Strait Barrage (1915-19).  
One of the main factors influencing the GSTB’s cost will be the sea-bottom cut-off wall to minimize 
seawater seepage—there is some slight possibility a submarine cut-off trench need not be dug on the 
seafloor, nor an uninterrupted underwater grout curtain need be installed to ensure proper functioning 
of the completed Gibraltar Strait Textile Barrage.  

From  its  western  approaches,  the  Gibraltar  Strait  Textile  Barrage  will  have  the  characteristic  of  an 
architectural  deception  resembling  an  English  Garden  or  zoo  landscape  architect’s  geotextile  ha-ha 
(also  known  as  a  “sunken  fence”)  in  that—absent  warning  light-buoys  and  radar  reflectors—ship 
navigators will visually misapprehend the true nature of the sea route ahead.  Those mariners (such as 
private-sector  fishermen  and  yachtsmen)  piloting  their  boats  and  other  types  of  watercraft  without 
benefit  of  up-to-date  navigational  sea  charts  that  indicate  the  GSTB’s  presence  in  the  seascape  will 
have no inkling via normal optical clues whatsoever that a 1 m drop in sea level obstructs the Strait of 
Gibraltar!  Mariners without radar readouts using the eastern approaches will visually spy a 1 m-high 
tensioned fabric wall, which if made of clear or aquamarine-colored material might be almost invisible 
until  closely sighted!  Approximately 50,000 vessels  of all types currently pass  through the Strait  of 
Gibraltar annually and the two ship traffic lanes are considered to be military chokepoints; at least one, 
and  possibly two,  Frei  Otto-style tensioned  fabric  ship  locks will  be required  to  accommodate  post-
construction GSTB shipping traffic (Otto,  1967).  Collapse of a blocking 1 m-high GSTB stretching 
across the 20 km breadth of this oceanic gateway won’t necessarily be a disaster for the Mediterranean 
Sea Basin nations; more or less, it will be similar to a strong storm surge event with a constant 106,000 
m3/s incoming “tide” rippling rapidly eastwards towards Greece and Turkey to eventually inundate (by 
1 m) 2.5 x 106 km2 of the Mediterranean Sea surface.  A 1 m-high tsunami impacting the 1 m-high air-
exposed eastern face of the GSTB will probably exert a momentary pressure of 10,000 kg/m2, or about 
200,000,000  kg  overall;  in  other  words,  a  new  kind  of  flexible  hydrostatic  seawall  installable  at 
suitable  locales—Gulf  of  Khambhat,  India?  (Gupta  and  Sharma,  1995)—will  become  effectively 
available to coastal macro-engineers (Cathcart, 2006; Barry 2006).

Other  than  collision  events  caused  by  errant  ships  and  the  cycling  pressure  changes  of  small  intra-
Basin tides, the most significant prospective structural integrity maintenance threat facing a Gibraltar 
Strait  Textile  Barrage  are  tsunami  generated  within  the  Basin  or  in  the  North  Atlantic  Ocean.    For 
example,  the  tsunami  caused  by  the  1  November  1755  Lisbon,  Portugal  seismic  event  caused  a 
maximum  11  m  wave  run-up  at  Tarifa  and  10  m  at  Tangier  in  Morocco;  the  Rock  of  Gibraltar’s 
seaport was impacted with  a maximum wave run-up  of 2  m.  The historically recorded  past and  the 
predicted future (Hills and Goda, 1998) related to tsunami impacts on the GSTB-served region means 
that tsunami momentum effects must be very carefully considered in great detail.  Harold G. Loomis 
(2002)  states  that  when  a  tsunami  wave  meets  a  semi-slack  barrier  the  barrier  “…takes  some 
momentum  from  the  wave  and  transfers  it  to…[the  barrier  if  it  can  move,  making  it  taut]….  A  fair 
amount  of  momentum  is  bounced  back  to  the  ocean in  various  directions.”    If  one  GSTB  is  judged 
insufficient  to  withstand  the  forces  applied  (snap  loading),  then  another  paralleling  GSTB  can  be 
installed  since  each  is  not  as  costly  as  a  single  Gibraltar  Strait  Bridge!    Elongation  of  the  GSTB’s 
super-ropes under dynamic loading will dissipate some tsunami-deposited energy.    

In the case of the GSTB, there is a quite interesting newly apprehended hydraulic effect (Rao, 2005) 
only partially comprehended by GSTB proponents: any North Atlantic Ocean tsunami overtopping the 
Gibraltar  Strait  Barrage  will  encounter  a  sudden  1  m  hydraulic  descent.    IS  IT  POSSIBLE  A 
SUDDEN  DESCENT  OF  FLOWING  SEAWATER  AT  THE  GSTB  IMPEDENANCE  IN  A 
ONE-METER  WATERFALL  WILL  EFFECTIVELY  ATTENUATE  A  POTENTIALLY 
13,000  KM  OF 
DEVASTATING  TSUNAMI’S 

SUBSEQUENT  RUN-UP  ON 

4

MEDITERRANEAN  SEA  BASIN  COAST?    The  acute  observation  by  Rao  (2005)  of  the 
remarkable effect of a sudden  topographical drop on tsunami propagation  hydrodynamics  may be as 
instigative subsequently as the contemplations of Benjamin Franklin (1706-90) on the spreading of oil 
on a UK freshwater pond as well as the ocean’s seawater (Tanford, 2004; Mertens, 2006).  

When a tsunami wave impacts the GSTB, part of the wave’s energy is transmitted through the GSTB, 
part  is  reflected  from  the  GSTB  and  another  part  is  absorbed  in  the  various  materials  of  which  the 
GSTB  is  constructed.    Tsunami  overtopping  of  the  impermeable  tensioned  fabric  dam  with  zero 
freeboard will cause a North Atlantic Ocean seawater hydraulic flow (from supercritical to subcritical) 
that induces GSTB  vibrations  (near-critical flow  induced vibrations,  vortex shedding and suction  on 
the air-exposed “downstream” face of the dam-artwork).  In effect, the Mediterranean Sea close to the 
intact quivering/resonating GSTB will become a “stilling basin” that will dissipate the kinetic energy 
of  the  overtopping  flow.    (A  1  m  overtopping  results  in  a  temporary  106,000  m3/s  flow  and  a  2  m 
overtopping results in a 300,000 m3/s waterfall.)  The optimum value of the drop height at the GSTB 
must be determined mathematically and by physical model testing since macro-engineers will wish to 
stabilize  its  geographical  position  and  not  cause  any  dangerous  structural  damage  to  the  GSTB.  
Unfortunately,  R&D  reports  on  tensioned  membranes  vertically  spanning  water  depths  of  limited 
extent  are  infrequent  in  the  appropriate  literature  (Lo,  2000).    The  total  area  of  the  water-retaining 
fabric drape that is planned to comprise the GSTB is about 200 km2 but only approximately 20,000 m2
of it will actually be fully exposed to the air and material-degrading sunshine on its eastern face while 
under a continuous imposed 1 m seawater head (hydraulic pressure) on its submerged western face.

5. IMPERVIOUS MEMBRANE ARCHITECTURE

Cables  and  membranes  are  the  essential  main  components  of  Frei  Otto’s  architecture  proposals.  
Application  of  advanced  technical  textiles  and  super-ropes  composed  mainly  of  Kevlar—or, 
eventually,  even  carbon  nanotubes—could  permit  safe  emplacement  and  use  of  a  pontoon  bridge 
spanning the Strait of Gibraltar—in fact, a vehicle-carrying floating bridge imitating the span used by 
Xerxes  in  480  BC  to  support  his  marching  troops  and  their  baggage  train  as  they  crossed  the 
Hellespont!  Braided or stranded super-ropes could stabilize a pontoon bridge in a fixed geographical 
alignment  for  a  long  period,  especially  in  a  1  m  s-1  eastward  flowing  surface  current  refilling  the 
evaporating Mediterranean Sea, which has a yearly seawater deficit of about 0.5 m.  

The  ultimate  hydrostatic  head  supported  by  a  textile  (woven  or  non-woven)  is  the  measure  of  the 
resistence to the passage of seawater through the material; the standard applicable for determining the 
resistence to seawater penetration is the hydrostatic pressure test.  Several international organizations, 
as well  as  many national  agencies  generally accept the  height  of a  seawater  column  given in  metric 
units of distance as the applicable validation of a test method primarily intended for dense fabrics and 
films.  Waterproof and watertight are synonyms in this report.  In the past, the resistence to seawater 
penetration  (in  ship  sails,  ship  hatch-covers  etc.)  has  been  technically  achieved  by  coating  woven 
textiles  with  various  waterproofing  materials;  watertight  textiles  can  now  be  achieved  by  dense 
weaving of strong fibers.  Multi-axial multi-ply textiles are bonded by a loop system, consisting of one 
or  more  yarn  layers  stretched  in  parallel;  yarn  layers  can  have  different  spatial  orientations  and 
different yarn densities.  The combination of multi-directional fiber layers has been found by scientific 
laboratory  and  commercial  factory  testing  to  be  remarkably  capable  of  distributing  extra-ordinarily 
high strain forces; multi-axial multi-ply textile structures are dimensionally stable in any direction and 
exhibit  isotropic  distribution  of  stress  forces  with  uniform  strain  behavior.    Kevlar  29,  49,  and  149 
since 1971 is a Dupont, USA, trade name for aromatic polyamides with a Tensile Strength of >3 Gpa, 
a Failure Strain of 3% and a Material Density of ~1.4 g/cm3 is a good example.   All extremely strong 

5

materials  able  to  perform  as  unitary  form-active  structures  ought  to  be  investigated  for  use  in  the 
proposed GSTB.  

The characteristic strength of a structural textile or film material must have a low probability (~5%) of 
not  being  reached  during  the  lifetime  of  the  material’s  use  in  the  GSTB  and  the  characteristic  load 
must not have more than a 5% probability of being exceeded during the design lifetime of the GSTB.  
Potentially,  embedded  fiber-optic  electronics—detectors,  reporters  and  automated  alarm  actuators—
ought to be used to monitor in real-time the super-ropes as well as the draped barrier, which must fit 
tightly to Gibraltar Strait’s sea bottom and sidewalls to successfully fulfill its macroproject functions, 
giving  instant  alerts  to  immediately  responsible  shore-based  supervisors  of  all  developing  GSTB 
structural  problems  related  to  the  GSTB’s  safe  and  efficient  performance.    Should  the  GSTB  be 
separated from its two sidewalls and sea bottom anchorage, swept away by an over-whelming tsunami 
after full loss of its structural integrity, then possibly it might be partly retrievable/salvageable and, if 
so, its quick post-failure replacement would “re-initiate” the artificial Mediterranean Sea reduction (by 
natural  evaporation)  GSTB  macroproject  in  a  manner  timely.    A  clever  collapse  design  could  even 
optimize recovery of a broken GSTB’s components—in other words, the GSTB might be constructed 
with a design philosophy including the possibility of semi-controlled collapsibility, even pre-planned
folding!

Let  us  now  consider  the  very  inexpensive-to-construct  GSTB  mathematically.    The  width  of  the 
Gibraltar Strait at the place designated previously (in Section  4) is  20,000 m, the maximum depth is 
900 m, with an average depth of ~450 m.  The GSTB will have a water surface difference of 1 m.  If 
the top of the Gibraltar Strait Textile Barrier is partially supported by pontoons floating on the North 
Atlantic Ocean, the installation may be utilized as a vehicular highway between Spain and Morocco.  
Sea-going ships arriving  and departing the  Mediterranean Sea Basin will bypass the GSTB by using 
sturdy  fabric  ship-locks  built  at  each  terminus  of  the  bridge-dam.    Our  purpose  in  Section  5  is  to 
estimate  the  needed  materials  (film,  supporting  super-ropes)  as  well  as  the  hydropower  output 
potential.  A simple sketch of the GSTB is provided in Fig. 1:

                        
Fig. 1.  Kevlar or other suitable film-like flexible material forming the seawater barrier and the installation’s 
associated hydropower station. (a) side-view, (b) front-view, (c) pontoon highway bridge between Spain 
and Morocco.  Notations: 1—flexible non-woven textile dam, 2—support cable, 3—pontoon, 4—
hydroelectric turbine, 5—North Atlantic Ocean water level, 6—Mediterranean Sea water level, 7—
anchor, super-rope spool, motor of support cable, 8—stabilizer, 9—stones, 10—tracks. Angle   = 300.

6

Computation

1. Force P [N/m2] for 1 m2 of dam is
                                                          

hgP


where g = 9.81 m/s2 is the Earth gravity;  is water density,  =1000 kg/m3; h is difference between 
top and lower levels of water surfaces, m (see computation in fig.2).

  ,                                                                         (1)

Fig. 2. Water pressure via difference of water levels

2. Water power N [W] is
                



gmh

N

,

,

v



m



vS

hSg
where m is mass flow across 1 m width kg/m; v is water speed, m/s; S is turbine area, m2;  is 
coefficient efficiency of the water turbine, N/S is specific power of water turbine, kW/m2.
Computation is presented in fig. 3

SN
/



453

.43

h


gh

gh

N







2

2

,

,

5.1

,  [kW/m2]      (2)

7

Fig. 3. Specific power of a water turbine via difference of water levels and turbine efficiency coefficient

3. Film thickness is

                                                                         
   where  is safety film tensile stress, N/m2. Results of computation are in fig. 4.

,                                                              (3)





2hg

2


Fig. 4. Film thickness via difference of water levels safety film tensile stress.

4. The film weight of 1m width is

                                                              
    Computation are in fig. 5. If our dam has long L m, we must multiple this results by L. 

,                                                                     (4)

W f

2.1

H

Fig. 5. Film weight via the deep of dam and film thickness c, density 1800 kg/m3 .

8

5. The diameter d of the support cable is
Pl
2

T



2

,

S



d



T


,

4
S


                                                       
where T is cable force, N; l2 is distance between cable, m; S is cross-section area, m2.
Computation is presented in fig. 6. The total weight of support cable is

,                                                 (5)

                                                     

W
c



2

c

HSL

/

Wl
,
a
2




c

SL

,

,                                                  (6)

where c is cable density, kg/m3; L is length of dam, m; Wa is additional (connection of banks) cable, 
m.

Fig. 6. Diameter of the support cable via difference of a water levels and the safety tensile stress.

  Using the graphs above, we can estimate the relevant physical parameters of many interesting 
macroprojects.
  Let us consider the GSTB emplaced between Spain and Morocco in the Strait of Gibraltar. The width 
of channel is 20000 m, the maximum deep is 900 m whilst the average depth is 450 m and the surface 
seawater level difference is 1m. 
If the topmost part of the GSTB, on the North Atlantic Ocean side, is partially supported by pontoons, 
the installation may be used as a fixed link super-highway, possibly even as a railroad bridge. 
Transiting ocean-going ships can use fabric-gate sea-locks to cross the GSTB.    
 Our suggested Gibraltar strait Textile Barrier is very cheap to construct, especially when compared 
with a conventional concrete gravity dam installation as first proposed during 1928 by Herman Sorgel. 

 Our purpose is estimation of the needed film, supporting super-ropes, and energy development 
potential. A simple sketch of the GSTB is presented in fig. 1.  The assumed difference of top and 
lower water levels (head) is 1 m.  The estimation may be made using figs. 2  6. However, we offer a 
clarifying computation that any reader can appreciate in this non-standard macro-engineering effort. 
 The force on 1 m2 of film is P = gh = 1010001=104 N/m2, Eq.(1). The power 1 m of dam width 
for  = 0.9 is N = Pv   4104 W/m. For a dam length of 20,000 m the total power is Nt = 800 MW. 

9

That is power of middle-of-the-Gibraltar Strait electric station. The head is small (1m only), that way 
the energy development potential is not as much.
  Let us take the safety film and cable tensile stress  = 10 kg/mm2 =108 N/m2. Using Eq. (3) we find 
the film thickness  = 0.05 mm, total film weight is Wf = HL = 0.0510-4  180045020000 = 810 
tons. Assume the support cables located l2 =10 m one from other. The cross-section area of cable is S 
= Pl2/ =10410/108 = 10 -3 m, diameter is d = 36 mm. The total cable weight is 3240 tons plus 32 
tons of the connecting 20,000 m cable. The total weight of our GSTB installation (without floating 
pontoons) is W = 810+3240+32 = 4182 tons. Floats can be also made from non-woven textile film and 
additional weight will be small ( 5  10%).  We used conventional film, cables from cheapest 
available plastic. The artificial fiber has maximum tensile stress  = 500  620 kg/mm2. Conventional 
strength factor has value 3 - 6. If we will use the artificial fiber with safety stress   = 100 kg/mm2, the 
total weight of installation decreases by 10 times (up to 418 tons). Than is millions times less (and 
much, much cheaper) then a conventional reinforced concrete gravity dam. The pontoons may be used 
as bridge for trains and/or motor vehicles. Conventional bypass channels may be used for surface 
shipping.

6. GSTB HYDROPOWER GENERATION OPPORTUNITY

Adjacent to the super-rope sidewall seals and sea bottom anchorages of our proposed Gibraltar Strait 
Barrage  macroproject,  the  landscapes  of  Spain  and  Morocco  offer  nearly  ideal  conditions  for  the 
emplacement of Siphonic Hydropower facilities.   Low-head hydroelectric  power plants of a recently 
perfected type can manufacture electricity using gearless air turbines moved by seawater falling 1 m 
from the North Atlantic Ocean to the reduced/stabilized Mediterranean Sea.  There can be an efficient 
recovery  of  economic  energy  in  the  form  of  electricity  from  low-head  seawater.        The  monetary 
construction costs of these two power plants will be reasonable, even less  than that of the GSTB; in 
total, this type of GSTB might be as little as 10% of the cost of a massive 1930s-style Herman Sorgel 
(1885-1952) concrete gravity dam—that is, about USA $10 billions instead of USA $100 billions!  All 
the machinery housed  in  these power plants ought  to  be  made secure from  damaging  environmental 
elements—possibly  even  small  tsunami—and  be  readily  examined  and  repaired  by  Spanish  and 
Moroccan  crews  working  on  solid  ground!    Researched  in  the  UK  by  Professor  M.J.  French  since 
1989 (French and Widden, 2001), Siphonic Hydropower has evidently reached a near-perfection status 
and early marketing stage in its rigorous macro-engineering R&D.  
[GOTO: http://www.engineering.lancs.ac.uk/REGROUPS/LUREG/home/content.asp ]
The  GSTB  will  present  Siphonic  hydropower  developers  with  all  the  basic  elements  required  for  a 
potential hydroelectric development—a  “limitless” world-ocean stream and an  anthropogenic  “drop” 
through  which  the  North  Atlantic  Ocean’s  seawater  can  be  used  to  convert  the  potential  hydraulic 
energy into electrical energy.  Where the available seawater head for the GSTB is only 1 m the losses 
in the Siphonic system  (for aeration, due to pipe friction and due to upward drift of the air bubbles) 
would waste probably 0.4 m of the available head.  Thus, the efficiency of the Siphonic system would 
be  about  60%,  without  considering  losses  in  the  air  turbines  and  electrical  transmission  losses.    A 
Siphonic system of the size envisioned for the GSTB would justify the use of very efficient—that is, 
costly and precisely manufactured—air turbines, say at least 80%, so that overall efficiency could be 
approximately 50%.  Thus, the electricity output could be ~500 MW.  While not remarkably large, the 
power  would  be  generated  24  hours/day,  every  day  of  the  year  regardless  of  weather  conditions, 
forming a Mediterranean Sea Basin electrical generation and distribution system’s reliable base-load.  
One megawatt is enough to power 1,000 European-style homes.  Compressed air turbines energized by 
falling seawater will  not  affect the region’s migratory birds,  which is  an advantage over  wind farms 
where windmills are clustered at a site with persistent favorable winds (Lucas et al., 2004).   

10

7. AFTERWORD

We propose a unique Ocean Art macroproject—the combination of the Gibraltar Strait Textile Barrage 
and  Siphonic  Hydropower  —as  an  inexpensive  total  solution  for  the  major  known  and  forecast 
multiple  environmental  macro-problems  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea  Basin.    Proof  and  practical 
adaptation of this technology at the GSTB might foster its adoption elsewhere.  We have also offered a 
new kind of textile-based hydrostatic seawall capable of successfully tolerating unpredictable incident 
1  m-high  tsunami  waves.    Joseph-Marie Jacquard  (1752-1834)  invented  the  automatic  loom and  his 
work  with  calculating  machines  has  eventuated  in  today’s  supercomputers,  according  to  James 
Essinger’s  Jacquard’s  Web  (Oxford  University  Press,  2004,  302  pages).    How  fitting,  then,  that 
commercially available textiles/super-ropes and computers are precisely the two industrial tools most 
needed to successfully resolve our gedanken experiment!

REFERENCES

Astiz,  M.A.  (1998)  “Flutter  Stability  of  Very  Long  Suspension  Bridges”  JOURNAL  OF  BRIDGE 
ENGINERING 3: 132-139.

Barry, P. (3 June 2006) “Sooner or later, the water will arrive”, NEW SCIENTIST 190: 8-9.

Bolonkin, A.A., (2006), Non-Rocket Space Launch and Flight, Elsevier, London, 488 pages.

Bolonkin, A.A. and R.B. Cathcart, (2006) “A Cable Space Transportation System at the Earth’s Poles 
to Support Exploitation of the Moon”, Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 59: 375-380.

Bolonkin A.A., (2006), Cheap Textile Dam Protection of Seaport Cities against Hurricane Storm 

Surge Waves, Tsunamis, and Other Weather-Related Floods. Printed in http://arxiv.org .

Bolonkin A.A., (2006), Control of Regional and Global Weather. Printed in http://arxiv.org .

Bolonkin, A.A. and R.B. Cathcart (2006), Antarctica: A Southern Hemisphere Windpower Station?
   Printed in http://arxiv.org .

Bolonkin, A.A. and R.B. Cathcart (2006), A Low-Cost Natural Gas/Freshwater Aerial Pipeline. 
   Printed in http://arxiv.org

Brownell,  B.  TRANSMATERIAL:  A  CATALOGUE  OF  MATERIALS  THAT  REDEFINE  OUR 
PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT (Princeton Architectural Press, Princeton, 2006, 237 pages).

Bureaud, A. (2005) “Did You Say Space Art? Leonardo’s Commitment to Space Art, 35 Years On”, 
LEONARDO 38: 374-375.

Cathcart,  R.B. 
2006) 
www.daviddarling.info/Cathcart.html .

(March 

“Gibraltar 

Strait  Dam  Macroprojects” 

posted 

at: 

Cathcart, R.B. and Cirkovic, M. “Extreme Climate Control Membrane Structures: Nth Degree Macro-
engineering”,  Chapter  9 
in  Badescu,  Cathcart,  Schuiling,  MACRO-ENGINEERING:  A 
CHALLENGE FOR THE FUTURE (Springer: 2006).

11

Cathcart,  R.B.  (2006)  “Sethusamudram  Ship  Channel  Macroproject  Anti-Tsunami  and  Storm  Surge 
Textile Arrestors (ATSSTA) Protecting Palk Bay (India and Sri Lanka), CURRENT SCIENCE.

Cerda, E. (2004) “The elements of draping”, PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF 
SCIENCE 101: 1806-1810.

Cheng, W. (2006) “Effects of Elevated Atmospheric CO2 Concentrations on CH4 and N2O Emission 
from  Rice  Soil:  An  Experiment  in  Controlled-environment  Chambers”,  BIOGEOCHEMISTRY  77: 
351-373.

Crossland,  C.J.,  EARTH  SYSTEM  SCIENCE  IN  THE  ANTHROPOCENE  (Springer,  New  York, 
2005) pages 78-79.

Cullen, Martin N. (2005) “Tension membrane water retaining structures”, TRANSACTIONS OF THE 
BUILT ENVIRONMENT 79: 427-436.

Emanuel,  K.  (2005)  “Genesis  and  maintenance  of  ‘Mediterranean  hurricanes’”  ADVANCES  IN 
GEOSCIENCES 2: 217-220.

Fenoglio-Marc, L. (2006) “Mass variation in the Mediterranean Sea from GRACE and its validation 
by altimetry, steric and hydrologic fields”, GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS 33: L196060.

French,  M.J.  and  Widden,  M.B.  (2001)  “The  exploitation  of  low-head  hydropower  by  pressure 
interchange  with  air,  using  siphons”,  PROC.  IMECH  PART  A—JOURNAL  OF  POWER  AND 
ENERGY 215 (A2): 223-230.

Garcia,  D.  et  al.  (2006)  “On  the  steric  and  mass-induced  contributions  to  the  annual  sea  level 
variations in the Mediterranean Sea”, JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH 111: C09030.

Goren, M. and Galil, B.S. (2005)  “A review  of changes in the  fish assemblages of  Levantine  inland 
and  marine  ecosystems  following  the  introduction  of  non-native  fishes”,  JOURNAL  OF  APPLIED 
ICHTHYOLOGY 21: 364.

Gupta, S.K. and Sharma, P. (1995) “Storing river runoff in the Gulf of Khambhat: A critique of the 
‘Kalpasar’ concept”, CURRENT SCIENCE 69: 227-228.

Guthenke,  C.  (March  2006)  “Watching  the  Great  Sea  of  Beauty:  Thinking  the  Ancient  Greek 
Mediterranean”, PRINCETON/STANFORD WORKING PAPERS IN CLASSICS.

Hills,  J.C.  and  Goda,  P.  (1998)  “Tsunami  from  asteroid  and  comet  impacts:  the  vulnerability  of 
Europe”, SCIENCE OF TSUNAMI HAZARDS 16: 3-10.

Khilyuk, L.F. and Chilingar, G.V. (2006) “On global forces of nature driving the Earth’s climate: Are 
humans involved?”, ENVIRONMENTAL GEOLOGY 50: 899-910.

Khush,  G.S.  (2005)  “What  it  will  take  to  feed  5.0  billion  rice  consumers  in  2030”,  PLANT 
MOLECULAR BIOLOGY 59: 1-6.

Lelieveld, J. et al. (2002) “Global Air Pollution Crossroads over the Mediterranean”, SCIENCE 298: 
794-799.

12

Li,  L.Z.X.  (2006)  “Atmospheric  GCM  response  to  an  idealized  anomaly  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea 
surface temperature”, CLIMATE DYNAMICS 27: 543-552.

Liquete, C. et al. (2004) “The Impact of Humans on Strata Formation Along Mediterranean Margins”, 
OCEANOGRAPHY 17: 70-79.

Lo, Yat-Man (2000) “Performance of a Flexible Membrane Wave Barrier of a Finite Vertical Extent”, 
COASTAL ENGINEERING JOURNAL 42: 237-251.

Loomis,  H.G.  (2002)  “The  Momentum  of  Tsunami  Waves”,  SCIENCE  OF  TSUNAMI  HAZARDS 
20: 38-41.

Lu, Y. and  Conrad, R. (2005)  “In Situ  Stable Isotope Probing of Methanogenic Archaea in the Rice 
Rhizosphere”, SCIENCE 309: 1088-1090.

Lucas,  M., Janss,  G.F.E.  and  Ferrer,  M.  (2004)  “The effects of  a  wind  farm  on  birds  in  a  migration 
point: the Strait of Gibraltar”, BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION 13: 395-407.

Marmer,  E.  and  Langmann,  B.  (2005)  “Impact of  ship  emissions  on  the  Mediterranean  summertime 
and climate: a regional model study”, ATMOSPHERIC ENVIRONMENT 39: 4659-4669.

Maslin,  M.,  M.  Own,  S.  Day  and  Long,  D.  (2004)  “Linking  continental-slope  failures  and  climate 
change: Testing the clathrate gun hypothesis”, GEOLOGY 32: 53-56.

Meier,  Urs  (1987)  “Proposal  for  a  carbon  fibre  reinforced  composite  bridge  across  the  Strait  of 
Gibraltar  at  its  narrowest  site”,  PROCEEDINGS  INSTITUTION  OF  MECHANICAL  ENGINEERS 
201: 73-78.

Mertens,  J.  (January  2006),  “Oil  on  Troubled  Waters:  Benjamin  Franklin  and  the  Honor  of  Dutch 
Seamen”, PHYSICS TODAY, pages 36-41.

Mosedale,  J.T.  (2004)  “Coastal  Mass  Tourism:  Diversification  and  Sustainable  Development  in 
Southern Europe”, ANNUALS OF TOURISM RESEARCH 32: 282-284.

Mullarney,  J.C.  (2006)  “The  effects  of  geothermal  heating  on  the  ocean  overturning  circulation”, 
GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS 33: L02607.

Nerdinger, W., FREI OTTO: COMPLETE WORKS (Birkhauser, Basel, 2005, 392 pages).

Nilsson,  C.,  (2005)  “Fragmentation  and  Flow  Regulation  of  the  World’s  Large  River  Systems”, 
SCIENCE 308: 405-408.

Noisternig,  J.F.  (2000)  “Carbon  Fibre  Composites  as  Stay  Cables  for  Bridges”,  APPLIED 
COMPOSITE MATERIALS 7: 139-150.

Otto, Frei (1967) TENSILE STRUCTURES, Vol. 1 (MIT Press, Cambridge) pages 126-130.

Pugno, N.M. (30 January 2006) “On the strength of the carbon nanotube-based space elevator cable: 
From nano- to mega-mechanics”, arXiv.org>condensed matter>cond-mat/0601668.

13

Rao,  B.  R.  (10  July  2005)  “Buckingham  Canal  saved  people  in  Andhra  Pradesh  (India)  from  the 
tsunami of 26 December 2004” CURRENT SCIENCE [INDIA] 89: 12-13.

Raper,  S.C.B.  and  Braithwaite,  R.J.,  (2006)  “Low  sea  level  rise  projections  from  mountain  glaciers 
and icecaps under global warming”, NATURE 439: 311-313.

Ruddiman, W.F., PLOWS, PLAGUES & PETROLEUM (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2005) 
page 76-83.

Skliris,  N.  and  Lascaratos,  A.  (2004)  “Impacts  of  the  Nile  River  damming  on  the  thermohaline 
circulation  and  water  mass  characteristics  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea”,  JOURNAL  OF  MARINE 
SYSTEMS 52: 121-143.

Tanford, C. BEN FRANKLIN STILLED THE WAVES: AN INFORMAL HISTORY OF POURING 
OIL ON  WATER WITH REFLECTIONS ON  THE UPS AND DOWNS OF SCIENTIFIC LIFE IN 
GENERAL (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2004) 269 pages.

Tiberghien, G.A., LAND ART (Princeton Architectural Press, New York, 1995, 312 pages).

Vaizey, M., CHRISTO (Rizzoli, New York, 1990), pages 74-79.

MACRO-ENGINEERING: A Challenge for the Future, Springer, 2006. Collection of articles.

14

