 

 

 

Enhanced functions supporting process planning for aircraft structural parts 

Ramy HARIK*†, Vincent CAPPONI**, Muriel Lombard*, Gabriel RIS* 
 
*CRAN, Research Center for Automatic Control, Nancy, CNRS UMR 7039 
Université Henri Poincaré, Nancy I, Faculté des Sciences 
Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, BP 239 – 54506, France 
Phone: +33-3-83684419, Fax: +33-3-83684437 
 
** Institute of Production and Robotics, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne  
EPFL-STI-IPR-LICP, Station 9, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 
Phone : +41 21 69 35 915, Fax : +41 21 69 33 509 

† Corresponding author: ramy.harik@cran.uhp-nancy.fr 
  

and 

post-process 

 
Abstract  –  Aiming  at  automating  the  different  trades 
intervening  in  mechanical  parts’  design  activities,  one  finds 
the  weakest  link  within  the  interface  linking  the  computer 
aided-design  trade  (CAD)  and  the  process  planning  trade 
(CAPP)  where  a  huge  semantic  gap  is  detected.  Works 
generally  tends  to  optimize  the  pre-process  planning  trade 
(design/CAD) 
trade 
(machinning/CAM).  So  as  to  bridge  in  between  CAD  and 
CAPP  we  present  at  first  support  functions  that  helps  a 
process  planner  setting  a  process  plan  for  an  aircraft 
structural part. The proposed functions will be forwarded in 
the same order the planner questions himself during his first 
analysis.  Each  function  is  justified  by  presenting  the  need 
behind.  We  end  up  on  the  benefits  of  having  such  an 
assistance tool as we mention the future perspectives of our 
works. 
 
Keywords:  Process  Planning,  Automation,  Geometric 
modeling, flank milling, CAD/CAPP/CAM 

planning 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Tending  towards  shortening  the  production  time  cycle, 
manufacturers  identified  the  different  intervening  trades 
and  studied  the  areas  where  the  production  can  be 
accelerated.  We  focus  our  study  between  the  design  and 
manufacturing  process.  Three  different  trades  intervenes 
generally, the design where the product specifications are 
established,  the  process  planning  where  the  process  plan 
is  set  up  and  the  manufacturing  where  the  milling 
parameters  are  selected.  Works  in  between  these  trades 
started evolving around each as a stand alone trade. 

CAD  systems  were  first  revealed  in  the  60’s,  however 
they were drawing oriented without any ability to conduct 
mechanical  calculus  in  behind.  In  the  late  70’s  CAD 
systems performance witnessed a new era and research on 
features-based  systems  accelerated  whereas  in  the  90’s 
these systems became an industrial need due to their high 
performance  ability.  In  parallel,  works  on  CAM  systems 
were  being  held.  But  there  were  no  real  interfacing  in 
between  the  two  different  trades.  Works  on  CAPP 
systems  started  around  the  80’s  with  the  first  systems 

providing  the  ability  to  generate  process  planning  being 
developed in few industrial ventures. While the interface 
between  CAPP  and  CAM  is  well  integrated  (since  they 
are  manipulating  the  same  objects),  there  is  a  huge 
semantic  loss  between  the  CAD  and  CAPP  trade,  where 
even  the  support  models  used  by  these  systems  are 
completely  different.  Different  works  were  publish 
around,  whether  using  STEP  (a  neutral  product  data 
exchange  system)  or  machining/design  features,  still  the 
semantic  gap  is  not  fulfilled  mainly  in  areas  of  interest 
that have high degree of specificity. 

French  RNTL  project  UsiQuick  was  established  to 
answer  this  need  in  the  aeronautical  field.  Analysis 
conducted showed that two main reasons justify the need 
of  automating  the  design/process  planning  interface  as 
well  as  characterizing  CAPP  supporting  functions.  The 
first  being  the  small  production  batch  when  it  comes  to 
the aeronautical manufactured parts, the second being the 
loss  of  expertise  knowledge  due  to  mass  retirements  of 
people that first worked in this domain. 

Through  the  different  sections  of  our  articles,  we  will 
forward  a  state  of  the  art  evolving  around  the  need  of 
automating  process  planning.  Once  justified,  we  shall 
forward  functions  proposed  to  simply  the  aeronautical 
process  planner  task.  The  functions  are  advanced  in 
identical  order  to  how  a  process  planner  questions  the 
is  made  first  by 
part.  Each  function  presentation 
presenting  the  need  and  utility  behind,  followed  by  the 
characterization algorithms and application. 

II. STATE OF THE ART 

Process  planning  is  a  function  within  manufacturing 
facilities 
that  selects  manufacturing  processes  and 
parameters  to  be  used  to  transform  a  part from its initial 
stage to the final stage based on a predefined engineering 
drawing  [Zha,  94].  Many  researches  were  made  to 
automate  the  process  planning  trade.  [Alt,  89]  defined  a 

list of the tasks a complete design to machining software 
should include. The first task is the transformation of the 
CAD model into a comprehensible product model for the 
manufacturing area. Whereas the first studies proposed a 
complete  automation  of  the  process  planning  trade, 
research 
towards  characterizing 
tending 
support  functions  to  the  process  planning  trade,  without 
eliminating the expert interaction.  

is  recently 

[Gam,  90]  defines  machining  features  as  the  association 
of  a  milling  process,  a  geometrical  shape  and 
specifications.  [Sha,  95]  gave  a  detailed  definition: 
Machining  features  are  a  set  of  geometrical  elements 
which corresponds to a certain machining process. These 
elements  can  be  used 
the  appropriate 
machining  means  that  can  help  creating  the  concerned 
geometry. 

to  generate 

[Ans,  94]  specified  that  process  planning  doesn’t  have  a 
structured  generation  method,  no  proved  techniques,  no 
synthesized  references,  and  no  norms.  It  is  completely 
based  on  the  expert’s  experience  and  the  available 
methods  in  the  company.  [Vil,  99]  adds  that  process 
planning  automation  evokes  a  multitude  of  opposed 
criterions  and  contradictory  objects  while  requiring  a 
huge expertise and knowledge, uneasy to be modeled and 
coded. 

Process  planning  generation  strategies  can  be  classified 
through  two  different  categories:  variant  and  generative 
ones. 

What we identify as variant process planning is a retrieval 
of  old  process  plan  based  on  the  part’s  morphology.  It 
usually  concerns  look-alike  parts’  domains  [Mut,  88  - 
Cha,  90]  such  as  the  hydraulic  one.  Variant  systems 
identify  previously  proposed  process  plans  for  similar 
parts and try to adjust them to the new part. This method 
proved that it is difficult to create and maintain. [Li, 94] 
presents  an  industrial  venture  where  after  spending  2 
years inserting data within the knowledge database, it was 
still  almost  impossible  to  integrate  new  manufacturing 
technologies due to time consuming database inquiries. It 
is to mention that this method is completely useless in the 
aeronautical field since we rarely find two similar parts. 

Generative  systems  consist  in  integrating  the  process 
the  process  planning 
planner  knowledge  within 
generation  system.  They  are  usually  split  in  between 
algorithmic  methods  [Wys,  77  –  Che,  92],  when  the 
knowledge is hardly coded within the system, and expert 
systems [Des, 81 – Tsa, 87], when the knowledge is being 
constructed  in  a  separate  database  and  only  called  once 
the  specific 
identified.  Recently, 
Artificial Intelligence systems are being questioned.  

trigger  reason 

is 

One  important  aspect  in  generative  methods  is  how  to 
formalize  the  planner’s  knowledge  from  one  side,  and 
how  to  memorize  it  within  the  systems,  from  the  other. 
Usually knowledge in machining is stored by two means 
[Vil,  03].  The  first  being  production  rules:  IF  {reason} 
THEN  {consequences}.  The  second  by  constraints: 
Geometrical  constraints  (same  setup  for  two  features), 
topological  constraints  (feature  one  processed  ahead 
feature  two)  and  kinematical  ones  (feature  processed 
using  this  milling  direction).  To  propose  a  framework 
during the reasoning, machining features are widely used. 

Feature  modeling  is  often  seen  as  the  answer  to  support 
the passage from CAD to CAPP. However these features 
are  not  widely  used 
in  nowadays  systems.  This 
consequences  leads  to  the  need  of  a  machining  oriented 
product  model  able  to  support  the  different  concerned 
trades. 

A  confidential  industrial  state  of  the  art  concludes  that 
through  the  establishment  of  certain  process  planning 
help  functions,  programming  time  would  be  reduced  up 
to  70%.  As  the  aeronautical  parts  are  produced  in  very 
small  batches,  any  reduction  of  the  programming  time 
leads to substantial savings on the total cost of each part.  

If  we  were  to  conclude  the  presented  state  of  the  art  in 
three points, they would be:  

•  We  renounce  the  complete  automation  idea 
the  specification  of  a  performing 

towards 
support system, 

•  The  generation  of  a machining oriented product 
model is essential to contain the newly generated 
information, 

•  Support  functions  are  needed  to  reduce  the 
enormous  time  spent  on  setting  up  aeronautical 
parts’ process plans. 

III. PROCESS PLANNING FUNCTIONS 

By  the  following  we  shall  present  some  of  the  functions 
that answer the first questions a process planner questions 
when  he  first  sees  an  aeronautical  part  (fig  1).  Those 
functions  were  extracted  after  extensive  studies  and 
interviews with process planners from aircraft companies. 
The  level  of  details  given  in  some  of  the  presented 
functions  was  subject  to  confidentiality  clause,  and  thus 
only  the  main  guidelines  are  presented  in  this  paper. 
These functions can be generalized to other industries as 
stand  alone  functions;  however  the  proposed  sequencing 
is representative of aircraft industries. 

The  functions  are  proposed  to  experimented  process 
planners, presuming that all the identified attributes were 
calculated  and  filled  in  the  part’s  newly  generated 
machining oriented product model. 

proposed  in  this  paper  does  not  tackle  the  multiple  part 
configuration. 

B. Potential milling tools 

While investigating the part, different generated attributes 
will  be  useful  for  selecting  the  finishing  milling  tools. 
Milling  tools  are  a  roller  with  indented  edge  or  surface, 
for  producing  like  indentations  in  metal  by  rolling 
pressure, as in turning. Their selection depends heavily on 
two  main  criterions.  The  first  being  the  type  of  the 
material: special cutting tools are made depending of the 
titanium…).  The  second 
stock  material  (aluminum, 
criterion depends on the part’s geometry. Upon the part’s 
analysis  we  define  three  main  parameters:  the  cutting 
length, the tool’s diameter and its corner radius. This first 
selection is made considering standard fillet-end cutter. 

a 

Tool diameter 

Corner radius 

Cutting length 

 

Fig. 4. Geometric characteristics of the Fillet-End Cutter  

 

Different  methods  are  called  to  determine  the  three 
parameters. 

The  cutting  length  is  selected  upon  ray  launching 
techniques.  Once  a  milling  mode  is  selected  or  that  the 
face is characterized as potentially machinable, and after 
the determination of the accessibility vector (check §3.D 
and §3.E), we can compute the minimum length of the to-
be-removed material. 

Fig. 1. Scheme representing the aim of our article: To answer the 
questions a process planner asks when he first sees the part 

A. Dimensions and stock selection 

The  first  evoked  question  evolves  around  the  part’s 
dimensions. The planner checks if the main dimensions of 
the  simplest  stock  around 
the  part  (fig.2)  remain 
compatible with the workspace of the available machine-
tools  in  the  workshop,  else  he  may  have  to  contact 
another  workshop  or  outsource  the  manufacturing  of  the 
part.  If  the  part  is  small  considering  the  average 
workspace,  he  may  consider  machining  several  parts  in 
the same stock, therefore in the same set-up (fig.3).  

Fig. 2. Minimal stock of the part  

 

 

Fig. 3. Multiple parts in the same stock. 

The support function for this task consists in providing a 
list  of  the  compatible  machine-tools  considering  the  part 
dimension.  For  this  rough  sorting,  the  minimal  stock 
(which  will  not  be  the  real  stock)  will  be  computed  and 
compared  to  the  workspace  of  the  available  machine-
tools.  For  each  machine-tool,  the  theoretical  number  of 
parts  machinable  on  the  same  set-up  can  be  calculated 
too. However, multiple parts in the same set-up increases 
the  difficulty  of  the  planning  tasks,  so  next  functions 

Fig. 5. Ray tracing to determine cutting length 

 

The  tool  corner  radius  is  computed  upon  the  smallest 
fillet  radius  of  the  part.  A  fillet  is  the  junction  surface 
often characterized by a cylinder whose radius is less then 

Fig. 7. Thin features nomenclature 

The  particularity  of  these  features  is  essentially  their 
milling  priority.  A  wing  top  should  be  finished  while 
roughing  the  part.  This  is  explained  by  the  effort 
generated while proceeding with the material removal. 

If we take the example of the presented mechanical part, 
the thin extension consists of two faces, one shown on the 
fig  7,  and  another  internal  (from  the  other  side).  The 
external part will be end milled while the inside one will 
be flank milled due to accessibility reasons. The wing top 
will  also  be  flank  milled.  An  understanding  of  the 
mechanical  forces  generated  while  proceeding  with  the 
material removal (fig 8) reveals that the forces present on 
the  part  might  induce  a  higher  part’s  deformation  when 
not milled in a particular order. 

4mm  or  a  sweep  face  whose  radius  is  less  then  6mm. 
usually designers omit placing fillets unless they perform 
certain functionalities. 

The  final  parameter  would  be  the  tool  diameter.  It  is 
directly  related  to  the  selected  milling  mode.  If  end 
milling,  then  the  diameter  is  selected  by  offsetting  the 
surface  and  checking 
it’s 
the 
surrounding.  If  flank  milling,  we  check  up  the  different 
adjacent  faces  and  their  type  (planar,  cylindrical,  ruled, 
conical…).  And  then  we  select  the  smallest  cylindrical 
radius to perform the milling. 

interactions  with 

iterating  and  checking 

Having  generated  a  first  potential  milling  tool,  we  can 
proceed  by 
the  results.  If 
convenient  we  fix  our  selection,  else  we  iterate  to  reach 
the  optimal  tool.  The  cutting  length  should  not  be  too 
long  else  it  might  induce  vibration  and  deflexion.  Once 
95%  of  the  face  is  milled  we  can  consider  the  tool  as 
satisfactory and proceed what remains with another tool. 

C. Machining difficulties 

To solve machining difficulties, some features have to be 
finished  while  proceeding  with  the  roughing.  We  shall 
present one of these particular features: “thin features”. 

“Thin  features”  are  characterized  by  two  planar  surfaces 
separated by a small distance in between them as shown 
in figure 6. 

(a)

(c)

(e)

(b)  

(d)  

(f)   

 

Fig. 6. Thin features 

These  features  can  be  enclosed  in  the  part  (they  will  be 
thus  characterised  as  bottom  thin  features),  or  half 
enclosed  (and  they  might  be  characterized  as  wing  thin 
features). 

Fig. 8. (a) Flank milling forces simulation, (b) end milling forces 
simulation, (c) internal flank milling deformations when external end 
milling is not processed, (d) internal flank milling deformations when 
external end milling is previously processed, (e) end milling deformation 
when inside flank milling is not processed, (f) end milling deformations 
when flank milling is previously processed.. 

The  figure  above  shows  the  orientation  of  the  forces, 
when  the  milling  tools  are  removing  the  material.  The 
flank  milling  of  the  web  top  is  to  be  conducted  first; 
hence  the  force  orientation  would  deform  the  part.  If 
finished  before  roughing  the  thin  extensions,  the  force 
to-be-removed 
efforts  will  be  propagated 

into 

the 

Wing top 

Thin Extension 

 

material.  Then  we  would  flank  mill  the  internal  side 
before  end  milling  the  external  side.  The  end  milling 
forces  being  in  the  planar  section  the  different  resulting 
stress forces won’t lead to the part deformation unlike the 
internal side flank milling. 

•  The  result  is  then  projected  on  the  original  face 

and, 

•  By  eliminating  inside  parts  of  the  projection 
(cleaning phase), we obtain the masked zone (fig 
10.d). 

Through  the  application  of  this  algorithm  on  the  part’s 
different  faces,  we  will  be  able  to  determine  which  ones 
can  be  machined  using  the  end  milling  mode.  And 
moreover, we are able to determine the exact percentage 
of the face that will be machined. 

Certain  process  planners  will  select  end  milling  even  if 
the  unmachined  area  reaches  20%  of  the  part,  and  then 
will  machine  the  remaining  with  either  flank  or  sweep 
milling. 

We conducted a simple static deformation calculus on the 
part  in  order  to  confirm  these  assumptions.  We  consider 
two  sequences  of  finishing  operations:  (1)  flank  milling 
the  inner  side  before  end  milling  the  outer  side  and  (2) 
flank  milling  the  inner  side  after  end  milling  the  outer 
side.  According  to  thin  walls  standard  strategies,  large 
finishing  allowance  (5mm)  has  been  set.  Figure  8 
illustrates  the  different  mentioned  cases  and  Table  1 
presents  the  maximum  deformation  values  during  the 
machining of the considered wall. 

Sequence 

(1) Flank + End 
(2) End + Flank 

Deformation 
during flank-milling 
5.10-5 mm (c) 
4.10-2 mm (d) 

Deformation 
during end-milling 
4.10-5 mm (f) 
1.10-3 mm (e) 

Table 1. Maximum deformation values 

By identifying these features we would be generating the 
first  process  planning  phase  within  an  internal  priority 
ranking to respect.  

In  the  following  two  sections  (D  and  E)  we  will  inquire 
the face’s ability to be milled with end and flank milling 
respectively.  The  following  figure (Fig. 9) represents the 
origins  of  this  nomenclature.  It  is  due  to  the  used  tool 
section in the part material removal process. 

a 

End milling 

Fig. 10. End milling computation different steps. In the end, we obtain 
the masked zone (in horizontal lines) and the machinable zone (in 
vertical lines). 

` 

Flank milling 

 

In  general,  we  type  the  part’s  face  with  the  end  milling 
mode, when 95% of the face is doable. The remaining 5% 
can be then hand milled or proceeded with other material 
removing techniques. 

Fig. 9. Different milling modes, flank milling when using the tool’s side, 
end milling when using the tool’s end, and simultaneous when using 
both. 

E. Flank Milling 

D. End Milling 

The  ability  of  a  part’s  face  to  be  end  milled  is  studied 
next. The approach is based on visibility and accessibility 
issues.  [Der,  05]  has  proposed  different  solutions  based 
on finite elements and topological operations. 

In his topological approach, the following algorithm was 
proposed, once the face is selected (fig 10.a): 

•  We construct an infinite extrusion of the studied 

face (fig 10.b), 

In  the  particular  sector  of  aeronautical  structural  parts, 
experts claims that flank milling is the optimal machining 
mode  for  the  face’s  quality,  cost  and  milling  time.  This 
finding is due to the enclosed geometries that restrict the 
potential  end-milling  tools  and  usually  lead  to  select 
cutters  with  small  diameter.  In  this  case,,  flank  milling 
may be 14 times faster than end milling due to the wider 
tool-part  contact  area.  At  the  same  time,  the  shape 
generated  by  the  flank  of  a  tool  is  often  of  finishing 
quality  and  having  reduced  the  machining  time  the  cost 
automatically decreases. 

•  Then  we  intersect  the  obtained  extrusion  with 

the originating part (fig 10.c), 

However flank milling’s trajectories generation for webs 
or  stiffeners  is  of  a  certain  complexity,  that  actually 

planners  prefer  end  milling  on  flank  milling.  Within  our 
PhD  studies,  we  suggested  different  modules  to  treat 
flank milling. 

Ruled surfaces can only be milled using the flank milling 
mode.  Ruled  surfaces  are  the  result  of  moving  a  rule 
along  a certain trajectory. Planar, cylindrical and conical 
faces  are  particular  ruled  ones.  The  treatment  of  flank 
milling  is  separated  between  the  planar  surfaces  on  one 
side,  and  the  general  ruled  surfaces,  the  cylindrical  and 
the conical on the other. This is mainly due to the infinite 
number  of  directions  that  a  planar  surface  can  be 
machined with while the general ruled surfaces can only 
be milled following the rule’s trajectory. 

The  study  generally  consists  of  identifying  the  ruled 
surface, extracting the machining directions [Har (a), 06], 
and  computing  the  visible  zone  [Har  (b),  06]  to  validate 
the selected machining directions.  

The machining directions for planar surfaces are based on 
industrial  knowledge  extraction  computations.  The 
method relies on three aspects: the face’ edges, the face’ 
vertex transitions and the backward edges. The first being 
a  local  treatment  depending  on  the  edge’  different 
parameters (sharpness, angles, adjacency…). For a certain 
value  of  the  different  parameters  a  certain  machining 
direction  will  be  proposed.  The  second  relying  on  the 
point  transitions  (sharpness  of  the  bounding  edges),  in 
fact  we  try  to  relay  the  most  constraining  vertexes  with 
the  least  constraining  ones  (which  might  eventually 
constitutes  accessible  areas  for  the  face).  The  last  would 
be a special treatment for the different edges that are not 
accessible  through  their  knowledge  proposed  machining 
direction.  

For  other  ruled  surfaces  the  machining  directions  are 
constituted of the set of rules generating the surface.  

intervening operations. The fixture elements are included 
in  the  stock  and  the workpiece remains connected to the 
stock by tabs at the end of the machining. To post-finish 
the part, the tabs are manually cut by an operator. As the 
initial orientation of the part in the stock is not specified 
by  the  designer,  the  planner  could  set  it  in  order  to  ease 
the machining. For the two set-ups, the slab stock will be 
stick on the table of the machine-tool; therefore the stock 
orientation question is totally related to the positioning of 
the part on the machine-tool.  

At  the  very  beginning  of  the  set-up  planning,  the  expert 
questions  itself  how  to  set  the  stock  ensuring  that  all 
machining directions of the parts are reachable within the 
two  opposite  set-ups.  By  his  experience,  the  planner 
usually  identifies  the  “bottom  of  the  part”  and  set  the 
great plane of the stock parallel to this “bottom”. Then, he 
checks  that  all  the  machining  directions  are  reachable 
respecting the rotational degree of freedom of the selected 
machine-tool.  If  that  is  not  the  case,  he  has  to  consider 
another stock orientation or additional set-up. 
As the identification of the “bottom of the part” relies on 
cognitive  interpretation  and  implicit  information  that 
cannot  be  included  in  the  manufacturing  product  model, 
we  propose  a  heuristic  method  based  on  the  previously 
calculated criterions: 

•  We select the plane features that were identified 
as “can be machined with an end milling mode”, 

•  Within  this  selection,  we  cluster  in  the  same 
group the planes that are parallels , and calculate 
the total area of each group (sum of  the area of 
all the clustered planes), 

•  We select the group with the biggest area and set 
the main plane of the stock parallel to a plane of 
the group.  

Once  the  machining  directions  are  proposed  we  call  on 
different  modules  to  validate  them.  These  methods  rely 
heavily on topological computations to extract the visible 
and masked zones. Having multiple machining directions 
attached  to  each  face  we  compute  each  direction’s 
accessibility on the part. Then, we intersect all the results 
obtained on a single face to generate the final result: the 
global visible area and the G-Zones [Har (b), 06]. 

F.    Toward  a  support  for  positioning  the  part  on  the 
machine-tool. 

The  function  we  present  below  is  very  dedicated  to  the 
machining  of  aircraft  structural  parts,  meaning  that  it  is 
the first step to support a specific planning activity, non-
usual  in  programming  for  other  components  such  as 
automotive  or  mould  parts  [Cap,  06].  Indeed,  structural 
aircraft  parts  are  made  from  slab  stock  in  two  setups 
(front-side/back-side) on a five-axis machine tool with no 

summarize,  we  propose  a  plane 

To 
the 
Manufacturing  Product  Model  that  implicitly  define  the 
orientation of the part on the machine-tool. This function 
relies on the previously presented machinability functions 
(end-milling  or  flank-milling  ability)  to  match  with  the 
planner way of thinking. 

from 

Finding  this  plane  automatically  will  allow  displaying 
directly the part on the machine-tool model (two degrees 
of  freedom  are  now  fixed),  helping  the  planner  to 
consider  accessibility  constraints.  Indeed,  the  next  step 
for  the  planner  is  to  set the position of the part ensuring 
that  the  limited  motions  of  rotational  axes  do  not  forbid 
the access to any of the selected machining directions. 

[Cap, 05] proposed several other methods to set the stock 
orientation  of  for  aircraft  structural  parts,  one  of  which 
was  to  compute  the  stock  of  minimal volume. They also 
proposed  a  visibility-based  method  and  an  algorithm  for 

positioning the part on the machine-tool and accessibility 
checking [Cap, 04]. Their usage is currently questioned in 
industry  and  will  serve  as  a  future  function  proposition 
for our process planning generation help system. 

Figure  11,  represents  of  the  results  actually  obtained  by 
applying  the  flank  milling  detection  (function  E)  on  a 
certain  mechanical  part.  The  presented  arrows  are 
directed  in  opposite  terms  to  how  the  milling  tool  will 
approach the part. 

G. Sharpness reduction 

The final function we shall present is relevant to assembly 
workers  safety.  Aeronautic  parts  have  often  sharp 
boundaries  which  might  lead  to  hand  cutting.  Already 
identified  in  the  part  characterization,  the  algorithm 
combines  the  edge’s  length  and  sharpness.  If  the  safety 
condition is unavailable (i.e. over 140 mm of length, with 
an open sharpness) we process to sharpness reduction on 
the  selected  edge.  The  reduction  might  be  through  a 
particular  industrial  method,  or  through  local  milling 
treatments on the edge. 

IV. APPLICATION 

The  presented  approach  was  developed  thanks  to  the 
open architecture of the CATIA® V5 PLM software with 
CAA 
(Component  Application  Architecture).  The 
development  consisted  of  different  phases  to  reach  the 
actual status. 

 

Fig. 10. The functions development completely integrated within the 
CAD/CAM to PLM software. 

The  presented  result  is  the  effort  (fig  10)  conducted 
within  the  UsiQuick  (French  RNTL)  project.  Four 
laboratories (besides ours – the CRAN) participated in the 
effort  (IRCCyN  –  Nantes,  LGIPM  –  Metz,  L3S  – 
Grenoble  and  LURPA  –  Cachan).  Two  Industrials  took 
part  of  the  venture  too  (DASSAULT  AVIATION  and 
DASSAULT  SYSTÈMES)  and  an  expertise  center 
(CETIM). 

 It  is  currently  applied  within  a  specific  IT  Tool  with 
perspectives  of  accepting  neutral  CAD  formats.    The 
actual status of the software nowadays proposes some of 
the  solutions  to  the  prescribed  functions,  while  the 
remaining is in current application. 

Fig. 11. Planar machinning directions resulting from the application of 
the E (Flank Milling) function. [Har (b), 06]. 

 

V. CONCLUSION 

The aim of our article was to present functions a process 
planner  requires  to  facilitate  his  time-consuming  effort. 
At  first,  we  proved  through  our  state  of  the  art,  that 
providing performing help functions is healthier then the 
approach  tending  to  automate  the  process  planning 
activity.  Then,  we  presented  the  functions:  Dimensions 
and  stock  selection,  Potential  milling  tools,  Machining 
Difficulties,  Particular  features,  End  milling,  Flank 
milling, Positioning and Sharpness reduction. Each of the 
functions was at first justified then parts of the algorithm 
were  presented.  We  ended 
the 
presentation  of  the  application  in  a  CAD/CAM  to  PLM 
software. 

the  article  with 

The  presented  functions  can  reduce  to  over  50%  the 
actual  time  a  process  planner  requires  to  study  a 
mechanical  part.  This  percentage  was  established  due  to 
the  aircraft 
interactions  with  process  planners 
industries. 
the 
perspectives 
characterization  of  other  software  functions.  Our  main 
effort  is  actually  concentrated  on  linking  the  different 
results  of  these  functions  to  assure  coherence  with  the 
different outputs the actual assistance module generates. 
REFERENCES 

comprehend 

Future 

in 

 
[Alt,  89]  L.  Alting  and  H.  Zhang,  “Computer  Aided  Process  Planning: 
the  state-of-the-art  survey”,  International  Journal  of  Production 
Research., Vol. 27, 4, pp. 553-585, 1989 

[Ans,  94]  B.  Anselmetti, “Génération  automatique  de  gammes  de 
tournage et contribution à la gestion d’une cellule de production”, 
Habilitation  à  diriger  des  recherches,  Université  de  Nancy,  jan. 
1994  

[Cha,  90]  T.C.  Chang  «  Expert  Process  Planning  for  Manufacturing  », 
Addison-Wesley Publication, Cy, Inc., ISBN 0-201-18297-1, USA, 
1990 

[Che,  92]  A.  Chep,  “Modèle  de  représentation  et  d’utilisation  des 
connaissances  nécessaires  à  la  conception  d’un  processus  de 
fabrication  :  application  à  la  génération  automatique  de  gammes 
d’usinage en tournage”, Ph.D dissertation, Ecole Centrale de Paris, 
LURPA, Janvier 1992 

[Cap, 04] V. Capponi, F. Villeneuve, H. Paris, “Handling of alternative 
processes for machining of aeronautical parts in a CAPP system”, 
Pre-prints  of  IFAC-MiM’04  Conference,  Athens,  21-22  October 
2004 

[Cap  05]  V.  Capponi,  “Les  interactions  homme-machine  dans  la 
génération  assistée  de  gammes  d'usinage  :  application  aux  pièces 
aéronautiques  de  structure“,  Ph.D  dissertation,  Université  Joseph 
Fourier - Grenoble 1, Grenoble (France), 2005. 

[Cap,  06]  V.  Capponi,  O.  Zirmi,  D.  Brissaud,  F.  Villeneuve,  “CAPP, 
Strategy And Models In Aircraft Industry”, to be published in 2006 
in  the  Journal  of  Engineering  Manufacture  (Special  Issue  of  the 
Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part B). 

[Der,  05]  W.  Derigent,  “  Méthodologie  de  passage  d’un  modèle  CAO 
vers  un  modèle  FAO  pour  des  pièces  aéronautiques:  Prototype 
logiciel  dans  le  cadre  du  projet  USIQUICK“,  Ph.D  dissertation, 
Université Henri Poincaré - Nancy 1, Nancy (France), 2005. 

[Des, 81] Y. Descotte and J.C. Latombe “GARI : A problem solver that 
plans  how  to  machine  mechanical  parts”,  proceedings  of  the  7th 
Int. Joint Conference on AI, Vancouver, Canada, 1981 

[Gam,  90]  Groupe  GAMA,  “La  gamme  automatique  en  usinage”, 

Hermès, 1990. 

 

[Har, 06 (a)] R. Harik, W. Derigent and G. Ris, “Automating the flank 
milling  planar  surfaces  milling  process”,  IDMME’06  Integrated 
Design and Manufacturing in Mechanical Engineering, Grenoble - 
France, 2006 

[Har, 06 (b)] R. Harik, P. Merlat and G. Ris, “Aeronautical planar flank 
milling  automation:  Computing  the  G-zones”,  Proceedings  of 
IDETC/CIE  2006,  ASME  International  Design  Engineering 
Technical  Conferences  &  Computers  and 
in 
Engineering  Conference,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania  USA, 
September 10-13, 2006 

Information 

[Mut,  88]  B.  Mutel,  “Computer-Aided  Group  Technology  Integrated 

System”, Annals of the CIRP, vol. 37/1, 1988 

[Sha,  95]  J.  Shah  and  M.  Mäntylä,  “Parametric  and  feature-based 
CAD/CAM”,  Editions  Wiley-Interscience,  New  York  (USA), 
ISSN/ISBN : 0-471-00214-3, 1995. 

[Tsa,  87]  J.  P.  Tsang,  “Planification  par  combinaison  de  plan. 
Application  à  la  génération  automatique  de  gammes  d'usinage”, 
Ph.D  dissertation,  Institut  National  Polytechnique  de  Grenoble, 
Grenoble (France), 1987. 

[Vil,  99]  F.  Villeneuve, “  ”,  Habilitation  à  diriger  des  recherches, 
Université Joseph Fourier - Grenoble 1, Grenoble (France), 1999 

[Vil,  03]  F.  Villeneuve,  “Génération  automatique  des  processus  de 
fabrication” in Fabrication assistée par ordinateur sous la direction 
de A. Bernard, Ed. Lavoisier, Hermès, pp. 295-350, 2003 

[Wys,  77]  R.A.  Wysk  “An  Automated  Process  Planning  and  Selection 
Program : APPAS ”, Ph.D dissertation, Purdue University, Indiana, 
USA, 1977 

[ZHA, 94]  H.C.  Zhang  and  L.  Alting,  “Computerised  Manufacturing 
Process  Planning  Systems”,  Chapman  and  Hall,  London,  1994

