 
 
 
 
 
DISCRETE SCALE RELATIVITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Robert L. Oldershaw 

Amherst College 

Amherst, MA 01002 

USA 

 

             rloldershaw@amherst.edu 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT:  The possibility that global discrete dilation invariance is a fundamental 

symmetry principle of nature is explored.  If the discrete self-similarity observed in 

nature is exact, then the Principle of General Covariance needs to be broadened in order 

to accommodate this form of discrete conformal invariance, and a further generalization 

of relativity theory is required. 

 
 
 

 

1

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The Einstein field equations of General Relativity can be written1 as: 

Rµν – ½ gµν R = k Tµν                    (1) 

where Rµν is the Ricci tensor, gµν is the metric tensor, R is the Ricci scalar, Tµν is the 

stress-energy tensor and k is the coupling factor between the geometry of a space-time 

and its matter content.  This equation can be written in an even more compact form: 

    Gµν = k Tµν                                        (2) 

where Gµν is called the Einstein tensor.  This deceptively simple expression disguises the 

fact that the equation represents a complicated and coupled set of 10 nonlinear partial 

differential equations in 4 unknowns.  However, the conceptual meaning of the equation 

has a simple elegance. The geometry of the space-time (Gµν) is determined by the energy 

and momentum densities/fluxes of the matter (Tµν) and, reciprocally, the motions of the 

matter are determined by the geometry of the space-time. 

 
In the present paper we explore the implications of a new paradigm for understanding 

nature, called the Self-Similar Cosmological Paradigm2-5 (SSCP), and its role in a 

possible extension of General Relativity.  The SSCP draws attention to the self-evident, 

but often inadequately appreciated, fact that nature is organized in a hierarchical manner, 

from the smallest observable subatomic particles to the largest cosmological structures.  

Although the whole hierarchy appears to be quasi-continuous, the SSCP emphasizes that 

the cosmological hierarchy is highly stratified.  While the observable portion of the entire 

hierarchy encompasses nearly 80 orders of magnitude in mass, three narrow mass ranges, 

each extending for only about 5 orders of magnitude, account for ≥ 99% of all mass 

 

2

observed in nature.  These dominant mass ranges: roughly 10-27 g to 10-22 g, 1028 g to 1033 

g and 1038 g to 1043 g, are referred to as the Atomic, Stellar and Galactic Scales, 

respectively.  They constitute the discrete self-similar scaffolding of the observable 

portion of the quasi-continuous hierarchy.  The SSCP proposes that nature’s hierarchy 

extends far beyond our current observational limits on both large and small scales, and is 

probably unbounded in terms of scale, such that there are no largest or smallest objects 

(or Scales) in nature.   

The SSCP further proposes that the Atomic, Stellar and Galactic Scales, and all other 

fundamental Scales of nature’s infinite hierarchy, are rigorously interrelated by a new 

symmetry property referred to as discrete cosmological self-similarity.  For each class of 

particle, composite system or phenomena on any given Scale, it is proposed that there is a 

discrete self-similar analogue on all other Scales.2-5  Mass (M), length (L) and time (T) 

parameters associated with analogues on neighboring Scales Ψ and Ψ-1 are related by the 

following set of discrete self-similar transformation equations. 

 

 

 

LΨ = Λ LΨ-1  

TΨ = Λ TΨ-1  

MΨ = ΛD MΨ-1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

where Λ and D are empirically derived2,3 dimensionless constants with values of 5.2 x 

1017 and 3.174, respectively.  The value of ΛD = 1.70 x 1056.  The symbol Ψ is used as a 

discrete index for keeping track of specific Scales, and numerically: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

 

Ψ = {… , -2, -1, 0, +1, +2 , …}. 

 

(6) 

Usually the Atomic, Stellar and Galactic Scales are assigned Ψ = -1, Ψ = 0 and Ψ = +1, 

respectively.    Any dimensional “constant” or parameter appearing in an equation 

associated with a given Scale must be transformed according to the scaling equations (3), 

(4) and (5) in order to find the correct value for the counterpart “constant” or parameter 

on a neighboring Scale. 

According to the SSCP, the Newtonian gravitational constant G (= 6.67 x 10-8 cm3/g 

sec2) in General Relativity must be replaced by the factor: 

GΨ = [Λ1-D ]Ψ G , 

 

 

(7) 

where again: Λ = 5.2 x 1017 and D = 3.174 .  We may also write GΨ = [Λ-2.174 ]Ψ G , since 

G α L3/MT2 and, according to the discrete self-similar scaling rules of the SSCP, G 

would therefore scale as Λ3/ΛDΛ2 = Λ-2.174.  It can be seen that for Ψ =  0, the expression 

[Λ1-D ]Ψ G reduces to G, in agreement with observations for Stellar Scale gravitational 

interactions. 

A revised form of General Relativity that incorporates discrete cosmological self-

similarity, which is a form of discrete conformal invariance known as discrete dilation 

invariance, would be: 

Rµν – ½ gµν R = 8π/c4 [Λ1 - D]Ψ G Tµν 

 

(8) 

 

 

 

 

 

4

Instead of a single equation for General Relativity, we now have an infinite set of 

identical equations, one for each cosmological Scale.  Another way to express this is the 

following equation:  

Rµν – ½ gµν R = 8π/c4 GΨ Tµν , 

 

(9) 

where GΨ is the infinite discrete series of correct SSCP coupling constants for 

gravitational interactions, one “constant” for each cosmological Scale. 

II.   EXTENDING THE PRINCIPLE OF GENERAL COVARIANCE 

General Relativity is covariant under conformal transformations (which preserve angles 

and length ratios, but do not involve absolute length scales), including dilation 

invariance, when masses and G are suitably scaled.  Maxwell’s equations of 

electromagnetism are likewise covariant under conformal transformations, including 

dilation invariance, when electric charges are suitably scaled.  From the point of view of 

the SSCP, the fact that General Relativity and electromagnetism are both consistent with 

discrete global dilation invariance is encouraging, since this form of discrete conformal 

invariance fits very well with the conceptual properties of the SSCP and its discrete self-

similar Scale transformation equations. 

The Principle of General Covariance states that the laws of physics should be fully 

independent of arbitrary choices of reference frames and coordinate systems.  From this 

one can infer that the laws of physics are independent of: spatial location, time, spatial 

orientation, and state of motion (inertial or accelerated).  Before the advent of the SSCP, 

size or scale (note small s) was the one unique thing that was not relative, but rather 

5

 

 

 

appeared to be absolute.  The hydrogen atom in its ground state was thought to have just 

one fixed set of scale values (m ≈ 1.67 x 10-24 g, r ≈ 0.8 x 10-8 cm , t ≈ 1.5 x 10-16 sec, 

…).  The SSCP, especially in the exact cosmological self-similarity form, proposes a 

radical change in our thinking about the concept of scale.  Within a cosmological Scale, 

one can still invoke absolute scale, but absolute scale no longer applies generally to 

nature’s infinite, discrete hierarchy of self-similar Scales.  If each Scale is exactly self-

similar to any other Scale, then there are an infinite number of differently sized hydrogen 

atoms (one for each Scale).  Each of these hydrogen atoms has a unique and equally valid 

set of scale parameters (mΨ, rΨ, tΨ, …). 

According to this radically revised natural philosophy, the Principle of General 

Covariance must now be extended so that the laws of physics are independent of: 

location, time, orientation, state of motion and discrete cosmological Scale. 

The latter addition reflects the idea that the laws of physics should not depend upon our 

arbitrary choice of a particular cosmological Scale as our reference system.  This is 

equivalent to saying that the fundamental laws of physics are identical on all 

cosmological Scales, for the case of exact cosmological self-similarity. 

III.  DISCRETE SCALE RELATIVITY 

The discrete global dilation invariance discussed above is formally equivalent to 

invariance with respect to a discrete global transformation of length, time and mass units. 

In order to make this clear, we start with the assumption of exact cosmological self-

similarity.  This means that each cosmological Scale is identical (except for scale) in 

 

 

 

6

terms of the objects comprising the Scale and their dynamical interactions.  Observers on 

any Scale would describe identical “observable universes”. 

1.  Fixed Units Approach: If we want to measure and compare populations of analogue 

systems from different Scales in terms of one fixed set of units (say the conventional 

Stellar Scale cm, g and sec that we are familiar with), then the numerical values of all 

length, time and mass parameters, as well as all dimensional “constants”, scale according 

to the discrete self-similar Scale transformation equations of the SSCP.  For example, a 

Stellar Scale proton analogue would have a radius of about 4.2 x 104 cm and an Atomic 

Scale proton would have a radius of about 0.8 x 10-13 cm, differing by the now familiar 

scale factor of Λ = 5.2 x 1017  for lengths (spatial and temporal). 

2.  Relative Units Approach: Again we choose the cm, g and sec as our length, mass and 

time units, but now we acknowledge that there is a different set of cm, g and sec for each 

Scale of the infinite discrete cosmological hierarchy.  Because the discrete self-similarity 

is exact, each [cmΨ, gΨ, secΨ] set is identical, equally fundamental and equally valid.  

One can easily see that reductionism is an endless “fool’s errand” in this paradigm.  In 

the relative units approach the discrete self-similar Scale transformation equations tell us 

the relative “sizes” of these units.  For example, the Stellar Scale proton and the Atomic 

Scale proton both have the same radius of about 4.2 x 104 cmΨ, but the Atomic Scale 

centimeters (cmΨ=-1) are 5.2 x 1017 times smaller than the Stellar Scale centimeters 

(cmΨ=0). 

 

 

 

 

7

Within the context of this discrete scaling of relative units, all fundamental physical laws 

and their constants are identical for each Scale, in both form and numerical values.  This 

relativity of Scale can be designated as Discrete Scale Relativity, or more simply as Scale 

Relativity, so long as we remember that: 

 

 

Scale ≡ cosmological Scale ≠ scale. 

 

(10) 

Scale Relativity is a further generalization of General Relativity, and the hierarchical 

subsuming of relativity theories can be symbolically expressed: 

{[(Special Relativity) General Relativity] Scale Relativity}. 

 

 

 

8

1.  Misner, C.W., Thorne, K.S. and Wheeler, J.A., Gravitation, W.H. Freeman, 

REFERENCES 

       

San Francisco, 1973. 

2.   Oldershaw, R.L., Internat. J. Theor. Phys., 28(6), 669-694, 1989. 

3.   Oldershaw, R.L., Internat. J. Theor. Phys., 28(12), 1503-1532, 1989. 

4.  Oldershaw, R.L., Astrophys. J., 322, 34-36, 1987. 

5.   Oldershaw, R.L., http://www.amherst.edu/~rloldershaw , 2007. 

 

 

