1

Olmec mirrors: an example of archaeological American mirrors

José J. Lunazzi
Universidade Estadual de Campinas - Instituto de Física
13083-970 - Campinas - SP - Brazil
lunazzi@ifi.unicamp.br

Archaeological   mirrors   from   the   Olmec   civilization   are   described   according   to 
bibliographic references and to personal observations and photographs.

ABSTRACT

CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION

2. APPEARANCE OF THE MIRRORS

3. HOW TO FIND THEM

4. THEIR SIGNIFICANCE IN THE CULTURAL CONTEXT OF THE  OLMECS 

5. TYPES OF MIRRORS

6. ON THE QUALITY OF REFRACTIVE ELEMENTS

7. CONCLUSIONS

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

9. REFERENCES

2

 

1. INTRODUCTION

This report was not intended to give all the available information on the subject, but just a 
simple   description  that   may   be   valuable   for   improving   the   knowledge   that   the   optical 
community may have on it. The author believes to have consulted most of the available 
scientific bibliography as it can be traced through cross-referencing from the most recent 
papers.

Olmec mirrors are the most ancient archaeological mirrors from Mexico and constitute a 
very good example of ancient American mirrors. The oldest mirrors found in America are 
from   the   Incas,   made   about   800   years   before   the   Olmecs,   dated   from   findings   in 
archaeological sites in Peru. How this technology would have been extended to the north, 
appearing  within the  Olmecs,  later  within  the  Teotihuacan civilization,  a  few  centuries 
before the Spanish colonization, is an interesting matter. Mirrors are important also within 
the   Aztec   civilization,   that   appeared   in   the   proximity   of   the   Olmec   and   Teotihuacan 
domains at about the time of their extintion.

The extension of the geographic area where these mirrors were employed seems to us not 
entirely well-known. Those made of Pyrite, the material of highest reflectivity, deteriorate 
very easily, making it difficult to recognize them as mirrors. Besides this inconvenience, 
for civilizations living in the jungle, the extension and difficulties of the territory make it 
hard to obtain archaeological material. More mirrors are expected to be found in future 
excavations and this may help to better understanding their utilization. Their existance can 
be   associated   to   the   skill   of   polishing   stones   with   good   quality   and   sphericity.   A 
fundamental property of the iron ore minerals employed is the good reflectivity they have 
when thoroughly polished. 

Most available Olmec mirrors were obtained at sites discovered during this century and 
studied   by   some   authors.   Many   of   the   specimens  are   merely   reported   as   belonging   to 
unidentified "Private Collections". In many cases the archaeological context of their origin 
is unknown. They were dated by the radiocarbon method as being between 3125 years up 
to 2130 years old. Their use, as some archaeologists suggest, goes from fire-making, self-
contemplation, medicine, divination, to imaging and astronomy. The range of focal lengths 
goes from 5cm to more than 80cm for concave surfaces, while convex mirrors, although 
rare, are known. 

Examples of their appearance in iconography are well known and their meaning is the 
subject of interesting studies.  The knowledge the makers had of the laws of reflection and 
imaging is a very intriguing subject.

2. APPEARANCE OF THE MIRRORS

Mirrors are widely spread in South America, the oldest being found at Huaca de los Reyes 
and Gramalote, on the Peruvian coast1  and in the Andes at Shillacoto and Kotosh2. They 
also existed in a later period at Chavin de Huántar, contemporary to the Olmecs. At later 

3

times in the Andes, polished copper and bronze mirrors were employed by the Incas. In 
Central America they appeared  at a high status burial ground in Sitio Conte on the Rio 
Grande de Coclé in Panamá.
One of the first general descriptions reported was published in 19263, but most excavations 
have occured since 1940 in a region to the south of Mexico City named La Venta, in the 
Tabasco   state,   constituting   at   present   the   main   site   for   Olmec   mirrors.   La   Venta,   San 
Lorenzo, Guerrero, Michoacan, Nayarit, Las Bocas - Puebla, San José Mogote - Oaxaca, 
Chalcatzingo   -   Morelos,   are     Mexican   sites   where   Olmec   mirrors   were   found,   while 
Palenque is reported as an example of a site with mirrors from the Mayas. In many cases, 
the origin of the material and technology employed could not be identified, from which it 
can be assumed that mirrors were imported from other places. The use of broken mirrors in 
some   offerings   has   been   suggested   as   an   indication   that   the   technology   could   have 
disappeared, making the existing elements even more valuable at that time.

3. HOW TO FIND THEM

Although two mirrors are reported at the collection of the American Museum of Natural 
History in United States and some at museums in Europe (British Museum, “Musée de 
l’Homme”), maybe the best way of seeing them is at the “Museo de Antropologia” in 
Mexico   City.   On   my   first   visit   to   it,   I   could   see   at   the   Pre-Classic   section   two   small 
feminine ceramic figurines with brilliant mirrors at their breast (Fig.1). 

                     

Fig.1: Two feminine Olmec figurines using mirrors, and a mirror sample close to them. 
Photograph by the author.

They are referred to by Carlson4 as findings of the Formative site of Tlatilco, and close to 
them there is one stone of irregular shape, smaller than 5cm, but very well polished. The 

observer's   face   can   be   seen   very   clearly   reflected,   demonstrating   the   high   quality   and 
convexity of the surface5. This situation is shown  in Fig.2. 

                         

4

Fig.2: Reflected image of a human face in a convex Olmec mirror. Photograph by the  
author.

Its possible use for self-contemplation becomes evident, constituting a small, very portable 
and   strong   element.   When   I   saw   this   unexpected   example   of   archaeological   optical 
techniques, I went excitedly to ask archaeologists for more information. I was told then that 
there   were   more   Olmec   mirrors   at   the   "Costa   del   Golfo"   section.   They   belong   to   the 
findings at La Venta and are concave mirrors laying horizontally on the shelf, but there is 
one inclined toward the ceiling. In September of 1992, there was a lamp at the ceiling 
located in a position that made it possible to see its image floating in front of that mirror. 
Once again, the quality of the image is astonishing. We returned in 1995 to produce  the 
image of a hand that is shown in this article. Six mirrors, five being concave and one 
convex, can be seen at the permanent exhibit of the “Museo”.

4. THEIR SIGNIFICANCE IN THE CULTURAL CONTEXT OF THE  OLMECS 

The   iconography     shows   that   mirrors   had   an   important   presence   in   Pre-Columbian 
civilizations, giving even the name to an Aztec divinity: "Tezcatlipoca", which means "The 
Smoking Mirror". This god is represented as having a smoking mirror instead of one of his 
feet. According to a transcription6, there is an Aztec myth that says that Tezcatlipoca, one 
of   the   minor  deities,   proposed   to   the   other  deities   to   visit   the   main   god   Quetzalcoatl, 
bringing a mirror draped in cotton. When Quetzalcoatl saw his face on the mirror, he cried 
because he thought himself to be a god but, having a human face, his destination would 

5

also be human. Then he left the country announcing his future return. The remaining part of 
this myth has to do with the belief that the arrival of the Spanish conquerors represented the 
returning god, but it suffices for us to know that mirrors were an important element on the 
Aztec mythology. Those mirrors were certainly a legacy from the Olmecs.
In many representations the mirrors are related to the sun god being fixed to his forehead4 
and with internal curved lines. This inner figure was interpreted as the curvature of straight 
lines distorted by an oblique angle of viewing. It appears displaced, occupying different 
positions in a way that makes us think about the image of the sun being visible on the 
mirror.   The   very   well-known   sculptures   of   a   feathered   serpent,   very   common   at   the 
Teotihuacan site,   represent the serpent traversing the mirror7. To give an example of  the 
capability of generating  real images, we made the photograph of the image of one hand 
reflected in a concave Olmec mirror (Fig.3).

                    
Fig.3: Image of a hand obtained by means of a concave Olmec mirror. Photograph by the  
author.

These are good images although we could not work at ideal conditions: the focal length of a 
105mm objective was doubled by means of a diverging additional lens, and we were not 
allowed to remove the protective glass, which was traversed twice by the light at an angle 
of about 70(cid:176) . We employed an aperture for the diaphragm of the objective on the camera of 
about 5mm, to obtain an image similar to the one obtained by the naked eye. We employed 
KODAK TMAX 400 ISO film. Although there was ordinary glass  between the mirror and 
the camera, and some deterioration may have occured on the mirror surface, changing its 
original conditions, the image is very clear and appears floating in the air in front of the 
mirror. None of the bibliographic references we consulted indicate the possibility of images 

6

from   the   mirrors   being   present   on   the   iconography   as   inverted   images,   which   would 
certainly be an interesting finding.

We can imagine what strong feelings these images would have caused on the Olmec people 
from the registers existing of other close civilizations also. Drawings associating mirrors to 
serpents, human faces, eyes, cotton, water, flowers, butterflies and others were described7 
for the Teotihuacan civilization. The representation of mirrors with a human-like eye inside 
could be the consequence of directly looking into a convex mirror of short focal length, but 
it is also known that looking at mirrors was interpreted as getting in contact with a magic 
domain.   Mirrors were associated also to  the jaguar’s eyes because of the reflections that 
can be seen on them. In many native languages, the Amerindians have the same or very 
close words for designating “mirror” and “eye”. Regarding the Aztecs, for example, in 
Book 10 of the Florentine Codex, both the eye and the pupil are described as “tezcatl” 
(mirror) 7. The word for mirror at the central Maya domain was “nen” derived from “lem”, 
which means something bright, gleaming and reflective. In Yucatec phrases, “nen” denotes 
rulers or persons of preeminent social status as “the reflection of the world” 8.
Mica and stones were used to represent the eyes of divinities in Teotihuacan sculptures, 
while   other   reflective   materials,   such   as   mercury   or   pearls   could   have   had   similar 
importance in relating their properties to spiritual worlds.
Making sacred fire by means of the sun is the most probable use of some mirrors, mainly 
for those which are spherical, although we know very little about successful experiences of 
firing with the original mirrors. The association of mirrors with cotton7 was suggested by 
us5 as a possible consequence of the Inca technique of making fire with mirrors described 
by the Inca  Garcilaso9  in the  16th century since it would be a  way of  obtaining more 
efficiency for starting fire than with dry wood or leaves .
When fire was obtained in this way in ritual sacrifices, this was interpreted as being the 
people in the grace of the gods, as reported by Garcilaso. Mirrors were used by the priests 
and the nobles, as a pectoral or on the back, probably being a symbol of high social status. 
We can get this impression from the photograph at Fig.4.
                          

7

Fig.4  :   Olmec   representation   where   a   reflecting   element   is  located   at   the   chest.   Jade 
figurine, 8cm high. Photograph by the author.

It has  been suggested that the Olmec elite identified themselves with a mythical jaguar 
ancestor. Even now some Amerindians preserve this identification, dressing as man-jaguars 
with a complete jaguar hide. One Olmec monument shows a jaguar-man figure apparently 
copulating with a human female, and a possible  mirror pendant is seen suspended on the 
chest of the jaguar-like figure. The  use  as  a pectoral is seen not only in the iconography 
but at the chest position of skeletons at burials.

The   most   probable   uses   of   mirrors   are:   divination,   introspection,   firing,   imaging   and 
medicine. Real images can be observed not only floating in the air but also projected on a 
white, partially covered surface10. It was mentioned that in the Chinese culture, a 1.000 
year old technique was reported where mirrors were applied for cauterizing under the sun 
light.  Plane mirrors are not reported for the Olmecs, which is an intriguing fact due to the 
utility they could have in light communications.

I would like to mention that many of  us were taught at school that when the Spanish 
conquerors came to America they exchanged mirrors for many valuables and goods with 
the natives.   This led us to think that they were marveled by the images on the mirrors, 

8

which must be true, but also that they were not familiar with those images. Now we can 
think of a different history; that the mirror images were considered to be divine or highly 
important.  Then  the people were taught to obey the priests and authorities who carried 
mirrors within their vestments. A natural transference of obeisance could had happened 
when seeing the mirrors the newcomers brought with  them.

5. TYPES OF MIRRORS

Mirrors made in a single piece were ground mainly from iron ore minerals, which have the 
remarkable property of good reflectivity when very well polished. The reflectivity of the 
mirrors is not reported in the references but the same materials have reported reflectivities 
of  21% for Magnetite, 28% for Hematite, 55% for Pyrite11.
Mica and Obsidian are low-reflecting materials also employed. In the case of Pyrite, the 
presence of  0.1% of gold within its structure was demonstrated, not visible at the optical 
microscope.   Being   the   most   brilliant   within   the   iron-ore   materials,   it   is   the   easiest   to 
deteriorate under humid conditions, to the point of leaving just a residual deposit. Pyrite 
seems not to have being available to the Olmecs but   reported to be found within the 
Mayas. The grinding materials could have been any of the elements available at that time, 
such   as   emery   (aluminum   oxide),   hematite   powder,   or   maybe   sand.   Ochre   (hematite 
jeweler’s   rouge)   was   used   for   polishing,   a   very   patient   task.   These   materials   are   not 
different from the ones employed now-a-days for making mirrors on glass. It has been 
indicated that the polish of the specimens is so good that it represents the limit of perfection 
that the material will allow10. No trace of abrasion marks was found and the microstructure 
of the mineral was revealed. This result can only be obtained in modern technology by 
combining   polishing   and   etching.   When   grinding,   sphericity   is   a   consequence   of   the 
lapidary process. A pair of complementary concave-convex surfaces is obtained, but it is 
clear that the preference was given to the concaves because convex surfaces were reshaped 
into  concave.  It   may  be   also  an  indication  of  not   having  too  much  material  available. 
Minute, local irregularities in the curvature of the surfaces suggest  that the work was done 
on small areas at a time. In  order to better analyze the procedure of fabrication, a site at 
San José Mogote - Oaxaca, is mentioned as a probable artisan workshop area, deserving 
further study.
A great variety of curvatures can be found, generating focal lengths from -50cm 5 to more 
than   80cm.   It   is   probable   that   the   shorter   focal   lengths   (about   5cm)   were   the   most 
appropriate   for   burning   purposes.     The   existence   of   many   mirrors   whose   vertical   and 
horizontal curvature do not coincide may be an indication of a different use, not precluding 
that of imaging5. A parabolization of the surface intended to better  concentrate the light is 
mentioned10,   although   not   characterized   in   detail.   Plane   mirrors   are   not   explicitily 
referenced but it seems very probable that they existed. The author could see one, reported 
as belonging to a private collection, and also received a suggestion of  its possible use in 
making signals by lighting remotely toward the observer.
Regarding the diameters of the mirrors, they corresponded to circular or elliptical shapes, 
the maximum reported diameter being 14cm. Mosaic mirrors and the use of Pyrite are not 
reported   for   the   Olmecs   but   for   the   Teotihuacan   and   Kaminaljuyu   findings.   They 
correspond to civilizations appearing in the Mexican and Guatemalan regions, later than the 
Olmecs. For them, the assembling of pieces may have allowed mirror diameters of up to 
50cm. No good images were reported for mosaic mirrors.

9

The quality of Olmec mirrors, although variable, can be very high, as it can be seen from 
the images they generate at the short distance of a few millimeters12  or even at the large 
distance of some meters5. Observation at the microscope showed good quality because no 
scratches   were   visible,   although   smoothness,   roughness,   reflectivity   or   aberration 
coefficients of the surfaces were not reported.

6. ON THE QUALITY OF REFRACTIVE ELEMENTS

Very well polished quartz objects are known to belong to the Olmec culture. Among them 
there is a small sphere, smaller than 10mm in diameter, within the group of offerings of the 
E   tomb   at   La   Venta,   Tabasco,   in   the   permanent   exhibit   of   the   "Museo   Nacional   de 
Antropologia" at Mexico City (Fig.5, second from left on the upper line).

                      

Fig.5:   Some small well-polished Olmec objects made of quartz, including one sphere. 
Photograph by the author.

 Although we could not have the opportunity of seeing an object through it, its appearance 
made us think that this element may function as a magnifying lens and that the knowledge 
the Olmecs had about optics could include some refractive properties. The focusing of the 
illuminating lamp is clear at the upper left side of the sphere.

7. CONCLUSIONS

10

From the information we obtained we can recognize the Olmec mirrors as very valuable 
cultural elements of unusual quality for ancient cultures.   The precise characterization of 
their   optical   parameters   seems   not   to   have   been   completely   reported,   so   that   its 
measurement   and   analysis   can   still   be   an   interesting   subject   of     research   in   an 
interdisciplinary field involving archaeology and optics in close relationship.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author wish to express his acknowledgment to the Organizing Committee of the "II 
Reunión Iberoamericana de Óptica" , Guanajuato - GTO, Mexico, 18-22 September 1995 
for their invitation to present this work at that meeting, particularly to its General President 
Dr. Daniel Malacara Hernandez whose broad way of thinking and acting has allowed the 
realization of many important activities in Latin America.

Financial   support   from   FAEP   -   Campinas   State   University,   FAPESP   -   Foundation   for 
Assistance to Research of the Sao Paulo State, CNPq - National Council of Research made 
this work  possible. I  am also grateful to Jesus Najera who, representing the Esperanto 
world community, helped with equipment and personal work to obtain the photographs. 
The "Museo Nacional de Antropologia" of Mexico City is acknowledged for allowing  us 
to introduce the photographic and video cameras, their mechanical holders and a lamp into 
their   exhibiting   hall   to   make   the   photographs.   Archaeologist   Marcia   L.   Castro     is 
acknowledged for the information reported at that museum in October 1992. Alexsandra 
Siqueira is acknowledged for helping at the photographic laboratory.

Next page: Color Plate printed at the center of the book 

11

Color Plate printed at the center of the book 
(it is inverted right-left in this reproduction):

Plate 22.1. Image of printed letters and colour symbol reflected from an Olmec mirror. 
Photographed by the author.

9. BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Fung Pineda, R. (1987), “The Late Pre-ceramic and Initial Period”, in: R.W. Keatinge 
ed. “Peruvian Prehistory”, Cambridge University Press, 67-98,. 

2. Burger, R.L. (1984), “The Prehistoric Occupation  of Chavin de Huántar, Peru”, Univ. of 
California Publications in Anthropology, V. 14. University of California Press, Berkeley, 
203-204.

3. Nordeskiold, E. (1926), “Mirroirs convexes et concaves en Amérique”, Journal de la 
Societé des Americanistes de Paris, n.s. tome XVIII, Paris,  102-110.

4. Carlson, J.B. (1981), The University of Maryland: "Olmec Concave Iron Ore Mirrors: 
The   Aesthetic   of   a   Litic   Technology   and   the   Lord   of   the   Mirror",   Dumbarton   Oaks 
Conference on the Olmecs, Dumbarton Oaks, Washington, 117-147.

12

5. Lunazzi, J.J.(1995),“On the quality of the Olmec mirrors and its utilization”, Proc. of the 
II Reunión Iberoamericana de Óptica, Guanajuato - GTO, Mexico, 18-22.09.95, 1996 SPIE 
2730 . 

6. Fuentes, C. (1992), "El espejo enterrado", Fondo de Cultura Económica, Mexico.

7. Taube, K.A. (1993), University of California at Riverside: "The Iconography of Mirrors 
at Teotihuacan" in "Art, Ideology and the City of Teotihuacan", J.C. Berlo ed., 169-204, 
Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection, Washington. 

8.   Saunders,   N.J.   (1988),   "Chatoyer,   Anthropological   Reflections   on   Archaeological 
Mirrors", in "Recent Studies in Pre-Columbian Archaeology" Vol. I, N.J. Saunders, O. de 
Montmollin editors, I-39, BAR International Series 313, Oxford, 1-37.

9. de la Vega, Garcilaso (1550?), "Libro Sexto de los Comentários Reales de los Incas", ch. 
XXII.

10. Gullberg, J.E. (1959), "Technical Notes on Concave Mirrors" in Excavations at La 
Venta, Tabasco, 1955, Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 
170, United States Government Printing Office, Washington, USA, 280-283 and pl.62.

11.  Craig, Vaughan, (1981), "Ore Microscopy and ore petrography", J. Wiley and Sons,.

12. Heizer, R.F., Gullberg, J.E.(1981), University of California, Berkeley,   in "Concave 
Mirrors   from  the   Site   of   La  Venta,  Tabasco:   Their   Occurrence,       Mineralogy,  Optical 
Description, and Function", Dumbarton Oaks Conference on the Olmecs, Dumbarton Oaks, 
Washington, 109-116.

