Boltzmann's Concept of Reality 
 
Marcelo B. Ribeiro1 
& 
Antonio A. P. Videira2 
 
 
In  this  article  we  describe  and  analyze  the  concept  of  reality  developed  by  the  Austrian 
theoretical physicist Ludwig Boltzmann. It is our thesis that Boltzmann was fully aware that 
reality  could,  and  actually  was,  described  by  different  points  of  view.  In  spite  of  this, 
Boltzmann  did  not  renounce  the  idea  that  reality  is  real.  We  also  discuss  his  main 
motivations  to  be  strongly  involved  with  philosophy  of  science,  as  well  as  further 
developments made by Boltzmann himself of his main philosophical ideas, namely scientific 
theories  as  images  of  Nature  and  its  consequences.  We  end  the  paper  with  a  discussion 
about the modernity of Boltzmann’s philosophy of science. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann was born on 20 February 1844 in Vienna. In 1863 
he  started  his  studies  in  natural  sciences  at  the  University  of  Vienna  and 
finished his doctorate in physics in 1866, publishing in this same year a paper 
on the mechanical theory of heat. This choice of topic shows clearly his early 
interest on the fundamentals of physics, interest which he followed through his 
teaching,  research  and 
entire  career.  His  academic 
administrative  positions  in  Vienna,  then  Graz,  Munich,  back  to  Vienna, 
Leipzig  and  Vienna  yet  again  in  1902,  where  he  stayed  until  his  death  by 
suicide on 5 September 1906 in Duino, a small city close to Trieste, when on 
vacation. Boltzmann’s interest in occupying different academic positions were 
a consequence of his goal of following his most basic ambition: contribute for 
the scientific progress and institutional consolidation of theoretical physics.  
 

led  him 

life 

to 

                                                 
1 Physics Institute, University of Brazil – UFRJ, Ilha do Fundão, CxP 68532, Rio de Janeiro, 21941-972 RJ, 
Brazil; e-mail: mbr@if.ufrj.br 
 
2 Department of Philosophy, State University of Rio de Janeiro – UERJ, Rua São Francisco Xavier 524, Rio 
de Janeiro, 20550-013 RJ, Brazil; e-mail: guto@cbpf.br 

 

1

theoretical  physics.  The 

Boltzmann’s  contributions  to  philosophy  of  science  were  born  out  of  his 
intense  debates  with  many  other  eminent  scientists  of  the  time,  like 
Helmholtz, Hertz, Mach, Ostwald, Duhem, Poincaré, Planck, on the aims and 
methods  of 
intensity  and  continuity  of  his 
participation  in  these  debates  shows  how  important  and  necessary  he 
considered them for the determination of the nature of theoretical physics. He 
did  not  seek  to  establish  a philosophy  for  physics,  even  less  a  philosophy  of 
science in general. His epistemological style was of defending his viewpoints 
about the fundamentals of science against the criticisms of other scientists and 
philosophers, who, in his opinion, had mistaken viewpoints about the nature of 
scientific theories. 
 
Boltzmann’s style of presenting his epistemological viewpoints was also due 
to one of his most important epistemological principles, which established that 
in  the  process  of  becoming  hegemonic  among  the  members  of  the  scientific 
community,  no  scientific  theory  could,  for  this  very  reason,  exclude  other 
theories.  According  to  Boltzmann,  the  exclusion  of  other  theories  would 
eliminate  the  possibility  of  progress  in  science  since  the  dogmatic  process 
intrinsic  to  this  behavior  would  lead  to  nothing  positive.  In  his  view  such  a 
process  would  end  up  with  the  impoverishment  of  the  scientific  enterprise. 
Thus, when participating on the debates of his time, Boltzmann was in favor 
of an open attitude regarding the analysis of various theories. His position in 
favor of pluralism was reinforced by his belief that, in not a too distant future, 
science would be deeply transformed in a way that nobody at his time could 
anticipate with certainty. 
 
Boltzmann viewed the end of the 19th century as an epoch of doubts, distrust 
and growing bad feelings of the scientists towards science. Inasmuch as many 
were convinced that important changes would forcefully occur, that realization 
was partially responsible in motivating them to defend their ideas in the hope 
that  one  among  them  could  help  remove  science  from  the  stalemate  that  it 
found itself. Such an impasse was due to the inconclusiveness of the debates 
about  the  importance  of  the  hypotheses  in  physics,  how  a  physical  theory  is 
built upon, whether or not one must always start from empirical known facts 
or  one  could  freely  use  scientific  ingenuity  and  creativity,  or  still  if  the 
physical 
the  natural 
phenomena, leaving aside the old ideal of reaching the real causes of them.  
 
When  participating  in  those  epistemological  discussions,  Boltzmann  sought 
first of all to assure the survival of his favorite theories, guaranteeing, at the 

theories  should  describe, 

instead  of  explaining, 

 

2

theory 

is  nothing  more 

same time, a place for other theories. The ability of a certain theory to predict 
new phenomena does not make it able to predict its own future and, even less, 
of science. On the other hand, a theory that had already produced good results 
should not have been abandoned. Recognizing the scientific limits of a theory 
does not mean that it should be excluded from the realm of science. Since a 
theory is incapable of predicting its own future, this conclusion was probably 
the  main  reason  that  motivated  Boltzmann  in  trying  to  better  understand  the 
process  along  which  science  develops.  His  interpretation  of  Darwinism  gave 
him  the  basis  from  where  he  was  able  to  reach  some  conclusions,  which 
afterwards opened up the way for him to follow along the path he intended to 
than  a 
follow.  For  Boltzmann  a  scientific 
representation of Nature. 
  
 
2. Basic ideas on reality and scientific truth 
 
According  to  Boltzmann,  the  question  about  the  existence  of  the  external 
world,  or  matter,  must  be  seen  in  the  light  of  another  problem:  “does  the 
answer  of  this  question  complicate  or  simplify  our  image  of  the  world 
(weltbild)?” 3 Boltzmann seems to feel necessary to avoid useless discussions, 
such  as  those  frequently  promoted  by  philosophers.  Even  though  he 
recognized  that  there  were  no  definitive  proofs  either  in  favor  or  against  the 
existence of matter, at least at his epoch, he considered that the belief in either 
position  to  be  ideology.  Although  he  did  not  define  what  he  meant  by 
ideology,  it  seems  correct  to  state  that  for  him  this  word  had  a  negative 
meaning.  In  any  case,  both  idealism  and  realism  are,  in  the  end,  ideologies. 
Another  important  example,  certainly  of  negative  connotation  and  more 
important  than  the  previous  one,  about  what  seems  to  be  Boltzmann’s 
viewpoint about ideology comes from solipsism. Boltzmann had a true horror 
of  idealism,  referring  to  it  as  the  major  madness  ever  created  by  the  human 
mind, since idealism denies the existence of the external material world. 
 
From the way he discussed this subject, Boltzmann seems to believe that it is 
impossible  not  to  choose  one  of  the  two  positions,  namely,  idealism  or 
realism. Inasmuch as one cannot in fact prove which position is best, choosing 
between  them  can  only  be  made  by  arguing  in  favor  of  an  evaluation  of  the 
weak points of each position. Then, by evaluating the weak points of idealism, 

                                                 
3 Boltzmann, L., 1905, “Über die Frage nach der objektiven Existenz der Vorgänge in der unbelebten Natur”, 
in “Populäre Schriften”, ed. J.A. Barth ,(Leipzig), 1905, p. 170 

 

3

which could not overcome the gap between what is alive and what is not alive, 
Boltzmann made his choice for the realism. Nevertheless, although he left no 
doubt about his preference, Boltzmann was careful in the way he referred to 
these  philosophical  systems,  stating  that  they  are  solely  manners  of 
expressions  (Ausdruckweise)  used  for  scientists  and  philosophers  to  convey 
their  ideas  about  reality.  Realism  has  a  mode  of  expression  more  adequate 
than of idealism. Choosing the most appropriate or most adequate expressing 
mode would allow the disappearance of false problems. One would not lose so 
much time in trying to answer false questions, which, according to Boltzmann, 
is one of the main obstacles to be avoided. The choice of the most adequate 
expressing mode of science leads us directly to the core of the epistemological 
thinking of the Austrian physicist.  
 
At  the  end  of  the  19th  century  Boltzmann  sought  to  show  that  all  scientific 
theories  are  nothing  more  than  representations,  that  is,  constructions  of  the 
natural phenomena. By being representations, scientific theories cannot aim to 
know  Nature  itself,  knowledge  which  would  explain  why  the  natural 
phenomena  show  themselves  to  us  the  way  we  observe  them,  since  such 
ultimate  knowledge  is,  and  will  ever  be,  unknowable.  As  a  consequence,  a 
scientific  theory  will  never  be  complete  or  definitively  true.  This  viewpoint 
actually redefines the concept of scientific truth by advancing the notion that 
the identification of the theory with the researched objects is a weak one, that 
is, such identification (1) cannot be unique, (2) cannot be complete and (3) is 
temporarily limited, since scientific theories are nothing more than images of 
Nature.  As  a  consequence,  (1.1)  the  same  aspects  of  Nature4  can  be 
represented  by  more  than  one  theory,  which  are  often  in  competition  among 
themselves  for  the  preference  of  the  scientific  community,  (2.1)  by  being 
representations  scientific  theories  will  never  be  able  to  show  all  aspects  of 
natural phenomena, inasmuch as such a complete knowledge is unknowable, 
and (3.1) a scientific theory can, and almost surely will, one day, be replaced 
by  another.  It  is  the  possibility  of  the  replacement  of  one  theory  by  another 
that defines and constitutes the scientific progress. 
 
Boltzmann's ideas about scientific models as representations are clearly stated 
in  the  passage  below,  quoted  from  the  entry “model”  of  the  1902  edition  of 
the Encyclopedia Britannica. 
 

                                                 
4 In this article we shall use the words “Nature”, “matter” and “external world” as synonyms. 

 

4

Models  in  the  mathematical,  physical  and  mechanical  sciences  are  of  the 
greatest  importance.  Long  ago  philosophy  perceived  the  essence  of  our 
process  of  thought  to  lie  in  the  fact  that  we  attach  to  the  various  real 
objects  around  us  particular  physical  attributes  -  our  concepts  -  and  by 
means of these try to represent the objects to our minds. Such views were 
formerly regarded by mathematicians and physicists as nothing more than 
unfertile speculations, but in more recent times they have been brought by 
J.  C.  Maxwell,  H.  v.  Helmholtz,  E.  Mach,  H.  Hertz  and  many  others  into 
intimate relation with the whole body of mathematical and physical theory. 
On this view our thoughts stand to things in the same relation as models to 
the objects they represent. The essence of the process is the attachment of 
one concept having a definite content to each thing, but without implying 
complete similarity between thing and thought; for naturally we can know 
but  little  of  the  resemblance  of  our  thoughts  to  the  things  to  which  we 
attach them. What resemblance there is, lies principally in the nature of the 
connexion, the correlation being analogous to that which obtains between 
thought  and  language,  language  and  writing.  (…)  Here,  of  course,  the 
symbolization  of  the  thing  is  the  important  point,  though,  where  feasible, 
the utmost possible correspondence is sought between the two (…) we are 
simply  extending  and  continuing  the  principle  by  means  of  which  we 
comprehend objects in thought and represent them in language or writing.5 

 
Boltzmann  also  pointed  out  that  the  thesis  that  a  scientific  theory  is  a 
representation was not new. Kant, in the 18th century, and Maxwell, one of the 
most important influences upon him in the middle of the 19th century, had both 
defended  similar  theses.  Other  contemporary  physicists,  like  Hertz  and 
Helmholtz,  shared  similar  views.  By  remembering  that  others  like  Kant  and 
Maxwell  had  already  expressed  similar  propositions,  Boltzmann  wished  to 
make sure that any theory or model would be continuously perfected, without 
being excluded by any other “tribunal” than the experience. 
 
The  most  important  epistemological  conclusion  reached  by  Boltzmann,  and 
which  constitutes  the  core  of  his  philosophical  thinking,  is  usually  called 
theoretical  pluralism.  This  is  a  consequence  of  the  thesis  that  all  scientific 
theories are representations of  Nature. By being a representation, a scientific 
theory is, therefore, initially a free creation of the scientist who can formulate 
it  from  a  purely  personal  perspective,  where  metaphysical  presuppositions, 
theoretical  options,  preferences  for  a  certain  type  of  mathematical  language, 
                                                 
5 Boltzmann, L., 1902, “Model”, in “Theoretical Physics and Philosophical  Problems: Selected Writings”, ed. 
B. McGuiness (Reidel: Dordretcht), 1974, p. 213 

 

5

and  even  the  dismissal  of  some  observational  data,  can  enter  into  its 
formulation.  That  happens  in  the  period  when  the  theory  is  formulated. 
However, in order to make this theory eligible to become part of science, it is 
necessary for it to be confronted by the experience. If it is not approved in this 
crucial  test,  the  theory  must  be  reformulated,  or  even  put  aside.  Boltzmann 
also  emphasized  that  since  all  scientific  theories  are,  to  some  extent,  free 
creations  of  scientists,  scientific  work  is  impossible  without  the  use  of 
theoretical  concepts,  which  originates  from  the  fact  that  it  is  impossible  the 
formulation  of  any  scientific  theory  simply  from  the  mere  observation  of 
natural phenomena. 
 
Theoretical  pluralism  also  states  that  the  same  natural  phenomenon  can  be 
explained  through  different  theories.  Still  according  to  Boltzmann,  this 
possibility  has  its  origins  in  the  fact  that,  as  seen  above,  any  theory  is  a 
representation,  a  construction,  an  image  of  the  natural  external  world,  and 
nothing  more  than  that.  From  Boltzmann’s  point  of  view  one  cannot  do 
science  in  any  other  way.  Either  it  is  a  construction,  a  representation,  or  the 
theory is not scientific. In Boltzmann's words: 
 

(…)  Hertz  makes  physicists  properly  aware  of  something  philosophers 
had no doubt long since stated, namely that no theory can be objective, 
actually  coinciding  with  nature,  but  rather  that  each  theory  is  only  a 
mental picture of phenomena, related to them as sign is to designatum.  
 
(…) From this it follows that it cannot be our task to find an absolutely 
correct theory but rather a picture that is, as simple as possible and that 
represents  phenomena  as  accurately  as  possible.  One  might  even 
conceive of two quite different theories both equally simple and equally 
congruent with phenomena, which therefore in spite of their difference 
are equally correct. The assertion that a given theory is the only correct 
one can only express our subjective conviction that there could not be 
another equally simple and fitting image.6 
 

In  summary,  theoretical  pluralism  synthesizes  the  fact  that,  since  knowledge 
of Nature itself is impossible, a theory can only be better than another. It is the 
necessary  mechanism  which  prevents  science  from  running  the  risk  of 
stagnation.  Within  this  perspective,  truth  can  only  be  provisional,  and  is  in 

                                                 
6Boltzmann, L., “On the Development of the Methods of Theoretical Physics in Recent Times”, in 
“Theoretical Physics and Philosophical  Problems: Selected Writings”, ed. B. McGuiness (Reidel: 
Dordretcht), 1974, p. 90  

 

6

truth  as 

fact  an  approximation  achieved  by  different  means,  that  is,  by  different 
theoretical images. 
 
An  important  consequence  of  Boltzmann's  theoretical  pluralism  is  his  notion 
of scientific truth. One of the main features of modern science is that since the 
beginning of the modern scientific revolution with Galileo, scientists began to 
define 
the  complete  correspondence  between  models  and 
observations.  We  may  term  this  relationship  as  strong  correspondence. 
Nevertheless,  since  Boltzmann's  main  thesis  states  that  all  scientific  theories 
are  representations  of  natural  phenomena,  that  is,  they  are  not  capable  of 
determining  what  really  constitutes  Nature,  the  concept  of  truth  in  modern 
science  should  no  longer  be  one  which  seeks  to  determine  Nature  itself. 
Therefore,  within  the  context  of  Boltzmann's  epistemological  thinking,  this 
strong  concept  of  correspondence  should  be 
replaced  by  a  weak 
correspondence  which  will  in  turn  enable  scientists  to  choose  one  model 
among  other  possible  ones,  since  more  than  one  model,  or  theory,  may  well 
represent the same group of natural phenomena and/or experimental data. At 
this  moment  Boltzmann  advances  another  definition  of  scientific  truth:  the 
adequacy. According to him, theory A is more adequate than theory B if the 
former is capable of explaining more rationally, more intelligibly, a certain set 
of natural phenomena, than the latter. In his own words, 
 

(…) let me choose as goal of the present talk not just kinetic molecular 
theory but a largely specialized branch of it. Far from wishing to deny 
that  this  contains  hypothetical  elements,  I  must  declare  that  branch  to 
be a picture that boldly transcends pure facts of observation, and yet I 
regard it as not unworthy of discussion at this point; a measure of my 
confidence  in  the  utility  of  the  hypotheses  as  soon  as  they  throw  new 
light  on  certain  peculiar  features  of  the  observed  facts,  representing 
their interrelation with a clarity unattainable by other means. Of course 
we shall always have to remember that we are dealing with hypotheses 
capable  and  needful  of  constant  further  development  and  to  be 
abandoned only when all the relations they represent can be understood 
even more clearly in some other way. 

(…)  We  must  not  aspire  to  derive  nature  from  our  concepts,  but  must 
adapt the latter to the former. We must not think that everything can be 
arranged according to our categories or that there is such a thing as a 

 

 

7

most  perfect  arrangement:  it  will  only  ever  be  a  variable  one,  merely 
adapted to current needs.7 

 
He  also  noted  that  since  theories  are  images  of  Nature,  all  have  some 
explanatory  power  and  that  a  good  theory  is  achieved  by  being  carefully 
crafted by scientists, in a process similar to Darwin's Natural Selection. 
 

Mach  himself  has  ingeniously  discussed  the  fact  that  no  theory  is 
absolutely true, and equally hardly any absolutely false either, but each 
must gradually be perfected, as organisms must according to Darwin's 
theory.  By  being  strongly  attacked,  a  theory  can  gradually  shed 
inappropriate elements while the appropriate residue remains.8 

 
In summary, Boltzmann in effect identifies scientific truth with adequacy and 
the  latter  with  the  concept  of  weak  correspondence  between  our  scientific 
theories  and  Nature.  As  opposed  to  the  strong  correspondence,  which 
identifies  completely  a 
theory  with  Nature,  his  concept  of  weak 
correspondence implies, as stated above, theoretical pluralism, that is, (1) the 
non uniqueness of any scientific theory – uniqueness implies dogmatism –, (2) 
the notion of the unavoidable incompleteness of any theory as they are images 
of  Nature  –  completeness  implies  dogmatism  –  and  that  (3)  all  scientific 
theories  are  temporally  limited,  i.e.,  no  theory  is  definitive  –  all  will  be 
replaced one day by better ones.  
 
3. Developments 
 
Boltzmann  himself  developed  further  various  consequences  of  the  views 
outlined  above.  As  a  convicted  Darwinist,  he  extended  the  notion  of 
theoretical pluralism to reason itself. For Boltzmann, the brain was a device, 
an organ aimed at the creation of images of the world which, due to the great 
usefulness  of  these  images  to  the  conservation  of  the  human  species,  as 
determined  by  Darwin’s  theory  of  Natural  Selection,  has  reached  a  certain 
degree of perfection. The brain can be thought of as being a physical structure 
ruled by evolution. So, reason will necessarily evolve by means of Darwin’s 

                                                 
7 Boltzmann, L., “On Statistical Mechanics”, in “Theoretical Physics and Philosophical  Problems: Selected 
Writings”, ed. B. McGuiness (Reidel: Dordretcht), 1974, pp. 163, 166 
8 Boltzmann, L., “An Inaugural Lecture on Natural Philosophy”, in “Theoretical Physics and Philosophical  
Problems: Selected Writings”, ed. B. McGuiness (Reidel: Dordretcht), 1974, p. 153 

 

8

Natural  Selection,  meaning  that  Kant’s  a  priori  philosophical  category  can, 
and will, change with time.  
 
Another  important  point  to  note  is  that  although  theories  are  representations, 
and,  as  we  saw  above,  personal  theoretical  options  can  enter  in  their 
formulation,  they  are  not  entirely  arbitrary  due  to  the  principle  of  weak 
correspondence  between  scientific  theories  and  the  external  world,  principle 
which is implicit in Boltzmann’s philosophical thinking. The basic aim of any 
theory  is  to  represent  something  that is  going  on  in  Nature,  and  a  successful 
theory does achieve this to a considerable extent. Therefore, such a theory can 
use  some  symbols,  or  a  specific  mathematical  language,  just  as  conventions. 
However,  since  Nature  itself  must  be  represented  in  it,  or,  stating  the  same, 
Nature  must  be  weakly  corresponded  in  any  theory,  conventions  will  always 
be  limited  to  only  those  aspects  of  the  model,  of  the  constructed 
representation,  which  are  not  perceived,  in  that  theory,  as  being  directly 
dictated by Nature. Thus, under Boltzmann's perspective, one cannot say that 
theories  are  just  conventions,  because  after  being  carefully  crafted  by  the 
scientists as representations of unique, non-arbitrary, natural phenomena, they 
become  attached  to  them,  and  end  up  saying  something  about  what  is  really 
going on in Nature. 
 
In addition, besides being a good representation, there is still another criterion 
capable  of  conducting  the  preference  of  scientists  towards  one  particular 
model:  its  predictive  ability.  This  is  important  because  once  a  certain 
theoretical  prediction  is  confirmed,  the  scientific  knowledge  about  Nature 
increases  quantitatively  due  to  the  weak  correspondence  principle.  A  correct 
prediction  is  also  important  because  it  is  formulated  within  the  context  of  a 
specific  theoretical  picture.  So,  by  being  capable  of  predicting  unknown 
phenomena,  a  model  shows  all  its  explanatory  power  since  it  is  not  only 
capable  of  announcing  the  already  known  “pieces”,  but  it  is  also  able  to  go 
even  further,  showing  the  existence  of  other  still  missing  pieces  which  are 
necessary  for  a  deeper  and  more  organized  understanding  of  Nature.  One 
cannot forget that one of the most important aims of science is to increase and 
organize our knowledge about Nature, and thus, a certain theory is richer than 
others  if  it  is  able  to  better  contribute  to  such  an  increase  and  organization. 
Such  a  preference  for  the  richer  theories  makes  them  more  likely  to  be  used 
and  developed  than  the  poorer  ones  –  even  by  the  incorporation  of  many 
useful elements of the poorer theories – and after a while the distance between 
them can be so great that it may no longer be worth for researchers to keep on 

 

9

working  with  the  poorer  representations,  which  are  then  put  aside  and, 
eventually, forgotten. 
 
One  must  stress  that  the  theoretical  pluralism  does  not  necessarily  imply 
competition  among  the  different  theories,  but  often  means  complementarity. 
Inasmuch  as  all  theories  have  some  explanatory  power,  all  theories  end  up 
saying something about the physical process that are going on in Nature since  
not all theories use the same set of ideas and phenomena which they seek to 
explain.  Therefore,  the  emergence  of  different  theories  for  similar  sets  of 
physical phenomena far from being a problem for our better understanding of 
Nature  is  an  essential  ingredient  for  it.  And  if  those  different  theories  have 
elements  which  contradict  each  other,  observations  and  experimentation 
provide  us  the  first  mechanism,  but  not  the  only  ones,  which  allows  us  to 
discard the inappropriate elements of the emergent theories. 
 
Under  Boltzmann’s  view  we  can  clearly  see  the  importance  of  orthodoxy  in 
science. Inasmuch as the validation of new theories and models usually takes 
time, a certain degree of conservatism towards new theories and models, and 
skepticism towards new observations, is, nevertheless, necessary since it is not 
possible  to  build  a  sound  conceptual  and  experimental  scientific  body  when 
there  is  a  continual  change  in  the  fundamental  scientific  concepts.  Such 
skepticism is also evidence of the existence of critique in science, which is one 
of the most important ingredients of modern scientific reasoning and practice. 
Therefore,  orthodoxy  plays  the  healthy  role  of  preserving  the  scientific 
knowledge obtained on solid bases until new theories prove to have sufficient 
internal consistency and experimental validation.  
 
However,  when  strong  conservatism  and  orthodoxy  becomes  deep  rooted  in 
the  scientific  community,  a  situation  may  arise  that,  if  not  effectively  and 
successfully challenged, may lead the community to avoid altogether any kind 
of  change  of  the  established  ideas.9  In  such  an  environment  the  established 
theories  crystallize,  becoming  dogmatic  and  the  scientific  debate  ceases  to 
exist.  So,  we  can  conclude  that  dogmatism  works  against  scientific  progress 
and the adoption of the theoretical pluralism can avoid its dangers, something 
that  Boltzmann’s  was  very  much  aware  due  to  his  passionate  defense  of  the 
atomic concept which, at the time, was facing a growing number of powerful 
opponents,  like  Ostwald  and  Georg  Helm  (1851-1923),  who  considered  the 
atomic picture of the world outdated and proposed an entirely energetic view 
                                                 
9 Ribeiro, M. B. & Videira, A. A. P., “Dogmatism and Theoretical Pluralism in Modern Cosmology”, 
Apeiron, vol. 5, Nr. 3-4 (1998) 227-234; arXiv.org: physics/9806011 

 

10

of  the  physical  world.  Boltzmann  feared  that  such  a  purely  energetic 
representation  would  lead  physics  to  become  dogmatic,  a  fact  that  would 
inevitably  also  lead  to  its  stagnation.  So,  when  Boltzmann  advanced 
theoretical  pluralism  he  had  the  goal  of  establishing  a  clear  and  unreachable 
limit for dogmatism. Boltzmann believed that once theoretical pluralism were 
accepted and completely absorbed in the research practice, it would not allow 
that, once proposed, a theory could be excluded from the scientific scenario. 
 
Another  consequence  of  the  theoretical  pluralism  is  that  if  our  scientific 
theories  and  models  represent  Nature  by  constructions,  their  descriptions  are 
unavoidably and intrinsically limited. So, if scientific theories are incomplete, 
there must be knowledge outside science. In other words, there must be other 
types  of  knowledge  which  cannot  be  classified  as  scientific,  but  which 
nevertheless do reflect, or mirror, processes and phenomena that do occur in 
Nature.  That  type  of  knowledge  can  be  considered  unstructured  in  the  sense 
that  it  lacks  internal  connections  produced  by  theoretical  thinking.  So,  that 
kind  of  knowledge  is  affirmative  knowledge  in  the  sense  that  is  states  that 
things are as they are because they are found, experimented or observed to be 
as they are. No further  attempts  at  structuring  and  searching for  internal  and 
external  connections  are  made.  If  so,  and  successful,  such  an  affirmative 
knowledge  becomes  no  longer  affirmative  and  starts  to  transmute  into 
phenomenological  science.  The  intrinsic  incompleteness  of  any  scientific 
discipline  means  that  various  types  of  affirmative  knowledges  will  always 
exist. 
 
Theoretical  pluralism  also  has  consequences  for  the  ethics  among  scientists. 
By being representations, that is, constructions from, or images of, Nature, the 
scientific theories are therefore human constructions, reflecting Nature without 
governing  them.  So,  those  images  are  built  by  generations  of  scientists  and 
this line of thought leads us inevitably to suppose that the relationship among 
the  scientists  themselves  should  play  a  relevant  role  in  this  constructive 
process. The existence of a free flow of ideas is essential for this construction, 
as well as the permanent critique and stimuli for the existence of motivations 
for  the  scientist.  All  that  implies  certain  behavioral  rules,  that  is,  an  ethics, 
required  so  that  the  scientific  enterprise  moves  on  and  avoids  stagnation. 
Although our scientific theories do reflect Nature, they are, and will ever be, 
human  constructions  and,  therefore,  rules  obliging  the  respect  and  possible 
acceptance of different ideas become essential. 
 

 

11

In  summary,  Boltzmann’s  views  about  reality  mean  that  one  cannot  confuse 
the concepts of “reality” and “real”. The former are the set of mental pictures, 
or images of Nature created by our brains, whereas the latter is Nature itself, 
the external world, whose ultimate knowledge is and will ever be unknowable. 
Nature  constitutes  what  is  real  and,  therefore,  is  outside  our  brains.  Reality, 
however,  is  the  collection  of  mental  pictures  created  in  our  brains  by  its 
interface with what is real, with Nature. Reality, thus, connects our brains with 
what is real, with the external world, meaning that reality is realistic. This last 
statement  means  exactly  this  connection.  Reason  then  can  be  thought  of  as 
being  the  “logical  rules”  10  that  govern  reality.  But,  since  reality  is  made  of 
mental pictures, or images, of Nature, and which will necessarily change with 
time, we can only conclude that reality and reason must evolve. 
 
4. Modern consequences of Boltzmann’s ideas 
 
A hundred years after Boltzmann’s death we are entitled to ask how modern 
Boltzmann’s  philosophy  of  science  really  is.  Are  his  ideas  capable  of 
influencing  our  modern  thinking?  Could  his  epistemology  be  further 
developed and, if so, what news results and conclusions could it bring about? 
 
Although  we  cannot  know  whether  or  not  there  will  ever  be  a  consensus  on 
the  adequate 
ideas  developed  by 
Boltzmann, it seems to us that it is impossible to deny that he developed his 
ideas with the intention of using them to counteract the creation of scientific 
and philosophical dogmas. Boltzmann believed in the importance of his ideas, 
mainly because they could contribute to the strengthening and improvement of 
science,  philosophy  and  the  human  life  in  general.  His  ideas  could  serve  as 
inspiration for the eternal path taken by the human species in its struggle for 
survival and should not be considered as the last words about such topics. For 
Boltzmann  the  authentic  progress  would  only  be  achieved  if  human  beings 
could continuously improve themselves. His definition of certainty frames this 
perspective:  “We  design  as  true  the  actions  whose  results  produce  desired 
things,  as  well  as  the  representations  that  direct  us  to  act  that  way.”  11  In 
other words, Boltzmann seems to place “action”, “intention”, “representation” 
and  “truth”  on  the  same  level  of  importance.  These  four  concepts  would 
constitute  a  balanced  and  indivisible  web.  The  key  idea  responsible  for  the 
                                                 
10 Boltzmann did not believe in “logical rules of reason” in the strict sense, but only as a result of the 
evolutionary processes incurred in our brains. 
11 Boltzmann, L., “Populäre Schriften,” ed. J. Barth, (Lepizig), 1905, p. 164 

the  philosophical 

interpretation  of 

 

12

maintenance of this balance is exactly his concept that the scientific theories 
are representations. 
 
One  can  conclude  by  stating  that  our  theoretical  constructions,  or  images  of 
Nature, can be applied to physics itself. So, if physics is a construction, as a 
logical consequence of Boltzmann’s ideas physics must also follow Darwinian 
Natural  Selection  as  a  solution  to  its  philosophical  problems.  Actually, 
Darwinism in this sense can be applied to science in general. Therefore, one 
must  not  seek  explanations  beyond  human  activity  and  beyond  what  we  can 
reach with our ordinary senses and our brains.  
 
The  activity  of  constructing  images  of  the  external  world,  as  well  as  the 
process of improving them so they become more adequate representations, are 
instinctive to human beings12 and, therefore, they are not the solely privilege 
of  scientists.  Ever  since  their  appearance  on  this  planet,  humans  have  been 
using their ability to construct internal mental pictures of the external world to 
control  their  surrounding  environments.  In  order  to  survive,  humans  need  to 
act and intervene on the environment. All representations, including those we 
call  scientific  theories,  have  a  practical  side  which  allows  mankind  to  make 
better use of Nature in their own benefit. Therefore, representing is a human 
activity  as  ordinary  as  any  other  and there  must  be  a  common  substratum  to 
any  human  activity,  being  not  relevant  if  this  activity  is  intellectual  or  not. 
Thus, representing becomes a construction since it requires practical decisions 
to  solve  problems  whose  solutions  we  seek. 
and  choices  necessary 
Representing then is nothing more than acting. 
 
 

                                                 
12 L. Boltzmann, “Populäre Schriften,” ed. J. Barth, (Lepizig), 1905, p. 179 

 

13

