 
 
 
 
 
 
Educational cosmic ray experiments with Geiger counters 
  
F. BLANCO, F. FICHERA, P. LA ROCCA, F. LIBRIZZI, O. PARASOLE AND F. RIGGI 
 
INFN and Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Catania, Via S.Sofia 64, 
I-95123 Catania, Italy 
 
 
 
Summary. —  Experiments concerning the physics of cosmic rays offer to high-school teachers 
and  students  a  relatively  easy  approach  to  the  field  of  research  in  high  energy  physics.  The 
detection  of  cosmic  rays  does  not  necessarily  require  the  use  of  sophisticated  equipment,  and 
various  properties  of  the  cosmic  radiation  can  be  observed  and  analysed  even  by  the  use  of  a 
single  Geiger  counter.  Nevertheless,  the  variety  of  such  kind  of  experiments  and  the  results 
obtained  are  limited  because  of  the  inclusive  nature  of  these  measurements.  A  significant 
improvement may be obtained when two or more Geiger counters are operated in coincidence. 
In  this  paper  we  discuss  the  potential  of  performing  educational  cosmic  ray  experiments  with 
Geiger  counters.  In  order  to  show  also  the  educational  value  of  coincidence  techniques, 
preliminary  results  of  cosmic  ray  experiments  carried  out  by  the  use  of  a  simple  coincidence 
circuit are briefly discussed. 
 
PACS 01.40.Ej  – Science in elementary and secondary school 
PACS 01.50.Pa – Laboratory experiments and apparatus 
PACS 29.40.-n  – Radiation detectors 
PACS 96.40.-z  – Cosmic rays 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. —  Introduction 

 
In  recent  years  examples  of  collaborations  which  involve  high  schools,  university 
and research centres in projects concerning cosmic ray physics have become more and 
more numerous all over the world [1,2]. The main reason of this trend lies in the evident 
educational aspects that characterize experiments for the detection of cosmic rays: this 
kind  of  activities  offers  to  school-teachers  and  associated  groups  of  students  the 
possibility to be trained in the world of experimental high energy physics, since not only 
they  may  learn  about  the  basics  of  cosmic  ray  physics,  but  also  stay  in  touch  with 
several aspects of a research activity. 

Detection configurations usually employed for these projects consist of scintillators, 
mostly  arranged  as  telescopes  or  small  arrays.  However,  if  students  may  derive  some 
benefit  from  the  use  of  sophisticated  equipments,  it  is  possible  to  examine  several 
properties  of  the  cosmic  radiation  even  by  the  use  of  simple  Geiger  counters.  This 
solution inevitably implies a reduction in the counting rate due to the small size of such 
devices.  On  the  other  side,  through  the  use  of  Geiger  counters  and  associated  simple 
electronics  and  data  acquisition,  schools  have  the  possibility  to  carry  out  cosmic  ray 
experiments in a completely autonomous way, because the use of such apparatus does 
not  require  sophisticated  skills  on  detection  techniques  and  also  runs  even  within  the 
limited budget of a high school. 

In this paper, we briefly describe a set of educational cosmic ray experiments which 
are part of  an established collaboration between the INFN, the Department  of  Physics 
and  Astronomy  of  our  University  and  local  area  high  schools.  Both  inclusive  and 
coincidence data have been obtained in the framework of these experiments. Section 2 
reports  a  summary  of  inclusive  experiments  carried  out  with  single  Geiger  counters, 
which  are  within  a  high-school’s  reach.  The  potential  of  such  experiments  may  be 
largely improved  by the use  of coincidence techniques.  Some  example  of  coincidence 
experiments  with  small  Geiger  counters  is  reported  in  Section  3.  Finally,  Section  4 
draws some conclusions and outlook. 

 

2. —  Examples of inclusive measurements performed with  single Geiger counters 
 

In most of the experiments discussed in this paper, commercial Geiger counters and 
associated  electronics/data  acquisition  have  been  used.  A  typical  arrangement  is 
sketched in fig. 1.  

This equipment is composed of a PASCO Interface (for instance Mod. 500 or 750) 
and various digital or analog sensors which may be connected to it. Data are collected 
and stored by means of a user-friendly software, so that the whole represents a useful 
ready-made system for experiments in physics [3]. Similar systems, based on the use of 
on-line sensors, are available on the market. 

Despite  its  evident  simplicity,  the  experimental  set-up  of  fig.  1  allows  to  perform 
various  measurements  of  educational  interest.  For  instance,  one  of  the  simplest 
investigations which may be performed is the study of the time variations in the cosmic 
ray  flux  at  the  sea  level.  Such  fluctuations  may  be  caused  by  several  factors  and  are 
related to phenomena which involve the Sun, the Earth and its environment in space. 

A  variation  that  is  often  studied  is  the  “barometric  effect”:  owing  to  the  mass 
absorption provided by the Earth’s atmosphere, variations of the atmospheric pressure 
result in small fluctuations of the cosmic ray flux. The barometric effect is estimated by 
the use of the barometric coefficient β, which expresses the percentage variation in the 
cosmic  ray  intensity  caused  by  a  pressure  change  of  1  mbar.  The  value  of  β  depends 
however on the particular experimental set-up used for the detection, on its geographical 
location and its local environment. The barometric coefficient is also strongly dependent 
on the nature of the secondary component being detected: for instance the value of β for 
the  neutron  component  is  about  0.7%/mbar,  while  it  is  smaller  for  the  ionizing 
component  (β~0.1-0.2%/mbar). Especially for the ionizing  component,  we  are  dealing 
with  very  small  variations  and  a  careful  study  of  such  effect  should  require  a  high 
statistical  accuracy.  The  use  of  detectors  with  small  area  (such  as  the  Geiger  counters 
previously  proposed)  is  not  recommended  for  such  kind  of  analysis.  However,  a  pilot 
measurement carried out by the use of a single Geiger counter showed that it is possible 

to obtain a realistic value of the barometric coefficient even by means of detectors with 
a  low  counting  rate  [4,  5].  For  such  investigation  we  used  a  Geiger  counter  together 
with a barometric sensor for a parallel recording of the local pressure. Owing to the low 
Geiger  counting  rate  (about  0.3  Hz),  the  atmospheric  pressure  and  the  counting  rate 
were monitored continuously for a period of approximately 100 days in 30' steps. Data 
analysis of such measurements offers a good opportunity to use statistical methods. For 
example,  periodic  variations  of  the  local  atmospheric  pressure  may  be  studied  by 
extracting  a  correlogram  from  the  data  [4].  This  gives  a  quantitative  measure  of  the 
correlation between the pressure at the time t and that at the time t+Δt, as a function of 
the time interval Δt. Figure 2 shows the correlogram from the pressure time series: the 
well-known periodicity of 24 hours emerges clearly from the plot. 

The  value  of  the  barometric  coefficient  β  may  be  extracted  through  a  standard 
weighted fit of the measured (count rate, pressure) pairs. For small pressure changes we 
may consider the relation between the counting rate R and the atmospheric pressure P to 
be    linear  and  in  this  approximation  our  data  gave  a  barometric  coefficient  of 
β=(0.023±0.009)%/mbar.  However,  more  in-depth  analyses  may  be  performed.  For 
instance,  in  order  to  minimize  the  effect  of  daily  variations  not  connected  to  pressure 
changes, the linear fit may be performed considering the daily averages of pressure and 
counting  rate.  Besides  daily  fluctuations,  the  cosmic  flux  may  be  also  affected  by  the 
presence of long term variations, which can destroy the correlation between R and P. An 
accurate analysis of the overall data led to the conclusion that in the second half of the 
measurement  period,  cosmic  flux  suffered  an  increase  not  due  to  the  atmospheric 
pressure. This variation is visible, only in a qualitative manner, in fig. 3, that shows the 
correlation plot between daily averages of pressure and counting rate for the overall set 
of data (upper) and for the first and the second half of the measurement period (middle 
and lower respectively). To take into account such long-term variations, we studied the 
correlation  within  small  time  periods  (10  days),  obtaining  an  average  barometric 
coefficient β=(0.051±0.015)%/mbar.  

The search for long term variations may be facilitated by comparing the measured 
data with those taken by professional stations for the detection of cosmic rays [6]. For 
example,  data  from  the  Moscow  Neutron  Monitor  confirm  the  presence  of  a  variation 
(about 1 %) of the cosmic flux in the second part of the period under consideration. So 
another didactic exercise could be the study  of the correlation  between data  measured 
with  a  Geiger  counter  and  fluxes  of  neutron  and  muons  obtained  by  professional 
monitor stations during a Forbush decrease. In  fact, besides the atmospheric effects, a 
lot of changes in cosmic ray intensity are due to the solar activity. The Forbush decrease 
belongs  to  this  class:  it  is  a  rapid,  short-term  variation  resulting  from  solar  flares  and 
mass  ejections  of  the  Sun  corona.  This  effect  is  more  difficult  to  see  with  muon 
detectors since it affects mainly the low energy particles. Data measured with a Geiger 
counter  during  a  Forbush  decrease  [6]  were  compared  to  fluxes  reported  by  two 
professional neutron stations: in both cases, the statistical errors did not allow to directly 
see  a  correlation  between  the  muon  flux  in  the  Geiger  counter  and  the  neutron  flux. 
However we must remind that Forbush events are characterized by two different phases, 
a first rapid intensity reduction, followed by a slow recovery. Therefore, it is possible to 
study  the  degree  of  correlation  during  these  different  phases,  using  both  the  data 
measured  with  the  Geiger  counter  and  data  measured  with  a  larger  statistics  from  a 
professional muon telescope. 

The solar activity affects the flux of cosmic rays not only through exceptional events 
(such as the Forbush decrease) but also through periodic effects (such as the 11-years, 

annual, 27-days, solar day cycles). For instance the data collected for the study of the 
barometric effect were again analyzed to search for daily variations [7]. The amplitude 
and the phase of such variations are not constant over long periods and depend on the 
location  of  the  detecting  apparatus,  as  well  as  on  the  nature  of  the  cosmic  component 
being detected. Once the data were corrected for the barometric effect, we normalized 
the  hourly  flux  to  the  average  daily  flux  so  as  to  minimize  the  effect  of  long-term 
variations. Carrying out an harmonic analysis for each individual day, we found a mean 
amplitude  of  0.16%  and  a  mean  phase  φ=22.3  hours  (solar  local  time).  An  alternative 
analysis  was  performed  by  considering  the  ratio  between  the  mean  hourly  flux  in  a 
selected  interval  along  the  day  and  the  corresponding  mean  flux  in  the  rest  of  day.  In 
fig.  4  we  choose  a  time  interval  of  12  consecutive  hours  and  this  ratio  is  plotted  by 
shifting the centroid of the selected time interval in steps of 30 minutes. Both analyses, 
carried out for a relatively long period (about 100 days), led to evidences of a periodic 
behaviour of the flux along the day.  

The  interpretation  of  all  the  effects  previously  described  is  not  however 
straightforward, particularly because of the inclusive nature of the observations. These 
investigations must then be considered as pilot studies in order to introduce high-school 
teams  to  several  aspects  of  a  physic  research  activity,  from    detection  techniques  to  
problems in data analysis and interpretation.  

 

3. —  Use of coincidence techniques in educational cosmic ray experiments 
 

In cosmic ray physics the use of coincidence techniques is a very common practise. 
Inclusive measurements often lead to results difficult to interpret; a partial improvement 
may  be  obtained  by  means  of  coincidence  techniques,  because  they  allow  to  fix  more 
restrictive work conditions so as to select only particular classes of events: for example, 
a telescope of two detectors in coincidence defines a particular orientation, allowing to 
better  control  the  effects  of  irregularity  due  to  materials  surrounding  the  telescope. 
Moreover, the use of coincidence techniques gives the possibility to investigate several 
aspects of the cosmic radiation which cannot be explored simply by means of inclusive 
measurements.  

For  most  of  these  investigations,  people  have  generally  used  relatively  large  area 
plastic scintillators, in order to have an acceptable rate of coincidences. However, fast 
detectors require complex and expensive electronics, which is not compatible with the 
limited resources of a high-school. On the contrary, inexpensive coincidence circuits for 
Geiger  counters  may  be  easily  built-up  even  by  a  high-school  student,  since  signals 
produced by these detectors allow to use simple AND gates. 

Coincidence circuits for Geiger counters are not easily available on the market and 
even companies which provide systems of on-line sensors do not make available such 
kind  of  devices  either.  In  order  to  use  the  same  system  in  fig.  1,  we  have  devised  a 
simple  coincidence  circuit  which  provides  a  signal  compatible  with  the  PASCO 
interface. The basics of this circuit is elementary: the signals of two Geiger counters are 
firstly sent to a dual retriggerable monostable multivibrator, in order to provide standard 
signals,  and  then  are  used  as  inputs  for  an  AND  gate.  Actually  the  monostable 
multivibrator  is  not  necessary  if  we  use  the  Pasco  Geiger  sensors,    which  provide  a 
TTL-like signal of amplitude + 5 V and width around 120 μs. This solution, however, 
gives the possibility to use the circuit also with other kinds of Geiger sensors. A detailed 
description of the electronics used is reported in Ref.  [8]. 

Once  tested,  the  system  has  been  used  to  carry  out  some  educational  coincidence 
experiments. A  typical investigation which  requires the use of a coincidence circuit is 
the  study  of  the  angular  dependence  of  the  cosmic  flux.  For  this  measurement  we 
arranged  two  Geiger  counters  in  order  to  set  up  a  telescope  for  cosmic  rays.  The 
coincidence  between  the  two  detectors  allows  to  select  only  those  particles  which 
simultaneously pass through both of them, so as to roughly select a particular direction 
for the incoming radiation. The solid angle of the telescope and, hence, its counting rate, 
are determined by the size of each detector and by their distance: the more the Geiger 
counters are distant, the more the telescope  orientation is precise and its counting rate 
low.  This  arrangement  allows  to  study  the  dependence  of  cosmic  ray  flux  at  the  sea 
level on the zenithal (θ) or  azimuthal (ϕ) angle. Owing to the absorption effect of the 
Earth’s atmosphere, the expected cosmic flux varies with a cos2θ trend for the zenithal 
angle, while it is quite uniform for the azimuthal angle. Figure 5 shows the number of 
coincidences per minute as a function of cos2θ, when the two Geiger counters are placed 
at a distance of 10 cm. Within the experimental errors, the points should lie on a straight 
line if the distribution follows a cos2θ law, as it appears from the weighted fit to the data 
(solid line). Due to the finite size of the counters, and their mutual distance, the effective 
angle defined by the telescope geometry is different from the nominal one. In order to 
evaluate the effective angle θeff for each detection geometry, a Monte Carlo simulation 
of  the  possible  trajectories  crossing  the  two  Geiger  cylindrical  volumes  (radius  1  cm, 
length 9 cm) was performed. Figure 6 (left) shows the distribution of the polar angles 
for a nominal orientation θ = 40° and a mutual distance of 10 cm. The centroid of the 
distribution  (105  events)  was  taken  as  an  estimate  of  the  effective  angle,  with  an 
uncertainty given by the RMS of the distribution. Figure 6 (right) shows the correlation 
between the nominal and the effective angle, for the geometry used in the present set-
up. As it can be seen, detection angles close to θ = 0° (vertical orientations) are difficult 
to obtain, due to the sizes of the counters, which allow also for inclined tracks even at θ 
= 0°, unless very large relative distances between the two counters are selected. On the 
other side, at large angles, the effective angle is very close to the nominal one. 

A  similar  set  of  measurements  was  carried  out  to  investigate  the  azimuthal  angle 
distribution. Once fixed the zenithal angle θ, we expect (and actually observe) a nearly 
uniform  distribution  for  the  angle  ϕ.  Small  variations  may  be  observed  only  in  the 
presence  of  huge  materials  around  the  telescope  (such  as  a  close  mountain),  but  this 
effect  is  very  difficult  to  observe  with  such  apparatus,  since  a  very  high  statistics  is 
required.  Precision  experiments  should  also  allow  to  investigate  the  small  east-west 
asymmetry, due to the charge of the particles being detected. 

Another  typical  coincidence  experiment  is  the  measure  of  the  decoherence  curve. 
For such investigation two or more detectors are placed on the same horizontal plane, 
separated by some distance; the decoherence curve is the dependence of the coincidence 
rate  upon  the  detector  separation.  The  detected  coincidences  are  due  in  such  case  to 
different cosmic particles, which however belong to the same air shower. Professional 
measurements  of  such  curve  show  that  the  coincidence  rate  decreases  dramatically  as 
the  separation  of  detectors  increases.  For  such  reason,  the  use  of  Geiger  counters 
requires  long  running  times  to  get  adequate  statistics.  Moreover,  the  two  Geiger 
counters  cannot  be  separated  too  much,  because  at  large  distances  the  counting  rate 
becomes comparable with that of the spurious coincidences Ns = 2 τ N1 N2, where N1, 
N2 are the individual count rates of the two detectors and τ is the coincidence window. 
For typical individual rates N1 = N2 = 0.3 Hz and τ = 150 μs, the spurious rate is in the 

order  of  1  coincidence  in  10  hours.  Figure  7  shows  a  preliminary  result  on  the 
decoherence  curve  obtained  with  two  small  Geiger  counters.  Data  were  corrected  for 
spurious  coincidences,  since  their  influence  is  not  negligible.  The  observed  trend 
follows approximately a r-n shape, with n ≅ 2. We must say that these results are very 
preliminary, since a higher statistics and a careful analysis of the influence of any shield 
above  the  counters  are  required.  Moreover,  this  arrangement  allows  to  also  have 
coincidences  due  to  single  nearly  horizontal  particles,  which  pass  through  both 
detectors.  Even  if  very  rare,  such  events  could  alter  the  effective  coincidence  rate, 
particularly  at  large  distances.  A  possible  solution  could  be  putting  a  third  detector 
above one of the two counters and selecting triple coincidences: in this way we could be 
confident  that  the  coincidences  are  given  by  two  different  particles,  since  a  single 
particle cannot pass through all three detectors. 

A  lot  of  other  educational  experiments  may  be  performed;  however  these  few 
examples certainly provide enough evidence to show the potential of using coincidence 
techniques in experiments involving high-school students. 

4. —  Conclusions 
 

It  has  been  shown  that  cosmic  ray  experiments  are  a  powerful  means  of  guiding 
high  school  teams  in  educational  projects  related  to  nuclear  and  high  energy  physics: 
while performing experiments concerning the detection of cosmic ray, students have the 
possibility  to  get  used  to  detection  techniques,  data  analysis  methods,  simulation 
procedures and so on. This idea is also supported by the fact that several properties of 
the  cosmic  radiation  may  be  investigated  even  by  the  use  of  simple  and  inexpensive 
experimental apparatus, whose cost and use may be entirely managed by a high school. 
In this paper we have discussed the possibility to carry out several investigations by the 
use of small Geiger counters: in spite of the simplicity of the entire experimental set-up, 
we  have  been  able  to  carry  out  both  inclusive  and  coincidence  measurements  and  we 
have  successfully  analyzed  several  aspects  of  the  cosmic  radiation,  such  as  the 
anticorrelation with the atmospheric pressure, the analysis of small time variations, the 
angular dependences of the flux and the decoherence curve. Even if such studies should 
be  improved  in  several  respects,  they  represent  anyway  good  examples  of  possible 
educational activities. The positive outcome of such investigations strengthens the idea 
of  a  more  intense  collaboration  between    university  and  research  centres  and  the  high 
school community, in order to introduce students to the world of scientific research. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] B. Famoso and F. Riggi, Report INFN/AE-04/01. 
[2] See     the     Web     site     of     the     Cosmic     Ray     Educational     Observatory,  
      http://www.ct.infn.it/rivel/cosmic.html. 
[3] PASCO Science Workshop Probeware, http://www.pasco.com. 
[4] B. Famoso, P. La Rocca and F. Riggi, Report INFN/AE-04/13. 
[5] B. Famoso, P. La Rocca and F. Riggi, Phys. Education,  40 (2005) 461. 
[6] P. La Rocca and F. Riggi, Report INFN/AE-05/02. 
[7] P. La Rocca and F. Riggi, Report INFN/AE-04/14. 
[8] F. Fichera, P. La Rocca, F. Librizzi and F. Riggi, Report INFN/AE-05/07 
 

 

 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.  —  Sketch of the connections employing the PASCO on-line system, including 
digital  and  analog  sensors.  A  home-made  coincidence  box  providing  digital  signals, 
compatible with those expected  from the PASCO interface, is also shown. 

 

Fig.  2.    —    Correlogram  analysis  of  the  time  series  of  the  atmospheric  pressure, 
measured  in  short  time  intervals.  A  periodicity  of  24  hours  is  easily  seen  in  the 
correlogram plot. 

 

Fig. 3.  —  Correlation plot of the daily averages of pressure (in mm Hg) and counting 
rate (counts/30 minutes) from a Geiger, for the overall data (100 days, upper), and for 
the first and second part of the measurement period (middle and lower respectively). 

 

Fig. 4.  —  Daily analysis of the cosmic counting rate with a Geiger counter. The ratio 
between  the  mean  hourly  flux  in  a  given  time  interval  (12  h)  and  the  corresponding 
mean flux in the rest of the day is shown, as a function of the centroid of time interval 
along the day. 

 

 
Fig.  5.    —    Angular  distribution  of  cosmics,  measured  by  a  telescope  of  two  small 
Geiger counters, placed 10 cm apart. Data are reported as a function of cos2θ to show 
their approximate linear trend. Solid line is a weighted fit to the data. 

Fig.  6.    —    (Left):  Distribution  of  the  polar  angles  for  cosmics  traversing  two  Geiger 
counters of finite size, placed 10 cm apart, at a nominal angle θ = 40°. (Right): Effective 
angle  subtended  by  two  Geiger  counters,  as  a  function  of  the  nominal  angle  of  the 
telescope. 

 

Fig. 7.  —  Decoherence curve (coincidence rate between the two horizontal counters as 
a function of their separation r) measured with two small Geiger counters. The dashed 
line gives an inverse square dependence 1/r2. 
 

 

