Parallel MRI at ultra-low fields

Vadim S. Zotev1*, Petr L. Volegov1, Andrei N. Matlachov1, Michelle A. Espy1, John C. Mosher1,
and Robert H. Kraus, Jr1.

Parallel imaging techniques have been widely used to acceler-
ate image acquisition in high-field MRI. Magnetic resonance
imaging at ultra-low fields (ULF MRI) is a new imaging ap-
proach that uses SQUID (superconducting quantum interfer-
ence device) sensors to detect spatially encoded precession of
pre-polarized nuclear spin population at microtesla measure-
ment fields. In this work, a seven-channel SQUID system is
used to study parallel
imaging at ultra-low fields. Fully en-
coded multi-channel 2D images of a water-based phantom and
of a human hand are acquired at 46 microtesla measurement
field. Various degrees of undersampling, characterized by the
reduction factor R, are introduced by excluding increasing
numbers of phase encoding lines from the experimental data.
Aliased images are unfolded using 1D SENSE (sensitivity en-
coding) method with experimentally determined seven-channel
sensitivity maps. In the case of the phantom, good-quality im-
ages are reconstructed for R values as high as 3. It is argued
that higher accelerations can be achieved with 2D SENSE. For
the human hand, the maximum practical value of R is 2, be-
cause of the lower signal-to-noise ratio. These results demon-
strate that parallel imaging methods can be efficiently used in
ULF MRI, provided that the system’s signal-to-noise ratio is
sufficiently high.

Key words: parallel MRI, ULF MRI, SENSE, SQUID, MEG

Parallel magnetic resonance imaging is based on simultane-
ous acquisition of magnetic resonance signals with multiple
receiver coils, characterized by distinct spatial sensitivities.
The spatial encoding effect of multiple coils is independent
of the gradient encoding mechanism of conventional Fou-
rier MRI, which relies on temporal characteristics (fre-
quency and phase) of spin precession to store image
information. This effect is used in parallel MRI to perform
some portion of encoding normally done with the gradients,
and thus reduce imaging time.

take

into account

Accelerated image acquisition in parallel MRI involves
undersampling along the phase encoding direction(s),
which, in conventional Fourier imaging, would lead to re-
duced field of view (FOV) and aliasing. Parallel MRI re-
construction methods
spatial
sensitivities to obtain a correct full-FOV image from the
undersampled data acquired by multiple channels. Based on
data representation during the reconstruction, these methods
can be divided into k-space, image-domain, and hybrid ap-
proaches. The k-space techniques, such as SMASH (1), use
information about coil sensitivities to recreate k-space
phase encoding lines, omitted due to undersampling, and
thus prevent aliasing in the reconstructed image. In the im-
age-domain approach, represented by the SENSE method in

coil

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM

*Correspondence to: Vadim S. Zotev, Los Alamos National Laboratory,
Group of Applied Modern Physics, MS D454, Los Alamos, NM 87545,
USA. Phone: (505)665-8460, Fax: (505)665-4507, E-mail:
vzotev@lanl.gov

its Cartesian formulation (2), a full-FOV image is recon-
structed by unfolding reduced-FOV aliased images from the
individual channels using the coils’ sensitivity maps. The
hybrid techniques, such as non-Cartesian SENSE (3), com-
bine k-space and image-domain reconstruction steps. All
parallel MRI methods can be formulated and compared
within the same theoretical framework (4,5). Imaging accel-
eration in parallel MRI is accompanied by reduction in sig-
nal-to-noise ratio (SNR).

Parallel imaging techniques have proved essential in MRI
applications requiring high temporal resolution, such as car-
diovascular MRI (6) and functional MRI of the human brain
(7). Acceleration factors as high as 16 have been reported
(8). Further imaging speedup is achieved in the recently
proposed dynamic magnetic resonance inverse imaging (MR
InI) method (9). This method generalizes parallel MRI by
combining it with the inverse-problem source localization
used in magnetoencephalography (MEG) (10). With a large
MEG-style detector array, it allows imaging without phase
encoding and can provide temporal resolution in the milli-
second range at the expense of some reduction in spatial
resolution (9).

Until present, parallel imaging methods have been applied
in high-field MRI with measurement fields of ≥1.5 T. Mag-
netic resonance imaging at ultra-low fields (ULF MRI),
which uses measurement fields in the microtesla range (11-
14), is a promising new imaging approach and possible al-
ternative to high-field MRI. In this method, nuclear spin
population is pre-polarized (15) by a relatively low (usually
≤300 mT) magnetic field, and spin precession is detected at
an ultra-low (typically ≤150 µT) measurement field after the
pre-polarizing field is removed (11-14). The ULF MRI sig-
nals are measured by superconducting quantum interference
device (SQUID) sensors with untuned input circuit (11-
that act as frequency-independent flux-to-voltage
14,16),
converters. High sensitivity of SQUIDs partially compen-
sates for MRI signal reduction due to relatively low sample
pre-polarization.

Magnetic resonance imaging at ultra-low fields has several
advantages over conventional high-field MRI. Spatial reso-
lution of MRI
is ultimately determined by the NMR
linewidth, which, in turn, depends on absolute field inho-
mogeneity. Because ultra-low fields of modest relative ho-
mogeneity are highly homogeneous on the absolute scale,
very narrow NMR lines with high signal-to-noise ratio are
achieved (17,18). Thus, measurement field and encoding
gradients for ULF MRI can be produced by simple and in-
expensive coil systems. Advantages of ULF MRI also in-
clude minimized susceptibility artifacts (17), enhanced T1
contrast (19), and possibility of imaging in the presence of
metal (20,21). The major drawback of ULF MRI in com-
parison with high-field imaging is its reduced SNR, which,

however, can be improved through the use of stronger pre-
polarizing fields.

Perhaps the most attractive property of ULF MRI is its
compatibility with SQUID-based techniques for biomag-
netic measurements (14). It has been shown that ULF NMR
signals from the human brain can be acquired simultane-
ously with MEG signals using the same SQUID sensor
(22). Compatibility of ULF NMR with such techniques as
magnetocardiography (MCG)
and magnetomyography
(MMG) has also been demonstrated (23). Combining MEG
and ULF MRI capabilities in a multi-channel SQUID sys-
tem is particularly promising, because it will allow simulta-
neous
(ULF MRI)
imaging of the human brain. Development of such systems
is currently under way (24,25).

(MEG) and anatomical

functional

Many imaging techniques developed in conventional
high-field MRI can be applied in ULF MRI as well. Parallel
imaging is particularly interesting in this respect, because
MEG systems traditionally use large arrays of SQUID sen-
sors. Thus, both well established (such as SENSE) and
newly developed (such as MR InI) parallel MRI methods
can be readily implemented to accelerate imaging at ultra-
low fields.

In this work, the first study of parallel MRI at ultra-low
fields is reported. The new seven-channel SQUID system
(24), specially designed for both MEG and ULF MRI, is
used to acquire fully encoded 2D images of a large water-
based phantom and of a human hand. Experimental k-space
data are then undersampled and resulting aliased images are
unfolded using SENSE (2).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

As mentioned above, relaxed requirements on relative ho-
mogeneity of the measurement field in ULF MRI make it
possible to build open-type ULF MRI systems of reduced
cost and complexity. An example of such a system for 2D
Fourier imaging, designed to be compatible with MEG (24),
is presented in Fig. 1. The system includes four sets of
coils. The ultra-low measurement field Bm along the Z axis
is created by a pair of round 120 cm Helmholtz coils. Two
80 cm square Maxwell coils provide the longitudinal gradi-
ent Gz=dBz/dz. The transverse gradient Gx=dBz/dx is pro-
duced by a specially designed set of eight rectangular coils
on two parallel 48 cm x 96 cm frames. A quasi-Helmholtz
pair of thick round coils with 25 cm diameter and 23 cm
spacing generates the millitesla-range pre-polarizing field
Bp perpendicular to the measurement field Bm. Despite its
compact size, the coil system provides easy inside access,
and allows imaging of large objects such as a human head.

The detector array of the new system consists of seven ax-
ial second-order gradiometers with SQUID sensors installed
inside a liquid helium dewar (24). The gradiometers have
37 mm diameter and 60 mm baseline. They are positioned
in parallel (one in the middle and six others surrounding it
in a circle) with 45 mm separations between nearby coil
centers. The system of seven gradiometers was designed to
be suitable for both MEG and ULF MRI measurements.
Because SQUID sensors are detectors of magnetic flux
(with typical flux noise of a few µΦ0/√Hz), an increase in

FIG. 1. Schematic of the 7-channel system for 2D ULF MRI.

the pick-up coil diameter improves magnetic field resolu-
tion, but reduces the coil’s efficiency in localization of mag-
netic sources. The gradiometers of 37 mm diameter
(compared to 10-15 mm in commercial MEG instruments)
improve the system’s ULF MRI performance, while largely
preserving its capability to localize MEG activity. The chan-
nels’ magnetic field noise spectral densities are ~1.2 fT/√Hz
at 1 kHz for the central channel (Ch 1), and 2.5-2.8 fT/√Hz
at 1 kHz for the surrounding channels due to the dewar
noise. The noise spectra remain essentially flat down to ~3
Hz. The system is operated inside a two-layer magnetically
shielded room. Technical details of the system’s design and
performance have been described elsewhere (24).

As a preliminary step to the study of parallel reconstruc-
tion, we obtained 2D full-FOV images of two objects: a
large water-based phantom (Fig. 2, left) and a human hand
(Fig. 2, right). Both objects were ~140 mm wide. The phan-
tom geometry was chosen to follow the symmetry of the
measurement system. The holes in the plastic base had 10
mm diameter and 25 mm depth. They were arranged with
22.5 mm distances between their centers in such a way that
each of the seven channels had the same pattern of holes
immediately under it (Fig. 2). The holes were filled with tap
* ~
water with experimentally determined relaxation time T2
* for the human hand was
2.8 s. The mean relaxation time T2
measured to be ~120 ms.

ULF MRI experiments were performed at the measure-
ment field Bm ~ 46 µT, corresponding to the proton Larmor
frequency of ~1950 Hz. The objects were pre-polarized in
Bp = 10 mT field, which was then removed non-adiabatically
(in less than 0.5 ms), inducing precession of nuclear spins in
the measurement field Bm. Conventional 2D gradient-echo
sequence was used, with spin-echo signal created by reversal
of the frequency encoding gradient Gx.

In the case of the phantom, the imaging sequence had the
following parameters. The phantom was pre-polarized for 2
s. Spin precession was encoded by the two gradients for 0.25
s, and the spin-echo signal was acquired for 0.5 s. The fre-
quency encoding gradient Gx assumed ±23.5 µT/m (±10
Hz/cm) values. The phase encoding gradient Gz was

2

FIG. 2. Objects for imaging: a phantom and a human hand.

FIG. 3. Combined sensitivity map of the seven channels.

changed in 0.49 µT/m (0.21 Hz/cm) steps, and had the lim-
iting values of ±23.5 µT/m (±10 Hz/cm). This procedure
provided 2 mm by 2 mm resolution. The mean single-
measurement SNR (defined as a ratio of rms signal to rms
noise) of the gradient-echo signal with Gz=0, acquired by
Channel 1, was 0.97. This parameter equaled 0.13 for
Gz=10 Hz/cm. Because of 2 s pre-polarization, a single k-
space scan required 4.8 minutes. The image acquisition
involved averaging 100 measured gradient-echo signals at
every phase encoding step and took 8 hours.

In the case of the hand imaging, the gradient-echo se-
quence had shorter times and stronger gradients (24). The
hand was pre-polarized for 0.5 s. The encoding and acquisi-
tion times were 40 ms and 80 ms, respectively. The Gx and
Gz gradients had the same limiting values of ±94 µT/m (±40
Hz/cm). The phase encoding gradient Gz varied with 4.9
µT/m (2.1 Hz/cm) step. The imaging resolution was 3 mm
by 3 mm. The mean single-measurement SNR of the gradi-
ent-echo signal from Channel 1 was 0.89 for Gz=0 and 0.07
for Gz=40 Hz/cm. Because 200 gradient-echo signals were
measured and averaged for each value of the phase encod-
ing gradient, the total acquisition time was 2 hours (24).

For the purpose of parallel image reconstruction, a seven-
channel sensitivity map was acquired after each of the de-
scribed experiments. This was done by imaging a large (23
cm diameter) uniform phantom with the same relaxation
time as that of the studied object. The same imaging proce-
dure as in the main experiment was used except for larger
FOV and lower (~1 cm) resolution along the phase encod-
ing direction. A combined sensitivity map, obtained as a
square root of the sum of squares of interpolated images
from the seven individual channels, is exhibited in Fig. 3. In
addition to the channel sensitivities, it reflects spatial varia-
tions of the Bp field strength.

After the full-FOV images of the objects in Fig. 2 and the
corresponding sensitivity maps had been acquired, various
degrees of undersampling were introduced by excluding
increasing numbers of phase encoding lines from the ex-
perimental data sets. Non-aliased images were then recon-
structed using SENSE method. In the simplest case of 2D
Fourier imaging, this method (1D SENSE) works as fol-
lows (2). To reduce scan time, the number of phase encod-
ing steps is reduced by factor R. This is done by increasing

the spacing between the phase encoding lines in k-space
while preserving the limiting k values. The spatial resolution
is thus unchanged, but the imaging field of view along the
phase encoding direction is reduced by the factor R, which
causes aliasing. This means that the image signal at an ali-
ased pixel within the reduced FOV is a superposition of up
to R signals corresponding to equidistant pixels in the full
FOV. The SENSE image reconstruction from the undersam-
pled data is performed in two steps. First, aliased images
from individual detector coils are obtained via the discrete
Fourier transform. Second, a non-aliased full-FOV image is
reconstructed from the individual images using full-FOV
sensitivity maps for all the coils. Because different coils in
an array have different local sensitivities, the superposition
of R signals due to aliasing occurs with different weights for
different coils (2), and can be undone by means of linear
algebra if the number of coils is greater than R. This allows
unfolding of the aliased images. Results of SENSE recon-
struction are presented in the next section.

RESULTS

for

images

degrees

different

seven-channel

Results of the phantom imaging and SENSE image recon-
struction are exhibited in Fig. 4. The top row shows compos-
ite
of
undersampling, characterized by the reduction factor R. The
images demonstrate how the R-fold imaging acceleration is
accompanied by the R-fold reduction in FOV and aliasing.
The bottom row in Fig. 4 contains corresponding full-FOV
images reconstructed by unfolding the aliased images via
SENSE method (2). The frequency and phase encoding di-
rections (X and Z axes in Fig. 1) are the horizontal and ver-
tical directions in Fig. 4, respectively.

The images in Fig. 4 were obtained as follows. Fully en-
coded k-space data sets of 97 phase encoding lines, corre-
sponding to the full imaging FOV along the phase encoding
direction, were acquired with the seven channels according
to the experimental procedure, described in the previous
section. Undersampled data sets were generated from each
through selection of
channel’s original
2[48/R]+1 phase encoding lines with spacing increased by
the factor R. An image from each channel was reconstructed
by 2D Fourier transform. Each composite image was com-
puted as a square root of the sum of squares of images from

k-space data

3

FIG. 4. Unfolding of the aliased phantom images via SENSE method. R is the acceleration factor.

the seven individual channels. Unfolding of the reduced-
FOV images was performed using the standard Cartesian
SENSE algorithm (2). The channels’ sensitivity maps were
determined experimentally as explained in the previous
section. A mask with known phantom outline was applied
to all SENSE-reconstructed images. All the images in Fig.
4, obtained with 2 mm by 2 mm resolution, were subjected
to fine-mesh bi-cubic interpolation.

According to Fig. 4, the SENSE reconstruction produces
nearly perfect images for R=1,2, and 3. The image with
R=4, however, exhibits distinct ghosting, and reconstruction
quality further deteriorates at the higher values of R. This
effect can be characterized by the geometry factor (2).
When SENSE method is used instead of full Fourier encod-
ing, the SNR changes by factor 1/(g√R). Here, √R results
from the R-fold reduction in acquisition time, and the ge-
ometry factor g≥1 varies from pixel to pixel, describing
local noise amplification (2). In this work, the geometry
factor is computed in the standard way (2) from the coils’
sensitivity maps with the assumption that there is no noise
correlation among the coils. For R=2, the average ga and
maximum gm values of the geometry factor are 1.03 and
2.06, respectively. For R=3, the corresponding numbers are
ga=1.07 and gm=2.09. These values increase to ga=1.91 and
gm=23.0 for R=4. This drastic increase in the maximum
geometry factor indicates that the SENSE reconstruction
becomes increasingly unstable at R≥4, suggesting that the
spatial
information provided by the sensor array is no
longer sufficient for unfolding of the aliased images. This is
not surprising, because the system’s channels form a two-

dimensional pattern and have substantially localized sensi-
tivities (Fig. 3). As a result, any straight line parallel to the
phase encoding direction (Z axis) crosses essential sensitiv-
ity regions of at most three coils, and only those coils make
significant contributions to 1D SENSE reconstruction. Grid-
type arrays are known to provide lower acceleration factors
in the case of 1D undersampling than linear arrays with the
same number of elements (26). This limitation would not
exist in 3D Fourier MRI with two phase encoding directions.
Sensitivity encoding in that case could be performed in two
spatial dimensions (2D SENSE) (27) with the total reduction
factor R being a product of two independently chosen factors
(for example, 3x2=6). The fact that the sensitivity maps
were acquired with rather coarse (~1 cm) resolution along
the phase encoding direction might have also contributed to
the image quality deterioration at R≥4.

Fig. 5 illustrates the opposite effects of signal averaging
and accelerated acquisition on the overall image quality. In
the present work, multiple gradient-echo signals are meas-
ured and averaged at every phase encoding step. Thus, the
parallel imaging SNR is proportional to √(Na/R), where Na is
the number of averaged signals. The results in Fig. 4 were
obtained with Na=100 to ensure that image distortions re-
main clearly visible as R increases. The images in Fig. 5
were reconstructed after averaging only 10 or 2 raw signals.
The mean SNR levels were determined in the images’ cen-
tral regions (inside circles with 35 mm radius centered at 0).
In the case of Na=10, the SNR levels for R=1 and R=4 were
9.8 and 5.4, respectively. For Na=2, the corresponding SNR
values were 5.5 and 3.0.

4

yields similar results. Only in systems with intrinsically high
SNR, where little or no averaging is required, can parallel
MRI methods lead to real imaging speedup. In Fig. 5, the
image with R=4 and Na=2 (lower right) is the only image
with true acceleration, because it could be obtained in half
the time needed for acquisition of a fully encoded image
without averaging. Its quality, however, is hardly satisfac-
tory.

Results of the SENSE reconstruction of the human hand
images are presented in Fig. 6. Data analysis was performed
the same way as in the case of the phantom. Undersampled
k-space data sets with R=2 were obtained from the seven
channels’ fully encoded k-space data sets by skipping every
other phase encoding line. The aliased images were unfolded
using the standard 1D SENSE method (2). As before, each
composite image was calculated as a square root of the sum
of squares of images from the seven individual channels. A
mask with known convex outline of the hand was used to
improve appearance of the SENSE-reconstructed images.
All the images in Fig. 6 were additionally interpolated.

Fig. 6 demonstrates feasibility of human-subject parallel
MRI at ultra-low fields. The imaging SNR, however, is sig-
nificantly lower than in the case of the water-based phan-
tom. Despite the fact that Na=200 gradient-echo signals were
averaged at every phase encoding step, the full-FOV com-
posite image (upper left in Fig. 6) still exhibits visible ran-
dom noise. It is the increase in the noise level that made the
use of reduction factors beyond R=2 impractical. Neverthe-
less, the aliased image was unfolded successfully, as evi-
denced by the unchanged positions of the joints (dark
elongated spots) in the SENSE-reconstructed images with
R=1 and R=2.

FIG. 5. Image quality for different numbers of raw
signals averaged prior to image reconstruction.

Fig. 5 shows that the SENSE-reconstructed image with
R=4 (upper right) and the sensitivity-corrected fully en-
coded (R=1) image with the number of averaged signals
reduced by a factor of 5 (lower left) have essentially the
same SNR levels (5.4 and 5.5, respectively). Thus, parallel
imaging methods provide no real acceleration in ULF MRI
systems with SNR enhanced by extensive averaging: simple
reduction in the degree of averaging for fully encoded data

FIG. 6. SENSE reconstruction of the human hand images.

5

CONCLUSIONS

We have used the new seven-channel SQUID system, de-
signed for both MEG and ULF MRI, to experimentally
demonstrate parallel MRI at ultra-low fields. It is shown
that the system’s detector array configuration allows 1D
SENSE reconstruction of aliased 2D images with reduction
factors as high as R=3. Higher reduction factors can be
achieved in 3D Fourier imaging by using 2D SENSE
method. However, parallel reconstruction capability is not
equivalent to actual imaging acceleration. Only in ULF
MRI systems with high SNR, that allow high-quality imag-
ing without signal averaging, can parallel MRI methods
provide real imaging speedup. The human hand images,
reported in this work, suggest that the SNR of the present
system should be enhanced by an order of magnitude to
satisfy this requirement. This can be achieved through the
corresponding increase in the strength of the pre-polarizing
field.

REFERENCES

1. Sodickson DK, Manning WJ. Simultaneous acquisition of spatial har-
monics (SMASH): fast imaging with radiofrequency coil arrays. Magn
Reson Med 1997;38:591-603.
2. Pruessmann KP, Weiger M, Scheidegger MB, Boesiger P. SENSE:
sensitivity encoding for fast MRI. Magn Reson Med 1999;42:952-962.
3. Pruessmann KP, Weiger M, Bornert P, Boesiger P. Advances in sensi-
tivity encoding with arbitrary k-space trajectories. Magn Reson Med
2001;46:638-651.
4. Sodickson DK, McKenzie CA. A generalized approach to parallel mag-
netic resonance imaging. Med Phys 2001;28:1629-1643.
5. Pruessmann KP. Encoding and reconstruction in parallel MRI. NMR
Biomed 2006;19:288-299.
6. Niendorf T, Sodickson DK. Parallel imaging in cardiovascular MRI:
methods and applications. NMR Biomed 2006;19:325-341.
7. de Zwart JA, van Gelderen P, Golay X, Ikonomidou VN, Duyn JH.
Accelerated parallel imaging for functional imaging of the human brain.
NMR Biomed 2006;19:342-351.
8. Zhu Y, Hardy CJ, Sodickson DK, Giaquinto RO, Dumoulin CL, Ken-
wood G, Niendorf T, Lejay H, McKenzie CA, Ohliger MA, Rofsky NM.
Highly parallel volumetric imaging with a 32-element RF coil array. Magn
Reson Med 2004;52:869-877.
9. Lin FH, Wald LL, Ahlfors SP, Hämäläinen MS, Kwong KK, Belliveau
JW. Dynamic magnetic resonance inverse imaging of human brain func-
tion. Magn Reson Med 2006;56:787-802.
10. Hämäläinen M, Hari R, Ilmoniemi R, Knuutila J, Lounasmaa O. Mag-
netoencephalography – theory, instrumentation, and application to non-
invasive studies of the working human brain. Rev Mod Phys 1993;65:413-
497.
11. McDermott R, Lee SK, ten Haken B, Trabesinger AH, Pines A, Clarke
J. Microtesla MRI with a superconducting quantum interference device.
Proc Nat Acad Sci 2004;101:7857-7861.
12. McDermott R, Kelso N, Lee SK, Mößle M, Mück M, Myers W, ten
Haken B, Seton HC, Trabesinger AH, Pines A, Clarke J. SQUID-detected
magnetic resonance imaging in microtesla magnetic fields. J Low Temp
Phys 2004;135:793-821.
13. Mößle M, Myers WR, Lee SK, Kelso N, Hatridge M, Pines A, Clarke
J. SQUID-detected in vivo MRI at microtesla magnetic fields. IEEE Trans
Appl Superconduct 2005;15:757-760.
14. Clarke J, McDermott R, Pines A, Trabesinger AH. SQUID detected
NMR and MRI at ultralow fields. U.S. Patent 6,885,192.
15. Macovski A, Conolly S. Novel approaches to low cost MRI. Magn
Reson Med 1993;30:221-230.
16. Greenberg YS. Application of superconducting quantum interference
devices to nuclear magnetic resonance. Rev Mod Phys 1998;70:175-222.
17. McDermott R, Trabesinger AH, Mück M, Hahn EL, Pines A, Clarke J.
Liquid-state NMR and scalar couplings in microtesla magnetic fields.
Science 2002;295:2247-2249.

18. Burghoff M, Hartwig S, Trahms L. Nuclear magnetic resonance in the
nanotesla range. Appl Phys Lett 2005;87:054103.
19. Lee SK, Mößle M, Myers W, Kelso N, Trabesinger AH, Pines A,
Clarke J. SQUID-detected MRI at 132 µT with T1-weighted contrast estab-
lished at 10 µT-300 mT. Magn Reson Med 2005;53:9-14.
20. Matlachov AN, Volegov PL, Espy MA, George JS, Kraus RH. SQUID
detected NMR in microtesla magnetic fields. J Magn Reson 2004;170:1-7.
21. Mößle M, Han SI, Myers WR, Lee SK, Kelso N, Hatridge M, Pines A,
Clarke J. SQUID-detected microtesla MRI in the presence of metal. J Magn
Reson 2006;179:146-151.
22. Volegov P, Matlachov AN, Espy MA, George JS, Kraus RH. Simulta-
neous magnetoencephalography and SQUID detected nuclear MR in micro-
tesla magnetic fields. Magn Reson Med 2004;52:467-470.
23. Espy MA, Matlachov AN, Volegov PL, Mosher JC, Kraus RH.
SQUID-based simultaneous detection of NMR and biomagnetic signals at
ultra-low magnetic fields. IEEE Trans Appl Superconduct 2005;15:635-
639.
24. Zotev VS, Matlachov AN, Volegov PL, Sandin HJ, Espy MA, Mosher
JC, Urbaitis AV, Newman SG, Kraus RH. Multi-channel SQUID system
for MEG and ultra-low-field MRI. IEEE Trans Appl Superconduct (in
press, preprint physics/0611290).
25. Thiel F, Hartwig S, Trahms L, Burghoff M, Vorwerk A, Orglmeister R.
Adaptation of a 304-channel MEG system to low field nuclear magnetic
resonance. Presented at Biomag 2006, Vancouver, Canada, August 20-26,
2006.
26. Ohliger MA, Sodickson DK. An introduction to coil array design for
parallel MRI. NMR Biomed 2006;19:300-315.
27. Weiger M, Pruessmann KP, Boesiger P. 2D SENSE for faster 3D MRI.
Magn Reson Mater Phys Biol Med 2001;14:10-19.

6

