Nyaya-Vaisheshika: The Indian Tradition of Physics 
 

Roopa Hulikal Narayan 

 
1 Introduction 
 
This paper is the first in a series on the Indian tradition of physics that while summarizing 
the earlier review by Kak [1], [2] will set the stage for a more comprehensive analysis to 
follow in later papers. In ancient India, the schools of Nyaya and Vaisheshika focused on 
logic and atomic approach to matter. In this paper, the idea of atomicity and other 
physical ideas given in Vaisheshika are reviewed in light of the central role the observer 
plays in Indian thought. We provide introduction to ideas that are described in greater 
detail in Potter’s text [10], where the focus is not on physical ideas but rather on 
philosophy. 
 
The Rigveda, the oldest of the Vedic texts of India, generally assigned to the early second 
millennium BC or earlier, is seen within the Indian tradition as the source of its approach 
to reality. The Vedic sages recognized a binding unity among all that constitutes this 
universe. They made an attempt to reflect this pattern of interdependence among the 
entities of the universe including the very structure of universe itself. This may be seen in 
the structure and symbolic purpose of Vedic altars, approach to language, and so on 
[3],[4],[5]. The observer or the experiencing subject was given a privileged state in 
physical thought [6-10].  
 
By the end of nineteenth century, the place of the observer also became a part of the 
mainstream discourse of academic physics and psychology in the consideration of the 
dichotomous issues of order and disorder.  The second law of thermodynamics stood for 
the principle of increasing disorder in physics, whereas in biology, the theory of 
evolution is a principle of ever-increasing order and organization [6, page 50]. 
 

Parallels to this dichotomy occur in Indian thought:  the self tends toward order whereas 
the atoms of the body it resides in and the mind it possesses tend toward disorder. But in 
the analysis of Indian writings we face the problem that its terminology is not always 
clear in commentaries. One of the tasks of the paper is to clarify the basic terminology 
used in the Indian physics tradition. 
 
2 Nyaya-Vaisheshika 
 
It is generally accepted [1],[10] that the origin of the Indian physical thought is in the Rig 
Veda where the order of nature is expressed as Rta. This Rta encompasses the laws of 
universe which are otherwise unexplainable unless an initial cause of universe is 
identified. The ability of consciousness to comprehend these laws is also in the purview 
of Rta. Kanada, one of the primary architects of Vaisheshika, states “I shall enumerate 
everything that has a character of being [1]”.  
 

 

1 

Vasheshika analyzes material particles through two independent means of knowledge, 
which are recognized as Perception and Inference. The dependence on these two means 
alone is evident from the fact that the Vaisheshika accepts the authority of the Vedas 
based on inference alone [1].  The same principle of inference is added as a prelude to the 
inference of the self as the basis of cognitive states. 
 
In India, objective science and the science of the self, go hand-in–hand. The Nyaya 
School as the discipline of logical inference complements Vaisheshika, and the two are 
often called as Nyaya-Vaisheshika. 
 
3 Brief introductions to their Sciences  
 
3.1 The Philosophers and their philosophy 
 
All thought systems evolve with time, and the philosophy of Vaisheshika is no exception 
to this rule. The two primary philosophers of interest to us are Kanada and Prashastapada, 
because their contributions have been remarkably significant.  
 
Kanada, one of the early philosophers of Vaisheshika, is known for his atomic view of 
the world. He uses the term ‘Vishesha’ to mean particularity of an atom and also in the 
sense of ‘Antya Vishesha’ meaning the ‘final individuator’ the ultimate individuality of 
each atom which individuates it from all else. This is a unique feature of this school and 
hence the term vishesha in its adjective form ‘Vaisheshika’ is the name of this school. 
 
Prashastapada, who came centuries after Kanada, describes the dissolution of earth, 
water, air and fire in terms of its atomic constituents that excludes space since its nature 
is taken to be non-atomic. The conjoining and disjoining of atoms is described as a 
natural property of atoms but Prashastapada includes a higher will (or order) as the 
guiding principle of universal dissolution which over-rides the natural karma (motion) of 
atoms [8, page 65].  
 

The cosmological cycle of creation and dissolution at an atomic level and the breakdown 
of all natural properties of atoms at such a time of dissolution until the process of creation 
is re-begun when such natural properties hold good once again is a remarkable insight. 
Initially atoms were described to conjoin and disjoin resulting in creation and dissolution 
of new substances which is because of the karma (laws) [8, page 65]. 
 
3.2. Inference 
 
3.2. 1 Definition and Classification 
 
Knowledge begins with cognition through two valid means of knowledge, namely 
Perception and Inference. Perception is when the sensory organs come in contact with 
some recognizable property of a substance like color of an object. Inference is the method 
of reasoning. It has a sub-classification of Drshta -what can be observed and, Adrshta – 
what cannot be observed.  

 

2 

 
Adrshta encompasses all that cannot be explained [7]. Although the inability to explain 
Adrshta is admitted, its significance is not under estimated. Absence of Adrishta will 
result in no contact between the body and self and hence result in collapse of cognition. 
Adrshta seems to be rejected by Nyaya. Kanada makes extensive use of this notion to 
explain magnetic attraction, initial motion of atoms, falling downwards [10].        
   
 
3.2. 2 a Priori Inference 
 
Primarily in the early periods a priori inference was preferred for empirical observations. 
The a priori inference can be described as: 
 
Thinking is a property. 
A property can reside in a substance alone. 
Therefore thinking must be attributed to a substance. 
There is no other known substance with thinking as its property. 
By elimination, a new substance with thinking as its property must exist [10, page 56]. 
 
 
3.2. 3 Observational Inference 
 
Prashastapada who focused on empirical inference redefines inference as observational. It 
is at two levels as Drishta - the observed, and Samanyato drishta – the generally 
observed. Observational inference is illustrated as follows: 
 
Dewlap exists only in cow. 
Dewlap is observed in an animal. 
Observed dewlap is associated with memory information. 
Inference about the observed object is drawn.  
Therefore the animal is recognized as cow alone [10, page 66]. 
 
Here Prashastapada mentions that the Self has to contact the mind before drawing the 
final conclusion. A clear parallel can be seen between his method of comparing the 
unknown object and partly observed object in question with a recollection, to his idea of 
Self contacting the mind in the final step of inference. Self is the completely known and 
observed in the physical sense which should contact the mind/manas whose existence is 
known through memory of previous interactions with the same mind. The external 
process of observation is mirrored in the internal process of understanding. An entire 
section is dedicated for the establishment of the concept of self expressed as “I”. 
 
An illustration for Samanyato drishta – The Generally Observed: 
 
As the name suggests this includes substances generally observed like air, which cannot 
be seen but is inferred through its commonly known properties. 
 

 

3 

Air possesses touch. 
Touch has the attributes of motion and quality. 
This substance does not inhere in any other known substance. 
Therefore this is a new Substance [10, page 56].  
 
 
A diagrammatic view of cognition is as follows: 
 
 
 
 

                               Cognition 

                                                  ↓ 
Perception ←———————————————→ Inference 

                   ↓   

                                                            Drshta ←——————————→ Adrshta                                                 
                                                                 ↓                           
                                                  —————————             
                                                 ↓                                  ↓      
                                          Observed               Generally Observed 
 
 
3.2. 4 Empirical Inference 
 
The principle of empirical inference is explained as a cause-effect relation or any of its 
derivatives. The process of inference is said to occur in one of the following ways: 
 
An object exists                  ≡  The object of inference exists. 
An object exists                 ≡  The object of inference does not exist. 
An object does not exist    ≡  The object of inference does not exist [7, page 289]. 
 
The inference about a substance can be drawn from both the existence and non-existence 
of the premise.  
 
The Vaisheshika School does not recognize Upamana-analogy and Shabda-verbal 
testimony as ways of acquiring knowledge like the Nyaya School. 
 
4 Atoms – The Anu 
 
4.1 Nature of Atoms 
 
The Vaisheshika sutra about atoms states  
 
That which is existent and has no cause (i.e., an atom) is eternal. It is not perceived but is 
inferred from its effect. [10]. (iv.1.1-5) 
 

 

4 

Atoms are the primordial infinitesimal particles of everything except space or Akasha. To 
a certain extent terms like atom, space, tend to give us the picture of current-day atom or 
space, but there are some differences.  
 
Atoms in Vaisheshika are essentially of four kinds: Earth, Apa- water, Tejas- Fire and 
Vayu-air. These atoms are characterized by their characteristic mass, basic molecular 
structure such as dyad, triad, etc, fluidity (or it’s opposite), viscosity (or its opposite), 
velocity (or quantity of impressed motion- Vega) and other characteristic potential color, 
taste, smell or touch not produced by chemical operation. It is these four kinds of atoms 
involved in all chemical reactions while the space remains unaffected.  
 
4.2 Atomic Combinations 
 
Atoms may conjoin or disjoin in reactions. Conjunction and disjunction: Kanada says 
there are three kinds of conjunction: 
 

a)  Contact produced due to motion of one object and not the other. 
b)  Both may be in motion. 
c)  Contact by actual contact. 

 
Prashastapada explains the last by referring to an example – consider a dyad of earth 
which is in contact with two water atoms which are themselves in contact and form a 
water dyad. Then the earth dyad’s contact with the water dyad is produced by the earth 
dyad’s contacts with the water atoms. It is important to note that while one ubiquitous 
substance like akasha (say) may contact non-ubiquitous substance, two ubiquitous 
substances cannot be in contact since neither is capable of motion. Disjunction is 
considered by the older Vaisheshikas to be a quality which inheres in a pair of substances 
when one has just parted contact with the other [10, page 121-122]. 
 
4.3 Nature of Atomic Combinations  
 
Atoms are invisible though the final substance formed by conjunction of many such 
atoms is visible. Several causes lead to such a multi-conjunction substance. The atoms 
unite in pairs and the unification continues until the visible substance is formed. As long 
as there is no external agent such as heat applied the properties of the atom are reflected 
in the binary structure as well. The atoms combine driven by an inherent tendency which 
is their natural property to form dyads. Although Prashastapada seems to have 
popularized this view of dyads, Kanada’s system maintained a different stand.  
 
Kanada says the atoms conjoin as a result of their inherent tendency, but different atoms 
combine in different patterns. Some in pairs, others in triads, tetrads and so on, which 
may happen in two different ways,  
 
Atoms combine   ≡   basic unit /molecule with two, three or n number of units and not 
                                  two three or n number of dyads where n ≥ 2 
 

 

5 

Further 
Basic unit of n atoms ≡ 1 atom + 1 atom… n atoms where n≥1.             
  
This essentially means 
                                       
                                    A group of n atoms fall together to form one unit. (n≥1)       
 
Prashastapada insists on  
 
Atoms combine   ≡   only to a binary molecule, not triad, tetrad, etc. 
 
Further 
Basic unit of n dyads ≡ 1 dyad + 1 dyad… n dyads where n ≥ 1 
 
These dyad combinations further combine in different proportions to form isomeric 
substances. The inherent properties exhibited by these different substances is a result of 
the collocation process where it may mean quantitative difference or even spatial 
arrangement since it is only ‘paramanu’ generally translated as ‘atom’ which is a point 
energy with zero mass and dimension. Therefore the dyad will have a finite mass and size 
and hence the spatial arrangement too becomes an important qualifier of the properties of 
the final substance to be formed [9]. 
 
This is comparable to the current physics point- of- view of basic particles like electrons, 
protons, bosons, etc that are mere energy clouds which inter-combine in different 
combinations to form all the known matter. The properties of energy when treated as a 
basic unit is a constant, but it is the difference in mere combination in quantity, quality 
and time that qualifies the finally formed substance as ‘The Substance’ with its inherent 
properties. Once the basic unit is formed, further conjunction results from several causes 
other than the basic impulse or nature of the atom. Hence the atom is different from the 
substance. 
 
Prashastapada and Kanada concur on the idea of the above said process of combination of 
the basic unit resulting in the variety of substances which is bound by the laws of 
universe. Therefore an element of consciousness is considered as playing a role in what 
the world appears to be.  
 
4.4 Atomic reactions 
 
A substance may change qualitatively under the influence of heat in its course of 
existence. The Vaisheshika’s stand on such a change is 
 
Substance A          ——application of heat——→   Decomposition in to paramanus or 
                                                                                   the basic unit with zero mass and 
                                                                                   not the unit of dyad, triad, etc. 
                                                                                                 ↓ 
Recombination of paramanus with a new      ←——application of heat 

 

6 

basic unit arrangement and order resulting 
in a new substance. 
 
 
The Vaisheshikas hold that under the influence of heat, substances are broken down to 
the most basic entity (paramanu) before being transformed in to a new substance where 
as the Nyaya school does not believe in decomposition in to the very basic entity. The 
Vaisheshikas believe that in transformation of a substance the basic properties of the 
atoms change and the Naiyayikas disagree [9, page 104-105].This also establishes how 
meticulous the ancient schools and their philosophers were to the very last detail. 
 
Prashastapada gives a specific example for such a reaction. He considers the fertilized 
ovum under the application of the animal heat or the bio-motor energy.  
 

 
                                                                       _____germ                   Both are isomeric                                                                                                               
                                                                      ↑                                           modes of 
Fertilized ovum       ——action of heat—→                                                 Earth 
                                                                      ↓____ sperm substance       
  
                                                                        
The fertilized ovum breaks down in to its constituents which in turn are reduced in to 
homogenous earth atoms. They are homogenous because they essentially belong to the 
same bhuta. These basic atoms of the bhuta earth re-combine under the influence of the 
metabolic heat to form the germ-plasm. The germ-plasm develops enriching itself 
through the nutrients of the body [9].  
 
Germ-plasm      —action of heat—→   germ     —— action  —  
                                                             radicals                           ↓ 
                                                                                         Of         → cells and tissues 
                                                                                                    ↑  
Food substance —action of heat—→    food     ——   heat   —   
                                                  constituent radicals                                 
 
As can be seen at each stage heat breaks down germ-plasm in to constituent atoms which 
combine with the constituent atoms of food and all these basic atoms will re-combine to 
form the cells and tissues. All along heat is a necessary element. 
 
5. Hetero-Bhautic compounds in action: 
 
The Naiyayikas and Vaisheshikas agree on how atoms of different bhutas, i.e. atoms of 
earth, water, air and fire interact when in contact under the stress of heat. Heat alone is 
seen as insufficient in many such hetero-bhautic reactions and hence a medium is 
required to keep the reaction going. Hetero-Bhautic as the term suggests refers to 
reactions between atoms of different bhutas. A medium is the energizer for the atoms of 
different bhutas in setting up intra-atomic dynamic forces which finally results in a new 

 

7 

substance as the end-product of the reaction. It may be easier to understand this with an 
analogy:   
 
Tea leaves and sugar cannot be chewed together for the effect of tea. Instead, the two 
have to be boiled in water where water is the substratum, such boiled decoction with or 
without milk is consumed as tea. Theoretically this is the same as the tea leaves and sugar 
chewed together.  
 
Likewise certain hetero-bhautic atoms require a substratum to inter-bond them though in 
the end such a substratum remains unaltered. Milk is an example of a quasi-compound 
where water is the energizer for the earth particles and when water is extracted from milk, 
milk retains its milky substance [9].   
 
Although all the four bhautic atoms can act as the substratum, it is only the earth atoms 
which can correspond to basic changes in the atoms since, they can arrest the molecular 
motion which may even be the motion such as liquid flowing due to gravity and the earth 
atoms can also counteract the tendency of atoms to fall in to a peculiar group or order [9].    
 
6. Action of light as a source of heat  
 
6. 1 Nature of Light  
 
Vatsayana of the Nyaya School describes the internal heat of a substance as acting in 
reactions where no external heat is traceable. Such an internal heat is compounded by the 
solar heat which is the source of all heat stored by substances utilized in chemical 
changes. An example is given as the change in grass color is due to the bhuta Tejas-fire 
in the form of latent heat which is stored in the atoms of grass obtained from sunlight and 
not Tejas in the form of Agni the fire [9]. Such heat cannot be taken away from the 
substance even by freezing it. It is the same internal heat obtained from the sunlight 
which ripens a mango fruit eventually resulting in the change of its color, smell, taste not 
to say about nutritional value.  
 
Light itself is described as constituting indefinitely small particles which mean something 
smaller and different than so far explained anu or paramanu since these particles are 
called neither anu nor paramanu. These particles radiate themselves in all directions 
rectilinearly with a conical dispersion from their source and with inconceivable velocity 
[9, page 105].  
 
6. 2 Action of Light  
 
Light can penetrate the inter-atomic or inter-molecular spaces, hence light particles must 
be indefinitely smaller than the atoms. Such penetration does not always affect the atomic 
structure necessarily which is explained with an analogy of frying paddy in a pan where 
the heat from the fire neither affects the pan nor the paddy structure. Such a penetration 
and passing through of the light rays accounts for translucent and transparent objects. In 

 

8 

other instances the light particles might rebound off the atomic surface as in reflection or 
simply are obstructed like in opaque objects to cast the shadows of the objects [9].  
 
All these processes also indicate no decomposition or re-composition of the atomic 
structure of the object of incidence.  
 
7 Parispanda – The fundamental Motion  
 
The atoms possess an inherent rotary or vibratory motion – Parispanda which is the root 
cause of all visible or invisible action and operation involving matter. Only an ideal body 
is devoid of any motion [6]. Akasha –The Space is devoid of this vibratory motion since 
it has no atomic structure. Vayu which is matter in gaseous form is explained as a state of 
Parispanda in action. The Nyaya-Vaisheshika holds such Parispanda-the basic inherent 
motion of all atoms as the basic form of all activity in the universe because all existing 
matter can be reduced to such jiggling atoms. The philosophers of this school also add 
that the concept of “Maheshvara” or any such godly agent is included to satisfy the 
philosophers but not to undermine either the power of Parispanda or the material causes 
and effects as can be seen or perceived or inferred. Yet consciousness is excluded from 
those substances which are affected by physical motion of atoms. At this juncture it is 
important to note that although the invisible god is not seen as the cause of all 
unexplainable phenomena the invisible consciousness is not treated similarly. The 
importance of consciousness is as real as any real visible object. 
 
A problem: A fundamental problem for Vaisheshikas was to explain how imperceptible 
atoms could combine to produce perceptible individuals. There is textual evidence to 
suggest that the early Vaisheshikas held the straight forward view that surely if one takes 
enough things below the threshold of perception and sets them beside each other it will 
produce something perceptible [10].   
 
8. Matter Classification 
 
8.1 Introduction 
 
Matter classification begins with classifying everything in to Dravya, Guna and Karma 
roughly translated in to Substance, Quality and Action. Such a translation is limited by 
language since even technical terms are influenced by the philosophy of the culture they 
originate in. A categorization such as this indicates an organized discipline of study. A 
clear differentiation is made between matter and its attributes. Here Dravya – the 
substance is a term used in a narrow technical sense to exclude quasi-compounds which 
refers to compounds made of atoms from the different bhutas, i.e. poly-bhautic 
compounds. 
 
8.2 Dravya – The Substance 
 
The dravya which is all that can be perceived is sub-classified in to five physical 
substances as earth, air, water, fire and space which are the Pancha Bhutas.  

 

9 

Substance is defined as the material cause of its quality and action. Kanada deals with 
each of the sub-categories of substance through their properties like: color, taste, smell 
associated with earth; color, taste, fluidity with water; so on with air and fire. It can be 
understood as: 
 

      *                *              *                 *              —               —      

 Properties           Color        Taste       Smell        Touch       Fluidity      Viscosity 
 
1. Earth 
 
2. Water                 *                *             —               *                *                  * 
 
3. Fire                    *                —            —              *                —               — 
 
4. Air                     —              —            —               *               —               — 
Table 1 
 
Fluidity is observed to occur both naturally and instrumentally. Water is in a liquid state 
naturally and can be converted in to gaseous state or solid state by externally applying or 
removing heat. Yet fluidity will be the primary state of water. Likewise butter or ghee is 
normally in a solid state (at least in winter) but can be melted in to a liquid state with very 
little application of heat. In such a case solid state would be their primary state [1].  
 
Dravya, Guna and Karma give rise to further categories. All the three are non-eternal. 
They are explained through their properties. Dravya possesses in it both guna which is 
quality and karma which is action, e.g. Fire which is a dravya possesses both the guna of 
heat and the action of moving upwards as in a flame. Thus Dravya, Guna and Karma 
have a real objective existence since they are associated with the real substances.  
 
8.3 Karma – The Motion 
 
Karma, motion, is a deeper concept than mere physical displacement with respect to time.  
Kanada defines five kinds of motions. They are Utksepana- ejection, Avaksepana- 
attraction, Akunchana-contraction, Prasarana- expansion and Gamana- composite 
movement. Vyomashiva clearly explains that motion is not instantaneous instead it is 
incremental. This is true even in a process like cooking the food where the food is neither 
cooked instantaneously nor does a change occur in its state until a minimum energy is 
expended [1, page 22]. Such a minimum energy can be seen as similar to the threshold 
energy concept of today. Here the threshold energy is greater than the rest energy of the 
final product to be obtained instead of a particle in the concept of current physics. The 
incremental nature of change in substances explained by Vyomashiva is what follows 
from today’s relativistic physics about no action being instantaneous.  
 
8.4 Akasha – The Space 
 
Space or Akasha is defined as that which has none of these attributes. Space is recognized 
as a separate category and it is clearly not earth’s atmosphere. It is conspicuously 

 

10 

eliminated from the sub-categories of Dravya which constitute atoms and it is an entity 
like a being is an entity. Akasha or space has no atomic structure and it is consequently 
inert.  
 
In very early times, ancient Indians had visualized the spherical nature of space and 
concluded it is the earth’s rotation which causes day and night [1].  
 
8.5 Space - Time 
 
It is interesting to note the background in which the ancient Indians propose the existence 
of Space and Time as entities. Bhaduri one of the philosophers summarizes this 
insightfully as – “We perceive pairs of objects with qualities of remoteness and nearness, 
spatial or temporal – inhering in them. Furthermore, we are able to make comparative 
judgments of this sort – we can say A is farther from B than from C, etc. What enables us 
to make this judgment? It is the greater number of contacts between individuals spread 
out between A and B than between A and C. For example, the ink bottle is nearer to the 
pen than to the radiator, that is, the number of contacts present in a line from the ink 
bottle to the radiator is greater than the number from the ink bottle to the pen. Only thus 
can the notion of “greater distance” be explained. But when we look for individuals 
whose contacts must be counted up, we do not find any belonging to other categories – or 
at least we do not find the right number to describe such nearness or farness. Between the 
inkbottle and the pen a book (say) is situated, while between the inkbottle and the radiator 
there is just space! Thus, in order to provide the material to explain these comparative 
judgments we must postulate an intervening series of entities and these are spatial.” As 
Bhaduri puts it, contact is not a transitive relation instead space is introduced to make it 
transitive and more generally to relate two otherwise unconnected things by a series of 
contacts postulated to lie between. This is spatial discrimination [10].  
 
Likewise Vachaspati states that for the concept of A is older than B the entity of time 
needs to be introduced. Therefore there is a particular spatial temporal relation 
connecting each pair of objects. Then why aren’t there as many spaces and times as there 
are relations of this sort? Vaisheshika talks of one space and one time since all objects in 
this continual space and time can be inter-related. If there were more than one space and 
one time, there is a possibility that an object from a certain space/time cannot be linked 
with another object from a different space/time [10].  
 
The Vaisheshika atomic substances are defined in a matrix of four non-atomic 
substances: Time, Space, Soul and Mind [1].       
 

A map of sizes, eternality and nature can be as follows: 
  
Substance              Size                 Eternality                     Nature 
 
Atom                     atomic            Eternal                         Active 
Manas                   atomic            Non-Eternal               Active 
Time                      mahan           Eternal                       Active 

 

11 

Akasha                   mahan            Eternal                       Inactive 
Soul                       mahan            Eternal                       Active 
Table 2 
 
The size atomic and mahan correspond to spherical structure being small and big 
respectively. Chandramati states that the same spherical nature resides in an atom when 
in minute proportion and in Akasha, time, place and self in infinite proportions. Space as 
a dravya that is Akasha has no absolute properties since space and time are relative in 
Indian science [1, page 26].   
 
8. Samanya, Vishesha and Samavaya. 
 
The next three categories in the total six categories of Vaisheshika are Samanya, 
Vishesha and Samavaya. Samanya is the class concept and Vishesha is particularity. 
Kanada’s view about samanya and vishesha is different from that of the later 
philosophers.  
 
Let us begin with Kanada. It has been suggested that translating these two terms as 
“genus” and “species” would render Kanada’s intent most accurately. Kanada makes a 
statement that a samanya may also be viewed as a vishesha in cases other than the Being. 
This can be understood by applying this concept to an entity such as, e.g., potness, which 
is a samanya-genus relative to particular pots but a species relative to the more inclusive 
genus clay-objectness.  
 
The later thinker’s concept of universals is that they are real, independent, timeless, 
ubiquitous entities which inhere in individual substances, qualities and motions and are 
repeatable, i.e., may inhere in several distinct individuals at once or at different times and 
places. The general term used for such an entity is samanya. Either way the postulation of 
universals in Vaisheshika  calls for the necessity of explaining the existence of natural 
kinds, the fact that certain entities are similar because of a true similarity and not merely 
because we think so [10, page 133-134].                      
 
A special feature of this school is Samavaya which is inherence referring to the special 
feature of individual atom of even the same element. Kanada explains inherence as the 
cause of notion that something is “here” in a locus and connects its function to causality. 
He also conceives that there is only one inherence, since there is no indication that 
different inherences connect different pairs of things related by inherence [7, page 292].  
 
Samanya , Samavaya and Vishesha are products of intellectual discrimination [1]. Such 
an idea is further emphasized by Kanada by including only Dravya, Guna and Karma 
under Bhava the Being. 
 
Time is defined as the cause of all non-eternal things and time is irrelevant and therefore 
absent for eternal substances. In Vaisheshika universal is taken to be ubiquitous and 
timeless. Whatever can be defined with respect to time and space cannot be a universal. 
The process that marks the passage of time on an object will thus be relative.It is only the 

 

12 

universal which is true for all time and space and it is the being [1]. Time is clearly 
differentiated from space and space is not absent from eternal things. This time is 
associated with motion, which begins with the universe in its cyclic life of creation and 
dissolution. The time is at rest when the universe is in the process of creation. An analogy 
of this is working with a piece of clay trying out various combinations and figures in it 
and making such arrangements with it as will lead to certain ends and aims which are 
potentially in it inherently.      
 
9. The Being or Existence 
 
Kanada and the early Vaisheshikas view existence as the highest genus which is not a 
genus species lying under any superior genus. Kanada calls such a supreme universal as 
‘Bhava’ from the root bhu meaning “to come to be”, and he specifically mentions that 
bhava includes dravya, guna and karma. Such a bhava is called Satta by the time of 
Chandramati and Prashastapada [10]. This indicates a clear differentiation between 
material or real concepts and intellectual or transcendental ideas even at the time of 
Kanada. The inclusion of consciousness or the Being as a variable in the studies of all 
matter or materialistic sciences does not hinder the understanding of matter, instead adds 
a new dimension to the perspective. 
 
10. Conclusion 
 
The Nyaya-Vaisheshika begins with the beginning of universe in an endless cycle of 
existence. This existence is marked by all sorts of motions- motion as microscopic as the 
inter-atomic vibrations and motion as macroscopic as that of the planets and stars. The 
motion ceases only during the rest period when the universe is preparing for the next 
cycle and at such a time all the atomic laws collapse. The universe can be understood as 
guided by the will of a personified god or the laws of nature Rta at an abstract level. The 
knowledge of universe, its creation, dissolution and life is comprehended by the 
consciousness which is an active element in all the actions of universe. 
 
 
References 
 

1.  S. Kak, Indian Physics: Outline of Early History. 2004; arXiv: physics/0310001 
2.  S. Kak, Aristotle and Gautama on Logic and Physics. 2005; arXiv: 

physics/0505172 

3.  S. Kak, Greek and Indian cosmology: review of early history. In The Golden 
Chain. G.C. Pande (ed.). CSC, New Delhi, 2005; arXiv: physics/0303001 
4.  S. Kak, Babylonian and Indian astronomy: early connections. In The Golden 
Chain. G.C. Pande (ed.). CSC, New Delhi, 2005; arXiv: physics/0301078. 
5.  S. Kak, Birth and early development of Indian astronomy. In Astronomy Across 
Cultures: The History of Non-Western Astronomy,Helaine Selin (editor), Kluwer 
Academic, Boston, 2000, pp. 303-340. arXiv: physics/0101063. 
6.  S. Kak, The Nature of Physical Reality. Peter Lang, New York, 1986.  
7.  S. Dasgupta , A History of Indian Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 1922.  

 

13 

8.  B.K. Matilal, Nyaya-Vaisesika. Otto Harrassowitz, Weisbaden, 1977.  
9.  B. Seal, The Positive Sciences of The Ancient Hindus. Motilal Banarasidass, 

10. K.H. Potter, Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology. Princeton University Press, 

Delhi. 1958. 

Princeton. 1977.     

 

14 

