Photographing by means of a diffractive axicon 

José Joaquín Lunazzi and Daniel S. Ferreira Magalhães 

Campinas State University (Unicamp), Instituto de Física Gleb Wataghin, Caixa Postal 

6165, 13083-852 Campinas, SP, Brazil  

 

In this paper we demonstrate that the light diffracted by a simple compact disc can be 

used to generate photographic images of a certain kind. Being the compact disc an axicon 

that generates a diffraction-free beam, we show that the focusing position of an image 

depends of the wavelength of the diffracted light, what makes possible its use as a 

spectral filter. 

42.30.-d, 42.25.Fx, 42.30.Kq, 42.15.Eq  

Introduction 

High quality photographic images were always associated with high quality refractive 

objectives. This situation may limit the capability of the student in thinking on imaging 

systems in a more general way connected to the capability of transmitting light 

information even when the relationship between object and image is not strictly point-by-

point. Any light distribution arising from a luminous object point may have information 

on the object if an elaborated analysis is made. A well corrected achromatic aplanatic 

objective is an elaborated component. By releasing the student's thought of a connection 

to a complicated and sophisticated refractive system the comprehension and even the 

1

 

 

  

 

 

discovery of new imaging systems can be allowed. The knowledge of the optical element 

properties may be employed as a way to determine characteristics of an object under not 

ideal imaging conditions. It was so that in the history of optics better imaging elements 

were developed in a constant evolution. In particular, the introduction of diffractive 

systems as imaging systems may result in new practical results for the future. An 

example is the development of a space telescope1. It is known2 that an axicon is a non-

conventional element not useful for high quality images but with better depth of field 

performance but because of its interesting properties we performed some experiments to 

be discussed in the teaching laboratory.  Since before the definition of the term “axicon”, 

fifty years ago, the axicon had generated many discussions that were extremely important 

to our knowledge in optics3. According to the definition of H. McLeod, an axicon is an 

optical element that images a point into a line segment along the optical axis 4 5 6. 

Traditionally, axicons are refractive and made of a glass cone. The basic properties of a 

refractive spherical or conical element can be easily experienced with domestic cups, as 

described below. Diffractive elements may correspond to the same properties, the 

spherical lens focusing being represented by a Gabor zone plate and the conical lens by a 

circular element with constant period. A Gabor zone plate (GZP) has a geometrical 

distribution equivalent to the classical Fresnel zone plate but, because of its sinusoidal 

transmission profile, has only one convergent and one divergent focus. It can be 

constructed through the photographic exposure of the interference of two coherent 

collinear light beams getting a holographic optical element (HOE) but a circular element 

with constant period can not be easily constructed by interference and it is also difficult 

to construct mechanically with a high number of lines per millimeter. The closest 

 

2

approximation can easily be found in a compact disc (CD), which is the element we 

demonstrate in this article. Sochacki 2 made a theoretical and experimental comparison of 

the depth of focus between a computer-generated uniform-intensity axicon and a 

holographic Fresnel lens also under monochromatic light to show that the axicon image is 

not clear but keeps its properties over a much longer distance. The presence of bulk or 

punctual objects, once detected, can be observed over a longitudinal distance comparable 

to the focal length.  In this paper we discuss the possibilities of didactic application of a 

CD as an element that forms images under white light illumination.  

Description 

We show some simple experiments made with refractive elements in order to describe the 

imaging process in the same way we propose for the diffractive corresponding elements. 

Ordinary cups filled with water are employed to constitute a spherical and a conical 

element and its focal depth. An ordinary CD adapted to transmit light represents the 

conical element and because its properties are less well known we describe it as follows: 

the diffraction pattern produced by a compact disc (CD) under monochromatic 

illumination or by any kind of spiral structure was calculated by Ferrari 7. The nth 

component of the field is 

En(r’,θ’,z)≅n E0 c-n π i-(n+1) exp(iπ/4) (zλ/4r0

2)1/2exp(i nθ’)exp(-iπn2zλ/r0

2)Jn(2πnr’/r0) 

Where, 

E0 is the incident collimated field; 

r0 is the radial distance between adjacent turns in the CD; 

(1) 

3

 

 

c-n is the nth component of a function that characterizes the profile of a CD (ex: a Bessel 

function of nth order); 

n is the diffraction order, in our case will be n=1; 

λ is the wavelength considered. 

This field is some orders of magnitude lower outside the region 

 

 

 

)
(
Rnr
λ
0

/

min

z
<<

(
Rnr
0

) max

λ

/

 

 

 

       (2) 

Where, 

Rmin and Rmax are the minimum and maximum radius of the compact disc. 

This shows the formation of a diffraction-free beam 8 whose length depends of the 

wavelength, the period (spiral grooves) and the radial dimensions of the structure. 

Magalhães 9 made a special treatment, which can turn a problem easier to explain than in 

that with spiral treatment, it is the circular approach. In many cases this last one can 

explain images done with spiral structures, usually in dimensions much greater than the 

structure period.  The scheme to understand the resulting pattern as a line is shown in 

figure 1: (a) considering a small annulus of the disc and many wavelengths, (b) for 

monochromatic light and light from different regions of the disc. For many point objects 

the light pattern to be expected on the image field is a bundle of lines diverging from the 

center of the axicon where the imaging plane receives its intersection to be sharp and 

with a limited bandwidth corresponding to its longitudinal position: longer wavelengths 

 

  

 

 

 

4

corresponds to distances closer to the axicon, monochromatic imaging at some distance 

which is the center of the diffracting line, and shorter wavelengths at farther distances. 

 

 

 

 

                                    (a)                                 

 

     (b) 

Fig 1: At left (a): a small annulus of the compact disc and many wavelengths. At 

right (b): monochromatic light and light from different regions of the disc. 

Experimental Setup 

We first performed some experiments to compare the properties of a spherical vs. a 

conical lens. Using simple elements we observed qualitatively images which although 

strongly aberrated may be interpreted in terms of its aberrations to get information on the 

object.   

In our first experiment, we can see an almost spherical cup with water at figure 2(a). Six 

objects are shown (b) and its off axis image (c). We can see how punctual objects create a 

 

5

figure, which is not a point but a consequence of the optical imaging element, while 

diffuse objects create diffuse but related images.  

 

 

 

 

 

    (a) 

 

 

 

(b) 

 

 

 

        (c) 

Fig 2: (a) An almost spherical cup with water. (b) Six objects. (c) The off axis image 

of the objects. 

To demonstrate the axicon properties we performed a second experiment to show the 

limited depth of field of a spherical refractive element: In figure 3(a), a lamp bulb filled 

with water represents a spherical plan-convex lens. The radius and thickness was 3.25 ± 

0.05 cm and 2.8 ± 0.1 cm respectively. At figure 3(b), the image of a point source at 

112±1 cm distance can be seen in off-axis focus at 9.8 ± 0.1 cm from the bulb. At figure 

3(c), the image resulting at distance 26.3±0.1 cm. In a short distance most light from the 

object become so spread that almost no image can be seen.  

 

6

 

(a) 

 

 

 

   (b) 

 

 

        (c) 

Fig 3: (a) A lamp bulb with water representing a spherical plan-convex lens. (b) The 

image of a point source in off-axis focus. (c) The spread image of the point source. 

Our third experiment shows an axicon: In figure 4(a), a conical cup with water. At figure 

4(b) the off-axis image of an object point done at 9.3±0.2 cm from the cup. At figure 4(c) 

the image at 34.3 ± 0.2 cm shows that the focused point image keeps the characteristics 

of a point.   

(a) 

 

 

 

(b) 

 

 

 

       (c) 

Fig 4: (a) A conical cup with water. (b) The off-axis image of the point source. (c) 

The image keeping the characteristics of the point source.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

Our fourth experiment employed a diffractive axicon: we characterized the optical action 

of the diffractive axicon by observing the line it generates when illuminated in 

monochromatic red light.  A laser pointer had its collimating lens removed to became a 

diverging point source located at 100±1 cm and the resulting line started at 5.0±0.5 cm 

distance ending at 13.0±0.5 cm distance, as showed in figure 5.  

 

 

 

 

Fig 5: Diffraction-free beam length to the red light laser. 

 

Our fifth experiment employed a diffractive axicon as in the previous experiment but we 

put the photographic camera in the diffracted line to register what an observer sees when 

looking through this position. A small fluorescent lamp bulb was employed as light 

source whose extension was reduced by means of a stop with a 2 mm circular hole. 

Different color rings can be clearly seen corresponding to the spectral lines of the source 

covering different regions of the disc according to the camera position10 (figure 6). 

8

B G R B P

 

 

(a) 

 

 

 

 

 

(b) 

Fig. 6: (a) The camera at position z=9.2±0.1 cm, the spectral lines of the source B 

(blue), G (green) and R (red) are seen. (b) The camera at position z=21.5±0.1 cm, the 

spectral lines of the source B (blue) and P (purple) are seen. 

Our sixth experiment was photographing a Christmas tree with a string of a hundred 

small colorful light bulbs (Christmas candles 0.5W each) placed within a distance 

interval 

0Z  between 4.2 to 4.4 m of the CD (figure 7). To register the image the color 

negative film Pro image 100 Kodak Professional (F) was employed, placed inside a 

Yashica FX-3 camera body.  The lamps were distributed by color along a height of 1m. 

Displacing the film with respect to the CD along the z-axis, we could see the image 

formation of each color lamp set occurring inside a length interval. We registered the 

image of the set of lamps at different positions with exposure time of 1.0 ± 0.1 s.   

 

9

 

 

 

Fig 7: The object. A string of a hundred small colorful light bulbs (of power 0.5W 

 

each) 

 

We employed an ordinary compact disc but without the reflective layer to work in 

transmission light to avoid the shadowing of the image by the photographic film, fixed to 

a support. The experiment is showed at figure 8. Discs without the reflective layer can be 

found as separators in most cylindrical CD-R boxes for fifty or hundred units. Or the 

layer can be removed in most discs by cutting the edges and dismounting its sandwiched 

composition. We covered the center of the CD to avoid the light that passes through the 

parts without grooves. The diffraction efficiency of the disk was measured as the relation 

of intensities between the first diffraction order of an ordinary red laser pointer and the 

transmitted intensity, and it was 11.1 ± 0.8 %. Its period was obtained by using the 

diffraction equation of a grating when measuring the diffraction angles corresponded to 

670±90 lines/mm. 

 

 

 

10

Fig 8: Experimental setup to the image caption. Z is the distance between the film F 

and the CD.        is the distance between the object and the CD. Rmin and Rmax are 

0Z

the minimum and maximum radius of the CD. 

We registered the image of the set of lamps in the film at different positions in the z-axis 

as shown in figures 9, 10 and 11. The figures are in the same size ratio, but inverted (top-

bottom) to facilitate the comparison with the real object in figure 7. In figure 9(a) we can 

see the beginning of the image formation; the red light (lamps surrounded and labeled as 

R) is more intensive. In 9(b), we can see the red, yellow and green light bulbs (labeled as 

R, Y and G).  

 

 

 

11

(a)            

                  (b)  

 

Fig 9: Image of the lamps at Z distances: (a) 4.5±0.3 cm, (b) 9.0±0.3 cm 

As the z-distance increases until 12.5 cm (figure 10(a)), no great change in the color 

distribution of each lamp can be seen. In 10(b), we can perceive a change in the image of 

the red lamps, their color changing from red to violet. This color change causes intensity 

reduction in the black-and-white photo. This kind of change also happens between 

figures 11(a) and 11(b), but now from yellow to violet.   

 

 

 

12

              

     (a)            

   

 

 

                (b) 

Fig 10: Image of the lamps at Z distances: (a) 12.5±0.3 cm, (b) 14.0±0.3 cm       

       

Fig 11: Image of the lamps at Z distances: (a) 16.0±0.3 cm, (b) 16.5±0.3 cm 

 

 

 

13

 

 

Discussions 

Using a mean wavelength and its deviation from its mean value11, we made a study of the 

depth of focus for the colors we used as objects. By means of Ferrari 7 and Magalhães 9 

results shown in equation 2, we could verify the theoretical results (table I). 

Theoretical Results 

Experimental Results 

Color 

Zmin 

Zmax 

Zmax 

Results agreement 

Red (λR=680±60 nm) 

4.8±0.6 cm 

13±1 cm 

13±1 cm 

100% 

Yellow (λY=580±10 nm)  5.7±0.5 cm 

15±1 cm 

16.3±0.6 cm  91% 

Green (λG=530±30 nm) 

6.2±0.6 cm 

16±2 cm 

Violet (λV=410±30 nm) 

8.0±0.9 cm 

21±2 cm 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Table I: Results to the diffraction-free beams length with Rmin=2.2±0.1cm, 

Rmax=5.8±0.1cm and r0=1.5±0.1μm. The error in Z was calculated by Error 

Propagation 12. 

The depth of focus of the system is directly related with the length of the diffraction-free 

beams. For white light objects, this depth begins at the red Zmin and finishes at the violet 

Zmax. By table I, we have 16 cm of depth of focus. We could determine experimentally 

that the depth of focus achieved was much greater than that of a photographic objective 

of the same focal length and aperture (90 ± 4 cm2).  By replacing the light bulbs by more 

pure color sources like LEDs we could see their images vanishing at the end of the 

respective diffraction line.  Images of extensive white light objects cannot be done by the 

14

 

 

 

 

 

system because all the light becomes mixed at the photographic plane. Besides, as in any 

single optical element, aberrations grow very fast as the incidence angle increases (off-

axis aberration). By means of Dyson 13 we can see that the path difference p is given by: 

p

=

1
2

2

θρ

2

cos

2

[
φ

1
Z

0

+

]

1
z

  

    

       (3) 

Where, 

ρ and φ are the polar coordinates of a point in the spiral diffraction grating; 

θ is the incident angle in the spiral diffraction grating; 

0Z is the distance between the object and grating and z is the distance grating-image. 

The absence of a term in cos φ indicates that there is no aberration of a comatic nature 

and the term in cos2φ represents astigmatism, that is the same in magnitude as the 

astigmatism of a simple lens. But, unlike conventional astigmatic images, the two 

degenerated focal lines can be seen at once, giving a characteristic cross-shaped 

appearance to the image of a small object. This astigmatism makes itself significant in an 

incident angle of about 7º. 

The luminous efficiency of the system is restricted by the efficiency of the diffraction 

element, about 11%. Works like Marciante 14 15, about the construction of diffraction 

elements with diffraction efficiency next to 100%, brings the expectation of evolution in 

this area, making practical systems possible in the future. 

  

 

 

 

15

Conclusions 

By means of simple elements we obtained images with longer focus depth than images 

done with a spherical lens, and the spot size evolution for spherical and conical elements. 

We showed that it is possible to get diffractive images of point elements and to use them 

with the advantage of spectral separation inside a longitudinal field with large depth of 

focus. The efficiency of the system is restricted by the diffraction efficiency of the 

diffraction element and by the astigmatism, which is present at great incident angles. The 

simplicity of the system makes possible the verification in the classroom of an unusual 

phenomenon. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors thank the “Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior” 

CAPES  of  the  Brazilian  Ministry  of  Education  and  the  “Comissão  de  Pós  Graduação” 

CPG of the Institute of Physics -Unicamp for financial support. The authors also thank J. 

A. Campos and T. Dellariva for technical support. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 

1  R. A. Hyde, Very large aperture diffractive telescopes, App. Opt. 38, 4198-4212 

2  J. Sochacki, A. Kolodziejczyk, Z. Jaroszewicz, and S. Bará, Applied Optics 31, No.25, 

3  Z. Jaroszewicz, A. Burvall, and A. Friberg, Optics & Photonics News 16, No.4, 34-39 

(1999).  

(2005).  

5326-5330 (1992).  

4  J. McLeod,  J. Opt. Soc. Am. 44, 592-597 (1954).  

5  J. McLeod,  J. Opt. Soc. Am. 50, 166-169 (1960).  

6  M. Pérez, C. Gómez-Reino, and J. Cuadrado, Opt. Acta 33, 1161-1176 (1986).  

7  J. Ferrari, E. Garbusi, and E. Frins,  Phys. Rev.E 67, 036619 (2003).  

8  J. Durnin, J. Miceli, Jr., and J. Eberly,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1499 (1987).  

9  D. Magalhães, Estudo de imagens por dupla difração com seleção de luz branca e 

elementos definidos bidimensionalmente MSc thesis, Instituto de Física Gleb Wataghin, 

17

                                                                                                                                                 

Universidade Estadual de Campinas (2005), at: 

http://www.ifi.unicamp.br/ccjdr/teses/apresentacao.php3?filename=IF419 

10  J. Lunazzi, D. Magalhães “Observing CD diffraction”, video at:  

http://www.ifi.unicamp.br/%7Elunazzi/F530_F590_F690_F809_F895/F809/F809videos/

CDdifracao.rm 

11  Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Color (Wikipedia, 2006), 

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Color 

12  Jose Henrique Vuolo, Fundamentos da teoria de erros (E. Bucher, São Paulo, 1992) 

13  J. Dyson, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and 

Physical Sciences, London, Vol. 248, No. 1252, pp. 93-106., (1958) Available at: 

http://www.jstor.org 

14  J. R. Marciante and D. H. Raguin,  Opt. Lett. 29, 542-544 (2004).  

15  J. R. Marciante, Frontiers of Optics 2004, 

http://www.osa.org/meetings/archives/2004/annual/default.asp, (2004)., Rochester, 

(2004). 

 

18

