THE  MISSING  MEASUREMENTS  OF  THE

 GRAVITATIONAL  CONSTANT

Maurizio Michelini

ENEA   Casaccia Research Centre   Rome , Italy
maurizio.michelini@casaccia.enea.it *

  In 1998 - two centuries after Cavendish - a conference on theory and experiment of the G

  Abstract 
measurement pointed out the progress made in various experimental methods and discussed the effects on
the accuracy of G.  In spite of several measurements with torsion balance in  vacuum  to the aim of
reducing some disturbances (air thermal convection, aerodynamic resistance upon the moving pendulum,
etc.), no mention was made about a possible pressure effect in calm air.  In 2000 J.Luo and Z.K.Hu firstly
denounced  the presence of some unknown systematic problem on G measurement.  In the present work a
new systematic error is analysed which arises from the non-zero balance of the overall momentum
discharged by the air molecules upon the test mass within the vacuum chamber.  This effect is normally
negligible, but when the pressure is so low that the molecule mean free path is comparable to the thickness
of the air meatus surrounding the test mass , the drawing force may become greater than the gravitational
force. Considering the usual size of the meatus, the molecular effect becomes maximum when the pressure
drops to about 10-5 bar.  Before Heyl s measurement at 1 millibar (1927), the experiments were made at
higher pressures.  Conversely those made with recent vacuum techniques show pressures down to 10-10 bar
(Gundlach & Merkowitz, 2000) and 10-11 bar (Gershteyn, 2002).  In these experiments the effect of the
vacuum  pressure appears very little.  As a matter of fact, we were not able to find in the literature some
measurements made at vacuum pressures between the millibar and the nanobar.  Why ? This lack appears
embarrassing in absence of an adequate  physical explanation.

* new adress :  317michyz28@libero.it

1. Introduction 

Everyone knows the simple experience of two flat microscopy glasses  which cannot be
separated from each other when their surfaces touch.
 Obviously this effect is due to the external pressure of the air molecules which are unable
to penetrate between the corrugations of the polished surfaces, so within the small meatus
there is a considerable air depression.   The mean free path of the air molecules at normal
pressure is about 10-7 metres, that is of the same order of magnitude of the polished
surface corrugations.   In general, the molecules are not able to freely penetrate within a
meatus whose thickness is reduced to about 1 mean free path .
  When we consider the meatus facing the gravitational test mass of a torsion balance
placed in a vacuum chamber, the air depression within the meatus originates a little
drawing force which adds to the gravitational force. The disturbing force is often
negligible, but when the pressure within the vacuum chamber is reduced beyond a millibar
(to avoid other disturbances due to air convection) the meatus optical thickness reduces,
so the above condition about 1 mean free path may occur.
  As a consequence, it appears necessary to investigate this phenomenon to obtain a
quantitative prediction of this systematic drawing force arising in the G measurements.
  The investigation shows that the total momentum discharged by the non-isotropic  flux
of gas particles upon two masses separated by a small meatus, originates a drawing force.
   In paragraph 7 we examine the case of a uniform flux of small quantum waves which
originate between two masses a drawing force reproducing the same characteristics of the
Newton s gravitational force . This new paradigm puts new light on the transmission of
the gravitational interaction, a problem existing both in Newon s theory as well as in
general relativity.

 

       2.  Measurements of the gravitational constant G

2

  The torsion balance apparatus was first used by Cavendish in 1798 in a simple form
which permitted him to reach an unexpected accuracy. In the following two centuries the
torsion balance was used by several experimenters (Boys, Eotvos, Heyl, etc.) who
substantially improved the technique, but the level of accuracy did not show a dramatic
enhancement.
  Several methods were devised in the XX century to measure G. 
In a Conference organised in London in 1998   two centuries after Cavendish - by
C.C.Speake and T.J.Quinn [1] a variety of papers described the methods of measurement
and their potential accuracy  related to the disturbances and systematic errors. Many
experiments were described. For instance: a torsion balance where the gravitational torque
is balanced by an electrostatic torque produced by an electrometer;  a torsion-strip balance
where the fibre is substituted by a strip; a dynamic method based on a rotating torsion
pendulum with angular acceleration feedback; a free fall method where the determination
of G depends on changes in acceleration of the falling object, etc.
 Notwithstanding the technological improvement, up to now the gravitational constant is
the less accurately known among the most important constants in physics.
 The uncertainty has been recognised to depend on various experimental factors.

To eliminate the air thermal convection on the test spheres, in 1897 K.F. Braun made a
torsion balance measurement after extracting the air from the ampoule.  The level of
vacuum obtained with the techniques of the time is not known.

  In 1927 Heyl [2] made a benchmark measurement with a heavy torsion balance to the
aim of establishing a firm value of G.  Since nobody suspected a possible disturbance due
to the calm air, the pressure po was reduced to 1-2 millibar, a level sufficient to eliminate
the air convection currents.
 The molecule mean free path at that pressure is about 10-4 metres, a quantity much
smaller than the thickness of the meatus.  From our investigation it appears that the air
pressure effect does not alter the accuracy of the classical G measurements performed at
pressures higher than some millibars.
   In 1987 G.T. Gillies published an Index of measurements [3] containing over 200
experiments,  but many of them have not been reported in what would now be considered
to be the open literature .

  A status of the recent G measurement was published in 2000 by J.Luo and Z.K.Hu [4] in
which the presence of some unknown systematic problem was first denounced : 
the last
nine measurements have produced values of G that differ wildly from each other .
  In 2003 the situation was analysed by R.Kritzer [5] who concluded that  the large
spread in results compared to small error estimates, indicates that there are large
systematic errors in various results .

 Among the last experiments, some of them used new sophisticated methods with
technologies coupled to very low pressures within the test chamber.
  J.H. Gundlach and S.M.Merkowitz [6] made a measurement where a flat pendulum is
suspended by a torsion fiber without torque since the accelerated rotation of the attracting
masses equals the gravitational acceleration of the pendulum. To minimise the air
dynamic resistance, the pressure was lowered to 10-7 Torr (po  10-10 bar).
 At this pressure the usual molecular mean free path  l = m/
homogeneous medium) is of the order of 1000 metres. Hence within the vacuum chamber

o  (valid within a large

3

the lack of flux homogeneity is everywhere present and becomes maximum within a small
meatus.

           Another accurate measurement was performed in 2002 by M.L.Gershteyn et al. [7]

with the time of swing method, where the pendulum feels a unique drawing mass fixed at
different distances from the test mass. The change of the oscillation period determines G.
To minimise the air disturbance, the pressure in the vacuum chamber was lowered to 10-6
Pascal (i.e. po =10-11 bar). Also in this experiment the reason for such a dramatic lowering
of the air pressure is not discussed.  Notice that the air dynamic resistance to the motion of
the test mass is of the order of 10-25 newton, a quantity totally negligible compared to the
measured gravitational force, estimated between 10-11 10-10 newton.  The authors revealed
the presence of a variation of G with the orientation (regard to the fixed stars) amounting
to 0.054%.  Incidentally, the anisotropy of G agrees with the gravitational-inertial theory
discussed in paragr. 7.

 In 2004 a new torsion balance configuration with four attracting spheres located within
the vacuum chamber (po =1.5x10-10 bar) was described by  Z.K.Hu and J.Luo [8].  The
four masses are aligned and each test mass oscillates within the large meatus (about 4 cm)
between a pair of attracting masses. Each test mass determines with the adjacent spheres a
small meatus (estimated about  4 mm) and a large meatus (about 16 mm).  During the
experiment the authors found the presence of an abnormal period of the torsion pendulum,
which resulted independent of the material wire, test mass, torsion beam and could not be
explained with external magnetic or electric fields. Adopting a magnetic damper system,
the abnormal mode was suppressed, but the variance of the fundamental period of the
pendulum introduced an uncertainty as large as 1400 ppm,  testifying the presence of a
systematic disturbance in determining G.
   We applied to this problem the analysis carried out in this paper (paragr. 4-5).  From the air
density of the vacuum chamber, we calculate the optical thickness of the small meatus and the
related air depression (eq.6), which substituted in eq(10) gives upon the test mass a disturbing
 10-14 newton, equivalent to about 10-4 times the gravitational force,
force rising up to F(po) 
which alters the pendulum period.   This fact agrees with the author conclusions [8] that the
torsion balance configuration would have an inherent accuracy of about 10 ppm in determining
G, but the uncertainty in the fundamental period reduces this accuracy to 1400 ppm.

    The presence of an abnormal disturbance was previously described (1998) by  Z.K.Hu, J.Luo,
X.H. Fu et al. [9] in dealing with the time-of-swing method.  They found the presence of
important nonlinear effects in the motion of the pendulum itself, independent of any defect in the
detector, caused by the finite amplitude of the swing .  Their configuration consisted in a torsion
balance with heavy masses external to the vacuum chamber, where the pressure was lowered to
po = 2x10-10 bar.  The test mass, diameter about 19 mm, was suspended within a stainless vacuum
tube placed between two heavy masses distant 60 mm apart.  Since the test mass oscillates up to 8
mm from the centre of the vacuum tube, the optical thickness of the small meatus can be
deduced. The smaller this thickness, the greater the disturbing force F(po). Repeating the analysis
carried out for the preceding experiment, we found a force F(po) which represents a little fraction
of the gravitational force, due to the heavy attractor masses.

  Comparing with many measurements done in the era of high vacuum technology
[10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18] we observed that the experimenters avoided to use in the
vacuum chambers pressures between the millibar and the nanobar.  The reason for this
avoidance does not appear to have been discussed.

 
  
 
 
 
 
 

       3. The scattering of gas particles upon smooth surfaces

4

/2   with the vertical axis, receive from the field a small vertical

The scattering of molecules hitting a smooth surface does not generally follow the optical
reflection because they interact mainly upon single atoms/molecules of the lattice.  Like
the random scattering arising when two free particles come in collision,  the nearly right-
angled molecules hitting a surface can be scattered in all directions.  Conversely, the
molecules hitting the surface from a nearly parallel direction interact softly with the field
of the atomic lattice.  In fact the nearly parallel molecules, whose momentum     q = mv
makes an angle  
momentum    q 
reflection.   Like the UV photons (whose momentum  hv/c  is comparable to the
momentum of air molecules at normal temperature) even the air molecules show a
limiting angle of optical reflection on a polished surface.
  To resume: after scattering on a flat surface the quasi-parallel molecules remain as such,
whereas a fraction of the nearly orthogonal molecules become quasi-parallel.
As a consequence an isotropic flux of molecules hitting a smooth surface, after scattering
becomes a non-isotropic flux   w( ).   This condition may be described by the
relationship
         (1)                                        w( ) 

 2 mv cos    which redirects the molecules along a nearly optical

1 cos  +  2 sin )

o (1 

where  o   is the incident flux and the parameters   1 ,  2  satisfy the condition

                                                    

sin

w( ) d  =  o .

2   

o   

Moreover we assume (similarly with the scattering of the photons) that about 10% of the nearly
right-angle molecules become quasi-parallel after scattering on the wall.  Applying  these two
 0.146,    2  = 2 1/
conditions one obtains the figures   1 
assumptions do not dramatically change these coefficients.

 0.0928 .  Different numerical

This physical condition is important to understand the phenomenon of the molecular flux
depression within the meatus between the moving mass and the adjacent vacuum chamber.  This
phenomenon happens at low air pressures. When the pressure is higher than a millibar, within the
meatus more than 99.99% of the molecules hitting the moving mass come from scattering with
other molecules, whereas less than 10-4 molecules come directly from the scattering on the
chamber side.  To feel a little flux depression in the meatus it is necessary that the molecules
coming from surface-scattering be about a half of the total. Within an air meatus of thickness  s
this happens when the optical thickness   
i.e. when the air density equals    o 
For usual torsion balances the critical vacuum pressure is around  po 

 107s  o   equals about 1 mean free path,

 (1 3)x10-5 bar.

 10-7/s .

o /m  

s = s

      4. The molecule momentum discharged on the gravitational mass

The old G measurements adopted a torsion balance at atmospheric pressure, that is
without the vacuum chamber, so the pressure effect took place in the meatus between the
test mass and the attracting sphere.  This happens also in G measurements in vacuum
when the heavy masses are comprised within the chamber, but in general the G
measurements in vacuum are made with the heavy masses outside the chamber. In this
case we define  meatus  the volume of air comprised between the test mass and the
adjacent wall of the vacuum chamber (fig.1).
To the aim of reducing the disturbances due to the air convection, in 1897 the torsion
balance was placed by Braun within a vacuum chamber where the pressure was reduced to
the level allowed by the vacuum technologies of the time. At a pressure of the order of

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5

m (1+ k x2)

some millibar we found that the molecular flux upon the moving mass results highly
uniform, so the sum of every momentum discharged by molecules on the sphere is null for
any practical purpose.
 However, when the pressure in the chamber is strongly reduced, the molecular flux shows
a little depression in the meatus.  The flux in the circular meatus may be expressed along
the radial direction  x as follows
         (2)                                           (x) 
where  m  is the figure the flux takes on the axis. The flux on the meatus boundary (x = L)
is the unperturbed flux  o, so    m (1+ k L2) =  o  , which shows that  k  is linked to the flux
depression
        (2a)                                           k = ( o / m  1) /L2                                                            
where  L 
depression. The angle 
mass, s is the minimum thickness of the meatus),  plays a fundamental role in the
phenomenon since it describes the  shadow  of the moving mass on the chamber wall.
    Choosing spherical co-ordinates with the same axis of the meatus and origin (fig.1) in
the point B, the following equation gives us the angular flux  B( ) of incident molecules
integrating along the thickness  s( )  the scattered molecules, to which one must add the
S( )  scattered on the surface of the moving mass
uncollided molecules due to the flux  

R cos    is the radius of the area of the moving mass experiencing the flux

 , defined by   sin  = R/R+s   (where R is the radius of the moving

     (3)                          B( ) = 

(r) exp(

r) dr  +  

S( )  exp(

s( ))

(  s

)

o

(r) =

(r)/m is the air macroscopic cross section;  

where  
isotropically scattered molecules;  
This angular flux holds for 
 .
This presentation of the problem has only an instructive character , because the fluxes  (r)  and

(r)  is the density of the
 of the meatus.

s( )  is the optical thickness along 

S( ) are unknown.

                     Fig. 1   Schematic drawing of a torsion balance comprised within a vacuum chamber.

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6

n

o

        The principle of superposition of the effects

  To solve the problem of calculating the molecular flux within the meatus we adopt the principle
of superposition of the effects.  Consider the test sphere surrounded by the air comprised in the
vacuum chamber at pressure po. To obtain the disturbing force F(po) on the test mass related to the
air depression in the meatus we must calculate the flux in the point A of the sphere and in the
point C diametrically opposite (fig.1).  Let s now remove the sphere and substitute an equal
volume of air at pressure po. In this case the chamber results filled with the uniform flux  o.  Now
we consider the spherical co-ordinates with origin in the point A (fig.1). The virtual flux 
the right of  the point A comes from scattering on the air molecules comprised in the whole
chamber (whose size equals  n >>1 m.f.p.)

r  on

       (3)                                              

r  = 

o exp(

r) dr  .

From the formal standpoint, eq(3) may be rewritten as follows

      (3a)                         

r  =  

o exp(

r) dr +  o exp(

t( ))

t

( 

)

o
   

where   t( ) = 2R cos    is the distance between the points A and P (fig.1) placed on the virtual
surface of the removed mass.   Let s notice that the first term in eq(3a) represents the flux due to
the air scattering source occupying the sphere volume.

  When we cancel this source term (for instance reintroducing the test mass), eq(3a) gives the  flux

    (3b)                                           Ar( ) =  o exp( 2

R cos ) .

         On the left of the point A the flux comes from scattering in the region of the air meatus

    (3c)                                 Al( ) = 

o exp(

r) dr +   w( ) exp(

z( )) =

(  z

)

o

                                                      =   o [1

exp(

z( ))] +  w( ) exp(

z( ))

where   z( )  is the wall distance and   w( )  is the flux scattered on the chamber wall, as defined
by eq(1).    Since in general the radius of the chamber is much larger than R , one may assume the
distance   z( ) 
flux hitting on the point A of the sphere

s /cos  . Subtracting the flux  Ar( ) from the flux  Al( ),  one gets the actual

(4) 

A( ) 

o  [1

exp( 2

R cos )] 

 [ o

w( )] exp(

s /cos ).

          Now we calculate with the same procedure the flux hitting on the point C

   (4a)                       C( ) 

o [1

exp( 2

R cos )] 

 [ o

w( )]  exp(

(s+2R)/cos )].

The disturbing force acting on the moving mass is linked to the different pressures due to the
molecule momentum discharged near the points A and C.  The pressure is related to the
molecular flux, which shows the following difference across the test mass diameter

                                     

o/ o = ( C 

A)/ o  = 

sin  [ C( ) 

A( )]d  .

   

2 

o   

          Substituting and putting   w( ) =  w( )/ o ,  one gets the flux difference

(5) 

           

o/ o = 

sin  [1  w( )] [exp(

s /cos ) 

exp(

(s+2R)/cos )]d

   

2 

o   

which confirms that the meatus depression depends on the anisotropy of the flux   w( )  scattered
on the wall.  Through eq(1) we also have

                                                        w( ) = 1 

1 cos  +  2 sin

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7

which, substituting in eq(5) gives the central air depression

    (6)                                        po/po = 

o/ o = [ 1  (  s,  R) 

2  

(  s,  R)]

where the functions

(6a)

(6b)

   

2 

o   

o  

  

 /2

(  s,

R)   = 

sin

cos  [exp(

s /cos ) 

exp(

(s+2R)/cos )]d

(  s,

R)  = 

sin2  [exp(

s /cos ) 

exp(

(s+2R)/cos )] d

depend on the meatus geometry and on the air density   o =
These functions do not appear to have been tabulated . Approximate fitting functions have been
used for calculations, whose accuracy does not appear completely satisfying.
To give a quantitative idea, the relative depression    po /po  had been calculated assuming figures
related to the usual size of a torsion balance.  For instance:

  in the vacuum chamber.

 m/

- Physical parameters : moving mass radius R = 5 mm,  meatus minimum thickness   s = 4 mm,
chamber pressure po = 1 millibar ,  air density  10-3 kg/m3 , macroscopic scattering cross section
   104 m-1 ,  

 40 .

s 

   Substituting in eq(6)  one obtains     po /po 
the molecular flux within the meatus at a pressure of  1 millibar.
   However the chamber pressure  po = 10-5 bar  corresponds a sensible depression     po /po 
3.37x10-3       which largely alters the measured gravitational force.

  4.5x10-19    which shows the high uniformity of

  5. The calculation of the drawing force

             

     The drawing force on the moving mass due to the small lowering of the air pressure
p(r) = mv (r)   within the meatus, is defined by

      (9)                                         

F

2 

r

[p 
o

p(  
r

)]

d 
r

L 

o 

where L = R cos   is the radius of the circular section of the meatus where  p(L) = po .

 Substituting the flux distribution given by eq(2) one gets
                                                             p(r) = mv m (1+ k r2)
and the corresponding depression within the meatus
                                                    po   p(r) =  po [1  ( m/ o) (1+ k r2)].

 Substituting the expression of  k  by eq(2a) one obtains

                                                   po   p(r) =  po (1 

m/ o) (1

r2/L2)

  which, substituted in eq(9), gives us the force
                                           F = ( /2) po L2  

o/ o =  ( /2) po L2    po/po

 where L = R cos   and the relative depression is given by eq(6).
Substituting we obtain the drawing force due to the air effect  when the pressure in the vacuum
chamber is  po
      (10)                       F = ( /2) po (R cos )2 [ 1  (  s,
To give an idea of this force we calculated in Table 1 some figures of   F(po)   for the same
torsion balance apparatus previously examined.

(  s,

R)] .

R)  

2  

 
 

8

       6. Discussion of the numerical results

  From the results reported on Table 1 one can notice that in the assumed torsion balance
apparatus (with light moving mass, R = 5 mm) the drawing force  F(po)  takes a maximum at a
pressure po  10-5 bar  which makes the optical thickness of the meatus about equal to 1.

  This maximum FM  is estimated to rise well over the figure of the measured gravitational force
Fgr  (in general between 10-10  10-11newton). However in the Gershteyn s light torsion balance the
measurement was made at a pressure  po =10-11 bar, so the disturbing force F(po) results about 10-7
times the measured gravitational force.
In the Heyl s heavy balance experiment the measured  Fgr   was of the order of 10-9 newton and the
maximum  FM  rises over Fgr  .  However the disturbing force F(po) at a pressure  po = 1 millibar
results about 1013 times lower than Fgr .

 These few data explain ad abundantiam  why the region of the intermediate pressures between
the millibar and the nanobar was avoided by the experimenters.

  Obviously, what is of interest in the measurements of G is the possible systematic error due to
F(po).  For instance in the case of the advanced measurement of Gundlach & Merkowitz [3]
within a vacuum chamber at  po 
the measured gravitational force.

 10-10  bar, the force F(po)  is estimated to be less than 10-5  times

 Table 1 is linked to a fixed size of the meatus and test mass.  In practice the meatus thickness
may rise to  s  10 mm.   As a consequence the force F(po) results  2 3 times lower than reported
in the Table (at equal figures of 
times lower than po .

s ) since the maximum FM  is displaced toward pressures 2 3

      Table 1   Calculation of the drawing force due to the air m0olecules within the vacuum  chamber
of a gravitational torsion balance.  The assumed geometrical characteristics are :  meatus thickness s =
4mm,  moving mass radius R = 5mm.

Vacuum
pressure
po
(pascal)

Air density

o

     (kg/m3 )

Meatus optical
thickness
s
(m.f.p.)

Molecular flux
depression in
the meatus

Disturbing
drawing force

F(po)               

100

10

1

0.1
10-2
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6

10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7
10-8
10-9
10-10
10-11

40

4

0.4
4x10-2
4x10-3
4x10-4
4x10-5
4x10-6
4x10-7

o/ o
1.4x10-20
2.86x10-4
3.37x10-3
6.74x10-3   
1.8x10-3
4.4x10-4
1.1x10-4
2.8x10-5
8x10-6

(newton)
  1.0x10-23
7.2x10-8
8.4x10-8
1.7x10-8
4.5x10-10
1.1x10-11
2.8x10-13
7x10-15
2x10-16

9

7. The interaction of a quantum wave flux with matter

                                                                                          

The Newton s action at a distance, as well as the experimental detection of the relativistic
gravitational waves (which encounters great difficulties), are perhaps the most puzzling problem
of the present-day physics.  According to G.T.Gillies [3], we think that general relativity
constitutes  the modernized presentation  of the classical gravitational interaction, which did not
receive substantial advancement after Newton.  Some authors firmly deny [19] that general
relativity predicts gravitational waves produced by the motion of bodies.
The problem of the transmission of any physical interaction is linked to the following great
paradigms:

1)  the well experienced field theory requires that any force between two charges or two masses

be transmitted by some kind of waves, which are specific to the interaction,

2)  the Newton s  gravitational mass  is an old paradigm which was accepted without an

adequate criticism in general relativity theory. It works well in the ordinary calculations, but
does not explain (for instance) the problem of the galactic supermassive obscure bodies [20 ]
and generates difficulties in observing the waves imagined to transmit the interaction between
the  gravitational masses .

  Is there anything which restricts the solution of this problem to the experienced paradigms? We
think not.  At any time the research finds new paradigms which interpret the physical evidences
better than the preceding ones.

 The gravitational force between bodies is a physical evidence.  How can a mass feel the force
due to another distant mass?  From the epistemology point of view we have to choose between

- 

- 

accepting a force between distant  gravitational masses  transmitted by the deformation of
the void space; however the void space does not constitute a physical reality interacting with
other physical realities,

accepting a gravitational force quantitatively linked to each mass, but generated from the
action of a surrounding physical agent, such as a flux of particles or quantum waves.

 There is no doubt that the second choice is less embarrassing because we know interactions
where the force between two bodies is generated by an external surrounding flux (particles,
waves, etc.) modified by the mutually shielding bodies.

  In this paper, dedicated to the analysis of G measurement, the generation of a drawing force on
the torsion balance has been shown quantitatively to depend on the air density in the vacuum
chamber. The non-isotropy of the air molecular flux hitting the test mass gives rise to an unknown
disturbing force, which in certain low pressure conditions becomes greater than the measured
gravitational force. 

This  strange  drawing force was not recognised during the past two centuries  because it is
contrary to common belief.  The G experimenters who encountered this disturbance avoided
discussing the problem, preferring to adopt conditions of measurement where it is negligible.
The problem was not solved, but removed.

         Reflections about the gravitational-inertial force

    Part  of  the  physicists  prefer  the  economic  old  concept  of  gravitational-mass  instead  of
joining the complex gravitational force based on the interaction of matter with an isotropic flux of
very  small  waves  (cosmic  quanta)  filling  the  space.   This  paradigm  requires  a  gravitational
constant  depending  on  the  orientation  respect  to  the  fixed  stars  [21],  in  accord  with  the  G
measurement made in 2002 by M.Gershteyn et al.[6].  These waves have a little energy Eo  and a
o  which  results  to  be  equal  to  the  Planck s  length,  while  the  relevant  quantum
wavelength 

10

constant  ho  = Eo o/c  is much smaller than the usual Planck s constant h. The flux of the cosmic
quanta  was  demonstrated  to  be  the  physical  reality  responsible  of  the  relativistic  inertial  forces
[22].    The very high accuracy of the related equations (which induced to believe that the inertial
forces  depend  on  the  space-continuum)  is  due  to  the  very  high  number  of  contemporaneous
collisions upon a particle.  As a consequence of the very high flux, the wavelength of the cosmic
quanta, which do not collide among them, results very small.

 The inertial mass of the elementary particles is proportional to the cross section 
  they show in
 /m = Ao  is a constant
the Compton collisions with the cosmic quanta [22]. As a consequence, 
for any particle.  Differently from classical and relativistic physics, which  explain  the inertial
forces through the motion of particles through the void space, the laws of motion depend on the
collisions between the cosmic quanta and matter.

The cosmic quanta easily cross the celestial bodies (excepting the very dense neutron stars)
leaving on each mass a little momentum proportional to the shield due to an other mass.  This
momentum is responsible for a drawing force linked exactly to the inverse square distance,
because a mass of (M/m) nucleons with inertial cross section 
towards the cosmic flux related to the solid angle
                                                            (r) = M  /m 2 r2   = AoM / 2 r2
which originates the Newton s gravitational force linked to the constant

  makes (at a distance r) a shield

                                                      G =Ko oEoAo

2/4 c

depending on the cosmic quanta characteristics [22].

   The principle of equivalence states that inertial and gravitational mass are equal, as
experimentally verified with an exceedingly high degree of accuracy.  Is there a link between the
above gravitation theory and this principle ? The answer is that the theory verifies entirely the
strong principle of equivalence,  since both inertia and gravitation descend from the same
physical phenomenon, i.e. the collision process between the elementary particles and the cosmic
quanta flux.  The elementary particles of each mass receive, colliding with the flux, the inertial
forces, whereas the flux modification due to the mutual shielding between masses generates a
drawing force which is known as the gravitational force.    

Someone may ask: Why leave the paradigm of  gravitational-mass  when the practical effects

of the two paradigms appear to be similar ?
There are many reasons to do this. The most basic one is that the old  gravitational-mass
undergoes the embarrassing unlimited collapse, which produces the infinite compression of
matter. This inconsistency rules out of physics the unlimited collapse.
As a consequence, rational science can do nothing else but to reject even the gravitational-mass
paradigm..

References

1  C.C. Speake, T.J. Quinn, Meas. Sci. Technol. 10,420 (1999)

2   P.R.Heyl , Proceed. National Academy of  Sciences 13, 601-605 (1927)

3   G.T. Gillies, Metrologia 24, 1-56, (1987)

4   J.Luo, Z.K. Hu, Class. Quantum Gravit. 17, 2351-2363 (2000)

11

5   R. Kritzer, www.physics.uni-wuerzburg.de (2003)

6 - J.H.Gundlach, S.M.Merkowitz , arxiv:gr-qc/0006043 v2   (Aug. 2000)

7   M.L.Gershteyn et al., arxiv : physics/0202058 (2002)

8   Z.K.Hu, J.Luo, Journal Korean Physical society, 45, S128-S131 (2004)

9   J.Luo, Z.K.Hu, X.H.Fu, S.H.Fan, M.X.Tang , Physical Review D, 59,042001 (1998)        

10   G.G. Luther, W.R. Towler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48(3), 121-123 (1981)        

11   J.H. Gundlach, G.L. Smith, E.G. Adelberger, et al. , Phys. Rev. Lett. 78(13), 2523 (1997)        

12   Y. Su, B.R. Heckel, H.G. Adelgerger, J.H. Gundlach, et al., Phys. Rev. D 50(6),3614        

13   A.J. Sanders, W.E. Deeds, Phys. Rev. D 46(2), 489 (1991)        

14   G.I. More, F.D. Stacey, G.J. Tuck, et al., Phys. Rev. D 38(4), 1023 (1988)        

15   O.V.Karagioz , V.P. Izmailov, G.T. Gillies, Gravit. & Cosmol. 4, 239 (1998)

        16 - R.C. Ritter, L.I. Winkler, G.T.Gillies, Meas. Sci. Technol. 10,499-507 (1999)        

17   M.P. Fitzgerald, , T.R. Armstrong, Meas. Sci. Technol. 10,439-444 (1999)        

18   J.H. Gundlach, Meas. Sci. Technol. 10,454-459 (1999)

        19 - A. Loinger, arxiv: physics/0606019 v1 (Jun 2006)        

20   M. Michelini, arxiv: physics/0509097 (Sept 2005)        

21   M. Michelini, arxiv: physics/0509017 (Sept.2005)

        22 - M. Michelini, arxiv: physics/0607136 (July 2006)

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.win2pdf.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.
This page will not be added after purchasing Win2PDF.

