Review of criticisms of ballistic pressure wave experiments, the Strasbourg goat tests, 
and the Marshall and Sanow data 

Michael Courtney, PhD
Ballistics Testing Group, Western Carolina University, Cullowhee, NC 28723
Michael_Courtney@alum.mit.edu

Amy Courtney, PhD
Department of Biology, Southwestern Community College, Sylva, NC 28779
Amy_Courtney@post.harvard.edu

Abstract:
This article reviews published  criticisms of several ballistic pressure  wave experiments authored  by Suneson  et al., 
the Marshall and Sanow “one shot stop” data set, and the Strasbourg goat tests.  These published criticisms contain 
numerous logical and rhetorical fallacies, are generally exaggerated, and fail to convincingly support the overly broad 
conclusions they contain.
12 December 2006

Introduction

I.
Selecting  service  caliber  handgun  loads  with  the  greatest 
potential for rapid incapacitation of violent criminal or terrorist 
attackers is of great interest in the law enforcement community 
[PAT89].  This interest has fueled heated debate regarding the 
scientific merits of some contributions.

There are many examples in the scientific literature addressing 
research  of  questioned  quality.    However,  the  use  of  ad 
hominem  attack  and  other  rhetorical  fallacies  is  relatively rare 
in  the  peer-reviewed  literature.    One  example  where  the 
scientific  community  is  constantly  striving  to  counter  low-
quality  science  is  in  the  area  of  claimed  health  benefits  of 
certain foods or nutritional supplements.  Literature addressing 
this  kind  of  pseudo-science  shows  greater  care,  respect,  and 
restraint  from  using  fallacies  and  exaggerations  than  the 
ballistics literature reviewed here.

This  review  of  exaggerated  criticisms  is  more  explicit  than 
many articles in reminding readers of the essential elements of 
scientific  method  and  publication,  because  this  article  should 
be understood by the layman as well as the trained scientist.

II. Position being defended in critical reviews
It  is  generally  agreed  that  bullet  design  plays  at  least  as 
important  a  role  in  bullet  effectiveness  as  the  cartridge  from 
which  it  is  fired.    However,  it  is  still  widely  debated  whether 
the  only  contributing  factors  to  the  effectiveness  of  different 
loads  are  the  volume  of  crushed  tissue  and  penetration  depth 
[PAT89].    Crushed  tissue  volume  and  penetration  clearly 
contribute  to  bullet  effectiveness  through  the  physiological 
consequences of blood loss. Over the years, mechanisms more 
heavily dependent on energy transfer have been suggested such 
as  hydrostatic  shock,  hydraulic  reaction,  and  the  temporary 
stretch cavity.  Authors who suggest these mechanisms usually 

have  something  in  mind  more  or  less  related  to  a  ballistic 
pressure wave.  

The  view  that  the  crushed  tissue  volume  (the  permanent 
cavity)  [PAT89,  FAC87a,  FAC96a,  MAC94]  is  the  only 
reliable  contributor  to  incapacitation  (for  handgun  bullet 
placements  that  do  not  hit  the  central  nervous  system  or 
supporting  bone  structure)  depends  strongly  on  the  unproven 
presupposition that easily detectable wounding1 is necessary to 
contribute to incapacitation.  Fackler summarizes the position 
that  there  are  only  two  wounding  mechanisms  for  all  bullet 
injuries [FAC87a]:

Tissue  crush  is  responsible  for  what  is  commonly  called  the 
permanent  cavity  and  tissue  stretch  is  responsible  for  the  so-called 
temporary cavity.  These are the sole wounding mechanisms.

Duncan  MacPherson  [MAC94  p63]  gives  the  reasoning 
behind the assertion that temporary cavitation plays little or no 
role in incapacitation via handgun bullets:

The short barrels of practical handguns limit the bullet velocities that 
can be reasonably achieved.  Testing has shown that the diameter of 
handgun bullet temporary cavities is usually less than 10 centimeters 
(4  inches)  even  at  depths  near  the  surface  that  do  not  contain  vital 
organs.    The  strain  produced  by  these  small  cavities  is  below  the 
elastic  limit  in  most  tissue,  and  so  there  is  usually  little  or  no 
damage.   There  are  impact areas  where  temporary  cavity produced 
by  handgun  bullets  causes  wound  trauma  incapacitation,  but  these 
areas  are relatively small.  Bullet impact in these atypical  tissues is 
by chance, not intent, and this is unlikely because these areas are a 
small  fraction  of  the  total.    The  temporary  cavity  produced  by 
handgun  bullets 
trauma 
incapacitation.
                                                
1 By this we mean wounding typically observed by a trauma surgeon 
or medical examiner.

is  usually  not  a 

in  wound 

factor 

1

Since  these  authors  assert  that  there  are  only  two  projectile 
wounding  mechanisms  (permanent  cavitation  and  temporary 
cavitation),  and  that  handgun  bullets  do  not  create  significant 
wounding  via  temporary  cavitation,  they  conclude  that  the 
permanent cavity (crushed tissue volume) is the only wounding 
mechanism in handgun bullets.  This is summarized by Patrick 
[PAT89]:

The  tissue  disruption  caused  by  a  handgun  bullet  is  limited  to  two 
mechanisms.    The  first,  or  crush  mechanism  is  the  hole  the  bullet 
makes  passing  through  tissue.    The  second,  or  stretch  mechanism  is 
the temporary cavity formed by the tissues being driven outward in a 
radial  direction  away  from  the  path  of  the  bullet.    Of  the  two,  the 
crush  mechanism,  the  result  of  penetration  and  permanent  cavity,  is 
the only handgun wounding mechanism which damages tissue.

Most  of  the  criticisms  considered  here  are  either  authored  by 
proponents of this view or published in a journal  whose editor 
is a proponent of this view.

A recurring comment in articles expressing this view is that the 
pressure  wave  does  not  move  or  damage  tissue  [FAC87a, 
MAC94].  This is based on an experiment from 1947 [HKO47], 
as  well  as  the  observation  that  the  ultra-sonic  shock  waves  of 
lithotripsy do not damage tissue.

Harvey et al. [HKO47] studied macroscopic effects of pressure 
waves  on  tissue,  but  did  not  consider  neurological  tissue,  and 
tissue  was  not  examined  with  any  advanced  microscopic  or 
chemical  technique  needed  to  detect  damage  caused  by 
pressure  waves  in  neurological  tissue.    Reliance  on  Harvey  et 
al. to support the view that pressure waves do not contribute to 
neurological  wounding  or  incapacitation  contains  several 
errors:


The presupposition that macroscopic movement is required 
for tissue damage.
The  presupposition  that  neurological  wounding  would 
have  been  observed  in  these  experiments  with  the  older 
techniques employed.
The  presupposition  that  easily  observable  wounding  is 
necessary for incapacitation.





The assertion that lithotriptors prove that pressure waves do not 
damage tissue is often phrased something like [FAC96a]:

A modern researcher wishing to study the sonic pressure wave could 
avoid the confounding effects of cavitation by using a lithotriptor.  The 
lithotriptor generates sonic pressure waves without using a projectile, 
therefore  yielding  no  temporary  cavity  .  .  .  these  sonic  waves do  not 
significantly harm the surrounding tissue.  

Not  only  does  this  suggested  experimental  design  have  the 
problem  that  ballistic  pressure  waves  are  much  broader  in 
frequency  spectrum  than  lithotriptor  waves,  more  recent 
research  has  revealed  that  the  pressure  waves  associated  with 

lithotripsy  do  indeed  have  the  potential  for  significant  tissue 
injury [EWL98, LOS01, LKK03].  

Proponents  of  the  view  that  wounding  and  incapacitation 
depend  only  on  permanent  and  temporary  cavitation  have 
done  considerable  research  validating  the  performance  of 
ballistic gelatin as a reliable tissue simulant [MAC94, FAC94, 
WOL91]  and  have  been  vocal  proponents  of  the  idea  that 
expanded  bullet  diameter  and  penetration  (parameters  easily 
measured  in  gelatin)  are  the  only  reliable  contributors  to 
incapacitation  via  handgun  bullets.    However,  they  have  not 
published  careful  studies  correlating  observed  metrics  of 
incapacitation  with  easily  observable  wounding  or  these 
parameters easily measured in gelatin.

In  defending  their  position  in  light  of  contrary  research 
findings, they have relied primarily on exaggerated criticisms 
of these research findings and personal attacks on the authors 
rather  than  publishing  or  referencing  incapacitation  data  to 
support their position.

Exaggerated  criticisms  of  ballistic  pressure  wave 

III.
experiments of Suneson et al.
Suneson et al. [SHS90a, SHS90b] report that peripheral high-
energy  missile  hits  to  the  thigh  of  anesthetized  pigs  cause 
pressure  changes  and  damage  to  the  central  nervous  system.  
This  experimental  study  on  pigs  used  high-speed  pressure 
transducers  implanted  in  the  thigh,  abdomen,  neck,  carotid 
artery, and brain [SHS90a p282]:

A small transducer . . . mounted in the end of a polyethylene catheter 
.  .  .  was  implanted  into  the  cerebral  tissue  in  the  left  frontoparietal 
region  about  10  mm  from  the  midline  and  5  mm  beneath  the  brain 
surface through a drill hole (6-mm diameter).

The sensor implanted in the brain measured pressure levels as 
high  as  46  PSI  and  50  PSI  for  pigs  shot  in  the  thigh  as 
described.    (See  Figure  2C  and  2D  [SHS90a  p284].)    The 
average  peak  positive  pressure  to  the  brain  over  the  different 
test shots with that set-up was 34.7 PSI +/- 9.7 PSI.  The error 
individual 
range  does  not 
measurements,  but  rather  uncertainty  in  determination  of  the 
mean  because  of  significant  shot-to-shot  variations  in  the 
pressure  magnitude  reaching  the  brain.    (For  a  given  local 
pressure  wave  magnitude  in  the  thigh,  the  distant  pressure 
wave magnitude in the brain will show variation.)

represent  uncertainty 

in 

Apneic (non-breathing) periods were observed during the first 
few  seconds  after  the  shot,  and  both  blood-brain  and  blood-
nerve  barrier  damage  were  found.      They  concluded  “distant 
effects,  likely  to  be  caused  by  the  oscillating  high-frequency 
pressure  waves,  appear  in  the  central  nervous  system  after  a 
high-energy missile extremity impact.”

Fackler  published  a  reply  [FAC91a,  see  also  FAC89a], 
asserting that “Shock Wave” is a myth:

2

In  ascribing  “local,  regional,  and  distant  injuries”  to  the  sonic 
pressure wave, Suneson et al. have overlooked the effect of transmitted 
tissue  movement  from  temporary  cavitation.    Since  two  distinct 
mechanisms  are  acting  in  the  Suneson  et.al  experiment,  one  cannot 
arbitrarily assign any effects observed to only one of them.

Fackler continues:

that  Fackler’s  swine  experiments  contradict 

the 

assert 
conclusions of Suneson et al.

Fackler’s reply has several major flaws:


that 

the  wave 

Fackler employs the straw  man fallacy by referring to the 
pressure  wave  studied  by  Suneson  et  al.  as  “the  sonic 
pressure  wave.”  The authors  studied a  “shock” wave and 
stated 
includes  ultrasonic  frequency 
components up to 250 kHz.  In addition, Fackler considers 
the  “sonic  pressure  wave”  to  be  limited  to  a  very  short 
(several  microseconds)  pulse  that  precedes  temporary 
cavitation.    Suneson  et  al.  are  describing  effects  of 
pressure waves with a longer duration (roughly 1 ms). 
Fackler creates a false dichotomy to divide effects beyond 
the permanent crush cavity into only the temporary cavity 
and  the  “sonic”  pressure  wave.    The  pressure  wave 
consists of every force per unit area that can be detected by 
a  high-speed  pressure  sensor.    The  leading  edge  of  the 
pressure  wave  travels  at  sonic  velocity,  but  the  pressure 
wave also has components that propagate more slowly.
Tissue  movement  by  cavitation  is  not  distinct  from  the 
ballistic  pressure  wave.    (One  can  consider  temporary 
cavitation  an  effect  of  the  inertial  component  of  the 
pressure  wave  [FAC96a].)    Consequently,  ascribing  the 
local  neural 
is  not 
unreasonable, though Fackler is correct to point out that in 
the  local  region,  the  pressure  wave  effects  cannot  be 
distinguished from temporary cavitation effects.
Suneson  et  al.  also  report  regional  and  distant  effects 
beyond the reach of the temporary cavity.   Nerve damage 
is observed as far as 0.5 m away from the wound channel.  
These  regional  and  distant  effects  cannot  be  ascribed  to 
temporary cavitation.

the  pressure  wave 

injuries 

to 







Fackler continues:

Recently,  eleven  adult  human-sized  swine  (90  kg)  were  shot  in  the 
proximal part of the hind leg with a projectile producing the damage 
profile of the Russian AK-74 Assault rifle bullet.  This same projectile 
was used in another study in which five 90 kg swine were shot through 
the  abdomen  …No  indication  of  any  sort  of  “distant”  damage  was 
seen  in  the  pigs’  behavior  and  no  “distant”  injuries  were  found  at 
autopsy.

The  methodology  of  Fackler’s  pig  experiments  [FBC89]  is 
significantly  different  from  that  of  Suneson  et  al.,  who  report 
that  the  neural  damage  is  not  easily  observable,  but  rather 
depends upon examination with light and electron microscopy.  
The  effects  that  Suneson  et  al.  report  “were  evident  a  few 
minutes  after  the  trauma  and  persisted  even  48  hr  after  the 
extremity injury.”  In Fackler’s experiments, autopsies were not 
performed  until  weeks  or  months  later.    With  such  great 
differences  in  experimental  methodology,  it  is  unfounded  to 

A  review  of  1400  rifle  wounds  from  Vietnam  (Wound  Data  and 
Munitions  Effectiveness  Team)  should  lay  to  rest  the  myth  of 
“distant” injuries.  In that study, there were no cases of bones being 
broken,  or  major  vessels  torn,  that  were  not  hit  by  the  penetrating 
bullet.

It  is  unreasonable  to  refute  modern  observations  (using  new 
methods) of microscopic damage to nerve cells by referring to 
the  absence  of  observations  of  broken  bones  or  torn  blood 
vessels  in  Vietnam-era  observations  from  trauma  surgeons.  
The  Vietnam-era  study  was  not  looking  for  distant  nerve 
damage  and  did  not employ the  methods  used by  Suneson  et 
al.  

Distant injuries are not a “myth” as Fackler claims.  Suneson 
et  al.  finds  agreement  with  later  experiments  in  dogs 
conducted  by  an  independent  research  group  using  a  similar 
method [WWZ04]:

The most prominent ultrastructural changes observed at 8 hours after 
impact were myelin deformation, axoplasmic shrinkage, microtubular 
diminution, and reactive changes of large neurons in the high-speed 
trauma  group.    These  findings  correspond  well  to  the  results  of 
Suneson et al., and confirmed that distant effect exists in the central 
nervous system after a high-energy missile impact to an extremity.  A 
high-frequency  oscillating  pressure  wave  with  large  amplitude  and 
short duration was found in the brain after the extremity impact of a 
high-energy missile . . . 

This  experiment  in  dogs  is  not  the  only  evidence  in  the 
literature  tending  to  confirm  the  findings  of  Suneson  et  al.  
The  lateral  fluid  percussion  model  of  traumatic  brain  injury 
has demonstrated conclusively that transient pressure pulses in 
the  same  magnitude  range  as  observed  by Suneson  et al.  can 
cause  traumatic  brain  injury  and  incapacitation  [THG97, 
  A  study  in  humans 
TLM05,  and  references  therein]. 
[OBW94]  also  supports  the  idea  of  remote  pressure  wave 
damage.

IV. Exaggerated criticisms of the Strasbourg goat tests
The  Strasbourg  Tests  [STR93]  studied  handgun  bullet 
effectiveness  in  goats  by  shooting  the  animals  broadside 
through  the  center  of  the  chest  and  recording  the  time  to 
incapacitation  (falling  down).    The  published  data  includes 
incapacitation  times  from  shooting  580  goats  with  116 
different handgun loads.  

These  tests  employed  a  pressure  sensor  inserted  into  the 
carotid  artery  of  live  unanaesthetized  goats.    These  tests 
directly suggest that  an internal  pressure  wave  created  by the 
interaction  of  the  bullet  and  tissue  can  contribute  to  rapid 

3

incapacitation and can incapacitate more quickly than the crush 
cavity/blood loss mechanism alone [STR93]:  

In a substantial number of cases, the subject was incapacitated almost 
instantly.    Each  time  this  occurred,  between  two  and  five  pressure 
spike tracings of high amplitude and short duration were found which 
immediately  preceded  and  matched  corresponding,  diffused,  or 
flattened  lines  (EEG  tracings).    Normally,  the  time  lag  between  the 
first pressure spike and the beginning of slowed or flattened lines was 
between  30  and  40  milliseconds  (although  there  were  several  cases 
where  this  delay  lasted  as  long  as  80  milliseconds)…The  taller 
pressure  spike  tracings  always  preceded  the  slowed  or  flat  line 
tracing…The  initial  spikes had  to  be of  a  certain  height  in  order  for 
the animal to collapse immediately.

The  average  incapacitation  times  show  good  correlation  (R 
=0.91)  with  an  empirical  model  based  on  pressure  wave 
magnitude [COC06c].  The relationship between pressure wave 
and incapacitation times in the  Strasbourg tests2 are consistent 
with  the  Suneson  et  al.  observations  [SHS90a,  SHS90b, 
SHK90, SHL89, SHS88, SHS87], the Wang et al. observations 
in dogs [WWZ04], observations of incapacitation and traumatic 
brain  injury  in  fluid  percussion  model  research  [THG97, 
TLM05,  and  references  therein],  as  well  as  an  incapacitation 
study in deer [COC06d].

However, the Strasbourg tests have been severely criticized on 
a number of points [FAC94a, FAC97a]. 

in  a  scientific 

Ad hominem and bandwagon fallacies

A.
Usually  a  concluding  paragraph 
journal 
summarizes  the  main  points  of  the  article,  draws  conclusions, 
or  suggests  areas  of  possible  future  research.    Outside  of  the 
critical  works  referenced  and  examined  here,  debate  in  the 
peer-reviewed  journals  is  almost  completely  free  of  ad 
hominem  attacks,  appeal  to  ridicule,  and  the  bandwagon 
fallacy.   

The  conclusion  of  Fackler’s  criticism  on  the  Strasbourg  tests 
contains a curious combination of all three [FAC94a]:

The  only  people  who  think  the  “Strasbourg  Tests”  are  real  are  the 
usual crowd of crackpot “magic bullet” believers and the pathetically 
incompetent editors of consumer gun magazines like Guns & Ammo.  I 
suppose  we’ll  soon  see  anonymous  reports  “proving”  that  Elvis  is 
alive and conducting one shot stop experiments on unicorns.  And, of 
course, someone will believe that too.

This  kind  of  attack  and  fallacious  reasoning  is  expected  in 
political ad campaigns and internet discussion groups, but it is 
shocking to find it in the peer-reviewed literature.

results 

If the report is a fraud, attempts to repeat the experiment would 
obtain  different 
(significantly  different  average 
incapacitation  times,  for  example)  than  those  reported.   In the 
                                                
2 More detailed time-domain analysis also reveals a fast incapacitation 
mechanism that correlates well with peak pressure magnitude.

absence  of  conclusive  eyewitness,  documentary,  or  physical 
evidence of fraud, failure to repeat experimental results under 
the  same  conditions  is  the  only  sound  scientific  basis  for  a 
definitive conclusion that results are fraudulent.3

Fallacy of expert opinion/appeal to authority
B.
It  is  untrue  that  expert  opinion  rather  than  repeatable 
experiments  is  the  ultimate  arbiter  of  scientific  truth.    The 
Copernican  model  of  a  heliocentric  solar  system  was  right, 
even though the experts of his day disagreed.  The theory that 
DNA  contains  the  inherited  genetic  information  was  not 
immediately accepted  by the  experts  of the day.   It  was right 
because 
repeatable 
it  was  ultimately  confirmed  by 
experiments.  The theory of cold fusion wasn’t wrong because 
expert opinion held it to be impossible, it was wrong because 
all the attempts to repeat it have failed.

In  the  absence  of  attempts  to  repeat  an  experiment,  the  best 
that  expert  opinion  and  peer  review  can  offer  is  an  early 
assessment on the likely validity and value of a new scientific 
claim  or  result.    Ultimate  validity  and  value  can  only  be 
determined in the light of work repeating the original, whether 
precisely  or  in  ways  that  attempt  to  confirm  the  same 
principles as the original.

Yet in Fackler’s review of Strasbourg, the initial opinion of a 
small  group  of  experts  is  taken  to  establish  with  finality  (see 
the  conclusion  quoted  above)  the  fraudulent  nature  of  the 
report, and this without eyewitness, documentary, or physical 
evidence suggesting fraud [FAC94a]:

The FBI committee, which includes a half dozen of the world’s most 
highly  regarded  gunshot-expert  forensic  pathologists,  felt  that  the 
organization  and  wording  of  the  document  betrayed  it  as  a  hoax.  
Why else would experimental results be circulated anonymously?

Reputable scientists put their names on their work, take responsibility 
for it and respond to critical reviews by their colleagues.   

The  matter  of  anonymous  authorship  will  be  addressed 
separately.    However,  if  full  disclosure  of  contributing 
scientist identity is so important to the validity of a work, one 
wonders  why the  author  fails  to  name  these  six  “most  highly 
respected gunshot-expert forensic pathologists.”  

If  “review  of  a  work  by  other  recognized  scientists  is 
mandatory before any results  are accepted as valid” then why 
do six contributors of the opinion that the Strasbourg tests are 
a  hoax  remain  anonymous?    The  FBI  committee  remains 

                                                
3 And even then, many researchers would be given the benefit of the 
doubt  and  the  discrepancy  would  tend  to  be  considered  as 
uncontrolled conditions, an invisible factor impacting the outcome, or 
an  unexplained  glitch.    Most  scientists  are  slow  to  reach  the 
conclusion of fraud.  However, combined with anonymity, failure to 
repeat  an  experiment  would  probably  be  considered  sufficient 
grounds for fraud. 

4

anonymous  while  stating  anonymity  as  the  criterion  used  to 
determine that the Strasbourg report is a hoax.  

review  articles  where  he  presents  his  side  of  the  debate  
[FAC96a, FAC88a].  

Fackler’s  appeal  to  authority  is  fallacious  because  it  fails  to 
meet  the  several  widely  accepted  standards  for  appeal  to 
authority. 4

A third requirement violated by Fackler’s fallacious appeal to 
authority is:



The  claim  being  made  by  the  person  is  within  their  area(s)  of 
expertise.

If a person makes a claim about some subject outside of his area(s) of 
expertise, then the person is not an expert in that context.  Hence, the 
claim in question is not backed by the required degree of expertise and 
is not reliable.

The  science  of  ballistic  incapacitation  combines  physics, 
wounding,  neurology,  physiology,  and  behavior. 
  No 
traditionally 
trained  doctor  or  scientist  qualifies  as  an 
authoritative  expert  to  the  degree  that  their  opinion  is 
believable  without  reference  to  repeatable  experiments  to 
support their point.  

trained  and  experienced 

Forensic  pathologists  are 
in 
determining the cause of death that is not necessarily the same 
as the cause of incapacitation.  Bullets that do not hit the CNS 
often kill by blood loss, but this takes at least several minutes.  
A  forensic  pathologist  almost  never  performs  the  sensitive 
microscopic  examination  required  to  detect  diffuse  axonal 
injury or chemical tests to determine whether remote injury to 
the brain might have caused incapacitation prior to death.  

In the absence of authoritative experts in the science of ballistic 
incapacitation,  sound  arguments  must  always 
to 
repeatable  experiments  rather  than  expert  opinion/appeal  to 
authority.

refer 

Another requirement for a valid appeal to authority is:



There  is  an  adequate  degree  of  agreement  among  the  other 
experts in the subject in question.

If there is a significant amount of legitimate dispute among the experts 
within  a  subject,  then  it  will  be  fallacious  to  make  an  Appeal  to 
Authority  using  the disputed  experts.  This  is because  for almost any 
claim  being  made  and  “supported”  by  one  expert,  there  will  be  a 
counterclaim  that  is  made  and  “supported”  by  another  expert.    In 
such  cases  an  Appeal  to  Authority  would  tend  to  be  futile.    In  such 
cases,  the  dispute  has  to  be  settled  by  consideration  of  the  actual 
issues under dispute.

Ongoing disputes in the field of wound ballistics are obvious in 
much of the  literature  reviewed here  as  well as  Fackler’s  own 

                                                
4
  (Italicized  material  on  fallacious  appeal  to  authority  quoted  from 
www.nizkor.org/fallacies/appeal-to-authority.html, 
accessed 
11/4/2006).  

5



The authority in question must be identified.

A common variation of the Appeal to Authority fallacy is an Appeal 
to an Unnamed Authority . . .

This fallacy is committed when a person asserts that a claim is true 
because an expert or authority makes the claim and the person does 
not  actually  identify  the  expert.    Since  the  expert  is  not  named  or 
identified,  there is no way to tell if the person is actually  an expert.  
Unless  the  person  is  identified  and  has  his  expertise  established, 
there is no reason to accept the claim.

Since the six forensic pathologists were not identified, there is 
no reason to accept their opinion that the Strasbourg report is a 
hoax.  

It is difficult to assess whether a fourth requirement for a valid 
appeal to authority is met:



The person in question is not significantly biased.

If an expert is significantly biased then the claims he makes within his 
area  of  bias will  be less reliable.   Since  a  biased  expert will  not be 
reliable,  an  Argument from  Authority  based  on  a  biased  expert  will 
be fallacious.  This is because the evidence will not justify accepting 
the claim.

Since Fackler’s appeal to authority based on the opinion of six 
unnamed  forensic  pathologists  fails  to  meet  at  least  three 
(possibly  four)  of  the  required  criteria  for  valid  appeals  to 
authority, this appeal to authority is fallacious.

C.

Criticisms of experimental design 

i.  Goats are not humans
Variations  of  this  criticism  appear  with  some  regularity,  and 
these  criticisms  are  generally  a  valid  caution  against 
interpreting  the  results  of  bullet  testing  in  goats  directly  for 
selection  of  handgun  ammunition  for  self-defense  against 
humans.  

However, the value in the goat tests is not in the unwarranted 
presupposition that the loads that work best in goats will work 
well  in  humans.    The  value  in  the  goat  tests  is  the  study  of 
different incapacitation mechanisms under carefully controlled 
conditions.    If  a  given  incapacitation  mechanism  is  shown  to 
exist in goats, it might exist in humans also, opening the door
to  further  work  to  establish  links  between  humans  and  the 
animal test subjects.

Head shots destroy necessary evidence

ii.
The Strasbourg test methods included euthanizing the goats by 
shooting  them  in  the  head.    Fackler  asserts  that  this  is  an 
experimental design error:

The  authors  of  the  purported  tests  postulated  some  mysterious 
pressure-mediated  effect  on  the  brain  that  causes  “incapacitation.”  
The  critical part  of any  such  study would be removal of  the  brain  to 
see  if  it  showed  any  physical  evidence  to  account  for  the  postulated 
effects.  In  the  purported  “study,” after the  animals  were shot  in the 
chest,  and  the  time  that  they  remained  standing  recorded,  they  were 
killed BY SHOOTING THEM IN THE HEAD.  This would destroy any 
possibility  of  establishing  the  mysterious  “incapacitation”  postulate 
as fact.

The  fact  that  a  ballistic  pressure  wave  originating  remotely 
reaches  the  brain  and  can  cause  neurological  damage  in  the 
brain had already been established by Suneson et al. in papers 
published  prior  to  the  Strasbourg  tests  [SHS90a,  SHS90b  and 
  The  results  of  microscopic  brain 
references 
examination using modern neurological techniques would have 
had some  value, but it is not essential given the prior  work of 
Suneson et al.  

therein]. 

Suneson  et  al.  linked  pressure  waves  to  neurological  damage.  
The  Strasbourg  design  probes the  link  between  pressure  wave 
and  incapacitation  without  investigating  detailed  mechanisms 
of  neurological  damage.    (Similarly,  a  study  can  link  a 
hazardous  chemical  with  cancer  without  investigating  the 
biomolecular  processes. 
  Biomolecular  details  can  be 
established independently.)

iii. Pressure wave effect should be immediate
Fackler writes:

Even if we presume pressure on the brain from transmitted temporary 
cavitation  via  pressure  pulses  in  the  aorta  and  carotid  vessels  to  be 
large  enough  to  cause  an  effect  on  the  goats,  everything  we  know 
about cerebral physiology and pathology suggests that any such effect, 
if it did occur, would be IMMEDIATE.

This  is  the  accent  fallacy  and  untrue.    As  discussed  later,  the 
pressure  wave  origin  is  not  restricted  to  temporary  cavitation 
compressing  blood  vessels.    Furthermore,  the  kind  of  mild 
traumatic brain  injury (TBI) thought to cause  incapacitation is 
probably  a  mild  (Grade  III)  concussion.    The  unconscious 
period  associated  with  mild  concussion 
is  not  always 
immediate [SHA02].

Fackler continues:

In  the  purported  “Strasbourg  tests”  none  of  the  goats  fell  over  .  .  . 
immediately; in most of the purported tests shots the magic took from 
5 to 40 seconds to work.

The Strasbourg authors do not suggest a pressure wave effect in 
cases where the test subject takes a relatively long time to fall 

down.    In  contrast,  the  pressure  spikes  are  correlated  with 
occasions where the goats fall almost instantly [STR93]:

In  a  substantial  number  of  cases,  the  subject  was  incapacitated 
almost  instantly.    Each  time  this  occurred,  between  two  and  five 
pressure  spike  tracings  of  high  amplitude  and  short  duration  were 
found… 

The  authors  don’t  give  a  precise  time  range  for  “almost 
instantly.”  However, the data shows incapacitation times less 
than  5  seconds  are  only  produced  by  the  highest  pressure 
waves delivered in the chest [COC06c].   Therefore, instances 
where  the  test  subject  falls  in  under  5  seconds  give  clearest 
evidence of a pressure wave mechanism.  Cases where the test 
subject remains standing for 5-40 seconds are instances where 
the pressure wave reaching the brain has little or no impact on 
incapacitation.    In  other  words,  the  blood  loss  mechanism 
seems dominant in these cases.

iv.

Pressure wave via temporary cavitation compressing 
aorta would be smaller in humans

The  objection  that  the  pressure  wave  created  by  temporary 
cavitation  compressing  the  aorta  would  usually  be  smaller  in 
humans  is  true,  but  it  ignores  the  other  components  of  the 
pressure  wave  [FAC96a], 
the  high-frequency 
components  that  Suneson  et  al.  had  already  shown  to 
contribute to TBI [SHS90a, SHS90b, and references therein].

including 

v.

Tests involving live unanesthetized animals would be 
prohibited in the USA

There  are  exceptions  to  the  anesthesia  requirements  in  the 
National Academy of Sciences (NAS) guidelines for research 
conducted  in  a  farm  environment  and  for  research  in  which 
withholding  anesthesia  is  important  to  the  scientific  goals  of 
the experiment.  While wounding can be observed, quantified, 
and studied in test subjects under anesthesia, it is not clear that 
incapacitation  can  be.    If  there  is  reasonable  support  that 
anesthesia might have changed the outcome of the experiment, 
shooting unanesthetized goats would have been allowed.

There  are  also  other  exceptions  in  the  NAS  guidelines  that 
allow  for  shooting  unanesthetized  animals.    Examples  are 
routine  slaughter  and  hunting.    Numerous  gun  writers  have 
reported  studies  of  bullet  performance  in  wild  game.    The 
tests  combined  a  bullet 
Thompson-LaGarde  stockyard 
effectiveness study with livestock [LAG16]5.

Criticisms of experimental results 

Rib  hits  correlate  too  well  with  long  incapacitation 
times 

The Strasbourg report contains the unlikely result that for 115 
of  116  loads  tested  the  case  with  the  longest  incapacitation 

                                                
5 This was before the NAS guidelines, but probably would have been 
allowed under the current rules.

D.

i.

6

time  (in  5  shots)  was  one  in  which  a  rib  was  hit.    Fackler 
assigns a fraudulent motive [FAC94a] to an experimental result 
that can more simply be ascribed to lack of objective criteria to 
determine whether or not a rib was hit.  

... the near perfect correlation of Marshall’s random torso “one-shot 
stops” with the purported goat shot results is strong evidence that the 
anonymous  “Strasbourg  Test”  results  have  been  fabricated  or 
doctored; or the “one-shot stop” results have, or both have.

Since  the  Strasbourg  report  does  not  describe  criteria  for 
determining  whether  a  rib  was  hit,  reservations  about  those 
assignments  are  justified.  Having  shot  numerous  similarly-
sized  deer  ourselves  [COC06d],  it  is  challenging  to  say  with 
certainty  whether  or  not  a  bullet  actually  hit  a  rib  or  whether 
the  rib  was  damaged  by  the  pressure  wave  or  temporary 
cavitation  of  a  near  miss.  Bullets  with  larger  pressure 
waves/cavitation almost always break at least one rib on entry 
in deer, even when placed between two ribs. 

Imaging  techniques  might objectively determine  whether a  rib 
is damaged by a passing bullet but would not indicate whether 
or  not  the  bullet  hit  the  rib.    It  is  not  possible  to  objectively 
determine  whether  or  not  the  bullet  hit  a  rib.    The  error  in 
Strasbourg is the subjective assignment of whether or not a rib 
was  hit.    Thus,  the  Strasbourg  data  set  is  reasonable  for 
incapacitation  times,  but  not  regarding  any  analysis  based  on 
whether or not ribs were hit.

ii.

Invokes  a  “bizarre 
phenomenon”

and 

heretofore 

unexplained 

The  pressure  wave  incapacitation  mechanism  may  have  been 
“unproven”  or  “doubted”  at  the  time  of  the  Strasbourg  report, 
but  there  is  sufficient  reference  to  it  in  both  the  scientific  and 
popular  ballistics  literature  that  referring  to  it  as  “bizarre  and 
heretofore unexplained” is an exaggeration.

Harvey  et  al.  showed  that  bullets  produce  significant  pressure 
waves  [HKO47].    In  tests  conducted  at  the  Aberdeen  Proving 
Grounds  from  1928  to  1930,  Frank  Chamberlain  determined 
that “explosive effects” cause tissue destruction in all directions 
far beyond the wound channel [MAS96 p26-27].  Goransson et 
al.  reported  EEG  suppression  in  pigs  that  was  attributed  to  a 
remote effect [GIK88], and Suneson et al. [SHS90a,  SHS90b] 
to  distant  effects 
injury  attributed 
had 
transmitted  via  pressure  wave  of  a  bullet  striking  the  thigh  in 
pigs.    A  study  in  humans  [OBW94]  later  determined  that 
remote pressure wave effects cause injury in humans.

reported  brain 

Ascribing  wounding  and  incapacitation  to  a  pressure  wave 
(using  either  these  words  or  hydrostatic  shock)  has  a  long 
history in wound ballistics.  Fackler’s knowledge of this history 
is  apparent  in  articles  asserting  his  point  of  view  [FAC87a, 
FAC96a].  There is a difference between supporting one’s own 
view  in  a  scientific  debate  and  pretending  that  the  other  point 
of view is a completely new idea.

iii. “Near perfect” correlation with M&S OSS rating
In a critical review of the second M&S book [MAS96], Fackler 
states [FAC97a]:

This would be a valid point if the Strasbourg results really had 
a  “near-perfect”  correlation  with  the  M&S  OSS  data.    The 
actual correlation coefficient between the Strasbourg tests and 
the OSS data  set depends  on which of the data  sets are  used, 
the model, and the estimation technique.  Steve Fuller reported 
R = 0.92 [MAS96 Ch28], and we found R = 0.87 [COC06b].  
M&S  report  a  Spearman  Rank  Correlation  Coefficient 
between  the  Strasbourg  data  and  their  OSS  rating  as  0.89 
[MAS96  p38].    These  levels  of  correlation  show  substantial 
agreement  without  coming  anywhere  near  the  exaggerated 
claim  that  the  level  of  agreement  is  “near  perfect”  or  “too 
good to be true.”6

iv. Difficulty obtaining 600 goats between 156 and 164 lbs
Obtaining  600  animals  within  2.5%  of  a  target  weight  is  a 
challenging  task,  but  the practical difficulty  in  performing  an 
experiment is not usually considered an indicator of fraud.  In 
addition,  without  knowing  the  market  conditions  local  to  the 
experiment, one cannot ascertain the number of animals from 
which selection was possible.

Those familiar with animal husbandry know that it is possible 
to  purchase  goats  in  a  much  broader  weight  range  (say  140-
175  lbs)  and  bring  most  of  these  goats  into  the  prescribed 
weight  range  within  a  reasonably  short  time  (several  weeks) 
with a carefully controlled diet and monitoring of their weight.  
With  a  carefully  designed  diet,  adult  livestock  in  this  size 
range  can  easily  gain  2-3  lbs  per  week  or  lose  1.5-2  lbs  per 
week without a negative impact on overall health.

E. Criticism of publication details

Anonymity of authors

i.
 Anonymous  authorship  is  the  main  reason  given  by  the  FBI 
committee for concluding that the Strasbourg report is a fraud 
[FAC94a].    In  his  summary  of  their  opinion,  Fackler  asked, 
“Why  else  would  experimental 
results  be  circulated 
anonymously?”

As  researchers  who  ourselves  have  been  involved  with  live 
animal  research  [COC06d,  COC06e],  we  can  describe  some 
reasons:

We  developed  a  method  to  study  handgun  bullets  in  deer 
[COC06d,  COC06e].    In  one  year,  our  hunting  efforts  were 

Avoiding harassment by animal rights fanatics  

                                                
6 Fackler  also  misquotes  M&S  as  finding  an  “extremely  high  rank 
correlation”  between  Strasbourg  and  their  own  data.    Quotation 
marks are usually reserved for exact quotes, but the  actual words of 
M&S  describing  the  correlation  between  Strasbourg  and  the  OSS 
data set are “impressive” and “credible.”

7

disturbed by animal rights activists on a dozen occasions.  We 
also  operated  a  pasture-based  livestock  operation  [CPD02, 
HOL05].  Livestock  were  let  out  of  pastures  on  several 
occasions  by  animal  rights  activists,  and  one  animal  was 
“rescued” (stolen).  One of the authors (MC) was threatened by 
an  animal  rights  activist  with  a  shotgun.  Other  deer 
management  operations  in  the  county  were  subjected  to 
litigation by the animal rights activists.

Scientists  connected  to  live  animal  research  are  frequently 
subjected to harassment and threats from animal rights activists 
and prefer to be discreet.  This is widely recognized in the law 
enforcement,  scientific  and  firearms  communities    (Editorial, 
American Rifleman, Dec 2005 p10):

PETA7 wants to stop medical advancements that use animal research 
in any way.

and

PETA's agenda is being forced upon society with acts of violence and 
terrorism . . . This eco-terrorism movement is so  dangerous, the FBI 
has declared it America's No. 1 domestic terrorist threat on American 
soil  .  .  .  Scientists,  doctors  and  their  families  are  having  property 
destroyed  and are getting hate mail,  letters loaded with razor blades 
and rat poison, and death threats and bomb threats.

Avoiding difficulty at home institutions

Nondisclosure agreement with funding source


Even  though  the  Strasbourg  tests  could  have  been  legally 
conducted under the NAS guidelines, it is a borderline case that 
could  result  in  litigation.    An  overzealous  prosecutor,  an 
activist judge, or an animal rights lawyer could create grief and 
expense  for  the  scientists  and  funding  source,  even  if  they 
ultimately  prevailed  in  court.    The  simplest  and  cheapest  way 
to avoid potential legal battles is to maintain anonymity.

Most participating scientists in this kind of project maintain full 
time  jobs  in  faculty  or  medical  positions.    Both  the  animal 
rights  and  the  anti-gun  interests  at  many  educational  and 
medical  institutions  can  stir  up  trouble  for  participants  in 
research projects that are not “politically correct.”  Most of the 
educational  and  medical  community  is  unfriendly  to  firearms 
and live animal research that is perceived as “borderline.”
Nondisclosure agreement with site and/or colleagues

One  site  where  our  live  animal  research  was conducted  asked 
not to be identified, and several contributing/advising scientists 
asked to remain anonymous.    

Does  anonymous  publication of scientific results  imply  fraud?  
Completely  anonymous  publication  of  scientific  results  is 
relatively  rare,  but  there  are  notable  historical  exceptions.  
Copernicus delayed publication of his heliocentric model of the 
solar system until after his death to avoid persecution from the 

                                                
7 PETA is the name of an activist animal rights group, People for the 
Ethical Treatment of Animals.

Inquisition.    Under  similar  threat,  Galileo  published  some  of 
his  results  under  a  pseudonym.    A  precursor  to  Darwin’s 
“Origin  of  the  Species”  entitled  Vestiges  of  the  Natural 
History  of  Creation  was  also  published  anonymously 
(eventually credited to Robert Chambers).8  

Many  pretend  that  they  would  boldly  stand  by  their  ideas  in 
spite  of  fears  of  negative  consequences,  telling  themselves 
they would not have feared the Inquisition and shrunk back in 
the  manner  of  Galileo  and  Copernicus.    But  few  men 
demonstrate the level of bravery we all hope to possess.

Who,  when presented  with a table of his “heretical” writings, 
would say to the Inquisition not only “yes these are mine” but 
also  “and  I  have  written  others”?    Who,  facing  fear  of  death 
and imprisonment would refuse to recant his writings and say 
bravely,  “Here  I  stand,  I  cannot  do  otherwise”?    While  there 
are notably few men like the original Martin Luther [BAI50], 
there  are  many  more  men  like  Copernicus  and  Galileo  who 
prefer  to  publish  posthumously  or  anonymously,  and  even 
many more who simply remain silent.  

Willingness to suffer negative legal, professional, and personal 
consequences  for  controversial  work  is  admirable.   However, 
it  is  not  essential  to  validity.    Maybe  a  modern  day  Martin 
Luther  can  criticize  the  Strasbourg  authors  for  remaining 
anonymous, but we will not.  

Documentation not available

ii.
It  is  frequently  mentioned  regarding  the  Strasbourg  tests  that 
experiments  are  not  valid  unless  accompanied  by  video  or 
photographic documentation.  However, it is not true that this 
level  of  documentation  always  accompanies  live  animal 
research  studies.    Authors  of  live  animal  research  studies  are 
careful  not 
rights  activists  with 
photographic evidence that can be presented in court to obtain 
a  restraining  order  or  posted  on  a  web  site  to  enhance  a 
funding campaign or ignite protests.

to  provide  animal 

researchers 

The  standard  of  documentation  in  any  scientific  study  is  a 
the  methods  and  results  sufficient  for 
description  of 
independent 
experiment.  
to 
Photographs  and  diagrams  need  only  accompany  a  report  to 
the degree necessary to communicate the essential elements of 
the method and results.  The existing Strasbourg report meets 
this  standard  without  the  inclusion  of  photographs.    An 
independent research group could shoot similar goats with the 

repeat 

the 

                                                
8 United States history also has examples of important and influential 
works  published  anonymously;  the  Federalist  Papers  are  the  most 
notable  example.    In  addition,  Ben  Franklin  had  a  number  of 
anonymous  publications,  including  not  only  political  but  also 
scientific  works. 
  Should  some  of  Ben  Franklin’s  scientific 
contributions  be  considered  fraudulent  because  they  were  published 
under a pseudonym?

8

same  shot  placement  and  observe  whether  the  incapacitation 
times are consistent with the original report.

The burden of proof for proponents of a scientific theory is to 
provide  evidence  supporting  that  theory  in  the  results  of 
repeatable  experiments.    In  the  absence  of  governmental  or 
institutional  requirements  mandating  a  specified  level  of 
documentation,  the  repeatability  of  an  experiment (rather  than 
the documentation) is generally considered to meet this burden 
of proof.

The burden of proof for those asserting a scientific  fraud rests 
with  those  asserting  fraud.    It  is  fallacious  for  those  asserting 
fraud to  assume  a  posture  of  “guilty  until proven  innocent”  in 
the  absence  of  any  eyewitness,  documentary,  or  physical 
evidence of fraud.  Shifting the burden to the original authors to 
prove themselves innocent of a fraud accusation is an example 
of the burden of proof fallacy.

Conclusion on Strasbourg
In  the  absence  of  support  or  direct  contradiction  from  other 
experiments,  the  veracity  of  the  Strasbourg  tests  should  fairly 
be  considered  to  be  an  open  question.   Neither the  anonymity 
of  the  authors  nor  other  criticisms  offered  are  sufficient  to 
consider the report fraudulent.  Rather than lean too heavily on 
(possibly  biased)  expert  opinions,  the  veracity  of  the  report 
should  be  determined  by  the  degree  to  which  the  reported 
results find support in other experimental findings.

The principle observations of the Strasbourg tests find support 
in  the  results  of  studies  in  pigs  [SHS90a,  SHS90b],  dogs 
[WWZ04],  rats  [THG97,  TLM05,  and  references  therein], 
humans  [MAS96,  OBW94],  whales  [KNO03],  and  deer 
[COC06d].

Exaggerated criticisms of the Marshall and Sanow 

V.
“one shot stop” data set 
The  Marshall  and  Sanow  (M&S)  study  [MAS92,  MAS96] 
collected historical data for a large number of shootings with a 
wide  variety  of  handgun  loads  in  an  attempt  to  quantify  the 
relative effectiveness of different handgun loads.  The selection 
criteria included events where a criminal attacker was hit in the 
thoracic  cavity  with  a  single  bullet  and  where  the  bullet  and 
load could be accurately identified.  

Events  where  the  attacker  ceased  the  attack  without  striking 
another  blow  or  firing  another  shot  were  classified  as  “one-
shot  stops.”    Events  where  the  attacker  delivered  subsequent 
blows,  fired  subsequent  shots,  or  ran  more  than  10  feet  were 
classified as “failures.”  Events where the attacker retreated but 
covered  less  than  10  feet  were  classified  as  successful  stops 
also.  The “one-shot stop” percentage (OSS) was determined by 
dividing the total “stops” by the total number of events meeting 
the selection criteria (stops + failures).

Most epidemiological-type studies of this size and complexity 
represent  compromises  between  the  breadth  of  the  selection 
criteria  and  the  number  of  data  points  available.    Other 
researchers  might  have  made  different  choices  about  these 
trade-offs  or  differed  in  implementation  details,  but  on  the 
whole,  the  M&S  OSS  data  set  is  a  valuable  contribution  to 
understanding incapacitation via handgun bullets.

A  number  of  criticisms  have  addressed  the  work  of  M&S 
[ROW92,  FAC94a,  FAC94b,  FAC97a,  FAC99a,  FAC99b, 
MAC97,  MAA99].    These  vary  in  validity  and  implications 
and were considered carefully before we used the OSS data set 
to  develop  an  empirical  model  of  the  ballistic  pressure  wave 
contributions to incapacitation [COC06b]. 

The  published  criticisms  range  from  unjustified  ad  hominem 
attacks  and  other  rhetorical  fallacies,  gross  exaggerations 
depending  upon  unjustified  presuppositions,  and  valid 
concerns  affecting  the  accuracy  but  not  the  validity  of 
considering  the  OSS  rating  as  a  measure  of  relative  handgun 
load effectiveness.

A.

Ad  hominem  attacks,  appeal  to  ridicule  fallacy,  and 
bandwagon fallacy

The  ad  hominem  attacks  address  both  the  authors  (Marshall 
and  Sanow)  and  those  “lunatic  fringe”  who  find  value  in  the 
OSS  data  [FAC99a].    Ad  hominem  attacks,  the  bandwagon 
fallacy,  and  impugning  the  motives  of  authors  without 
evidence  have  no  place  in  the  peer-reviewed  scientific 
literature.

In  their  critical  book  review  [ROW92]  of  the  first  stopping 
power book [MAS92], Roberts and Wolberg write:

No clear thinking person should fall prey to this nonsense, but some 
individuals  with  no  background  in  science  or  those  too  indolent  or 
busy  to  do  their  own  thinking  could  be  misled.    This  book  is  a  bad 
joke... 

...this confusing text provides the reader with a schizophrenic mixture 
of material.

In  the  article,  “Undeniable  Evidence,”  [FAC99b]  Fackler 
combines the bandwagon fallacy with an appeal to ridicule:

From  the  outset,  those  with  training  in  statistics,  those  schooled  in 
the  scientific  method,  those  with  experience  in  scientific  research, 
and even those laymen who do their own thinking, have believed that 
the  “one-shot  stop”  statistics  published  by  Marshall  were  not 
collected as claimed, but simply made up – fabricated.

...it  is  difficult  to  imagine  many  remaining  “believers”  in  the 
Marshall-Sanow  camp.    Sadly,  however,  there  will  always  be 

and

and

9

“believers”;  primarily  those  with  meager  intellectual  gifts  and  those 
so inherently indolent that they will accept the word of some “expert” 
for anything that would require the least amount of thought.

In “Sanow Strikes (Out) Again” [MAC97],  MacPherson writes 
about  Steve  Fuller’s  empirical  curve  fit  and  Ed  Sanow’s 
comments on it [SAN96].

This is just like someone’s claim to have seen a unicorn; they didn’t, 
and  it  doesn’t  really  matter  whether  they  sincerely  think  they  did  or 
are simply lying about it.

received  compensation 

There  is  a  lot  of  information  regarding  bullet  designs  in  the 
Stopping  Power  books,  but  no  one  has  shown  that  Marshall 
and  Sanow 
from  ammunition 
companies  in  a  time  frame  consistent  with  it  swaying  their 
OSS  results.10    Some  of  the  leading  bullet  designers  were 
willing  to  share  details  of  the  bullet  design  and  development 
process,  and  it  appears  the  authors  included  this  information 
because of significant reader interest.

In this book review Fackler also writes:

and

The  bottom line is that this  is just another pathetic  chapter in a very 
pathetic story.

In a review of the second M&S book [MAS96], Fackler begins 
by impugning the motives of the authors with a circumstantial 
ad hominem attack [FAC97a]:9

The authors of this book are gunwriters who have close ties to bullet 
companies  that  specialize  in  lightweight  handgun  bullets  shot  at 
higher than usual velocities.  They have published numerous articles, 
and a previous book, Handgun Stopping Power—the Definitive Study, 
which are essentially unabashed advertisements for this type of bullet.

One  willing  to  commit  the  to  quoque  (you too!)  fallacy could 
reply about Fackler:

The  author  of  this  critique  is  closely  tied  to  an  FBI  committee  who 
selected a Winchester 147 grain JHP load for 9mm use and frequently 
advocates other heavy and slow bullets.  He has published numerous 
articles, which are essentially unabashed advertisements for this kind 
of bullet.

This  reply is  also  fallacious,  because  it  mistakenly  frames  the 
debate  in  terms  of  “light  and  fast”  vs.  “heavy  and  slow.”  
Several “heavy and slow” bullets make a good showing in the 
M&S OSS figures, and several “light and fast” bullets perform 
poorly.    For  many  cartridges,  the  top  ranked  loads  are  from 
Remington  and  Federal,  two  of  the  largest  ammunition 
suppliers who do not “specialize in lightweight handgun bullets 
shot at higher than usual velocities” but rather offer an array of 
ammunition choices covering both the  “light and  fast” as  well 
as the “heavy and slow” ends of the spectrum.  

In addition, the M&S text goes into detail on the importance of 
bullet design beyond the oversimplification of considering only 
weight and velocity [MAS96 Ch 17-23].

                                                
9 A  circumstantial  ad  hominem  is  a  fallacy  because  a  person’s 
interests and circumstances have no bearing on the truth or falsity of 
the 
made. 
(www.nizkor,org/features/fallacies/circumstantial-ad-hominem.htm, 
accessed 11/4/2006).

claim 

being 

Fortunately,  the  great  majority  of  law  enforcement  groups  have 
ignored  the  Marhsall  and  Sanow  “Definitive  Study”  and  opted  for 
the heavier, slower bullets, which have proved far more reliable than 
the faster, lighter bullets they replaced.

In  addition  to  being  the  bandwagon  fallacy,  this  argument  is 
somewhat  circular.    Many  law  enforcement  agencies  simply 
follow  the  lead  and  standards  of  the  FBI  that  Fackler  had 
significant  input  in developing.   Even if it  were true,  the fact 
that many law enforcement agencies are following the lead of 
the  side  of  a  debate  that  is  considerably  influential  in  law 
enforcement  (because  it’s  the  FBI)  is  not  compelling  that 
experiments supporting the other side of a debate are invalid.  

Ammunition  selection  by  law  enforcement  agencies  swings 
back and forth between “slow and heavy” and “light and fast,” 
and  these  changes  are  often  due  to  the  vivid  appeal  fallacy 
rather  than  sound  scientific  reasoning  based  on  statistical 
outcomes.    Since  handguns  are  inherently  unreliable  at 
creating  rapid  incapacitation  [PAT89],  there  will  be  some 
vivid demonstrations of failures with any load that is selected.  
A  “light  and  fast”  115  grain  9mm  bullet  failed  to  adequately 
penetrate in a famous 1986 gunfight in which two FBI agents 
lost  their  lives.    This  inspired  wide  adoption  of  a  “slow  and 
heavy” 147 grain JHP at 990 FPS.

Failures of the 147 grain JHP at 990 FPS in 9mm has lead to 
development  of  the  .357  Sig  cartridge  and  a  number  of 
agencies  adopting  a  125  grain  bullet  at  1350  FPS  (light  and 
fast).    In  the  absence  of  sound  statistical  reasoning  based  on 
evaluation  of  a  large  number  of  shooting  events,  these 
decisions  represent  either  the  vivid  appeal  or  expert  opinion 
fallacies.

Fackler’s book review [FAC97a] also includes the attack:

... the authors of “Street Stoppers” fail to understand the most basic 
of scientific principles and discourse... 

Marshall and Sanow have more law enforcement than science 
backgrounds,  and  their  studies  and  writing  style  reflect  this.  
an 
However, 

approach  of  designing 

their  general 

                                                
10 Evan Marshall opened  a gun  shop  in 2005  and can reasonably be 
presumed to have a current interest in selling ammunition.

10

epidemiological  type  of  study  with  selection  criteria  for 
inclusion  and  criteria  for  determining  success  or  failure  is 
scientifically  sound.    They  formulated  a  useful  methodology 
for  addressing  an  important  law  enforcement  issue  and  set 
about  carefully  collecting  and  analyzing  data  to  address  the 
issue.

Fackler’s conclusion continues with the ridiculing:

No  intelligent  reader  will  tolerate  a  nonfiction  book  devoid  of 
references.

ii.

apparently  implying  that  interspersing  references  in  the  text 
(rather than collecting them in a bibliography) is unacceptable.  
Other authors in the field [MAC94] use the same approach yet 
garnered Fackler’s praise and recommendation.  

In the final paragraph of the book review, Fackler writes:

“Street Stoppers” is a compilation of fantasy: written in the arrogant, 
dead certain tone of the con man.  Everything echoes “trust me.”  The 
reader is constantly preached to, with evangelistic fervor: and without 
equivocation  implored  to  believe  in  nonsense  with  no  basis  in 
established  fact.    This  book  is  the  antithesis  of  honest,  intelligent, 
scientific discourse in which the evidence is laid out, dispassionately...

The reasoning of M&S might not always be perfectly clear, and 
the  content  is  not  always  perfectly  organized,  but  their  books 
are more dispassionately written and contain fewer ad hominem
attacks (none) than the criticism offered in response.11  

B. Criticisms of experimental design 
There are several criticisms of the experimental design used by 
M&S to generate their OSS index.

i. Excludes multiple hits (overly narrow selection criteria)
As  described  above,  the  M&S  OSS  data  set  only  includes 
events where the person receives a single bullet to the thoracic 
cavity.    Those  criticizing  this  criterion  [FAC92a,  MAA99] 
assert that cases where an attacker is shot multiple times should 
be  included  as  failures.    This  position  depends  on  the 
unsupported  premise  that  attackers  only  sustain  multiple 
gunshot injuries in cases where the first hit is ineffective.  

Most  law  enforcement  officers  and  many  armed  citizens  are 
trained to fire multiple shots without stopping to assess whether 
the  first  shot  has  created  the  desired  incapacitating  effect.12  
Most  law  enforcement  officers  and  many  armed  citizens  train 
to a level of proficiency where firing multiple shots is possible 
in the time required for an attacker to fall down even if the first 
shot  severs  the  spine  (about  0.4  seconds).    Since  shooters  are 
usually not re-evaluating to determine whether a second shot is 

                                                
11 Evan Marshall and Ed Sanow have shown significant character and 
remarkable restraint in not answering their critics in kind.
12 Exhortations to use the “double-tap” (two shots) or “shoot to 
lockback” are examples of this kind of training.

11

necessary,  the  presence  of  a  second  hit  cannot  be  taken  as 
evidence of a first hit failure.

In the same  way that a study of the effectiveness of a certain 
medicine  needs  to  specify  the  dose  of  the  drug,  a  study  of 
bullet  effectiveness  needs  to  specify  the  “dosage”  of  a  given 
load.    Excluding  multiple  hit  events  from  the  data  set  is 
analogous to excluding walks from a batting average.

Thoracic  cavity  is  too  large  (overly  broad  selection 
criterion)

It has been suggested [ROW92, FAC97a] that any valid study 
of  bullet  effectiveness  would  have  to  precisely  specify  the 
anatomic  structures  impacted  by  the  bullet.    This  assertion 
ignores  the  power  of  statistical  approaches  to  quantify 
probabilistic  outcomes  given  certain  (even  if  broad)  input 
information.   For  example,  the  idea  behind  actuarial  tables is 
that a person’s life expectancy can be predicted from relatively 
broad  selection  criteria  such  as  a  person’s  weight,  age, 
income, marital status, drinking and smoking habits.

Narrowing  the  selection  criteria  allows  for  more  accurate 
statistical  descriptions  given  the  same  number  of  available 
data  points,  but  the  tradeoff  is  that  narrowing  the  selection 
criteria  reduces  the  included  data  points  in  an  available  data 
set.  The designers of all epidemiological-type studies face this 
tradeoff,  and  setting  the  criteria  at  a  given  level  does  not  
impact the  validity of a study.  (It affects the accuracy  of the 
conclusions.)

In fact, epidemiological data with broad selection criteria have 
been  used  to  draw  well-founded  conclusions  in  wound 
ballistics.    For  example,  Fackler  correlates  the  declining 
incidence  of  specific  infections  with  the  increasing  use  of 
antibiotics  on  the  battlefield  to  infer  that  “the  benefits  of 
systemic  antibiotic  usage  have  been  incorrectly  attributed  to 
wound debridement” [FAC87a].  

iii. Too few data points
Some  loads  included  in  the  study  have  as  few  as  10  data 
points.    Other  loads  have  thousands.    As  long  as  the  basic 
relationship  between  number  of  data  points  and  accuracy  of 
the OSS rating is considered in interpreting the results, this is 
not  a  problem.    The  M&S  OSS  data  set  grew  to  eventually 
include over 20,000 shooting events [MAS01].  

iv. Not a random sample
The  OSS  data  set  does  not  represent  a  truly  random  sample 
[MAA99,  ROW92],  but  depends  on  voluntary  submission  of 
shooting  event  reports  to  the  authors  of  the  study  by  law 
enforcement agencies.  Thus the possibility exists for bias and 
falsification  if  the  sources  submitting  the  data  exclude  or 
falsify information because  it does not fit their pre-conceived 
notions.    However,  crime  statistics  are  often  the  result  of 
voluntary reporting by law enforcement agencies.  This might 

affect  the  accuracy  of  such  statistics  but  does  not  make  them 
completely useless.

Since the data set was compiled over more than a decade, it is 
also likely to include other non-random effects such as changes 
in  officer  training,  improvements  in  product  quality,  and 
changing  geographical  distribution  of  the  data  set.    For 
example,  data  from  the  warmer  climates  are  less  likely  to 
represent  the  effects  of  heavy  clothing  than  data  from  colder 
climates.  

v. Conclusion on M&S design
In  conclusion,  the  experimental  design  leading  the  M&S  OSS 
rating is valid for considering relative effectiveness of different 
handgun loads.  It is limited in accuracy primarily by different 
loads  having  different  shot  placement  distributions  within  the 
thoracic cavity, by the number of data points available for each 
load,  by  voluntary  submission  of  shooting  reports,  and  by 
difficulties with completely objective determination of whether 
or  not  a  shooting  event  resulted  in  a  stop.    Other  factors 
impacting the accuracy of the one shot stop index are different 
loads  having  different  distributions  of  impact  conditions  such 
as  range  and  intermediate  barriers  and  the  potential  for 
different 
to  have  different  distributions  of  why 
subsequent hits were achieved.  

loads 

C.

Criticisms with analysis

i. Neurogenic shock
Thinking a shock effect might be demonstrated in their data set, 
M&S invited Dennis Tobin, MD to write a section entitled “A 
Neurologist’s View of Stopping Power” [MAS92 Ch2].  

In their critique, Roberts and Wolberg [ROW92] write:

The  absurd  claims  made  in  this  chapter…regarding  the  ability  of  a 
bullet to remotely stress and  shock the  central nervous system (CNS) 
are  grossly  inaccurate  and  completely  unsupported  by  any  scientific 
evidence…  This  pseudoscientific  speculation  is  presented  as  verified 
scientific fact, yet allusion to Goransson’s discredited data is the only 
scientific  reference  the  authors  cite  to  support  their  unjustified 
claims...

A  thorough  review  of  the  scientific  literature  relating  to  wound 
ballistics  has  failed  to  identify  any  valid  research  papers  which 
demonstrate that projectiles can exert a remote effect on the CNS.

The remote CNS effect that Dr. Tobin suggests might fairly be 
classified  as  a  hypothesis  at  the  time  of  writing.    However, 
referring  to  it as  “pseudoscientific  speculation”  is  exaggerated 
given his reference [GIK88].

The Suneson et al. studies of remote pressure  wave effects on 
the CNS may not have been available to Tobin when he wrote 
the  original  article.    However,  these  papers  appeared  in  print 
more  than  two  years  before  the  critique.    Therefore,  the 
assertion  that  a  thorough  review  of  the  literature  missed  these 

papers  is  surprising,  especially  since  a  comment  on  these 
papers  was  published  in  the  widely  read  Wound  Ballistics 
Review  [FAC91a]  to  which  both  of  the  critical  authors  had 
been contributors.  

The  allusion to  Goransson’s data  [GIK88]  as “discredited” is 
also  an  unsupported  exaggeration.    The  data  of  Goransson  et 
al.  find  substantial  support  in  the  work  of  Suneson  et  al.
[SHS90a,  SHS90b]  and  Wang  et  al  [WWZ04].    Roberts  and 
Wolberg fail to cite any articles critical of this work.  Note that 
in  the  same  article  criticizing  M&S  for  not  adequately 
documenting  their  work,  Roberts  and  Wolberg  failed  to 
document  their  claim  that  Goransson’s  work  had  been 
discredited.13

ii. Pseudo-scientific formulas
In Chapter 17 of Handgun Stopping Power [MAS92], M&S 
present  the  results  of  linear  least  squares  fits  between  their 
OSS rankings and parameters commonly measured in ballistic 
gelatin.    They  find  that  the  OSS  rating  correlates  better  with 
temporary stretch cavity (R = 0.8) than permanent crush cavity 
(R  =  0.6).    This  contradicts  the  view  that  only  permanent 
trauma 
significantly 
cavitation  contributes 
incapacitation [MAC94, PAT89].  Roberts and Wolberg write 
in criticism [ROW92]:

to  wound 

The pseudoscientific formulas purported to predict “stopping power” 
which are presented in Chapter 17 are unsupported by any scientific 
evidence.  These formulas appear to be completely meaningless since 
they are based on the irrelevant and misleading “street results” and 
since  the  gelatin  tests  used  by  the  authors  appear  to  be  flawed  and 
inaccurate.

The data set is based on a sound design.  The criticism of the 
M&S  gelatin  testing  will  be  considered  below.    Using 
regression  analysis  and  correlation  coefficients  to  determine 
whether  two  data  sets  are  related  is  a  time-proven  scientific 
approach.    Therefore,  there  is  little  room  for  valid  criticism 
here14  beyond  the  validity  of  the  OSS  data  set  itself  and  the 
validity of the criticism of the gelatin measurements. 

iii. Gelatin results inaccurate

Roberts and Wolberg write [ROW92]:

The  penetration  depths  of  test  shots  into  ordnance  gelatin  listed  by 
Marshall and Sanow in Table 17-1 [MAS92] are consistently deeper 
than  those  reported  by  other  wound  ballistic  research  facilities 
throughout  the  United  States,  as  illustrated  by  the  following  (three) 
examples...
                                                
13 Usually a negative comment “discrediting” an article would appear 
in  the  same  journal  as  the  original  paper.    No  such  criticism  of 
Goransson  et  al.  appears  in  J  Trauma.    Using  commonly  available 
scholarly search engines, one finds several peer-reviewed articles that 
cite Goransson et al. favorably, but none that “discredit” the data.
14  A  model  with  proper  limiting  behavior  might  be  preferred 
[COC06b].

12

Comparing  all  24  loads  in  the  table  with  independently 
produced  results  would  be  a  more  sound  method  of 
demonstrating systematic errors in the gelatin data.  The reader 
is  left  uncertain  whether  the  three  referenced  examples  are 
typical or worst cases.  

Even  if  the  M&S  gelatin  results  systematically  overestimate 
penetration,  this  does  not  nullify  their  correlations.    Accuracy 
in  many  scientific  fields  gradually  increases  over  time  due  to 
adoption  of  better  testing  standards.    The  gradual  adoption  of 
carefully calibrated  10%  gelatin at a  controlled  temperature  in 
the  1980’s  and  1990’s 
improved  evaluation  of  bullet 
penetration and expansion.  However, the suggestion that M&S 
used  uncalibrated  gelatin  does  not  nullify  their  results.    It 
suggests  only  that  their  gelatin  measurements  might  not  be 
optimally accurate.

D.

Criticisms of experimental implementation

i. Better with time
Many  of  the  reported  OSS  ratings increase  slightly  over  time.  
This has been criticized [MAA99, FAC97a] using the logic that 
if  new  shootings  were  simply  added to  the data  set,  “about  as 
many  “one-shot  stop”  percentages  would  be  expected  to 
decrease as would be expected to increase” [FAC97a].  Rather 
than  being  an  indication  of  “too  good  to  be  true,”  which 
Fackler asserts implies fraud, these slight increases in 48 of 60 
loads can be understood to result from a variety of non-random 
factors,  including  improvements  in  loads  meeting  velocity 
specifications,  improved  training,  more  data  from  warmer 
climates,  etc.    The  premise  of  randomness  that  creates  the 
expectation of sameness over time is flawed.

ii. Data added too fast
van  Maanen  [MAA99]  points  out  that  the  published  data  set 
increases from 6136 events in 1992 [MAS92] to 20742 events 
in 1996 [MAS96].  He incorrectly infers that 

…the number of cases added to the Marshall and Sanow “data base” 
was  14606  between  1992  and  1996;  an  average  of  10  cases  per day 
365 days a year.

van  Maanen  goes  on  to  comment  that  because  many cases  do 
not meet the selection criteria, it would have been prohibitively 
time  consuming  for  the  authors to  carefully  evaluate the  large 
number of cases to determine whether and how they should be 
included in the data set, writing:

This  analysis  on  the  rate  of  new  shootings  added  to  the  data 
set  is  in  error  because  the  book  published  in  1992  did  not 
contain  any  data  for  .22LR  and  .25  ACP  loadings,  which 
account for 10288 events in the data published in 1996.  Most 
of  these  events  had  already  been  collected  and  analyzed  in 
1992, but M&S chose not to publish them at that time.   

Thus,  the  number  of  events  added  to  the  data  set  was  much 
smaller  than  the  number  of  additional  events  published  in 
1996.  The average number of cases added to the data set per 
day was probably less than five.

van Maanen’s analysis also employs the unlikely premise  that 
the entire labor burden of shooting analysis was personally on 
the  authors.    Using  trained  assistants  to  perform  “triage”  on 
shooting  reports  would  have  greatly  streamlined  the  analysis 
process  for  the  principal  investigators.    Shootings  clearly  not 
meeting  inclusion  criteria  could  have  been  sorted  by  trained 
assistants to save time for the principal investigators.

The claim that the principal investigators did not have the time 
to  personally  perform  all  of  the  described  procedures  is  not 
usually  considered  a  valid  reason  to  conclude  that  results  are 
indistinguishable from outright falsified data.

iii. Events removed from data set
Analysis  [MAA99]  of  the  data  set  over  time  shows  that 
shooting events for 16 loads must have been removed from the 
data set between 1992 [MAS92] and 1996 [MAS96].  Rather 
than  considering  possible  valid  reasons  for  removing  events, 
van Maanen takes this to support his prior conclusion of fraud:

Any kind of secret reevaluation of the results is a clear-cut violation 
of doing research because it is one form of “fudging” the data.

This ignores other reasonable possibilities:
 Discovery  and  correction  of  clerical  errors  resulting  in 

double counting.

 Discovery  that  some  data  sources  proved  unreliable  and 

removal of the affected subset of data.

Optimally,  M&S  would  have  provided  explanation  and 
justification  for  these  adjustments.    However,  given  attacks 
and  fallacious  rhetoric  that  had  already  appeared,  they  might 
have  been  reasonably  reluctant  to  provide  critics  with 
ammunition  regarding  the  validity  or  accuracy  of  their  first 
book [MAS92].  Finally, it should be noted that less than 20% 
of the loads studied indicate removal of events.

One must conclude that the care taken in evaluating the shootings that 
make  up  the  Marshall and  Sanow  “data”  is at  best  far  less  than  the 
authors’  claims  in  the  description  of  the  process.    One  could  easily 
conclude  that  the  time  available  for  evaluating  each  case  inherently 
makes  the  integrity  of  any  evaluation  process  indistinguishable  from 
simply making up the cases outright.

iv. A source says reports fail to meet selection criteria 
In addition to presenting the OSS data set and method used to 
produce  it,  the  M&S  books  [MAS92,  MAS96]  present  other 
material of reader interest including background on new bullet 
designs,  results  of  shooting  ballistic  gelatin,  tactical  advice, 
physiological  information,  and  a  number  of  shooting  event 

13

anecdotes  written  in  a  journalistic  style  intended  to  capture 
reader interest rather than document the OSS data.

Roberts  and  Wolberg  suggest  fraud  [ROW92a]  because  some 
of the anecdotal shooting reports  M&S ascribe  to  Wolberg do 
not meet criteria for inclusion in the OSS data set (insufficient 
documentation).    However,  there  is  no  indication  that  these 
events  are  included  in  the  data  set  [MAS92,  p121].    A 
significant  fraction  of  the  journalistic-type  shooting  reports 
clearly  do  not  meet  the  criteria  for  inclusion.    Thus  the 
conclusion  of  Roberts  and  Wolberg  that  the  data  set  is 
unreliable is fallacious.  It rests on the false premise that all the 
anecdotal shooting reports were included in the data set.  In the 
second  book,  M&S  clearly  state  that  many  of  the  anecdotal 
accounts are not included in the data set [MAS96, p19].

E. Criticisms of publication details: source data is not shared
M&S  have  been  criticized  for  not  publishing  or  sharing  their 
raw  source  data  with  other  investigators  [FAC97a],  even 
though  they  provide  voluminous  data  in  aggregate  form 
[MAS92, MAS96, MAS01].  The criticism implies that sharing 
raw data is a universally accepted scientific standard necessary 
to establish the validity of a work.  

This  is  not  true.  In  the  absence  of  legal  or  institutional 
requirements  governing 
raw  data, 
investigators  have  the  sole  right  to  make  decisions  regarding 
the sharing of raw data and other proprietary research products 
(computer programs, designs, photographs, etc.).

the  availability  of 

It  is  an  exaggeration  to  conclude  that  researchers  who  limit 
distribution of raw data are hiding something. Valid reasons to 
restrict access to raw data and documentation include:

1. Protecting the privacy of sources.
2. Maintaining non-disclosure agreements.
3. Maintaining individual patient/victim confidentiality.
4. Maintaining 

grant 
future  discoveries,  and  new  product 

competitive 

advantage 

on 

proposals, 
development.

5. Protecting investment acquiring the raw data.
6. Avoiding costs incurred in sharing the data.
7. Avoiding  misuse/misinterpretation  leading  to  legal 

liabilities. 

In the  absence  of legal  or  institutional  requirements, access to 
the  raw  data,  computer  programs,  documentation,  or  other 
proprietary products of scientific research is at the discretion of 
the  investigators.    Scientists  are  often  willing  to  share  with 
other  scientists  who  have  developed  a  trust  relationship  and 
offer  possibility 
the  sharing 
for  mutual  benefit 
relationship.    Benefits  that  commonly  induce  researchers  to 
share proprietary data or other research products include:

from 

1. Hope  of  discoveries  leading  to  jointly  authored 

publications unlikely to occur otherwise.

2. Possibility of securing additional funding.
3. Acknowledgements in peer-reviewed publications.
4. Greater awareness of the scientist’s contributions.
5. Maximal use made of live animal studies.
6. Overt  quid  pro  quo  exchanges  of  one  research 

product for another (or for money).

Trust, goodwill, and mutual admiration are the bedrock of this 
kind  of  scientific  collaboration,  so  it  is  not  surprising  that 
Marshall  and  Sanow  declined  to  share  their  raw  data  and 
documentation with those who have been antagonistic.  

F. Conclusion on Marshall and Sanow
Answering  every  fallacious  and  exaggerated  criticism  would 
take  a  lot  more  space  and  involve  an  unreasonable  level  of 
quibbling over details that are not important to the validity of 
the OSS rating as an indicator of relative bullet effectiveness. 

The  weaknesses in  the  M&S  OSS ratings  affect  the  accuracy 
as  a  relative  measure  of  stopping  power,  but  not  the  overall 
validity.    The  accuracy  of  the  OSS  assignment  for  different 
loads  depends  on  the  details  of  the  given  load  but  is  most 
strongly dependent on the number of data points included for 
that load.  For most loads containing N events, the accuracy of 
the  OSS  rating  is  probably  within  a  factor  of  two  of  the 
statistical  uncertainty,  0.5/N1/2. 
  This  level  of  accuracy  is 
sufficient  to  provide  confirmation  of  the  pressure  wave 
contribution to rapid incapacitation.

The  correlation  between  the  M&S  OSS  ratings  and  the 
Strasbourg average incapacitation times [COC06b, MAS96] is 
also compelling support.  Add this to the results that the M&S 
OSS  ratings  can  be  accurately  modeled  as  a  function  of 
pressure wave magnitude [COC06b] and that a growing body 
of  literature  [SHS90a,  SHS90b,  OBW94,  WWZ04,  THG97, 
TLM05] supports connections between pressure  wave, injury, 
and  incapacitation.    The  criticisms  of  the  M&S  OSS  data  set 
are  exaggerated,  and  the  M&S  data  set  has  considerable 
consistency with results of independent work.

in 

light  of 

the  criticisms  of 

Overall Conclusion

VI.
the  demonstrated  ad  hominem  attacks, 
In 
exaggerations  and  fallacies 
these 
experimental  findings,  one  wonders  whether  the  critical 
authors  were  depending  more  on  their  reputation  as  experts 
and the quantity of their fallacies (ad nauseum fallacy) rather 
than  quality  arguments,  sound  reasoning,  and  repeatable 
experiments.  The critical authors left quite a paper trail in the 
literature,  but  reason,  the  scientific  method,  and  repeatable 
experiments and analysis have shown the original works to be 
more sound than the published criticisms.

This  is  not  to  say  that  the  criticized  works  are  perfect  or 
beyond reasonable criticism or scrutiny, only that the ultimate 
validity and value of these works should be determined by the 
whole body of relevant literature, as well as future work.

14

The  level  of  exaggeration,  ad  hominem  attack,  and  other 
rhetorical  fallacies  in  these  critical  reviews  far  exceeds  the 
boundaries  of  sober  and  rational  discourse  that  characterize 
modern  peer-reviewed  scientific  literature.    Even  in  areas  rife 
with  pseudo-science  (such  as  nutritional  supplements,  psychic 
phenomena,  global  warming,  the  creation/evolution  debate), 
the tenor of the peer-reviewed scientific literature is remarkably 
more restrained and sound in its reasoning.  

Since  we  (the  authors,  Michael  Courtney  and  Amy  Courtney) 
are  now  contributors  in  a  field  with  unusually  high  levels  of 
“ammonia  and  acetic  acid,”  we  would  like  to  express  our 
sincere  hope  that  future  debate  will  be  characterized  by  more 
civilized  discussion  without  resorting  to  personal  attacks, 
insults, and unrestrained rhetorical fallacies.  Going beyond the 
accepted  boundaries  of  scientific  discourse  reflects  poorly  on 
the  field,  on  the  law  enforcement  interests  in  the  discussion, 
and on firearms-related issues in general.  

REFERENCES/BIBLIOGRAPHY:

[BAI50]  Bainton  R:  Here  I  Stand.  Abington  Press,  Nashville, 
TN, 1995, orig. 1950.

[COC06a]  Courtney  M,  Courtney  A:  Review  of  criticisms  of 
ballistic  pressure  wave experiments,  the  Strasbourg  goat  tests, 
and the Marshall and Sanow data.  Search title at arxiv.org.

[COC06b]  Courtney  M,  Courtney  A:  Relative  incapacitation 
contributions  of  pressure  wave  and  wound  channel  in  the 
Marshall and Sanow data set.  Search title at arxiv.org.

[COC06c]  Courtney  M,  Courtney  A:  Ballistic  pressure  wave 
contributions  to  rapid  incapacitation  in  the  Strasbourg  goat 
tests.  Search title at arxiv.org.

[COC06d]  Courtney  M,  Courtney  A:  A  method  for  testing 
handgun bullets in deer.  Search title at arxiv.org.

[COC06e] Courtney M and Courtney A: Using sound of target 
impact 
reconstruction  of  shooting  events, 
submitted to AFTE Journal.  

for  acoustic 

[CPD02] Krouse P: Young Growers Go After Niche of Selling 
Right to Consumers. Cleveland Plain Dealer October 23, 2002, 
Page C1.

[EWL98]  Evan  AP,  Willis  LR  Lingeman  JE,  McAteer  JA: 
Editorial:  Renal  Trauma  and 
the  Risk  of  Long-Term 
Complications in Shock Wave Lithotripsy.  Nephron 78(1):1-8, 
1998.

[FAC88a] Fackler ML: Wound Ballistics: A review of common 
misconceptions.  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association 
259:2730-2736; 1988.

[FAC89a] Fackler ML: Letter to the Editor. Journal of Trauma 
29(10):1455; 1989.

[FAC91a]  Fackler  ML:  Literature  Review  and  Comment. 
Wound Ballistics Review Winter 1991: pp38-40. 

[FAC92a]  Fackler  ML:  Police  Handgun  Ammunition 
Selection. Wound Ballistics Review 1(3):36; 1992.

[FAC94a]  Fackler  ML:  The  ‘Strasbourg  Tests:’  Another 
Gunwriter/Bullet  Salesman  Fraud?  Wound  Ballistics  Review 
1(4):10-11; 1994.

[FAC94b] Fackler ML: Marshall-Sanow Can’t Beat the Long 
Odds: Wound Wizards Tally Too Good to be True.  Soldier of 
Fortune January:64-65; 1994.

[FAC96a]  Fackler  ML:  Gunshot  Wound  Review.  Annals  of 
Emergency Medicine 28(1): 194-203; 1996.

[FAC97a]  Fackler  ML:  Book  Review:  Street  Stoppers  –  The 
Latest  Handgun  Stopping  Power  Street  Results.  Wound 
Ballistics Review 3(1):26-31; 1997.

[FAC99a]  Fackler  ML:  Editorial.  Wound  Ballistics  Review 
4(2):15-16; 1999.

[FAC99b]  Fackler  ML:  Undeniable  Evidence.  Wound 
Ballistics Review 4(2):15-16; 1999. 

[FBC89]  Fackler  ML,  Breteau  JPL,  Courbil  LJ,  et  al.:  Open 
Wound  Drainage  Versus  Wound  Excision  in  Treating  the 
Modern Assault Rifle Wound. Surgery 105(5):576-84; 1989.

[GIK88]  Göransson  AM,  Ingvar  DH,  Kutyna  F:  Remote 
Cerebral Effects on EEG in High-Energy Missile Trauma. The 
Journal  of  Trauma.  28(1  Supplement):S204-S205;  January 
1988. 

[HKO47]  Harvey  EN,  Korr  IM,  Oster  G,  et  al.:Secondary 
Damage  in  wounding  due  to  pressure  changes  accompanying 
the  passage  of  high  velocity  missiles.  Surgery  21:218-239; 
1947.

[HOL05]  Holmes  M:  Entrepreneurial  Farming:  Part  of  the 
Plan for Prosperity in Northeast Ohio.  A Special  Report.  The 
Farmland Center, Peninsula, OH. 2005

[KNO03]  Knudsen  SK,  Oen  EO:  Blast-induced  Neurotrauma 
in Whales.  Neuroscience Research 46(3):377-386; 2003. 

[LAG16]  LaGarde  LA:  Gunshot  Injuries    ed  2.  New  York: 
William Wood & company, 1916.

15

[LKK03]  Lingeman  JE,  Kim  SC, Keo  RL,  McAteer  JA, Evan 
AP: Shockwave Lithotripsy: Anecdotes and Insights. Journal of 
Endourology 17(9):687-693; 2003.

[LOS01]  Lokhandwalla  M,  Sturtevant  B:  Mechanical 
Haemolysis  in  Shock  Wave  Lithotripsy  (SWL):  I.  Analysis  of 
Cell  Deformation  due  to  SWL  Flow-Fields.”  Physics  in 
Medicine & Biology 46(2):413-437; 2001.

[MAA99]  van  Maanen,  M:  Discrepancies  in  the  Marshall  & 
Sanow  ‘Data  Base’:  An  Evaluation  Over  Time.  Wound 
Ballistics Review 4(2):9-13; 1999. 

[MAC94]  MacPherson  D:  Bullet  Penetration—Modeling  the 
Dynamics  and  the  Incapacitation  Resulting  From  Wound 
Trauma. Ballistics Publications, El Segundo, CA, 1994.

[MAC97]  MacPherson D: Sanow Strikes  (Out) Again. Wound 
Ballistics Review 3(1):32-35; 1997.

[MAS92]  Marshall  EP  and  Sanow  EJ:  Handgun  Stopping 
Power:  The  Definitive  Study.  Paladin  Press,  Boulder,  CO, 
1992.

[MAS96] Marshall EP and Sanow EJ: Street Stoppers. Paladin 
Press, Boulder, CO, 1996.

[MAS01]  Marshall  EP  and  Sanow  EJ:  Stopping  Power. 
Paladin, Boulder, CO, 2001.

[NEW92]  Newgard,  Ken,  MD:  The  Physiological  Effects  of 
Handgun  Bullets:  The  Mechanisms  of  Wounding  and 
Incapacitation. Wound Ballistics Review, 1(3): 12-17; 1992.

[OBW94]  Ordog  GJ,  Balasubramanian  S,  Wasserberger  J,  et 
al.: Extremity Gunshot Wounds. I. Identification and Treatment 
of  Patients  at  High  Risk  of  Vascular  Injury.    The  Journal  of 
Trauma 36:358-368; 1994.

[PAT89]  Patrick  UW:  Handgun  Wounding  Factors  and 
Effectiveness.  FBI  Firearms  Training  Unit,  Quantico,  VA. 
1989.

[ROW92]  Roberts  GK,  Wolberg  EJ:  Book  Review:  Handgun 
Stopping Power: The Definitive Study. AFTE Journal 24(4):10; 
1992.

[SAN96]  Sanow  E:  Predicting  Stopping  Power.  Handguns 
November; 1996.  

[SBC01]  Sokolov  DL,  Bailey  MR,  Crum  LA:  Use  of  a  Dual-
Pulse  Lithotriptor  to  Generate  a  Localized  and  Intensified 
Cavitation Field. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 
110(3):1685-1695, 2001.

[SHA02]  Shaw  NA:  The  Neurophysiology  of  Concussion. 
Progress in Neurobiology 67:281-344; 2002.

[SHK90]  Suneson  A,  Hansson  HA,  Kjellström BT,  Lycke  E, 
and  Seeman  T:  Pressure  Waves  by  High  Energy  Missile 
Impair  Respiration  of  Cultured  Dorsal  Root  Ganglion  Cells. 
The Journal of Trauma 30(4):484-488; 1990.

[SHL89]  Suneson  A,  Hansson  HA,  Lycke  E:  Pressure  Wave 
Injuries  to  Rat  Dorsal  Cell  Ganglion  Root  Cells  in  Culture 
Caused  by  High  Energy  Missiles,  The  Journal  of  Trauma. 
29(1):10-18; 1989. 

[SHS87]  Suneson  A,  Hansson  HA,  Seeman  T:  Peripheral 
High-Energy  Missile  Hits  Cause  Pressure  Changes  and 
Damage  to  the  Nervous  System:  Experimental  Studies  on 
Pigs.  The Journal of Trauma. 27(7):782-789; 1987. 

[SHS88]  Suneson  A,  Hansson  HA,  Seeman  T:  Central  and 
Peripheral  Nervous  Damage  Following  High-Energy  Missile 
Wounds 
the  Thigh.  The  Journal  of  Trauma.  28(1 
Supplement):S197-S203; January 1988. 

in 

[SHS90a]  Suneson  A,  Hansson  HA,  Seeman  T:  Pressure 
Wave Injuries to the Nervous System Caused by High Energy 
Missile Extremity Impact: Part I. Local and Distant Effects on 
the  Peripheral  Nervous  System.  A  Light  and  Electron 
Microscopic  Study  on  Pigs.  The  Journal  of  Trauma. 
30(3):281-294; 1990.

[SHS90b]  Suneson  A,  Hansson  HA,  Seeman  T:  Pressure 
Wave Injuries to the Nervous System Caused by High Energy 
Missile  extremity  Impact:  Part  II.  Distant  Effects  on  the 
Central  Nervous  System.  A  Light  and  Electron  Microscopic 
Study on Pigs. The Journal of Trauma. 30(3):295-306; 1990.

[STR93] The Strasbourg Tests, presented at the 1993 ASLET 
International Training Conference, Reno, Nevada.

[THG97]    Toth  Z,  Hollrigel  G,  Gorcs  T,  and  Soltesz  I: 
Instantaneous Perturbation of Dentate Interneuronal Networks 
by  a  Pressure  Wave  Transient  Delivered  to  the  Neocortex.  
The Journal of Neuroscience 17(7);8106-8117; 1997.

[TLM05]  Thompson HJ, Lifshitz J, Marklund N, Grady MS, 
Graham  DI,  Hovda  DA,  McIntosh  TK:  Lateral  Fluid 
Percussion  Brain  Injury:  A  15-Year  Review  and  Evaluation. 
Journal of Neurotrauma 22(1):42-75; 2005. 

[WWZ04]    Wang  Q,  Wang  Z,  Zhu  P,  Jiang  J:  Alterations  of 
the  Myelin  Basic  Protein  and  Ultrastructure  in  the  Limbic 
System  and  the  Early  Stage  of  Trauma-Related  Stress 
Disorder  in  Dogs.  The  Journal  of  Trauma.  56(3):604-610; 
2004.

16

[WOL91]  Wolberg  EJ:  Performance  of  the  Winchester  9mm 
147  Grain  Subsonic  Jacketed  Hollow  Point  Bullet  in  Human 
Tissue and Tissue  Simulant. Wound Ballistics Review. Winter 
91:10-13; 1991.

About the Authors
Michael  Courtney  earned  a  PhD  in  Physics  from  the  Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology.    He  currently  serves  as  Director  of  the 
Forensic  Science  program  at  Western  Carolina  University.    Michael 
has taught college level Physics, Statistics, and Forensic Science.  He 
has  extensive  experience 
systems, 
instrumentation  and  measurement,  and  data  analysis.    Michael 

in  analysis  of  complex 

founded the Ballistics Testing Group in 2001 to study incapacitation 
ballistics and reconstruction of shooting events.  

Amy Courtney earned a MS in Biomedical Engineering from Harvard 
and a PhD in Medical Engineering and Medical Physics from a joint 
Harvard/MIT program.  She was a research scientist for Reebok, Inc., 
and  the  Cleveland Clinic, as well as on  the  Biomedical Engineering 
faculty of Ohio State University.  Her area of specialty is the failure 
of  visco-elastic  biological  tissues  under  applied  force,  pressure,  and 
strain.      Her  strengths  are  experimental  design,  statistical  analysis, 
and  measurement  instrumentation.    She  has  been  a  member  of  the 
Ballistics Testing Group since it was founded in 2001.

17

