THE  NOTION  OF  TIME  IN  SPECIAL  RELATIVITY

Yefim Bakman* and Boris Pogorelsky

*Tel-Aviv University, E-mail: bakman@post.tau.ac.il

Abstract. Even though the concepts of time and space are basic concepts of physics, they 
have not been vouchsafed a constructive definition. As to space, this is no wonder because 
a correct notion of space cannot be formed in the frame of the existing physical paradigm. 
We intend to discuss this problem in another article. However, a definition of time can be 
given  on  the  basis  of  the  simple  principle  that  each  physical  magnitude  constitutes  a 
feature  of  some  physical  carrier  (Costa,  1987).  This  article  deals  with  identifying  that 
carrier  for  the  feature  “time”.  Finally  this  article  affirms  that  because  of  the  lack  of  a 
definition  of  time  some  physical  experiments  have  been  erroneously  interpreted  as  signs 
of time dilation.

1. “Time” before special relativity

Before  the  publication  of  the  theory  of  special  relativity  in  1905  time  was  considered 
absolutely  stable  and  phrases  like  “time  dilation”  were  inadmissible.  Hence,  we  can  say 
that time before special relativity was different from time after it.
Let  us  try  and  give  a  definition  of  time  on  the  basis  of  the  principle  “Each  physical 
magnitude is defined by the method it is measured”:

Definition  1.  Time  is  the  magnitude  measured  by  clocks.

Let  us  see  how  this  definition  works.  The  period  of  a  pendulum  clock  is  equal  to 
, where l  is the pendulum length, g  is the free fall acceleration. Hence placed 

in a valley, such a clock will run faster than on the top of a high mountain because the free 
fall acceleration gets greater when you are going down. Does this mean that “the time in 
the  valley”  runs  faster?  The  answer,  according  to  Definition  1  must  be  “yes”.  But  how 
then do we distinguish between such an acceleration of time from when a regular clock is 
fast, and what, consequently, does it mean when we say “a clock is fast”? Fast respective 
to what?
Asking such questions helps us to understand the notion of “time standard” which was in 
use before the introduction of special relativity theory:

1

2/Tlg=πDefinition  2.  The  time  standard  was  defined  by  the  angle  of  the  earth’s 
rotation  around  its  axis.

The  fact  that  people  try  to  synchronize  their  watches  and  clocks  with  the  process  of  the 
earth’s  rotation  around  its  axis  testifies  that  this  process  constitutes  the  time  standard. 
Consequently, like any standard it is unchangeable by definition and the acceleration of the 
pendulum clock in the valley does not mean acceleration of time - it only means that the 
pendulum’s swings diverge from the time standard.

2. Time as the rate of a process

In  the  case  of  length  we  know  that  there  exists  a  length  standard  and  we  know  that  any 
body  has  its  particular  length.  This  is  quite  different  in  the  case  of  time.  Instead  of 
speaking about the time of a process, one must use the term “duration”. This is an example 
how language use can hinder our understanding of a phenomenon. Here language deprives 
usual processes of the time feature, ascribing them “duration”  instead. This results in the 
illusion that the process of the earth’s rotation and the clocks synchronized with it are the 
only carriers of the feature “time”. But in fact any process has its time. Compare this with 
the term “length” which can be used both as the feature of the length standard and as the 
feature of any other body. Thus, we can offer the following definition of time:

Definition  3.  Any  process  has  its  own  time  which  characterizes  the  rate 
of  this  process.

The rate of a process can change, so the individual time is changeable.
Consider  the  earlier  mentioned  pendulum  clock,  placed  in  the  valley,  and  let  us  try  to 
answer  the  same  question  “Does  time  in  the  valley  run  faster?”  in  the  light  of  the  last 
definition.  In  the  previous  section  we  saw  that  the  clock  is  fast  relative  to  the  time 
standard. Now, from the viewpoint of Definition  3, we know that the phrase “time in the 
valley”  is  meaningless  because  time  is  not  a  feature  of  place,  hence  the  question  is 
incorrect.  We  may  say  that  the  time  of  the  pendulum  swings  runs  faster  and  this  is  a 
commonsense phrase like “the length of a body has increased”.
Thus,  the  definitions  1-3  do  not  contradict  one  another.  On  the  contrary,  together  they 
represent different aspects of the same notion of time:

2

Time  is  the  rate  of  a  process.  Of  all  processes,  the  earth’s  rotation  around 
its  axis  was  chosen  as  the  time  standard.  Clocks  are  attempts  to  copy  the 
standard  but  they  always  measure  their  own  time  which  is  affected  by  the 
conditions  specific  for  each  clock.

Now when we have developed the notion of time independent of the language we are ready 
to consider the time problem in special relativity theory, the problem which resulted from 
the lack of a constructive time definition.

3. The notion of time in special relativity theory

Since special relativity (SR) claims that time dilation is possible, it is clear that SR deals 
with  the  particular  time  of  a  process,  not  with  the  time  standard  which,  by  definition, 
cannot be changed. On the other hand, SR argues that there exists some common time for 
all bodies which belong to a certain inertial reference frame. This means that each inertial 
reference  frame  possesses  a  time  standard  of  its  own  which  constitutes  the  carrier  of  the 
feature  “time”  for  that  specific  reference  frame.  Thus,  we  conclude  that  the  only 
explanation  that  can  account  for  SR’s  time  dilation  may  be  different  time  standards  for 
different reference frames. But this is not possible either because time dilation is reciprocal 
(a<b  and  b<a  cannot  both  be  true).  Hence,  we  conclude  that  the  time  of  SR  is  not  a 
physical notion - it cannot be a feature of some physical process. 
What  we  described  here  with  regard  to  time  also  obtains  for  the  concept  length  as  well. 
This is, of course, a very bold assertion in the light of the experiments that confirmed the 
special relativity theory. In the next section we will discuss two of these experiments and 
we will offer some alternative explanations for their results.

4. The long lifetime of quick mesons

The  long  lifetime  of  quick  mesons  compared  to  slow  mesons  is  one  of  the  few 
confirmations of SR’s conclusions on time dilation in a moving reference frame (Rossi and 
Hall, [2]). However, we propose another interpretation of the phenomenon. 
Let us consider on what the inference of time dilation is based. Time dilation in SR means 
the following:

(A) All processes slow down equally (other conditions being equal).

3

The  phrase  in  parenthesis  is  important  because  if,  for  example,  it  goes  about  chemical 
reaction  in the  presence  of catalytic  agents  then  the  deceleration  will  occur  relatively  the 
same reaction with the presence of the same catalytic agents. This means that  

(B) Other factors except time can affect the speed of processes.

It follows from Assertion (B) that if an additional factor (except time) affected the speed of 
the  quick  mesons  decay,  the  experiment  would  not  prove  time  dilation.  This  means  that 
implicitly or explicitly it is assumed that the decay of particles is subjected strictly to one 
influence, namely the influence of time. Thus, according to SR and contrary to Assertion 
(B) we have 

(C) Time is the unique factor affecting the decay speed.

Indeed, if other factors could affect the decay speed, then it is possible that just they, rather 
than time, decelerated the quick mesons decay in Rossi and Hall’s experiment hence their 
experiment did not confirm the time delay. 
It was Shnoll et al.’s experiment [3-5] that evidenced that Assertion (C) is wrong. For more 
than three decades these scientists investigated anomalous statistical regularities in a wide 
range of physical, chemical, and biological processes, from radioactive decay to the rates 
of  biochemical  reactions.  The  evidence  points  unambiguously  to  the  existence  of  a 
previously unknown relationship between fluctuations in the rates of radioactive and other 
processes in the laboratory, and major astronomical cycles, including the day, month, and 
year.  The  implication  is,  that  many  phenomena  which  until  now  have  been  regarded  as 
purely  statistical  -  such  as  the  distribution  of  fluctuations  in  the  momentary  rates  of 
radioactivity  measured  in  a  sample  -  are  strongly  influenced  by  an  astrophysical  factor, 
which varies in time in the same way at all points on the Earth.
Since Shnoll et al. [3-5] discovered the additional factor affecting the decay speed, Rossi 
and Hall’s experiment [2] does not prove time dilation for quick mesons.

Conclusion 
The time of SR cannot be a feature of a physical process; therefore it is not a physical 
concept but rather a handy mathematical symbol.

4

References
[1] O. Costa De Beauregard (1987). Time,  the  Physical  Magnitude  (Reidel Publ.) Boston 

[2]  Rossi  B.  and  Hall  D.B.  (1941)  ‘Variation  of  Decay  of  Mesotrons  with  Momentum’, 

studies in the philosophy of science, v.99.

Physical  Review  59, 223-228. 

[3] S.E. Shnoll, V.A. Kolombet, E.V. Pozharskii, T.A. Zenchenko, I.M. Zvereva, and A.A. 
Konradov,  (1998).  “Realization  of  discrete  states  during  fluctuations  in  macroscopic 
processes,” Uspekhi  Fisicheskikh  Nauk, 41(10), 1025-1035. 

[4] S.E. Shnoll, T.A. Zenchenko, K.I. Zenchenko, E.V. Pozharskii, V.A. Kolombet, A.A. 
Konradov, (2000). “Regular variation of the fine structure of statistical distributions as a 
consequence of cosmophysical agents”, Physics  –  Uspekhi  43(2), 205-209.

[5]  S.  E.  Shnoll,  K.  I.  Zenchenko,  S.  N.  Shapovalov,  E.  S.  Gorshkov,  A.  V.  Makarevich 
and  O.  A.  Troshichev,  (2004).  The  specific  form  of  histograms  presenting  the 
distribution of data of (cid:302)(cid:16)decay measurements appears simultaneously in the moment of 
New  Moon 
Antarctic. 
points 
different 
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0412152

Arctic 

from 

to 

in 

5

