 

  

 

1

Metallo-Dielectric Multilayer Structure for 
Lactose Malabsorption Diagnosis through      
H2-Breath-Test  

N. Cioffi, D. de Ceglia, M. De Sario, A. D’Orazio, V. Petruzzelli, F. Prudenzano, M. Scalora, 
S.Trevisi, M. A. Vincenti 

structure 

Abstract—A  metallo-dielectric  multilayer 

is 
proposed  as  a  novel  approach  to  the  analysis  of  lactose 
malabsorption.  When  lactose  intolerance  occurs,  the  bacterial 
overgrowth  in  the  intestine  causes  an  increased  spontaneous 
emission of H2 in the human breath. By monitoring the changes 
in  the  optical  properties  of  a  multilayer  palladium-polymeric 
structure, one is able to detect the patient’s disease and the level 
of 
  lactose  malabsorption  with  high  sensitivity  and  rapid 
response. 
 

Index Terms — Chemical Sensor, Lactose Intolerance, Breath-

test, Multilayer, Metallo-dielectric, PBG 
 

T 

HE  lowest  layer  of  the  terrestrial  atmosphere,  the 
troposphere,  contains  about  0.575ppm  of  hydrogen  (H2).  
In contrast, the breath exhaled by healthy people preferentially 
holds 20ppm or more of H2. The increased hydrogen emission 
occurs  primarily  because  part  of  ingested  carbohydrates  and 
proteins is not absorbed or digested, and is instead fermented 
to  form  hydrogen  by  bacteria  settling  either  in  the  colon  or, 
especially  in  the  case  of  a  bacterial  overgrowth,  in  the  small 
intestine.  Part  of  this  hydrogen  is  then  dissolved  in  mucosal 
blood,  transported  to  the  lungs  within  a  few  minutes,  and 
finally  appears  in  the  breath  [1].  The  most  common  cause of 
lactose  malabsorption  and  lactose  intolerance  is  a  natural 
decrease  in  intestinal  lactase  levels,  known  as  primary  adult 
hypolactasia  or  lactase  non-persistence  [2].  The  lactose 
intolerance can be hard to diagnose based on symptoms alone 
because  the  symptoms  associated  with  this  disorder  are  also 
common  in  other  conditions,  for  example,  irritable  bowel 
syndrome.  The  most  common  test  used  to  diagnose  lactose 
malabsorption is the lactose hydrogen breath test. During this 

  
D. de Ceglia,  M. De Sario, A. D’Orazio, V. Pertruzzelli, S. Trevisi, M. A. 
Vincenti  are  with 
the  Dipartimento  di  Elettrotecnica  ed  Elettronica, 
Politecnico  di  Bari,  Via  Orabona  4,  70125,  Bari,  Italy  (e-mail:  vincenti@ 
deemail.poliba.it).  

F.  Prudenzano  is  with  Dipartimento  di  Ingegneria  dell’Ambiente  e  per  lo 
Sviluppo Sostenibile, Politecnico di Bari, Taranto, Via del Turismo 8, 74100, 
Italy. 

M.  Scalora  is  with  the  Charles  M.  Bowden  Research  Center,  AMSRD-

AMR-WS-ST, Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898-5000, USA 

N.Cioffi  is  with  Università  degli  Studi  di  Bari,  Dipartimento  di  Chimica, 

Via Orabona 4, 70125, Italy. 

 

indicates 

theoretically 

the  baseline) 

test,  the  patient  ingests  a  large  dose  of  lactose,  after  which 
hydrogen levels in the breath are measured at regular intervals 
of 30 or 40 minutes. A rise in hydrogen breath levels (>20ppm 
over 
increased  gas 
production  due  to  malabsorbed  lactose  reaching  the  large 
intestine. Hence, by plotting the H2-concentration in the breath 
as  a  function  of  time  after  ingestion  of  the  lactose  solution, 
one  is  able  to  reveal  a  malabsorption  condition.  However,  a 
positive  response  in  the  H2  breath  test  that  diagnoses  lactose 
malabsorption may or may not mean the occurrence of lactose 
intolerance [3-5]. 
In  order  to  realize  a  highly  sensitive  sensor  for  a  H2  breath 
test,  we  underline  the  importance  of  the  selectivity  in 
hydrogen  sensing.  This  issue  arises  from  the  fact  that  in  the 
majority of field applications, as well as in the exhaled breath, 
hydrogen must be detected in the presence of other gases, i.e. 
oxygen  and  nitrogen  in  the  air.  Moreover,  the  breath  of 
healthy  people  contains  nitrogen,  oxygen,  carbon  dioxide, 
water  vapor  and  inert  gases.  The  remainder  of  human  breath 
(<0.000001%)  is  a  mixture  of  as  many  as  500  different 
compounds  [6].  However,  pathologic  conditions  could  alter 
the breath composition introducing other gases and substances 
that  can  modify  the  sensor  response.  As  a  consequence,  the 
presence  of  some  traps  for  organic  species  is  essential  to 
preserve  the  detection  mechanism  from  external  damaging 
agents. A large number of materials and devices operating on 
different  principles  has  been  exploited  for  hydrogen  sensing 
[7], such as a modified metal-oxide resistive gas sensor [8,9],  
pellistor  [10]  and  ChemFET  type  [11]  devices.  Furthermore, 
many  transition  metals  of  the  group  VIII  such  as  nickel, 
palladium and platinum spontaneously absorb hydrogen. This 
absorption causes a change of electrical and optical properties 
of  the  above  mentioned  metals.  Palladium  has  a  remarkable 
ability  to  absorb  hydrogen.    In  addition,  the  formation  of 
palladium  hydride  results  in  increased  electrical  resistance, 
and 
[12].  Several 
configurations for hydrogen sensors based on the properties of 
palladium have been proposed. It has been demonstrated that 
thin  palladium  films  can  be  deposited  on  an  optical  fiber  to 
detect  hydrogen  [13,  14].  The  measurement  of  hydrogen 
concentrations  is  also  possible  by  monitoring  the  reflectivity 
of a thin palladium film deposited on the tip of an optical fiber 

in  decreased  dielectric 

constant 

2

 

[15],  or  by  monitoring  the  optical  transmittance  of  a  thin 
palladium film grown on a glass substrate [16]. Finally, more 
sensitive  but  also  more  complex  measurements  could  be 
performed  by  monitoring  optical  changes  in  the  surface 
plasmon resonance, [17] or interference phenomena [18]. 
In this paper we propose a novel approach to the detection and 
inspection  of  hydrogen  concentrations.  Our  analysis  yields  a 
new  device  useful  for  H2-breath-test  analysis.  A  palladium-
dielectric  multilayer  structure  reacts  with  small  quantities  of 
hydrogen  in  the  human  breath,  leading  to  reversible  changes 
in  the  transmission  spectrum.  These  changes  involve  certain 
wavelengths inside the spectrum, and depend on the capability 
of  palladium  films  to  absorb  hydrogen  molecules,  leading  to 
changes in the dielectric constant.   

ε

Pd

=

ε
−∞

  

 

 

 

 

 (2) 

(
)
ω τ
p

2

2

(1

+

(
)
ωτ

)

 
where ε∞ is the relative permittivity at high frequencies, ωp is 
the  plasma  frequency,  τ  is  the  relaxation  time  and  ω  is  the 
angular  frequency.  In  order  to  express  the  Drude  parameters 
as  a  function  of  hydrogen  concentration,  the  ε  of  the  Pd  thin 
film  has  been  measured  using  different  substrates,  and  by 
comparing the results in terms of transmittance and reflectance 
[24]. Once the nonlinear function h (see eq.1) is evaluated, the 
Drude parameters and the dielectric constant are calculated for 
all  the  hydrogen  concentrations  under  investigation.  By 

 

 

 
 

I.  THE PALLADIUM-HYDROGEN SYSTEM 

 
Hydrogen  is  a  combustible  substance  with  a  lower  explosive 
limit of 4.65% at room temperature and pressure, and since it 
is  the  smallest  of  the  elements,  one  of  the  main  barriers  to 
overcome  is  the  detection  of  small  quantities  of  hydrogen. 
Due to its combustible nature, optical monitoring of hydrogen 
is  considered  the  most  appropriate  method  owing  to  its 
inherent  safe  nature  when  compared  with  techniques  that 
require  electrical  measurements  [12].  Moreover,  a  lot  of 
transition  metals  such  as  nickel,  palladium  and  platinum 
absorb  hydrogen  spontaneously,  changing 
their  optical 
properties as a function of hydrogen concentration. At the end 
of  19th  century,  it  was  demonstrated  that  palladium  shows 
larger absorption of hydrogen compared to iron or platinum or 
other  transition  metals,  and  that  it  is  possible  to  store  a  high 
quantity of hydrogen in a Pd lattice [19]. Free electrons states 
of  Pd  are  filled  by  free  electrons  of  the  absorbed  hydrogen, 
modifying  the  Fermi  level  and  changing  reversibly  the 
electrical  [20]  and  optical  [21]  properties  of  palladium.  This 
causes the decrease of both the real and the imaginary parts of 
the  complex  permittivity  of  palladium  [22].  It  was  also 
demonstrated  that  the  complex  permittivity  of  palladium 
hydride films εPdH could be expressed as: 
 

ε

PdH

 

=

 

h

×

ε
Pd

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

 
where εPd is the complex permittivity of bare palladium and h 
is  a  nonlinear  function  having  values  between  0  and  1,  that 
describes  the  dispersive  behavior  of  Pd  as  a  function  of 
hydrogen concentration. Values of h have been calculated and 
measured  for  a  wide  range  of  hydrogen  concentrations,  and 
they  remain  approximately  constant  if  the  metal  thickness  is 
changed [13]. It was also demonstrated that the Drude model 
could  describe  the  hydride  palladium  optical  properties  as 
well,  when  the  hydrogen  concentration  is  increased  [13,23]. 
Hence,  to  take  into  account  the  dispersion  properties  of  bare 
Pd  we  use  the  well  known  Drude  model,  expressed  by  the 
following relation: 

Fig.1: (a) real part and (b) imaginary part of the dielectric constant against 
the  hydrogen  concentration  in  air.  Hydrogen  concentration  values  are 
typical of hypolactasia pathologic condition. 

interpolating ωp, τ  and ε∞, the real (Fig. 1a) and the imaginary 
parts (Fig. 1b) of  the dielectric constant for hydride palladium 
are  uniquely  determined.  How  a palladium hydride condition 
occurs?  The  Palladium  hydride  is  formed  when  palladium  is 
exposed to hydrogen, and an efficient dissociation rate occurs 

 

3

when  hydrogen  atoms  are  in  contact  with  the  palladium 
surface. The palladium hydride film has different mechanical, 
electrical, and optical properties than those of bare palladium. 
Moreover,  hydride  palladium  exhibits  a  different  behavior 
depending  on  the  value  of  the  hydrogen  concentration.  The 
hydride  palladium  could  be  characterized  by  two  different 
phases,  the  α  phase  and  the  β  phase.  The  reversible  α  phase 
occurs at low hydrogen concentrations, and in the absence of 
hydrogen  Pd  is  considered  in  the  α  phase  as  well.  If  the 
hydrogen  concentration  is  increased,  Pd  is  transformed  into 
the  β  phase.  The  transition  point  not  only  depends  on  the 
hydrogen  concentration,  but  also  on  the  film  thickness  and 
temperature.  The  β  phase  is  not  reversible  and  introduces  an 
hysteresis  in  the  optical  and  mechanical  parameters  of  the 
palladium  film.  The  transition  from  α  to  β  phases  for  a  thin 
palladium  film  (10-100nm)  occurs  at  wider  hydrogen 
concentration  values  (more  than  4%)  [25].  For  hydrogen 
sensing  applications  it  is  important  to  avoid  the  Palladium 
phase  transition  during  the  experiments.  A  H2-breath-test  is 
based  on  the  detection  of  small  quantities  of  hydrogen, 
ranging from 20ppm for healthy conditions, to 80ppm or more 
for  pathologic  conditions.  In  the  whole  range  of  our 
investigation  it  is  assumed  that  the  palladium  remains  in  the 
reversible  α  phase,  in  order  to  be  able  to  repeat  the 
measurements  with  the  same  device  without  any  hysteresis 
phenomena,  or  other  structural  variations.  The  desorption  of 
the  hydrogen  can  be  operated  by  using  a  pure  nitrogen 
atmosphere.    
 

II.  METALLO-DIELECTRIC STRUCTURE THEORY 

 
In  recent years it has been demonstrated that it is possible to 
realize  one-dimensional  photonic  band  gap  (PBG)  structures, 
containing  hundreds  of  nanometers  of  metals,  which  remain 
relatively  transparent  in  a  pre-established  range,  the  visible 
light,  and  opaque  for  infrared  and  ultraviolet  light  [26].  This 
interesting  property  could  be  useful  for  many  wide-ranging 
applications, from micro opto-electromechanical systems [27], 
or  the  enhancement  of  the  quadratic  and  cubic  nonlinearities 
of metal [28]. Propagation of light through the stack occurs as 
a  result  of  a  resonance  tunneling  phenomenon.  This  feature 
takes place for many transition metals ranging from group III 
to group XII. Some of the noble metals, such as Au, Ag or Cu, 
are  relatively  transparent  within  a  transmission  window 
located  at  the  beginning  of  interband  transition  from  the  d 
band  to  conduction  band  [28].  The  most  important  objective 
of  a  metallo-dielectric,  multilayer  structure  is  to  enhance  the 
transmitted  field  with  respect  to  the  transmission  through  an 
equivalent amount of metal in a certain range of wavelengths. 
In this way, one is able to use a large quantity of metal many 
skin  depths  thick  while  maintaining  losses  exceptionally 
small.  In  fact,  the  concept  of  skin  depth  (as  the  distance  at 
which the field intensity is decreased to 1/e of its input value) 
the  presence  of  spatial 
to 
looses 

its  meaning  due 

discontinuities  that  drastically  modify  the  physical  properties 
of the structure [26]. The bandwidth and the spectral position 
of the zero reflection condition, i.e. transparent metal regime, 
can be tuned by properly choosing the thickness of each layer. 
One  or 
two  anti-reflection  coatings  can  be  efficiently 
dimensioned  by  calculating  the  phase  shift  induced  by  the 
metal  within  the  structure  to  improve  the  transmittance  [29]. 
High  values  of  transmittance  and  a  high  sensitivity  to  the 
presence  of  small  quantity  of  the  analyte,  i.e.  hydrogen,  are 
reachable  by  using  Pd,  which  is  a  transition  metal,  inside  a 
periodic,  metallo-dielectric  structure.  Several  solutions  for 
hydrogen sensing using Pd have been proposed by embedding 
a thin film of metal between an isolating film and the tip of an 
optical  fiber  [30],  or  by  coating  a  piece  of  fiber  with  a 
sensitive material [31]. As suggested by the theory of metallo-
dielectric  multilayer  structure,  the  overall  thickness  of  Pd 
within  the  whole  device  can  be  increased,  while  keeping  the 
device  transparent  to  the  visible  light.  As  an  example,  we 
compare  the  transmittivity  of  a  50nm  of  pure  Pd  film  grown 
on  a  glass  substrate  with  that  of  a  multilayer  structure, 
composed  of  4  periods  and  a  half  of  Pd/dielectric  (the 
dielectric  material  considered  is  ideal  and  has  a  relative 
permittivity  equal 
two 
antireflection coatings. As depicted in Fig.2, we can notice an 
enhancement  in  the  transmittivity  by  comparing  the  two 

to  εx=6.25),  embedded  within 

 
Fig.2: Comparison between the transmittivity of two structures containing 
the same quantity of Palladium: dashed line refers to a pure 50nm Pd film 
grown  on  a  glass  substrate;  solid  line  refers  to  a  multilayer  metal-
dielectric structure, composed of 4 periods and a half made by 10 nm of 
Pd and dielectric layers 85nm thick (εx=6.25). The peak value of T for the 
multilayer structure is 38,3% (487nm), compared with 0.78% of 50nm of 
pure Pd.

devices under test. 
 
 
 
 

 

III.  OPERATING PRINCIPLE 

 

4

considered  in  all  the  simulations.  We  emphasize  that  the 
dielectric  layers  are  about  eight  times  thicker  than  the 
palladium  ones.  By  properly  varying  the  dielectric  thickness 
inside  the  multilayer  structure  one  is  able  to  narrow  the 
resonance  bandwidth,  achieving  values  of  full-width  at  half 
maximum  of  ~15nm  for  dielectric  thicknesses  of  500nm  or 
more.  We  notice  that  this  phenomenon  does  not  modify  the 

As mentioned above, an efficient H2-breath-test device has to 
detect small quantities of hydrogen in the breath exhaled, with 
high selectivity in the presence of other gases.  For this reason 
traps  for  organics  between  the  exhaled  breath  and  the 
detecting  device  are  useful  in  order  to  avoid  damage  or 
undesired  chemical  reactions.  An  efficient  detection  of 
hydrogen, operated by a multilayer structure, requires the use 
of  an  inert  dielectric  material  that  should  be  permeable  to 
hydrogen. Furthermore, the optical properties of the dielectric 
material,  i.e.  the  real  and  the imaginary  part  of  the  refractive 
index,  must  verify  the  following  condition:  the  difference 
between  the  real  part  of  the  refractive  index  of  the  dielectric 
and  the  real  part  of  the  refractive  index  of  palladium,  in  the 
visible  range,  must  be  sufficiently  high  to  guarantee  the 
resonance  tunneling  phenomenon.  We  start  our  analysis  by 
considering  a  theoretical  structure  containing  the  sensitive 
material, Pd, and an ideal dielectric material X having εx=6.25 
and  an  extinction  coefficient  equal  to  zero.  Low  values  of 
hydrogen  concentration,  under  the  explosive  limit  of  4.65%, 
can be easily detected by the palladium/dielectric device if the 
optical  properties  of  the  hydride  palladium  are  properly 
analyzed (Fig.1 a – b). If the surrounding mixture of gases is 
composed of oxygen (30%), nitrogen (70%) and hydrogen (a 
few  ppm)  only,  we  can  extract  information  about  the  optical 
properties  of  the  Pd  films,  in  order  to  relate  a  pathologic 
condition with an optical response for the sensitive metal. The 
creation  of  a  relation  between  the  total  hydrogen  part  in  the 
mixture  and  the  correspondent  pathologic  condition  is  very 
useful for our purposes. A malabsorption condition results in 
an  increase  from  a  baseline  value  of  20ppm  in  the  exhaled 
breath. This value remains constant during the test for healthy 
people,  and  changes  dramatically  after  few  minutes  for 
patients  that  suffer  from  lactose  malabsorption  or  lactose 
intolerance.  For  medical  purposes,  we  have  to  consider 
hydrogen  values  ranging  from  20ppm  to  100ppm,  which  are 
typical  values  for  pathologic  conditions  [32].  Several  works 
report  on  changes  of  the  optical  properties  of  thin  films  of 
hydride 
hydrogen 
absorbing 
concentrations,  both  under  and  over  the  explosive  limit  of 
hydrogen  [21,22].  As  reported  above,  through  the  evaluation 
of the nonlinear function h (see eq.1), all the parameters of the 
Drude model and the dielectric constant are calculated for all 
the  hydrogen  concentrations  under  investigation.  The  use  of 
the  multilayer,  metallo-dielectric  structure  increases  the  total 
amount  of  sensitive  material,  i.e.  palladium,  and  at  the  same 
time  it  improves  the  transmissivity.  The  multilayer  structure 
under investigation is composed of five layers of 10nm of Pd 
alternated  by  4  layers  of  85nm  of  the  X  dielectric  material. 
This structure is embedded within two antireflection coatings 
of  45  nm  of  the  same  dielectric  X,  as  depicted  in  Fig.3.  The 
antireflection layers thickness is calculated by considering the 
phase  shift  due  to  the  presence  of  the  metal  within  the 
structure  for  an  operating  wavelength  equal  to  550  nm.  The 
transmission spectrum of this structure, reported in Fig.4, has 
been  calculated  using  the  standard  transfer  matrix  method. 
Normal  incidence,  absorption  and  dispersion  phenomena  are 

palladium 

different 

 
Fig.3: Metallo-dielectric sensor: light grey regions are the dielectric layers 
(X)  and  dark  grey  regions  are  the  metal  layers  (Pd).  The  thicknesses  of 
each layer are defined as a=45nm, c=85nm, b=10nm.  

 

 
Fig.4:  Sketch  of  transmission  and  reflection  spectra  for  the  multilayer 
structure. 

transmission  properties  of  the  structure,  altering  only  the 
spectral  response  of  the  structure  in  terms  of  resonance 
spectral position and bandwidth. The transmission spectrum of 
the  multilayer  system  undergoes  small  changes  as  the  H2 
concentration  is  varied  in  the  environment.  For  example,  by 
increased 
increasing 

concentration  of  hydrogen, 

the 

 

transmittivity levels within the visible range is increased. This 
phenomenon  is  strictly  linked  to  the  red  shift  of  the  plasma 
frequency  and  to  the  enhancement  of  the  damping  factor  of 
the  palladium  hydride  as  well.  As  depicted  in  Fig.5,  we 
predict  an  increase  of  6,3%  in  terms  of  peak  transmission 
value  when  a  malabsorption  condition  is  detected,  i.e.  the 
overtaking  of  the  20ppm  baseline. Moreover, a total increase 
of about 12,2% of the transmission spectrum is revealed when 
the total amount of hydrogen in the environment grows from 
20ppm to 100ppm. 
 

IV.  DEVICE MODELING 

to  be  permeable 

 
An efficient detection of hydrogen, operated by the multilayer 
structure,  can  be  realized  if  a  dielectric  material  inert  and 
permeable to the hydrogen presence is used. Moreover, one of 
the  most  important  issues  to  reach  the  transparent  metal 
regime  is  ensured  by  a  sufficiently  high  difference  between 
the  real  part  of  the  refractive  index  of  the  dielectric  and  the 
real part of the refractive index of palladium across the visible 
range.  Polymers  are  the  best  candidates  for  our  purposes, 
combining two of the most important requirements mentioned 
above:  they  are  inert  in  the  presence  of  hydrogen  and  their 
chemical  features  allow 
to  hydrogen 
molecules.  While  the  majority  of  commercial  polymers  are 
characterized  by  a  relatively  low  real  part  of  the  refractive 
index,  reaching  values  lower  than  1.8  [33],  a  high  refractive 
index  material  has  been  recently  proposed  and  realized.  This 
material,  known  as  EXP0454,  is  a  titanium  dioxide-rich 
polymer with a refractive index that reaches values close to 2 
across  the  visible  range.  It  shows  high  transparency  and 
resistance to chemical attack [34]. This polymer is suitable for 
the  realization  of  an  H2-breath-test  device  by  all  means.  In 
fact, by properly alternating EXP0454 and Pd should be able 
to  exploit  the  properties  of  a  metallo-dielectric  structure  in 
order to realize a high sensitivity hydrogen sensor. As seen for 
the  structure  sketched  in  Fig.  3,  the  optimization  of  the 
transmission  spectrum  and  spectral  peak  position  depends  on 
the  parameters  a,  b  and  c.  Another  significant  feature  of  the 
proposed  device  is  the  sensitivity  of  the  structure  against  the 
variation  of  hydrogen  concentration  in  the  human  exhaled 
breath. As shown in Fig. 5, the rise of the transmittance peak 
value  against  the  hydrogen  concentration  could  not  be 
described  exactly  by  a  linear  function.  Our  aim  is  to  find  a 
trade-off  between  an  excellent  sensitivity  in  the  whole  range 
of  hydrogen  concentration  under 
the 
compactness  of  the  device,  obtained  through  the  analysis  of 
the  transmission  properties  of  the  multilayer  structure.  As 
depicted in Fig. 6 an analysis of the sensor sensitivity has been 
performed  by  varying  the  parameter  c  (see  Fig.  3).  The 
sensitivity  of 
the  following 
expression: 
 

investigation  and 

is  defined  by 

the  sensor 

Tpeak
Δ

[%]

S

=

∫

H ppm H ppm
]
Δ

[

[

]

2

2

 ,   H [
2

ppm

]

=

20, ...100 ppm

     (3) 

5

 

 

 
We  have  performed  an  optimization  analysis  of  the  key 
parameters in order to find a balance between the width of the 
whole  structure,  the  transmission  features,  including  the 
transmission peak bandwidth, and the device sensitivity in the 
whole  range  of  hydrogen  concentration  under  investigation. 
According  to  Fig.  6  it  is  difficult  to  describe  the  sensitivity 
value  (see  eq.3)  as  a  regular  function.  The  maximum  of 
sensitivity  is  reached  at  c=110nm  (Fig.6).  As  depicted  in 

 

 

 
transmission 
Fig.5:  Metallo-dielectric  sensor  calibration  curve: 
spectrum peak value (487 nm) increases by growing the concentration of

the 

 
Fig6:  Hydrogen  sensor  sensitivity  (S)  as  a  function  of  dielectric  layer 
thickness, defined as c 
 

Fig.7,  the  calibration  curve  for  c=110nm  shows  the  highest 
average sensitivity S, but it has a flat shape in the 40÷60ppm 
range. In this interval the device is not sufficiently sensitive to 
small  variations  of  the  percentage  of  H2,  and  it  does  not 
appear to be useful for an H2-breath-test. Looking for a better 
configuration,  able  to  ensure  good  sensitivity  in  the  whole 
range  of  investigation,  we  have  analyzed  configurations 

 

6

 
 
 
 

 

characterized  by  other  values  of  S  (Fig.6).  Among  these,  we 
found that c=120nm represents the best compromise in terms 
of  sensitivity,  device  compactness  and  linearity  of  the 
calibration  curve  (Fig.7).  In  Tab.1  we  summarized  some 
features  for  the  devices  characterized  by  c=110nm  and 
c=120nm. In particular we report on sensitivity of the devices 
(S)  their  total  width  (W)  and  transmission  peak  full-width  at 
half  maximum  (B).  No  considerable  variations  of  sensitivity 
are found by varying the total thickness of palladium layers in 
the  structure  (parameter  b  in  Fig.3).  The  transmission 
spectrum  of  the  optimized  sensor  (in  this  context,  it  is  clear 
that we have not exhausted all of parameter space) is depicted 
in  Fig.8.  This  spectrum  is  produced by a multilayer structure 
similar  to  the  one  sketched  in  Fig.3,  using  the  following 
c=120nm.  The  measured 
values: 
transmittance  allows  us  to  plot  the  curve  that  relates  the 
exhaled  hydrogen  concentration  during  the  test  after  the 
ingestion  of  the  lactose  solution.  After  the  ingestion  the 
hydrogen levels in the breath are measured at regular intervals 
of 30 or 40 minutes.  
 

a=65nm,  b=10nm, 

 
TABLE I 

c [nm] 
110 
120 

S [%·ppm-1] 
0.0716 
0.0702 

W [µm] 
0.596 
0.636 

B [nm]  
53 
61 

 
Fig.8:  Transmission  spectra  for  the  optimized  H2  sensor  :  an  increase  of  
11.6% in terms of transmittivity is noticed when a malabsorption condition 
occurs,  i.e.  the overtaking of the 20ppm baseline; the total increase of the 
transmittivity swelling the hydrogen concentration from 20ppm to 100ppm 
is about 16%. 
 

 

 

V.  CONCLUSION 

 We  have  proposed  a  novel  approach  to  hydrogen  sensing  in 
terms  of  a  compact,  nano-optical  sensor  suitable  for    H2-
breath-test  analysis.  This  kind  of  device  is  potentially  very 
useful for the detection of lactose malabsorption or intolerance 
condition,  and  provides  clear  information  about  the  healthy-
unhealthy  threshold.  Moreover,  this  structure  can  be  used  to 
reveal  the  amount  of  hydrogen  in  the  breath  exhaled  by 
unhealthy people, and can be used to establish  a relationship 
between  time  and  exhaled  hydrogen,  resulting  in  an  efficient 
H2-breath-test  analysis,  lactose  malabsorption  diagnosis  in 
particular. 
 

REFERENCES 

[1]  T.H.Vesa,  P.  Marteau,  R.  Korpela,  “Lactose  Intolerance”,  J.  Am.  Coll. 

Nutr, vol. 19,  pp. 165S-175S, 2000. 

[2]  D. L. Swagerty, A.D. Walling, R. M. Klein, “Lactose Intolerance”, Am. 

Fam. Phys., vol. 65, pp. 1845-1850, 2002. 

[3]  A.  Carroccio,  G.  Montalto,  G.  Cavera,  A.  Notarbatolo,  “Lactose 
Intolerance and self reported milk intolerance: Relationship with lactose 
maldigestion  and  nutrient  intake”,  J.  Am.  Coll.  Of    Nutr.,  vol  17,  pp. 
631-636, 1998. 

[4]  M. D. Di Stefano, G. Veneto, S. Malservisi, “Lactose Malabsorbtion and 
intolerance  and  peak  bone  mass”,  Gastroenterology,  vol.122,  pp.1793-
1799, 2002. 

[5]  A.D.  Shaw,  G.J.  Davies,  “Lactose  Intolerance:  Problems  in  diagnosis 

and treatment”, J. Clin. Gastroenter., vol. 28, pp. 208-216, 1999. 

[6]  T.  H.  Risby,  “Trace  gas  analysis  in  exhaled  human  breath  for  disease 
diagnosis”,  Conference  on  Lasers  and  Electro-Optics,  vol.2,  pp.  898-
899, 2005. 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
Fig.7:  Metallo-dielectric  sensor  calibration  curves  for  different  dielectric 
thicknesses: c=110 nm (solid line) and c=120 nm (dashed line). Even if the 
average sensitivity value is approximately equal for these structures the one 
corresponding to c=120 nm is more appropriate to the breath test analysis, 
showing  a  gradual  increase  of  the  transmission  peak  value  especially 
between  40  and  60ppm.  The  transmission  peak  position  occurs  at  508nm 
(solid line) and at 544 nm (dashed line). 

 

 

7

[7]  P.T.  Moseley,  J.O.W.  Norris  and  D.E.  Williams,  “Techniques  and 

Mechanism in gas sensing”, Philadelphia, PA: IOP, 1991. 

[8]  K. Hara and N. Nishida, “H2 sensor using Fe2O3 based thin film”, Sens. 

and Actuators B, vol. 65, pp. 366-370, 2000. 

[9]  S. Basu and A. Dutta, “Modified heterojunction based on zinc oxide thin 
film  for  hydrogen  gas  sensor  application”,  Sens.  and  Actuators  B,  vol. 
22, pp. 83-87, 1994. 

[10]  V.R.  Katti,  A.  K.  Debnath,  S.C.  Gadkari,  S.K.  Gupta,  and  V.C.  Sahni, 
“Passivated  thick  film  catalytic  type  H2  sensor  operating  at  low 
temperature” , Sens. and Actuators B, vol. 84, pp. 219-225, 2002. 
[11]  K.  Domansky,  A.  Rose,  W.H.  Grover,  and  G.  J.  Exharos,  “  Localized 
deposition  of  zinc  oxide  films  by  automated  fluid  dispensing  method”, 
Mater. Sci.Eng. B, vol.76, no.2 , pp. 116-121, 2000. 

[12]  F.A.  Lewis,  “The  Palladium  Hydrogen  system”,  New  York:  Academic, 

1967. 

[13]  X.  Bevenot,  A.  Trouillet,  C.  Veillas,  H.  Gagnaire,  and  M.  Clement, 
“Hydrogen  leak  detection  using  an  optical  fibre  sensor  for  aerospace 
application”, Sens. and Actuators B, vol. 67, pp. 57-67, 2000. 

[14]  J.  Villatoro,  and  D.  Monzon-Hernandez,  “Fast  detection  of  hydrogen 
with  nano  fiber  tapers  coated  with  ultra  thin  palladium  layers”,  Optics 
Express, vol. 13, no.13, pp.5087-5092, 2005. 

[15]  M.A. Buttler, “ Fiber optic sensor for hydrogen concentrations near the 

explosive limit”, J. Electrochem. Soc., vol. 138, pp. 46-47, 1991. 

[16]  Y. Oh, J. Hamagami, Y. Watanabe, M. Tanaka, H. Yanagida, “A novel 
palladium  thin  film  hydrogen  detector”,  J.  Ceram.  Soc.  Jpn.,  vol.  110, 
pp. 618-620, 1993.  

[17]  B. Chadwick, J.Tann, M. Brungs, M. Gal, “A hydrogen sensor based on 
the  optical  generation  of  surface  plasmons  in  a  palladium  alloy”,  Sens. 
Actuators B, vol. 17, pp. 215-220, 1994. 

[18]  A. Bearzotti, C. Caliendo, A. d’Amico, “Integrated optic sensor for the 
detection of H2 concentrations”, Sens. Actuators B, vol. 7, pp. 685-688, 
1992.  

[19]  T. Graham, “On the absoption of  dialytic separation of gases by colloid 

septa”, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., vol. 156, pp. 399-439, 1866. 

[20]  J.C.  Barton,  J.A.S.  Green,  F.A.  Lewis,  “Changes  of  electrode  potential 
and  electrical  resistance  as  a  function  of  the  hydrogen  content  of some 
Pd + Ni and Pd + Rh alloys”, Trans. Faraday Soc., vol.62, pp. 960-970, 
1966. 

[21]  A. Mandelis, J.A. Garcia, “Pd/PVDF thin film hydrogen sensor based on 
laser  amplitude    modulated  optical  transmittance:  dependence  on  H2 
concentration and device physics”, Sens. Actuators B, vol. 49, pp. 258-
267, 1998.  

[22]  K. Wyrzykowski, A. Rodzik, B. Baranowski, “Optical transmission and 
reflection  of  PdHx  thin  films”,  J.  Phys.  Condens.  Matter,  vol.  1,  pp. 
2269-2982, 1999.  

[23]  M.A. Ordal, L.L. Long, R.J. Bell, S.E. Bell, R.R. Bell, R.W. Alexander, 
C.A. Ward, “Optical properties of the metals Al, Co, Cu, Au, Fe, Pb, Ni, 
Pd, Pt, Ag, Ti, and W in the infrared and far infrared”, Appl. Opt., vol. 
22, pp. 1099-1120, 1983.  

[24]  W.E.  Vargas,  I.  Rojas,  D.E.  Azofeifa,  N.  Clark,  “Optical  and  electrical 
properties  of  hydrided  palladium  thin  films  studied  by  and  inversion 
approach from transmittance measurements”, Thin solid Films, vol. 496, 
pp. 189-196, 2006. 

[25]  M.  Tabib-Azar  et  al.,  “Highly  sensitive  hydrogen  sensors  using 
palladium  coated  fiber  optics  with  exposed  cores  and  evanescent  field 
interactions”, Sens. Actuators B, vol. 56, pp.158-163, 1999. 

[26]  M.  Scalora,  M.J.  Bloemer,  A.S.  Pethel,  J.P.  Dowling,  C.M.  Bowden, 
A.S. Manka, “Transparent, metallo-dielectric, one-dimensional, photonic 
band gap structure”, Jour. App. Phys., vol. 83,  pp. 2377-2383, 1998. 
[27]  S.  Baglio,  M.  Bloemer,  N. Savalli, M. Scalora, “Development of novel 
optoelectromechanical  systems  based  on  Transparent  metals  PBG 
structures”, IEEE sensor journal, vol.1, pp. 288-295, 2001. 

[28]  N.N.  Lepeshkin,  A.  Schweinsberg,  G.  Piredda,  R.S.  Bennik,  R.  W. 
Boyd,  “Enahanced  nonlinear  optical  response  of  one-dimensional 
metallo-dielectric  photonic  crystals”,  Phys.  Rev. Lett., vol. 93, 123902, 
2004. 

[29]  Y.K. Choi, Y.K. Hs, J.E. Kim, H.. Park, K. Kim, “Antireflection film in 
one-dimensional metallo-dielectric photonic crystals”, Opt. Comm., vol. 
230, pp. 239-243, 2004. 

[30]  R.  Pitts,  R.D.  Smith,  S.H.  Lee,  E.  Tracy,  “  Interfacial  Stability  of  thin 
film  hydrogen  sensors”,  DOE  Hydrogen  Program,  FY  2004  Progress 
Report. 

[31]  J.  Villatoro,  D.  Monzon-Hernandez,  “Fast  detection  of  hydrogen  with 
nano fiber tapers coated with ultra thin palladium layers”, Opt. Express, 
vol. 13, pp. 5087-5092, 2005. 

[32]  R.J.  Vonk,  M.G.  Priebe,H.A.  Koetse,  F.  Stellaard,  I.  Lenoir-Wijnkoop, 
J.-M. Antoine, Y. Zhong, C. Y. Huang, “Lactose intolerance: analysis of 
underlining factor”, Eur. Jour. Clin. Invest., vol. 33, pp. 70-75, 2003. 
[33]  N.  Sadayori,  Y.  Hotta,  U.S.  Patent  Application  publication  No. 

20040158021A1, August 12, 2004. 

[34]  Y.  Wang,  T.  Flaim,  R.  Mercado,  S.  Fowler,  D.  Holmes,  C.  Planje, 
“Hybrid  high  refractive  index  polymer  coatings”,  Proceedings  of  the 
SPIE, vol. 5724, pp. 42-49, 2005. 

the  University  of  Bari,  working  on 

 
 
Nicola Cioffi is graduated in Chemistry -summa cum laude- at the University 
of  Bari  in  1997.  In  2001  he  received  his  Ph.D.    in  Chemistry  of  Innovative 
Materials  at 
the  development, 
characterisation  and  analytical  application  of  new  nanostructured  materials 
such  as  metal  nanoparticles,  organic/inorganic  nano-composites  and 
conductive  polymer  thin  films.  In  2001  he  received  the  "Best  Young 
Researcher"  Award  from  the  Analytical  Chemistry  Division  of  the  Italian 
Chemical  Society  (SCI).  From  2001  to  2005  he  had  several  post-doc 
fellowships, still working on innovative nano-materials. Since April 2005, he 
is a researcher at the Chemistry Department of the University of Bari. 
He  has  been  member  of  the  Organizing  and/or  Scientific  Committee  of 
national and international conferences; moreover, he his an active member of 
many  Scientific  Societies.  In  particular,  since  2003,  he  is  member  of  the 
Analytical Spectroscopy Board of the SCI - Analytical Chemistry Division.  
He serves as referee for several journals and is Grant Reviewer for the Health, 
Welfare and Food Bureau of the Hong Kong Government. 
The scientific production of Nicola Cioffi is documented by 50 papers on peer-
reviewed  journals  and  textbooks,  and  77  communications  presented  in 
national and international conferences.  He is also author of a state-of-the-art 
review  chapter  dealing  with  metal-fluoropolymer  vapour  sensors,  published 
on the Encyclopedia of Sensors (details at www.aspbs.com/eos). 
 
 
Domenico  de  Ceglia  was  born  in  Terlizzi  (Bari-Italy)  in  1977  and  he 
graduated  in  Electronic  Engineering  at  the  Politecnico  di  Bari,  in  July  2003. 
He is currently enrolled in the Ph.D. program in Electronic Engineering. His 
main  research  activities  concern  the  study  of    linear  and  nonlinear  effects  in 
photonic structures, waveguides, negative index materials, and the analysis of 
pulse  propagation  in  nonlinear  devices.  He  is  currently  a  guest  researcher  at 
the  Charles  M.  Bowden  Research  Center,  Redstone  Arsenal,  Huntsville 
(Alabama-USA). 
 
Marco De Sario  was born in Cellamare (Bari-Italy) in 1942. He graduated in 
Electrical  Engineering  at  the  University  of  Bari  in  1968.  Since  1986  he  is  a 
full  professor  in  Electromagnetic  Fields.  His  main  research  interests  are  in 
microwave  amplifiers,  micro-strip  devices,  optical  fibers,  integrated  optics, 
optical  non-linear  devices,  optical  amplifiers  and  laser  in  chalcogenide 
glasses, and photonic band-gap devices. Prof. De Sario is author or co-author 
of  about  250  scientific  papers  published  on  prestigious,  high  impact  factor 
international  magazines,  congresses,  conferences,  etc.  Marco  De  Sario  is  a 
referee  of  many  scientific  international  magazines  as  IEEE  Journals,  OSA 
Journals,  etc.,  and  referee  of  the  Politecnico  of  Bari  in  the  Italian 
Electromagnetic board. 
 
 
Antonella D’Orazio was born in Potenza (Italy) in 1958. She received the Dr. 
Eng. degree, summa cum laude, in Electrical Engineering at the University of 
Bari in 1983 and the Ph.D.  in Electromagnetisms  in 1987. Since 1983 she has 
joined the Dipartimento di Elettrotecnica ed Elettronica of the Politecnico of 
Bari.  Presently  she  is    full    professor  in  Electromagnetic  Fields.  Since  2003 
she  is  Coordinator  of  the  Teacher  Council  of  the  Phylosophiae  Doctorate  in 
Electronics  Engineering.  Her  main  research  interests  are    the  design,  
fabrication  and  characterization  of  integrated  optic,  linear  and  nonlinear 
devices  based  on  titanium  diffused  lithium  niobate  waveguides  and  ion-
exchanged  waveguides,  the    numerical  modeling  of  photonic  band  gap 
devices. She has co-authored over 200 publications  published on international 
journals  and    conference  proceedings,  lectures  and  invited    papers.  She  is 
involved in several national and international projects and co-operations. She 
is  currently  referee  of  a  number  of  international  journals.    She  served  as 
member  of  the  program  committee  for  many  national  and  international 

 

8

the  Federazione 

workshops and conferences. Since 2003 she is involved in the activities of the 
COST P11 action “Physics of linear, nonlinear and active phoyonic crystals”   
and, also as member of the Management Committee appointed by the Italian  
Ministry  of  University  and  Scientific  Research,    in      the  activities    of    the 
COST  288  action  “Nanoscale  and  ultrafast  photonics”.    Prof.  D'Orazio  is  a 
member  of 
Italiana  di  Elettrotecnica,  Elettronica, 
Automazione,  Informatica  e  Telecomunicazioni  (AEIT),  of  the  Institute  of 
Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers  (IEEE)  and  of  the  Optical  Society  of 
America (OSA). 
 
Vincenzo  Petruzzelli  was  born  in  Bari  (Italy)  in  1955  and  graduated  in 
Electrical  Engineering  at  the  University  of  Bari  in  1986.  Since  then  he  has 
joined the Dipartimento di Elettrotecnica ed Elettronica of Politecnico di Bari, 
receiving  in  1992  the  Ph.  D.  in  Electronic  Engineering.  He  is  currently 
associate  professor  of  Politecnico  di  Bari.  Now  he  is  engaged  in  theoretical 
and  technological  research  on  integrated  optic  devices,  titanium  diffused 
lithium  niobate  waveguides,  ion-exchanged  waveguides,  nonlinear  optics, 
active devices. He is co-authored about 160  journal and conference papers.  
 
Francesco  Prudenzano  was  born  in  Manduria  (Taranto-Italy)  in  1964.  He 
received the Degree in  Electronic Engineering at University of Bari in 1990 
and  the  PhD  Degree  in  Electronic  Engineering  in  1996.    Since  1990  he  has 
been with the Dipartimento di Elettrotecnica ed Elettronica of the Politecnico 
of Bari where he is currently associate professor. His research work includes 
the design of  integrated optical linear and nonlinear, active devices, numerical 
modeling  of  photonic  and  electromagnetic 
  band  gap  structures  and 
microstructured fibers. 
 
Michael  Scalora  was  born  in  Solarino,  (Siracusa-Italy),  on  November  9, 
1962.   He  earned  a  BS  degree  in  Physics  from  Montclair  State  University, 
Montclair,  NJ,  in  1984,  a  Master  of  Science  and  a  PhD  in  Physics  from 
Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute,  Troy,  NY, 
in  1990, 
respectively.   He  is  currently  with  the  Charles  M.  Bowden  Research  Center, 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama. 
 
Simona  Trevisi  was  born  in  Bari,  Italy,  in  1983  and  she  is  graduating  in 
Electronic Engineering at  Politecnico di Bari. 
 
Maria Antonietta Vincenti was born in Bari, Italy, in 1982 and graduated in 
Electronic  Engineering,  summa  cum  laude,  at  the  Politecnico  di  Bari  in 
December 2005. In May 2006 she joined the Dipartimento di Elettrotecnica ed 
Elettronica  of  Politecnico  di  Bari,  as  a  Ph.D.  student  in  Electronic 
Engineering. Her main research activities concern the study of optical sensors 
for  medical  applications  and  imaging  techniques  based  on  metallo-dielectric 
structures.  
 
 

in  1988  and 

