 
 
 

Constructional details for 

A simple atmospheric electrical instrument for educational use 

A. J. Bennett1 and R.G. Harrison 

Submitted to: Advances in Geosciences  

Abstract 
Electricity  in  the  atmosphere  provides  an  ideal  topic  for  educational  outreach  in 
environmental science. To support this objective, a simple instrument to measure real 
atmospheric electrical parameters has been developed and its performance evaluated. 
This  project  compliments  educational  activities  undertaken  by  the  Coupling  of 
Atmospheric  Layers  (CAL)  European  research  collaboration.  The  new  instrument  is 
inexpensive  to  construct  and  simple  to  operate,  readily  allowing  it  to  be  used  in 
schools  as well  as  at  the  undergraduate  University  level. It is  suited  to students at a 
variety  of  different  educational  levels,  as  the  results  can  be  analysed  with  different 
levels of sophistication. Students can make measurements of the fair weather electric 
field and current density, thereby gaining an understanding of the electrical nature of 
the  atmosphere.  This  work  was  stimulated  by  the  centenary  of  the  1906  paper  in 
which  C.T.R.  Wilson  described  a  new  apparatus  to  measure  the  electric  field  and 
conduction  current  density.   Measurements  using  instruments  based  on  the  same 
principles continued regularly in the UK until 1979. The instrument proposed is based 
on the same physical principles as C.T.R. Wilson's 1906 instrument.  

Keywords: electrostatics; potential gradient; air-earth current density; meteorology;  

Overview 
This  instrument  consists  of  a  printed  electrode  with  defined  geometry,  to  which  an 
ultra high input impedance unit gain voltage follower is connected. This provides the 
voltage  output.  The  output  voltage  is  also  applied  to  a  printed  guard  electrode,  to 
minimise leakage. 

Assembly 

Making the PCB 
The PCB is made from double sided copper clad PCB material. A complete sheet of 
160mm  x  100mm  board  is  used.  One  side  (the  “bottom”  side)  of  the  PCB  has  the 
circuit  tracks  and  the  detector  plate.  The  top  side  is  the  earth  plate  with  the  copper 
removed from the component area. To make the board proceed as follows: 

Print  out  the  mask  and  carefully  crop  the  image  with  approximately  10mm 
spare on all sides. Now draw an accurate line with a pen 5mm from the image 

                                                
1  Department  of  Meteorology,  The  University  of  Reading.  P.O.  Box  243,  Earley  Gate,  Reading  RG6 

6BB, UK. E-mail: a.j.bennett@reading.ac.uk 

1

 
 
 
 
 

on the right and bottom sides. This is a guide for positioning the board so that 
both sides etch correctly. 
First expose the top side in the UV box. First remove the protective covering 
from  the  PCB  sheet  where  the  copper  is  to  be  removed.  This  is  done  by 
carefully marking out the area and cutting away just the component area. This 
area is directly exposed in the light box. 
Expose the track side by positioning the PCB sheet on the marked out image. 
Remove the covering and expose the track side. 
Etching and tinning are performed as normal, ensuring both sides of the board 
are processed. 

Components 
Assemble  board  as  normal  until  IC1  and  R1,  which  need  to  be  air  wired.  IC2  is 
mounted in a socket except for pin 3, which is bent out horizontally. Drill a 3mm hole 
to the left of IC2 pin 3 (the board is marked out for it). Solder a piece of tinned copper 
wire to the detector plate (track side). The wire goes through the hole. R1 is soldered 
between the electrode wire and pin 3 of IC1. 

Connections 

Earth plate 

To connect the earth of the circuit to the earth back plate, drill a 1mm hole in the earth 
area at the bottom of the circuit. The hole in marked out on the board. Solder a piece 
of  tinned  copper  wire  into  this  hole.  On  the  earth  side  bend  the  wire  over  the  earth 
plate and solder it. 

2

  
 

Summary image: (viewed from bottom side)   

3

  
 

Scale: Expanded to show the component area 

4

 
 

PCB (track layer) 

Scale: Expanded to show the component area 

5

 
 

PCB (components/links layer) 

Scale: Expanded to show the component area 

6

   
 

Image of board 

7

  
 

Circuit schematic 

8

       
 

Component list  

Ref 

Value 

Description 

R1 

R2 

R3 

R4 

C1 

C2 

D1 

IC1 

1M 

10K 

6K8 

1K 

1uF 

1uF 

1/8 W metal film resistor, 2% 

1/8 W metal film resistor, 2% 

1/8 W metal film resistor, 2% 

1/8 W metal film resistor, 2% 

Ceramic, 50V 

Ceramic, 50V 

1N4148 

Small signal diode 

MAX407 

Dual electrometer op-amp 

9

