Article Weather Control 12 11 06

1

Control of Regional and Global Weather
Alexander Bolonkin
C&R, 1310 Avenue R, #F-6, Brooklyn, NY 11229, USA
T/F 718-339-4563, aBolonkin@juno.com, http://Bolonkin.narod.ru
Abstract
  Author suggests and researches a new revolutionary idea for regional and global weather control. 
He offers to cover cities, bad regions of country, full country or a continent by a thin closed film 
with control clarity located at a top limit of the Earth's troposphere (4 - 6 km). The film is supported 
at altitude by small additional atmospheric pressure and connected to ground by thin cables. It is 
known, the troposphere defines the Earth's weather. Authors show this closed dome allows to do a 
full control of the weather in a given region (the day is always fine, the rain is only in night, no 
strong wind). The average Earth (white cloudy) reflectance equal 0.3 - 0.5. That means the Earth 
losses about 30% - 50% of a solar energy. The dome controls the clarity of film and converts the 
cold regions to subtropics and creates the hot deserts, desolate wildernesses to the prosperous 
regions with temperate climate. That is a realistic and the cheapest method of the weather control in 
the Earth at the current time.
  Key words: Global weather control, gigantic film dome, converting a cold region to subtropics, converting 
desolate wilderness to a prosperous region.

Introduction

  Governments spend billions of dollars to studying of weather. The many big government research 
scientific organizations and hundred thousands of scientists studying a Earth weather more then 
hundred years.  There are gigantic numbers of scientific works about weather control. Most of them 
are out of practice. We cannot exactly predict weather at long period, to avert a rain, strong wind, 
storm, hurricane, tornado. We cannot control the clouds, temperature and humidity of atmosphere, 
power of rain. We cannot make better a winter and summer. We cannot convert a cold region to 
subtropics, a desolate wilderness to a prosperous region. We can only observe the storms and 
hurricanes and approximately predict their direction of movement.  Every year the terrible storms, 
hurricanes, strong winds and rains, inundations destroy thousands of houses, kill thousands of men.

In this chapter, we consider a damage and prejudice from unnormal weather.

1. A tropical cyclone (hurricane) is a storm system fueled by the heat released when moist air 
rises and the water vapor in it condenses. The term describes the storm's origin in the tropics and 
its cyclonic nature, which means that its circulation is counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere 
and clockwise in the southern hemisphere. Tropical cyclones are distinguished from other cyclonic 
windstorms such as nor'easters, European windstorms, and polar lows by the heat mechanism 
that fuels them, which makes them "warm core" storm systems.

Depending on their location and strength, there are various terms by which tropical cyclones are 
known, such as hurricane, typhoon, tropical storm, cyclonic storm and tropical depression.

Tropical cyclones can produce extremely strong winds, tornadoes, torrential rain, high waves, and 
storm surges. The heavy rains and storm surges can produce extensive flooding. Although their 
effects on human populations can be devastating, tropical cyclones also can have beneficial effects 
by relieving drought conditions. They carry heat away from the tropics, an important mechanism 
of the global atmospheric circulation that maintains equilibrium in the earth's troposphere.

An average of 86 tropical cyclones of tropical storm intensity form annually worldwide, with 47 
reaching hurricane/typhoon strength, and 20 becoming intense tropical cyclones (at least of 
Category 3 intensity).

2
Worldwide, tropical cyclone activity peaks in late summer when water temperatures are warmest. 
However, each particular basin has its own seasonal patterns. On a worldwide scale, May is the 
least active month, while September is the most active.

In the North Atlantic, a distinct hurricane season occurs from June 1 to November 30, sharply 
peaking from late August through September. The statistical peak of the North Atlantic hurricane 
season is September 10. The Northeast Pacific has a broader period of activity, but in a similar 
time frame to the Atlantic. The Northwest Pacific sees tropical cyclones year-round, with a 
minimum in February and a peak in early September. In the North Indian basin, storms are most 
common from April to December, with peaks in May and November.[22]

Season Lengths and Seasonal Averages

Table No. 1.

Basin

Season 
Start

Season 
End

Tropical 
Storms (>34 
knots)

Tropical 
Cyclones (>63 
knots)

Category 3+ 
Tropical Cyclones 
(>95 knots)

–

–

26.7

South Indian

October May

20.6

May

November 16.3

North Atlantic

June

November 10.6

Northwest
Pacific

Northeast 
Pacific

Australia 
Southwest 
Pacific

October May

10.6

North Indian

April

December 5.4

16.9

10.3

9.0

5.9

4.8

2.2

8.5

4.3

4.1

2.0

1.9

0.4

A mature tropical cyclone can release heat at a rate upwards of 6x1014 watts.[3] Tropical cyclones 
on the open sea cause large waves, heavy rain, and high winds, disrupting international shipping 
and sometimes sinking ships. However, the most devastating effects of a tropical cyclone occur 
when they cross coastlines, making landfall. A tropical cyclone moving over land can do direct
damage in four ways:

 High winds - Hurricane strength winds can damage or destroy vehicles, buildings, bridges, 

etc. High winds also turn loose debris into flying projectiles, making the outdoor 
environment even more dangerous. 

 Storm surge - Tropical cyclones cause an increase in sea level, which can flood coastal 

communities. This is the worst effect, as historically cyclones claimed 80% of their victims 
when they first strike shore. 

 Heavy rain - The thunderstorm activity in a tropical cyclone causes intense rainfall. 

Rivers and streams flood, roads become impassable, and landslides can occur. Inland areas 
are particularly vulnerable to freshwater flooding, due to residents not preparing 
adequately. 

 Tornado activity - The broad rotation of a hurricane often spawns tornadoes. Also, 

tornadoes can be spawned as a result of eyewall mesovortices, which persist until landfall. 
While these tornadoes are normally not as strong as their non-tropical counterparts, they can 
still cause tremendous damage.[31]

3

Fig.1. The aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in Gulfport, Mississippi. Katrina was the costliest tropical 
cyclone in United States history.

Often, the secondary effects of a tropical cyclone are equally damaging. These include:

 Disease - The wet environment in the aftermath of a tropical cyclone, combined with the 
destruction of sanitation facilities and a warm tropical climate, can induce epidemics of 
disease which claim lives long after the storm passes. One of the most common post-
hurricane injuries is stepping on a nail in storm debris, leading to a risk of tetanus or other 
infection. Infections of cuts and bruises can be greatly amplified by wading in sewage-
polluted water. Large areas of standing water caused by flooding also contribute to 
mosquito-borne illnesses.

 Power outages - Tropical cyclones often knock out power to tens or hundreds of thousands 

of people (or occasionally millions if a large urban area is affected), prohibiting vital 
communication and hampering rescue efforts. 

 Transportation difficulties - Tropical cyclones often destroy key bridges, overpasses, and 
roads, complicating efforts to transport food, clean water, and medicine to the areas that 
need it. 

. Hurricane Katrina is the most obvious example, as it devastated the region that had been 
revitalized after Hurricane Camille. Of course, many former residents and businesses do relocate to 
inland areas away from the threat of future hurricanes as well.

While the number of storms in the Atlantic has increased since 1995, there seems to be no signs of 
a numerical global trend; the annual global number of tropical cyclones remains about 90 ± 10. 
However, there is some evidence that the intensity of hurricanes is increasing. "Records of 
hurricane activity worldwide show an upswing of both the maximum wind speed in and the 
duration of hurricanes. The energy released by the average hurricane (again considering all 
hurricanes worldwide) seems to have increased by around 70% in the past 30 years or so, 
corresponding to about a 15% increase in the maximum wind speed and a 60% increase in storm 
lifetime." 

Atlantic storms are certainly becoming more destructive financially, since five of the ten most 
expensive storms in United States history have occurred since 1990. This can be attributed to the 
increased intensity and duration of hurricanes striking North America and to the number of people 
living in susceptible coastal area following increased development in the region since the last surge 
in Atlantic hurricane activity in the 1960s.

4
Tropical cyclones that cause massive destruction are fortunately rare, but when they happen, they 
can cause damage in the range of billions of dollars and disrupt or end thousands of lives.

The deadliest tropical cyclone on record hit the densely populated Ganges Delta region of
Bangladesh on November 13, 1970, likely as a Category 3 tropical cyclone. It killed an 
estimated 500,000 people. The North Indian basin has historically been the deadliest, with several 
storms since 1900 killing over 100,000 people, each in Bangladesh. 

In the Atlantic basin, at least three storms have killed more than 10,000 people. Hurricane Mitch
during the 1998 Atlantic hurricane season caused severe flooding and mudslides in Honduras, 
killing about 18,000 people and changing the landscape enough that entirely new maps of the 
country were needed. The Galveston Hurricane of 1900, which made landfall at Galveston, 
Texas as an estimated Category 4 storm, killed 8,000 to 12,000 people, and remains the deadliest 
natural disaster in the history of the United States. The deadliest Atlantic storm on record was the 
Great Hurricane of 1780, which killed about 22,000 people in the Antilles. 

Hurricane Iniki in 1992 was the most powerful storm to strike Hawaii in recorded history, hitting 
Kauai as a Category 4 hurricane, killing six and causing $3 billion in damage. Other destructive 
Pacific hurricanes include Pauline and Kenna. 

On March 26, 2004, Cyclone Catarina became the first recorded South Atlantic cyclone
(cyclone is the southern hemispheric term for hurricane). Previous South Atlantic cyclones in 1991
and 2004 reached only tropical storm strength. Tropical cyclones may have formed there before 
1960 but were not observed until weather satellites began monitoring the Earth's oceans in that 
year.

A tropical cyclone need not be particularly strong to cause memorable damage; Tropical Storm 
Thelma, in November 1991 killed thousands in the Philippines even though it never became a 
typhoon; the damage from Thelma was mostly due to flooding, not winds or storm surge. In 1982, 
the unnamed tropical depression that eventually became Hurricane Paul caused the deaths of 
around 1,000 people in Central America due to the effects of its rainfall. In addition, Hurricane 
Jeanne in 2004 caused the majority of its damage in Haiti, including approximately 3,000 deaths, 
while just a tropical depression.

On August 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina made landfall in Louisiana and Mississippi. The U.S. 
National Hurricane Center, in its August review of the tropical storm season stated that Katrina was 
probably the worst natural disaster in U.S. history. Currently, its death toll is at least 1,836, mainly 
from flooding and the aftermath in New Orleans, Louisiana and the Mississippi Gulf Coast. It is 
also estimated to have caused $81.2 billion in property damage. Before Katrina, the costliest system 
in monetary terms had been 1992's Hurricane Andrew, which caused an estimated $39 billion 
(2005 USD) in damage in Florida. 

2. A flood (inundation) is an overflow of water, an expanse of water submerging land, a deluge. 
In the sense of "flowing water", the word is applied to the inflow of the tide, as opposed to the 
outflow or "ebb". The Flood, the great Universal Deluge of myth and perhaps of history is treated at 
Deluge in mythology.

Since prehistoric times people have lived by the seas and rivers for the access to cheap and quick 
transportation and access to food sources and trade; without human populations near natural bodies 
of water, there would be no concern for floods. However fertile soil in a river delta is subject to 
regular inundation from normal variation in precipitation.

5

Floods from the sea can cause overflow or overtopping of flood-defenses like dikes as well as 
flattening of dunes or bluffs. Land behind the coastal defence may be inundated or experience 
damage. A flood from sea may be caused by a heavy storm (storm surge), a high tide, a tsunami, 
or a combination thereof. As many urban communities are located near the coast this is a major 
threat around the world.

Fig. 2. Rock River floodwaters in downtown Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin.

Many rivers that flow over relatively flat land border on broad flood plains. When heavy the 
deposition of silt on the rich farmlands and can result in their eventual depletion. The annual cycle 
of flood and farming was of great significance to many early farming cultures, most famously to 
the ancient Egyptians of the Nile river and to the Mesopotamians of the Tigris and Euphrates
rivers .

A flood happens when an area of land, usually low-lying, is covered with water. The worst floods 
usually occur when a river overflows its banks. An example of this is the January 1999 
Queensland floods, which swamped south-eastern Queensland. Floods happen when soil and 
vegetation cannot absorb all the water. The water then runs off the land in quantities that cannot be 
carried in stream channels or kept in natural ponds or man-made reservoirs.

Periodic floods occur naturally on many rivers, forming an area known as the flood plain. These 
river floods usually result from heavy rain, sometimes combined with melting snow, which causes 
the rivers to overflow their banks. A flood that rises and falls rapidly with little or no advance 
warning is called a flash flood. Flash floods usually result from intense rainfall over a relatively
small area. Coastal areas are occasionally flooded by high tides caused by severe winds on ocean 
surfaces, or by tidal waves caused by undersea earthquakes. There are often many causes for a 
flood.

Monsoon rainfalls can cause disastrous flooding in some equatorial countries, such as 
Bangladesh, Hurricanes have a number of different features which, together, can cause 
devastating flooding. One is the storm surge (sea flooding as much as 8 metres high) caused by 
the leading edge of the hurricane when it moves from sea to land. Another is the large amounts of 
precipitation associated with hurricanes. The eye of a hurricane has extremely low pressure, so 
sea level may rise a few metres in the eye of the storm. This type of coastal flooding occurs 
regularly in Bangladesh.

In Europe floods from sea may occur as a result from heavy Atlantic storms, pushing the water to 
the coast. Especially in combination with high tide this can be damaging.

Under some rare conditions associated with heat waves, flash floods from quickly melting 
mountain snow have caused loss of property and life.

Undersea earthquakes, eruptions of island volcanos that form a caldera, (such as Thera or 
Krakatau) and marine landslips on continental shelves may all engender a tidal wave called a 

tsunami that causes destruction to coastal areas. See the tsunami article for full details of these 
marine floods.

6

Floods are the most frequent type of disaster worldwide. Thus, it is often difficult or impossible to 
obtain insurance policies which cover destruction of property due to flooding, since floods are a 
relatively predictable risk.





In 1983 the Pacific Northwest saw one of their worst winter floods. And the some of the 
Northwest states saw their wettest winter yet. The damage was estimated at 1.1 billion 
dollars.* In 1965 Hurricane Betsy flooded large areas of New Orleans for up to 10 days, 
drowning around 40 people. 
In 1957, storm surge flooding from Hurricane Audrey killed about 400 people in 
southwest Louisiana. 

 The Hunter Valley floods of 1955 in New South Wales destroyed over 100 homes and 

caused 45,000 to be evacuated. 

 The North Sea Flood of 1953 caused over 2,000 deaths in the Dutch province of Zeeland 
and the United Kingdom and led to the construction of the Delta Works and the Thames 
Barrier. 

 The Lynmouth flood of 1952 killed only 34 people, however it was very destructive and 

destroyed over 80 buildings. 

 The 1931 Huang He flood caused between 800,000 and 4,000,000 deaths in China, one of 

a series of disastrous floods on the Huang He. 

 The Great Mississippi Flood in 1927 was one of the most destructive floods in United 

States history. 

  The 2005 tragedy of New Orleans shows that disregard of protection of the USA’s coastal cities 
(New York, Los Angles-San Pedro) from strong storm-caused waves, hurricane storm surges, and 
small tsunamis gives rise to gigantic damages, material losses, human deaths and injuries. 
  The Metropolitan East Coast (MEC) region -- with New York City at its center -- has nearly 20 
million people, a $1 trillion economy, and $2 trillion worth of built assets, nearly half of which are 
complex infrastructure. 
   Many elements of transportation and other essential infrastructure systems in the MEC region, 
and even some of its regular building stock, are located at elevations from 6 to 20 feet above 
current sea level. This is well within the range of expected coastal storm surge elevation of 8 to 
more than 20 feet for tropical (hurricanes) and extra-tropical storms. Depending on which climate 
change scenarios apply, the sea level regional rise over the next 100 years will accelerate and 
amount to at most 3 feet by the year 2100. This seemingly modest increase in sea level has the 
effect to raise the frequency of coastal storm surges and related flooding by factors of 2 to 10, with 
an average of about 3. 
   The rate of financial losses incurred from these coastal floods will increase accordingly. Expected 
annualized losses from coastal storms, already on the order of about $1 billion per year, would be 
small enough to be absorbed by the $1 trillion economy of the region. However, actual losses do 
not occur in regular annualized doses. Rather, they occur during infrequent extreme events that can 
cause losses of hundreds of billions of dollars for the largest events, albeit with low probability. 

Ten deadliest natural disasters                    Table 2

Rank Event

Location

Date

1.

2.

1931 Yellow River flood

Yellow River, China

Summer 1931

1887 Yellow River flood

Yellow River, China

September-
October 1887

Death Toll 
(Estimate)
850,000-
4,000,000
900,000-
2,000,000

7

3.

1970 Bhola cyclone

Ganges Delta, East 
Pakistan

November 13, 
1970

500,000-
1,000,000

4.

Earthquake

1201

1,000,000

Eastern 
Mediterranean

5.

1938 Yellow River flood

Yellow River, China

June 9th, 1938

500,000 -
900,000

6.

Shaanxi Earthquake

Shaanxi Province, 
China

January 23, 
1556

830,000

7.

2004 Indian Ocean 
earthquake/tsunami

Indian Ocean

December 26, 
2004

225,000-
275,000

8.

Tropical Cyclone

Haiphong, Vietnam

1881

300,000

9.

Flood

Kaifeng, Henan 
Province, China

1642

300,000

10.

Earthquake

Tangshan, China

July 28, 1976

242,000*

* Official Government figure. Estimated death toll as high as 655,000.

  3. Brif information about cover film and liquid crystal. Our dome cover (film) has 5 layers
(fig. 4): transparant dielectric layer, conducting layer (about 1 - 3 ), liquid crystal layer (about 10 -
100 ), conducting layer (for example, SnO2), and transparant dielectric layer. Common thickness 
is 0.1 - 0.5 mm. Control voltage is 5 - 10 V. Film is produced the industry and it not expensive.
    Liquid crystals (LC) are substances that exhibit a phase of matter that has properties between 
those of a conventional liquid, and those of a solid crystal. 
  Liquid crystals find wide use in liquid crystal displays (LCD), which rely on the optical
properties of certain liquid crystalline molecules in the presence or absence of an electric field. The 
electric field can be used to make a pixel switch between clear or dark on command. Color LCD 
systems use the same technique, with color filters used to generate red, green, and blue pixels. 
Similar principles can be used to make other liquid crystal based optical devices. Liquid crystal in 
fluid form is used to detect electrically generated hot spots for failure analysis in the 
semiconductor industry. Liquid crystal memory units with extensive capacity were used in Space 
Shuttle navigation equipment. It is also worth noting that many common fluids are in fact liquid 
crystals. Soap, for instance, is a liquid crystal, and forms a variety of LC phases depending on its 
concentration in water.
  The conventional control clarity film reflected a superfluos energy back to space. If film has  solar 
cells that converts  the superfluos solar energy into electricity.

2. DESCRIPTION AND INNOVATIONS

   
  Our idea is a dome covering a big region (city, large bad area, country, continent) by a thin film
with  control  clarity (reflectivity, carrying  capacity of  solar  spectrum).  The  film  is  located  at  high 
altitude (4 - 6 km) which include the Earth's troposphere where are the main climatic changes. The 
film is support at the altitude by a small additional air pressure produced by ground ventilators and 

8
connected to Earth's ground by cables. The closed area is also divided by sub-areas by film having 
control clarity. That allows to make different conditions (solar heating) in sub-areas and pumping 
hot, warm, cold, moist air from one sub-area to other sub-area. There are a cheap film having liquid 
crystal and conducting layers. The clarity of them is controlled by electric voltage. They can pass or 
blockade the solar light (or parts of solar spectrum) and pass or blockade the Earth radiation. The 
outer and incite radiations  have different wave  lengths. That makes  to  control  of them separately 
and  to  control  a  heating  of  the  Earth  surface.  In  conventional  conditions  about  50%  of  the  solar 
energy reaches the Earth surface. The most part is reflected back to outer space by the white clouds. 
In our closed system the clouts (and rain) will be made in a night when temperature is low. That 
means the many cold regions (Alaska, Siberia) may be accepted more solar energy and became a 
temperate climate or sub-tropic climate. That also means the Sahara desert can be a prosperous area
with fine climate and with closed-loop water cycle.
  The  building  of  film  dome is  very  ease.  We  spread out  the  film  over  Earth  surface,  turn  on  the 
pumping propellers and film is risen by air to needed altitude limited by the support cables. The bid 
damage of  film  is  not  trouble  because  the additional  air  pressure is  very small  and  air leakage  is 
compensated by propeller pumps.  
  The other advantages of the suggested method is possibility to pain the pictures on sky (dome), to 
show  films  on  the  sky  by  projector,  to  suspend  illuminations,  decorations,  and  air  tramway. The 
long distance aircraft fly at altitude 8 - 11 km and our dome do not trouble for it. The support cable 
will have illumination and internal helicopters also will avoid the contact with them.
  The people throw out hundreds the thin film plastic bags from purchases every month. If we will 
collect them and use for the offered dome, we make fine our weather, get new territory for living 
with wonderful climate.

   Our design for the dome is presented in Fig. 3, which includes the thin inflated film dome.  The 
innovations  are listed  here: (1) the construction is  air-inflatable; (2) each  dome is  fabricated with 
very  thin,  transparent  film  (thickness  is  0.1  to  0.3  mm)  having  the  control  clarity  without  rigid 
supports; (3) the enclosing film has two conductivity layers plus a liquid crystal layer between them
which  changes  its  clarity,  color  and  reflectivity  under  an  electric  voltage  (fig,4);  (4)  the  bound 
section of dome has a hemisphere form (#5, fig.3) . The air pressure is more in these sections and 
they protect the central sections from outer wind.

                
Fig.3. Film dome over city. Notations: 1 - city, 2 - thin film cover with control clarity, 3 - support cable, 4 -
exits and ventilators, 5 - semi-cylindrical border section.

   Fig. 3 illustrates the thin transparent control dome cover we envision.  The inflated textile shell—
technical “textiles” can be woven or non-woven (films)—embodies the innovations listed: (1) the 
film is very thin, approximately 0.1 to 0.3 mm.  A film this thin has never before been used in a 
major building; (2) the film has two strong nets, with a mesh of about 0.1  0.1 m and a = 1  1 m, 
the threads are about 0.5 mm for a small mesh and about 1 mm for a big mesh.  The net prevents 
the watertight and airtight film covering from being damaged by vibration; (3) the film incorporates 
a tiny electrically conductive wire net with a mesh about 0.1 x 0.1 m and a line width of about 100 
 and a thickness near 10 .  The wire net is electric (voltage) control conductor. It can inform the
dome supervisors concerning the place and size of film damage (tears, rips, etc.) ; (4) the film may 
be twin-layered with the gap — c = 1 m and b = 2 m—between covering’s layers for heat saving. In 
polar regions this multi-layered covering is the main means for heat insulation and puncture of one 
of the layers wont cause a loss of shape because the film’s second layer is unaffected by holing; (5) 

9
the airspace in the dome’s covering can be partitioned, either hermetically or not; and (6) part of the 
covering can have a very thin shiny aluminum coating that is about 1 for reflection of unnecessary
solar radiation in equatorial or polar regions [1].

                              
Fig.4. Design of covering membrane. Notations: (a) Big fragment of cover with control clarity (reflectivity, 

carrying capacity); (b) Small fragment of cover; (c) Cross-section of cover (film)having 5 layers; (d) 
Longitudinal cross-section of cover for cold regions; 1 - cover; 2 -mesh; 3 - small mesh; 4 - thin 
electric net; 5 - cell of cover; 6 - tubes;: 7 - transparant dielectric layer, 8 - conducting layer (about 1 -
3 ), 9 - liquid crystal layer (about 10 - 100 ), 10 - conducting layer, and 11 - transparant dielectric 
layer. Common thickness is 0.1 - 0.5 mm. Control voltage is 5 - 10 V.

3. THEORY AND COMPUTATIONS DOME

   As  wind  flows  over  and  around  a  fully  exposed,  nearly  completely  sealed  inflated  dome,  the 
weather affecting the external film on the windward side must endure positive air pressures as the 
wind stagnates.  Simultaneously, low air pressure eddies will be present on the leeward side of the 
dome.  In other words, air pressure gradients caused by air density differences on different parts of 
the  dome’s  envelope  is  characterized  as  the  “buoyancy  effect”.    The  buoyancy  effect  will  be 
greatest  during  the  coldest  weather  when  the  dome  is  heated  and  the  temperature  difference 
between  its  interior  and  exterior  are  greatest.    In  extremely  cold  climates  such  as  the  Arctic  and 
Antarctic Regions the buoyancy effect tends to dominate dome pressurization.

   Our  basic  computed  equations,  below,  are  derived  from  a  Russian-language  textbook.  Solar 
radiation impinging the orbiting Earth is approximately 1400 W/m2.  The average Earth reflection 
by  clouds  and  the  sub-aerial  surfaces  (water,  ice  and  land)  is  about  0.3.    The  Earth-atmosphere 
adsorbs about 0.2 of the Sun’s radiation.  That means about q0 = 700 W/m2s of solar energy (heat) 
reaches  our  planet’s  surface  at  the  Equator.  Our  troposphere  dome  does  not  have  clouds  in  light 
time and contains about 1/3 part of Earth atmosphere. That means we can adsorb about 70 - 80% of 
solar energy. It is useful for polar regions and in winter time. 
 The solar spectrum is graphed in Fig. 5.

10

Fig.5. Spectrum of solar radiation. Visible light is 0,4 - 0,8 .

The visible part of the Sun’s spectrum is only  = 0.4 to 0.8 ..  Any warm body emits radiation.  
The  emission  wavelength  depends  on  the  body’s  temperature.    The  wavelength  of  the  maximum 
intensity (see Fig. 5) is governed by the black-body law originated by Max Planck (1858-1947):

m 

9.2
T

,

[

mm

]

,

(1)

where T is body temperature, oK. For example, if a body has an ideal temperature 20 oC (T = 293 
oK), the wavelength is m = 9.9 .    
   The energy emitted by a body may be computed by employment of the Josef Stefan-Ludwig 
Boltzmann law.  

,

E

4T

S

[W/m2],
where  is coefficient of body blackness ( =0.03  0.99 for real bodies), s = 5.6710 -8  [W/m2
.K] Stefan-Boltzmann constant. For example, the absolute black-body ( = 1) emits (at T = 293 0K) 
the energy E = 418 W/m2.  
   Amount of the maximum solar heat flow at 1 m2 per 1 second of Earth surface is 
(3)

q = qo cos ( )   [W/m2],

(2)

where  is Earth longevity,  is angle between projection of Earth polar axis to  the plate which  is 
perpendicular to the ecliptic plate and contains the line Sun-Earth and the perpendicular to ecliptic 
plate. The sign "+" signifies Summer and the "-" signifies Winter, qo  700 W/m2 is the annual 
average solar heat flow to Earth at equator corrected for Earth reflectance. For our case this 
magnitude can reach  qo  1000 - 1100 W/m2.
   This angle is changed during a year and may be estimated for Earth's North Polar Region 
hemisphere by the following the first approximation equation:

,

m

cos



where




2

N
364

,

(4)

where m is maximum ,  m = 23.5o =0.41 radian;  N is number of day in a year.  The 
computations for Summer and Winter are presented in fig.6.

11

Fig.6. Maximum Sun radiation flow at Earth surface via Earth latitude and season without dome.

  The heat flow for a hemisphere having reflector [1] at noon may be computed by equation





S
where S is fraction (relative) area of reflector to service area of "Evergreen" dome [1]. For reflector 
of Fig.1 [1] S = 0.5; c1 is film transparency coefficient (c1 0.9 - 0.95).
  The daily average solar irradiation (energy) is calculated by equation







cos

qc
01

(5)

sin





q

,

,



Q

qtc

where

86400


tan
,

where c is daily average heat flow coefficient, c  0.5 without dome, c  0.75 with dome; t is 
relative daily light time, 86400 = 246060 is number of seconds in a day.
The computation for relative daily light period is presented in Fig. 7.

tan



15.0

(6)

tan

tan







1

,

t

    

       Fig.7. Relative daily light time via Earth latitude.

   The heat loss flow per 1 m2 of dome film cover by convection and heat conduction is (see [2]): 

q




tk
1



t

2


,

where

k



/1


1







i
2

/1

/

i

,

1

i

(7)

where k is heat transfer coefficient, W/m2.K; t1,2 are temperatures of the inter and outer multi-layers 
of the heat insulators, oC; 1,2 are convention coefficients of the inter and outer multi-layers of heat 
insulators ( = 30  100), W/m2K; i are thickness of insulator layers; i are coefficients of heat 
transfer of insulator layers (see Table 1), m; t1,2 are temperatures of initial and final layers o C.
  The radiation heat flow per 1 m2s of the service area computed by equations (2):

     

Cq


r

4

T
1
100

4




T
2
100

















,






where

C

r



/1


1




2



1

,

c

s



67.5

 [W/m2K4],

(8)

where Cr is general radiation coefficient,  are black body rate (emittance) of plates (see Table 2); T
is temperatures of plates, oK. 
  The radiation flow across a set of the heat reflector plates is computed by equation

12

c
s
/1

q

 5.0

C
C


r q
r

r

,

(9)

rC  is computed by equation (8) between plate and reflector. 

where 
The data of some construction materials is found in Table 3, 4.

Density, kg/m3    Thermal conductivity, , W/m. oC

Table 3. [2], p.331. Heat Transferring.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Heat capacity, kJ/kg. oC
Material
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Concrete
Baked brick 
Ice 
Snow
Glass
Steel
Air
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  

1.279
0.758
2.25
0.465
0.744
45
0.0244

2300
1800
  920
  560
2500
7900
1.225

1.13
0.879
2.26
2.09
0.67
0.461
1

As the reader will see, the air layer is the best heat insulator. We do not limit its thickness .

Table 4. [2], p. 465. Emittance  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------    
Material
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------     
Bright Aluminum 0.04 - 0.06
0.91 - 0.94
t = 50  500 o C

Glass
t = 20  100 o C

  Baked brick
t = 20 o C

Emittance,  Material

Emittance, 

Emittance, 

0.88 - 0.93

  Material

As  the  reader  will  notice,  the  shiny  aluminum  louver  coating  is  excellent  mean  jalousie  against 
radiation losses from the dome.

The general radiation heat Q computes by equation [6].  Equations [1] – [9] allow computation of 
the heat balance and comparison of incoming heat (gain) and outgoing heat (loss).
  The  computations  of  heat  balance  of  a  dome  of  any  size  in  the  coldest  wintertime  of  the  Polar 
Regions are presented in Fig. 8.

13

Fig. 8. Daily heat balance through 1 m2 of dome during coldest winter day versus Earth's latitude (North 

hemisphere example). Data used for computations (see Eq. (1) - (9)): temperature inside of dome is t1= 
+20 o C, outside are t2 = -10, -30, -50 o C; reflectivity coefficient of mirror is c2= 0.9; coefficient 
transparency of film is c1 = 0.9; convectively coefficients are 1= 2 = 30; thickness of film layers are 
1= 2 =0.0001 m; thickness of air layer is  = 1 m; coefficient of film heat transfer is 1= 3 = 0.75, for 
air 2 = 0.0244; ratio of cover blackness 1= 3 = 0.9, for louvers 2 = 0.05. 

The  thickness  of  the  dome  envelope,  its  sheltering  shell  of  film,  is  computed  by  formulas  (from 
equation for tensile strength):

,

,






1


2

Rp
2


Rp

where 1 is the film thickness for a spherical dome, m; 2 is the film thickness for a cylindrical 
dome, m; R is radius of dome, m; p is additional pressure into the dome, N/m2;  is safety tensile 
stress of film, N/m2.
  The dynamic pressure from wind is
2V

2

  (11)

(10)

pw

, 



where  = 1.225 kg/m3 is air density; V is wind speed, m/s.
   For example, a storm wind with speed V = 20 m/s, standard air density is  = 1.225 kg/m3.  Then 
dynamic pressure is pw = 245 N/m2.  That is four time less when internal pressure p = 1000 N/m2.  
When the need arises, sometimes the internal pressure can be voluntarily decreased, bled off.
    In Fig. 8 the alert reader has noticed: the daily heat loss is about the solar heat in the very coldest 
Winter day when a dome located above 600 North or South Latitude and the outside air temperature 
is –50 0C.  
  In  [1]  we  show  the  heat  loss  of  the  dome  in  Polar  region  is  less  than  14  times  the  heat  of  the 
buildings inside unprotected by an inflated dome.
    We consider a two-layer dome film and one heat screen.  If needed, better protection can further 
reduce  the  head  losses  as  we  can  utilize  inflated  dome  covers  with  more  layers  and  more  heat 
screens.  One heat screen decreases heat losses by 2, two screens can decrease heat flow by 3 times, 
three by  4  times,  and  so  on.    If the  Polar  Region  domes  have  a  mesh  structure,  the  heat  transfer 
decreases proportional to the summary thickness of its enveloping film layers.

The  dome  shelter  innovations  outlined  here  can  be  practically  applied  to  many  climatic  regimes 
(from Polar to Tropical).  The North and South Poles may, during the 21st Century, become places 
of cargo and passenger  congregation since the a Cable Space Transportation  System, installed on 
Antarctica’s  ice-cap  and  on  a  floating  artificial  ice  island  has  been  proposed  the  would  transfer 
people and things to and from the Moon.i  

14
4. DISCUSSION
      As with any innovative macro-project proposal, the reader will naturally have many questions.  

We offer brief answers to the four most obvious questions our readers are likely to ponder.

How can snow and ice be removed from the dome?

(1)
     The rain, snow clouds located in Earth troposphere lower 4 km altitude. Our dome has height 4 -
6 km. If water appears over film, it flows down through special opening. If snow appears over 
film, the control made the black film, the sun flux the snow. The film cover is flexible and has 
a lift force of about 1 -100 kg/m2. We imagine that a controlled change of interior air pressure 
will serve to shake the snow and ice off.  

(2) Storm wind.
      The storm wind can be only on bounding sections of dome. They are special semi-cylindrical 

form (fig.3) and more strong then central sections.
(3) Cover damage.
The  envelope  contains  a  cable  mesh  so  that  the  film  cannot  be  damaged  greatly.    Electronic 
signals alert supervising personnel of any rupture problems.

(3) What is the design life of the film covering?

Depending  on  the  kind  of  materials  used,  it  may  be  as  much  a  decade.    In  all  or  in  part,  the 
cover can be replaced periodically.

5. CONCLUSION
 The  control  of  Regional  and  Global  Earth  Weather  is  important  problem  of  humanity.  That 
dramatically increases the territory suitable for men living, sown area, crop capacity. That allows to 
convert all Earth lend such as Alaska, North Canada, Siberia, deserts Sahara or Gobi in prosperous 
garden. The suggested method is very cheap (cost of covering 1 m2 is about 2 - 15 cents) and may 
be  utilized  at  present  time.  We  can  start  from  small  area,  from  small  towns  in  bad  regions  and 
extended in large area. 
    Film  domes can  foster  the  fuller  economic  development  of  cold  regions  such  as  the  Earth’s 
Arctic  and  Antarctic  and,  thus,  increase  the  effective  area  of  territory  dominated  by  humans.  
Normal  human  health  can  be  maintained  by  ingestion  of  locally  grown  fresh  vegetables  and 
healthful  “outdoor”  exercise.    The  domes  can  also  be  used  in  the  Tropics  and  Temperate  Zone.  
Eventually,  they  may  find  application  on  the  Moon  or  Mars  since  a  vertical  variant,  inflatable
towers  to  outer  space,  are  soon  to  become  available  for  launching  spacecraft  inexpensively  into 
Earth-orbit or interplanetary flights.
  The closed problems are researched in references [3]-[10].

REFERENCES

1. Bolonkin, A.A. and R.B. Cathcart, Inflatable ‘Evergreen’ Dome Settlements for Earth’s Polar Regions. Clean. 

Techn. Environ. Policy. DOI 10.1007/s10098.006-0073.4 .

2. Naschekin, V.V., Technical thermodynamic and heat transmission. Public House High University, Moscow. 1969 

(in Russian).

3. Bolonkin, A.A. and R.B. Cathcart, “A Cable Space Transportation System at the Earth’s Poles to Support 

Exploitation of the Moon”, Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 59: 375-380, 2006.

4. Bolonkin A.A., Cheap Textile Dam Protection of Seaport Cities against Hurricane Storm Surge Waves,
  Tsunamis, and Other Weather-Related Floods, 2006. http://arxiv.org.
5. Bolonkin, A.A. and R.B. Cathcart, Antarctica: A Southern Hemisphere Windpower Station? Arxiv, 2007.
6. Cathcart R.B. and Bolonkin, A.A. Ocean Terracing, 2006. http://arxiv.org.
7. Bolonkin, A.A. and R.B. Cathcart, The Java-Sumatra Aerial Mega-Tramway, 2006. http://arxiv.org.
8. Bolonkin, A.A., “Optimal Inflatable Space Towers with 3-100 km Height”, Journal of the British Interplanetary
   Society Vol. 56, pp. 87 - 97, 2003.
9. Bolonkin A.A., Non-Rocket Space Launch and Flight, Elsevier, London, 2006, 488 ps.
10. Macro-Engineering: A Challenge for the Future. Springer, 2006. 318 ps. Collection articles.
11. Bolonkin A.A., Cathcart R.B., Inflatable ‘Evergreen’ Polar Zone Dome (EPZD) Settlements, 2006. http://arxiv.org.
                                                

