Symmetry: Culture and Science 
Vol. 16,  No.1,  page_first-page_last,  2005 

CHIRAL STRUCTURES UNDER THE STANDARD OF 
ORTHOGONAL GROUPS 

Salvatore Capozzielloa and Alessandra Lattanzib 

Dipartimento  di  Scienze  Fisiche  e  INFN  sez.  di  Napoli,  Università  di  Napoli  “Federico  II”,  Complesso 
Universitario di Monte S. Angelo, Via Cinthia I-80126, Napoli, Italy.  

Dipartimento di Chimica, Università di Salerno, Via Ponte don Melillo, 84084, Fisciano, Italy.  

a

 

E-mail: capozziello@na.infn.it. 
b

E-mail: lattanzi@unisa.it. 

Abstract:  General  features  of  microscopic  and  macroscopic  chiral  structures  can  be  discussed  under  the 
standard  of  orthogonal  group  theory.  Configuration  space  of  systems,  not  physical  space,  is  taken  into 
account.  This  change  of  perspective  allows  to  overcome  traditional  shortcomings  related  to  true  and  false 
chirality, statistical realization of mirror images, classification of objects as “more” or “less” chiral. From this 
viewpoint, a chiral object is a physical system whose configurations are described by the O(N) algebra in an 
abstract  N-dimensional  space.  A  quantum  mechanical  interpretation  is  straightforward  due  to  the  fact  that 
combinations of chiral states give rise to parity states which can be interpreted as energy eigenstates. 

Keywords: chirality, orthogonal groups, chiral operators. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Chirality  is  the  underlying  symmetry  characterizing  physical  systems  ranging  from 

elementary particles to spiral galaxies.1 Due to this fact, a huge amount of classification 

schemes  for  chiral  objects  has  been  proposed  which,  essentially,  try  to  distinguish 

between  “more”  and  “less”  chiral  systems,2  between  “true”  or  “false”  chirality,3 

between fundamental and statistical chirality4 and so on. Despite of all these efforts, few 

authors have tried to face the problem looking for a unifying approach able to overcome 

traditional  classifications  which  take  into  account  only  single  classes  of  systems 

(particles,  molecules,  macrostructures,  etc.).  The  result  of  this  way  of  thinking  is  that 

 
2 

NAME OF THE AUTHOR(S) 

chirality is often considered only as a “geometric symmetry” with the final goal to find 

out only the most refined chiral index of a particular class of objects. On the other hand, 

chirality is also a “dynamical symmetry”, not only related to rotations, reflections and 

inversions, but also to fundamental interactions and force laws governing the evolution 

of  systems.  Under  this  standard,  chirality  is  a  fundamental  symmetry  of  nature, 

witnessing  some  process  which  has  given  rise  to  the  enantiomeric  modality  by  which 

we  recognize  almost  all  classes  of  systems.  Besides,  chirality  is  the  footprint  of  the 

intrinsic asymmetry of physical objects which we observe in nature, ranging from left-

handed neutrinos to L-amino acids, from D-sugars to trailing spiral galaxies. This points 

out that i) the expected achiral symmetry of nature has been broken by some dynamical 

process; ii) chirality is present at all scales, so then it is legitimate to look for a unifying 

scheme under which to enclose all these classes of systems and phenomena. However, 

the  geometric  symmetries  are  strictly  related  to  dynamical  symmetries  and,  following 

the  “Erlangen  program”,  according  to  Felix  Klein,5  every  geometry  and  dynamcs  of 

objects can be characterized by their own group of transformations. In this perspective, 

identifying  the  configuration  space  of  a  class  of  objects  is  the  first  step  toward  the 

transformations  which  such  objects  undergo  and  then  toward  the  full  dynamical 

description.  This  approach  is  successfully  pursued  in  particle  physics,  where  once 

identified the configuration space of systems (e.g. the configuration space of spins), the 

construction  of  the  related  Lie  algebra  allows  to  achieve  the  dynamics  (e.g.  the 

Hamiltonian of the interactions of the system). The problem is, however, more involved 

for  mesoscopic,  macroscopic  or  many-body  systems  but,  if  the  specific  configuration 

(or interaction) is recognized at least an effective description can be achieved. For chiral 

structures,  a  combination  of  spatial  rotations  and  inversions  seems  the  fundamental 

transformation characterizing systems at any scale and for any spatial dimension. Either 

simple or complex the structure is, the enantiomeric “modality” of any system cannot be 

absolutely recognized: it is realized by the identification of its mirror image recovered, 

in  every  case,  by  a  combination  of  rotations  and  inversions  which  generates  a  non-

superimposable  system.  Every  (apparent  or  real)  mechanism  capable  of  giving  rise  to 

 

TITLE OF THE ARTICLE 

 3 

mirror  system  is  a  chiral  transformation.  This  definition  is  completely  independent  of 

the  effective  physical  realization  of  the  enantiomer  of  the  given  system  (particle, 

molecule, spiral galaxy, etc.), then a general chiral group can be, in principle, identified 

at  any  scale  and  for  any  physical  dimension.  In  other  words,  a  system  which  results 

“mirrored”  after  rotations  and  inversions  is,  in  general,  chiral  or,  using  a  physical 

concept,  its  Hamiltonian  has  to  contain  a  chiral  interaction  term.  However,  it  is  well-

known that the Hamiltonian function could not be easy to achieve for complex systems, 

but the presence of the above transformations is the probe of chiral dynamics. 

In this paper, without saking for completeness, we want to face the problem of finding a 

group of transformations able to encompass a broad number of classes of chiral objects. 

From our viewpoint, this is the orthogonal O(N) group, where N is the dimension of the 

configuration space. Due to this feature, the intrinsic chirality of an object is not related 

to  the  physical  space  where  it  lives,  but  to  the  abstract  space  of  all  possible 

configurations  in  which  it  can  be  realized.  Furthermore,  the  total  number  of  possible 

configurations  is  related  to  the generators of the O(N) group and the approach results 

completely  general,  thus  allowing  to  deal  with  spin-particles,  tetrahedral  molecules, 

helical structures or spiral galaxies under the same standard. In section 2, we discuss the 

general  feature  of  a  chiral  object  comparing  some  of  the  most  popular  definitions  of 

chirality. It is shown that the configuration space plays a fundamental role in order to 

identify  chiral  transformations.  Section  3  is  devoted  to  the  discussion  of  orthogonal 

groups  O(N).  Their  algebra  emerges  as  the  natural  candidate  to  describe  chiral 

transformations  and  chirality  as  a  geometric  symmetry.  A  general  definition  and  a 

related  theorem  for  chiral  structures  are given. In section 4, the cases of tetrahedrons, 

spin-particles  and  spiral  galaxies  are  discussed  as  realizations  of  the  above  algebra. 

Section 5 is devoted to quantum mechanical considerations, to the discussion of chiral 

transformations  with  respect  to  parity  and  quantum  states.  The  goal  is  to  show  that 

orthogonal  groups  describe  chirality  also  at  fundamental  level  and  then  are  related  to 

dynamical symmetries of the systems. Conclusions are drawn in section 6.  

 
4 

NAME OF THE AUTHOR(S) 

2. LOOKING FOR A CHIRAL GROUP 

C’est  la  dissymmétrie  qui  creé  le  phénomène.6  This  famous  sentence  by  Curie  can  be 

considered the essence of chirality which emerges as the property which differentiates 

an  object  from  its  mirror  image.  Such  a  “dissymetry”  is  related  to  some  fundamental 

symmetry  breaking  mechanism  (e.g.  CP  violation)7  and  manifests  itself  at  any  scale 

ranging  from  objects  like  neutrinos  up  to  huge  systems  as  spiral  galaxies.8  In  particle 

physics,  chiral  symmetry  is  broken  and,  for  example,  for  small  quark  masses,  we  can 

view the π meson as the Goldstone boson for the broken chiral symmetry. The fact that 

π meson has a light mass is a good indicator of the fact that chirality is an approximate 

symmetry, or, in other words, a dissymmetry.9 In general, chiral symmetry of particles 

can be described by SU(N)

SU(N) transformations, where N is related to the specific 

interaction  (N=2  for  Dirac  spin-particles,  N=3  for  Quantum  Chromodynamics,  etc.). 

Clearly, a fundamental role is played by N, the dimension of the abstract configuration 

space  where  the  interaction  is  described.  From  this  point  of  view,  chirality  is  not  a 

feature  of  the  physical  space  where  particles  live,  but  a  property  of  the  group  of 

quantum  mechanical  transformations  they  undergo.  This  concept  will  be  extensively 

discussed  in  the  conclusions  considering  also  that  the  distinction  between  chiral  and 

achiral objects can be directly related to the dimension of the embedding space.10  

On 

the  other  hand, 

in  chemistry,  chirality 

is  experimentally  manifested  by 

“pseudoscalar measurements” related to optical rotation and circular dichroism. Due to 

this  fact,  it  is  often  considered  only  a  genuine  spatial  property  of  molecules  and  then 

described  in  a  completely  different  fashion  with  respect  to  its  particle  counterpart, 

although the issue that particle and molecular chirality has the same fundamental origin 

has  been  often  supported.10  Considering  molecular  chirality  as  a  geometric  symmetry 

has  led  to  the  classification  of  molecules  as  achiral  compounds,  diastereoisomers, 

enantiomers.11  In  other  words,  chemical  systems  can  be  divided  into  sets  containing 

chiral objects: if the chiral objects are handed (i.e. shoe-like), conventionally we have 

“left” and “right” objects; if the chiral objects are non-handed (i.e. potato-like), they are 

 

TITLE OF THE ARTICLE 

 5 

neither  identical  with  nor  a  mirror  image  of  a  non-handed  object.12  The  situation 

becomes  more  involved  for  complex  objects  as  octahedrons  or  helical  structures  as 

nucleic acids (DNA) and polymers. People are searching for classification schemes able 

to point out the chirality degree (chirality indexes). In this respect, it has been proposed 

to  measure  the  minimal  distance  between  a  chiral  compound  and  a  reference  achiral 

structure,  which 

is 

the  basic  concept  of 

the  “continuous  chirality  measure” 

methodology.13  Quantitative  correlations  between  these  chirality  measurements  and 

chemical,  physical  parameters can be estabilished. Moreover, chirality is connected to 

the  inability  to  make  a  structure  coincident  with  a  statistical  realization  of  its  mirror 

image;4 the probe-dependent measurement of this inability is the chirality content of the 

structure.  This  last  definition  results  operative  for  large  random  supramolecular 

structures  as  spiral  bacterial  colonies,  spiral  hurricane  cloud  formations  and  spiral 

galaxies. However, even if this state of art works to describe single classes of objects, it 

is unsatisfactory from the viewpoint of symmetry and conservation laws, since it seems 

that a different kind of chirality descriptor is necessary at different scales. Conversely, 

the nature of chirality would depend on the size of objects and this is not reliable in a 

unitary picture of science. For example, taking into account fundamental interactions as 

gravitation  or  electromagnetism,  a  suitable  working  hypothesis  is  that  they  act  in  the 

same  way  from  microscopic  to  macroscopic  scales.  This  hypothesis  is  supported  by 

experiments  and  observations,  so  the  intrinsic  unitarity  of  physics  (covariance  and 

invariance of physical laws) is a standard paradigm. This result should be achieved also 

for  chirality  at  any  scale,  since  it  is  a  general  feature  of  nature.  With  these 

considerations  in  mind,  it  is  possible  to  find  out  a  group  of  transformations  whose 

algebra works at any scale and for any chiral object? Such a group can be related to the 

configurations that the object can assume without taking into account the physical space 

where the object is embedded? Answering these questions would represent a non-trivial 

step to deal with chirality as a dynamical symmetry and then understanding its features 

independently  of  the  physical  size  and  spatial  dimension of chiral objects. In the next 

section,  we  show  that  orthogonal  group  O(N)  present  several  features  useful  to  fully 

 
6 

NAME OF THE AUTHOR(S) 

achieve this program at every physical scale. Interesting examples will be discussed in 

section 4. 

3.  ORTHOGONAL  GROUPS  AND  THEIR  RELATIONS  TO 
CHIRALITY 

Starting from Kelvin definition: Any geometric figure, or groups of points is chiral, and 

it  has  chirality,  if  its  image  in  a  plane  mirror,  ideally  realized,  cannot  be  brought  to 

coincide  with  itself.15  The  corresponding  definition  of  absence  of  chirality  can  be 

expressed saying that a structure and its mirror image are superimposable by rotation or 

any motion preserving the structure. It is clear that, independently of the object size, a 

chiral transformation has to be constituted by a combination of rotations and inversions. 

This  statement  works  for  configurations  of  objects  considered  in  the  physical  space 

(e.g. molecules) or in the abstract space of spins (e.g. particles). Furthermore, the size 

and the structure of the object has to be conserved in the “mirroring” transformation.16 

This means that the transformation has to be unitary or, in other words, distances in N 

dimensions have to be preserved. Specifically, the distance from the origin to the point 

xi, by the Pythagorean theorem, is given by 

. Therefore, xi xi is an invariant and 

the N-dimensional rotation is defined by 

 

 

 

       (1) 

The number of independent elements in each member of O(N) is N2 minus the number 

of constraints arising from the orthogonality condition, that is: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

       (2) 

This  is  the  number  of  independent  antisymmetric  NxN  matrices,  that  is,  we  can 

parametrize the independent components within O(N) by either orthogonal matrices or 

 

TITLE OF THE ARTICLE 

 7 

by  exponentiating  antisymmetric  ones.  Any  orthogonal  matrix  can,  thereby,  be 

parametrized as 

 

 

       (3) 

where  τj  are  linearly  independent,  antisymmetric  matrices  with  purely  imaginary 

elements. They are called the “generators” of the group, and θj are the rotation angles or 

the  “parameters”  of  the  group.  Finding  representations  of  O(N)  is  complicated, 

however, the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff theorem can be used. It states that 

 

 

       (4) 

where [A,B] is a commutator.17 If eA and eB are close together, then these elements form 

a group as long as the commutators of A and B form an algebra. Without entering into 

details  of  group  theory,  we  want  to  show  that  O(N)  groups  are  sufficient  to  represent 

any chiral transformation in the configuration space of a given system. Let us consider, 

for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  the  O(2)  case  and  the  fact  that  “enantiomer”  means  that  a 

physical  system  can  be  present  in  two  modalities  with  non-superimposable  mirror 

images.  Being  N=2,  the  number  of  generators  of  transformations  is  2(2-1)/2=1, 

corresponding to a rotation angle. Any rotation in the plane can be written as 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

which  is  a  particular  case  of  (1).  Because  the  group  is  orthogonal,  it  follows  that 

 and then 

 

       (5) 

 

       (6) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
8 

NAME OF THE AUTHOR(S) 

which means that the inverse of an orthogonal matrix is its transposition, that is O-1≡OT. 

Considering the determinant of both sides of eq. (6), we get 

 

 

       (7) 

that is the determinant of O can be ±1. Considering the subset with det(O)=1, we have 

the  subgroup  SO(2)  of  special  orthogonal  matrices  in  two  dimensions  describing  2D 

rotations.  The  subset  of  O(2),  given  by  det(O)=-1,  does  not  constitute  a  group.  It 

consists of elements of SO(2) times the matrix 

and then gives rise to the transformation 

 

   

 

 

       (8) 

       (9) 

which takes a plane and maps it into its mirror image. In summary, O(2) represents the 

group of all possible rotations and inversions in a 2D-space independently of the nature 

of  the  space  and  the  object  described  in  it.  Any  2D-chiral  transformation,  where  an 

object is “mirrored” in itself can be represented by a one-parameter continuous rotation 

plus a discrete reflection. If the result of such an operation gives rise to the enantiomer 

of  a  given  system,  the  transformation  has  determinant  det(O)=-1;  if  the  “mirrored” 

object  results identical to the starting one, det(O)=1. This kind of transformations can 

be  represented  also  by  complex  numbers.  In  this  case,  if 

  is  a  complex 

number (a vector in the complex plane), it can be transformed as 

where U(

) is a complex unitary matrix 

 

     (10) 

 

 

     (11) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TITLE OF THE ARTICLE 

 9 

where 

is  the  Hermitean  conjugate  operator  of  U.  The  set  of  all  one-dimensional 

unitary matrices 

 is the group U(1) where the multipication law 

 

     (12) 

holds.  This  multlipication  law  is  the  same  of  O(2)  even  though  this  construction  is 

based on the one-dimensional space of complex number. Then the correspondence 

   

 

 

 

 

 

     (13) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

is  straightforward:  this  means  that  two  real  numbers  transformed  by  O(2)  can  be 

combined  into  a  single  complex  number  transformed  by  U(1).  In  other  words,  a 

transformation  given  by  a  rotation  and  an  inversion  in  a  real  space  is  equivalent  to  a 

complex conjugation in a complex space. Again, a chiral transformation can be reduced 

to a complex conjugation. The previous considerations can be extended in a Theorem: 

chiral transformations in any N-dimensional space are given by the transformations of 

the corresponding O(N) algebra. The number of independent generators is [N(N-1)]/2 

(i.e. the number of independent parameters), the number of possible configurations of 

the system is N! where ½(N!) belongs to an enantiomer and ½(N!) to its opposite mirror 

image. 

This  theorem  can  be  immediately  translated  into  a  complex  number  representation,  if 

we adopt U(N) (or SU(N)) groups. In the following section, we shall give some peculiar 

examples  of  chiral  systems  which  can  be  represented  under  the  unifying  view  of 

orthogonal  groups  independently  of  the  physical  space  in  which  they  are  embedded. 

However,  it  is  worth  nothing  that  an  object  is  chiral  or  achiral  depending  on  the 

dimension N of the configuration space: it is chiral only in the lowest dimensional space 

where it is embeddable.10 

 
10 

NAME OF THE AUTHOR(S) 

4. EXAMPLES OF CHIRAL STRUCTURES 

As  a  first  application  of  the  above  considerations,  let  us  take  into  account  tetrahedral 

molecules18  whose  configuration  space  can  be  easily  achieved  by  the  well-known 

Fischer  projections.12  This  representation  is  based  on  some  simple  empirical  rules 

whose aim is to achieve planar projections of the molecule: the atoms pointing sideways 

must project forward in the model, those pointing up and down in the projection must 

extend toward the rear. In the following picture, these rules are illustrated for the lactic 

acid as a model compound (Figure 1). 

Figure 1: Fundamental rules to handle Fischer projections. 

 

Starting  from  a  fundamental  projection,  rotation  of  90°  are  not  allowed,  while  180° 

rotations give correct results. The interchange of any two groups gives rise to the mirror 

image  of  a  given  enantiomer.  The  chemical  groups  are  indicated  by  numbers  running 

from 1 to 4. Without considering their priorities according to Cahn-Ingold-Prelog (CIP) 

rules,19 we can set: OH=1, CO2H=2, H=3, CH3=4. There are 4!=24 permutations of 4 

ligands  and  12  of  these  correspond  to  the  (+)-enantiomer  (Fig.  2)  and  the  other  12 

graphs to the (-)-enantiomer (Fig. 3). 

 

TITLE OF THE ARTICLE 

 11 

Figure 2: Fischer projections of (S)-(+)-lactic acid. 

 

 

Figure 3: Fischer projections of (S)-(-)-lactic acid. 

 

 
12 

NAME OF THE AUTHOR(S) 

Permutations  in  Fig.  2  can  be  achieved  either  permuting  groups  of  3  bonds  or  by 

turning the projections by 180°. Permutations in Fig. 3 are obtained by those in Fig. 2 

interchanging  two  chemical  groups.  Considerations  of  section  3  can  be  immediately 

applied to this case. The tetrahedral molecule is represented as a column vector 

Μ

 in a 

4D space, i.e. 

Μ

 

 

 

 

(14) 

2

 Ψ1

Ψ=


Ψ


 Ψ

3

4









The 24 Fischer projections in Figs.(2) and (3) can be realized from the fundamental one 

through an O(4) algebra whose elements are the 4x4 matrix-operators in Tables I and II 

acting on the fundamental projection. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TITLE OF THE ARTICLE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1: (+)-Enantiomer. 

Table 2: (-)-Enantiomer. 

 13 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
14 

NAME OF THE AUTHOR(S) 

Clearly, the matrix-operators in Table 1 are rotations with 

, while operators in 

Table 2 are inversions with 

. The generalization to chains of molecules with 

n stereogenic centres is straightforward.20 Through this approach, a molecular “aufbau” 

method, useful for classification of enantiomers, diastereoisomers and achiral molecules 

can be achieved. As final assessment, the chiral algebra is independent of physical 3D 

space  of  the  molecule  while  the  chiral  features  emerge  thanks  to  the  transformation 

properties in the 4D configuration space. 

On  a  completely  different  ground,  it  is  possible  to  show  that  the  O(4)  chiral  algebra 

works also for spin-particles. In this case, regardless to the size of the systems, particles 

and  molecules  undergo  exactly  the  same  transformations.  For  example,  a  Dirac  spin-

vector  (describing  electrons  and  positrons  with  the  same  mass,  opposite  charges  and 

obeying the same Dirac equation) can be described as a relativistic 4-vector field 

2

 Ψ1

Ψ=


Ψ


 Ψ

3

4









 

 

 

     (15) 

representing  the  spin-up-down  states  of  an  electron-positron  multiplet.21  Any  spin 

transformation is a member of the 2D special unitary group SU(2) and the isomorphism 

holds for the whole multiplet (15). A chiral transformation, combining the 4-momentum 

and the helicity, is easily achieved by the pseudoscalar chiral operator 

 

 

     (16) 

 

    (17) 

where I is the 2x2 unit matrix and the 4x4 matrices γi are the Dirac matrices 

 

 

 

, 

 

 

TITLE OF THE ARTICLE 

 15 

.   

 

     (18) 

The 2x2 matrices 

 

 

 

 

     (19) 

constitute  the  SU(2)  Pauli  algebra.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  matrix  γ5 

corresponds to the above matrix 

 in Table 1. The 4x4 matrices γ0, γi, γ5, plus the 4x4 

unit  matrix  constitute  a  chiral  algebra  equivalent  to  the  previous  O(4)  algebra  of 

tetrahedral  molecules  thanks  to  the  isomorphism  (16).  In  the  previous  case,  we  have 

used a real representation of the algebra, in this case, the complex representation is due 

to the fact that charge conjugation of Dirac spinors is represented by complex matrices.7 

The corresponding “enantiomers” can be identified in the 4D configuration space as a 

left-handed  fermion,  whose  spin  is  anti-parallel  to  its  momentum  vector  (negative 

helicity)  and  a  right-handed  fermion,  whose  spin  is  parallel  to  its  momentum  vector 

(positive helicity) as depicted in Figure 4. 

particle spin

direction of motion

<

<

antiparticle spin

 

Figure 4: Chirality of Dirac spin particles. 

 

 
16 

NAME OF THE AUTHOR(S) 

We remark again that such a form of chirality can be identified only in the 4D abstract 

space  of  configurations  and  not  in  physical  space.  If  we  take  into  account  a  different 

space of configurations, such a chiral feature is not present.10  

The  orthogonal  group  approach  to  chirality  works  also  for  extremely  macroscopic 

systems  once  a  configuration  space  is  correctly  identified.  For  example,  it  is  easy  to 

show  that  the  spiral  structure  of  galaxies  is  intrinsically  chiral.22  In  fact,  trailing  and 

leading  arms  of  spiral  galaxies  require  the  kinematical  determination  of  the  galaxy 

plane  orientation  with  respect  to  our  line  of  sight,  so  that  radial  velocity  can  be 

interpreted  in  terms  of  the  direction  of  the  galaxy  rotation.23  Taking  into  account  the 

recession  velocity,  given  by  the  Hubble  relation 

,  where  H0  is  the  Hubble 

constant  and  “d”  the  distance  of  the  galaxy  from  the  observer,  we  can  assign  helicity 

moving along the arms of the galaxy toward the center (Figure 5). 

 

TITLE OF THE ARTICLE 

 17 

Figure 5. Trailing and leading modes of spiral galaxies. 

 

Trailing  galaxies  are  left-helical  while  leading  galaxies  are  right-helical.  The  two 

systems result non-superimposable with respect to reflections within the plane. In other 

words, the enantiomers in 2D, are the trailing arm galaxy rotating in one sense and the 

leading arm galaxy rotating in the opposite sense. This means that rotation of the system 

has to be considered with respect to recession velocity. In summary, the configuration 

space of a spiral galaxy is globally assigned by a rotation and a reflection so that O(2) 

orthogonal group is suitable to describe galaxies as chiral structures. Even in this case, 

information on the size and the physical space in which the system lives is not required. 

Several  other  chiral  (mesoscopic  or  macroscopic)  systems  can  be  described  under  the 

standard  of  orthogonal  groups.  For  example,  spiral  hurricane  cloud  formations  can be 

dealt  as  O(2)-trailing  or  leading  systems.  The  “enantiomers”  are  represented  by  their 

clockwise  or  anti-clockwise  rotation  modality  with  respect  to  the  Earth  equator  line. 

 
18 

NAME OF THE AUTHOR(S) 

Short  helical  systems  as  helicenes  and  long  analogs  as  DNA,  proteins  and  synthetic 

polymers can be globally described as chiral systems considering the transformations of 

the  O(2)⊗ -composed  group,  including  rotations,  inversions  and  translations.  In 

conclusion,  any  chiral  system  at  every  scale  can  be  dealt  under  the  standard  of 

orthogonal  groups  once  the  global  transformations  which  it  can  undergo  are  correctly 

identified. This operation allows to construct the configuration space of the system, i.e. 

the dimensionality N, the number of possible configurations N!, the number N(N-1)/2 

of generators of transformations which is the number of independent parameters and the 

procedure is completely independent of the physical space where the system lives. 

5. QUANTUM MECHANICAL CONSIDERATIONS 

From  the  fundamental  physics  viewpoint,  geometric  symmetries  are  always  related  to 

dynamical  symmetries.  The  first  ones  refer  to  the  geometric  structures  of  the  systems 

and  includes  rotations,  reflections,  inversions  and  translations.  The  second  ones  relate 

to the particular form of the interactions among the different parts of the system. In a 

certain sense, the second ones yield the first ones, which are the easiest to be identified. 

Conversely, identifying the whole group of transformations which a system undergo is 

the first step toward the full dynamical description of the system. In the specific case of 

chiral structures, if they are described by O(N) groups, this means that related dynamics 

has to be associated to orthogonal transformations and the Hamiltonian operator of the 

systems has to commute with orthogonal operators. However, dynamics and geometric 

symmetries have to be considered into the configuration space of the system and then 

into  the  phase  space.  In  general,  when  studying  the  chiral  dynamics,  we  can  suppose 

that chiral states interconvert between the left- and right-handed states, which, therefore 

do  not  have  definite  parity.  In  other  words,  we  can  suppose  that  any  racemic  parity-

defined state is given by the superposition of two enantiomers of a given chiral system. 

We can take into account the set of operator 

, 

χ

k

 and 

kχ

where 

 is the total 

 

TITLE OF THE ARTICLE 

 19 

Hamiltonian  operator  of  the  degenerate  generalized  “isomer”  consisting  of  even  and 

odd part  

 

 

     (20) 

kχ

  are  chiral  operators  giving  rise,  respectively,  to  rotations  and  inversions  in  a 

kχ , 
given N-dimensional configuration space and k is an index running from 1 to (1/2)N!. 

For  the  sake  of  simplicity,  let  us  ignore  parity  violations.  In  this  picture,24  energy 

eigenstates are superpositions of handed states, i.e. 

  

(21) 

It  is  worth  noting  that  the  chiral  system  has  not  been  specified,  so  the  discussion  is 

completely general. Immediately, the relation 

holds  for  the  parity  operator 

  whose  eigenvalues  are 

.  Dropping  the  indices 

and considering any chiral state of the system in the configuration space, it is 

The 

kχ

  operators  interconvert  the  two  handed  states,  while 

  are  pure  rotations 

kχ

leaving unchanged the handness of the state. Let us consider now the energy eigenstates 

(21) which are also parity eigenstates thanks to (22). We have 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

and 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(22) 

(23) 

(24) 

(25) 

(26) 

 

 

;  

;  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
20 

 

NAME OF THE AUTHOR(S) 

 

 

 

 

That is the N! 

kχ

 and 

kχ

 operators of the O(N) algebra leave unchanged the parity of 

energy states (i.e. parity is conserved). This result is completely general and works for 

microscopic, mesoscopic and macroscopic chiral systems. We have used Dirac notation 

in  order  to  stress  that  the  approach  is  completely  independent  of  physical  space  in 

which the system is set. However, we should consider processes as P or CP-violation in 

order  to  achieve  a  detailed  dynamics  capable  of  matching  experimental  data,  but  our 

aim here is to show that chirality, under the standard of O(N) groups, can be dealt also 

as a dynamical symmetry other than a geometrical one. 

6. CONCLUSIONS 

In this paper, we have discussed an approach by which it is possible to describe chiral 

structures  regardless  their  size,  but  considering  only  the  transformations  which  they 

undergo  in  the  configuration  space.  This  way  of  thinking  leads  to  take  into  account 

orthogonal  groups  O(N)  which  encompass  all  unitary  transformations,  rotations  and 

inversions, by which it is possible to estabilish if the (real or virtual) mirror image of a 

system is superimposable or not with respect to the given one. This approach is general 

to define chirality of systems and it does not depend on the size and the fact that we are 

considering either quantum or classical systems. In this way, the chirality of completely 

different  systems  as  particles,  molecules  or  spiral  galaxies  can  be  described  under  the 

same  standard.  The  crucial  points  are  the  identification  of  the  configuration  space 

dimensions,  the  independent  parameters  or  generators  of  transformations,  the  suitable 

representation of the unitary group which can be achieved by real or complex numbers. 

The  number  of rotation and inversion operators is related to the dimensionality of the 

space and to the number of configurations of the system. It is possible to show that such 

a  geometric  chiral  symmetry  is  also  a  dynamical  symmetry  related  to  the  energy 

eigenstates  of  the  system.  However,  this  statement  rigorously  holds  if  symmetry 

 

TITLE OF THE ARTICLE 

 21 

violations (as CP or P-violation) are not considered, but it is extremely general since it 

does not depend on the intrinsic nature of the system. In other words, we only need that 

a physical system could be globally described as an isomer presenting two enantiomeric 

states. Dynamical symmetry is guaranteed by the fact that combinations of chiral states 

give  rise  to  definite  parity  eigenstates  which  are  also  energy  eigenstates.  Such  an 

approach  has  to  be  furtherly  refined,  first  of  all  in  relation  to  the  symmetry  breaking 

processes  but,  in  any  case,  it  could  be  a  further  step  to  frame  microscopic  and 

macroscopic  chiral  systems  into  the  same  theoretical  scheme.  However,  some 

considerations  on  the  effective  meaning  of  chirality  with  respect  to  the  embedding 

space  are  in  order  at  this  point.  It  can  be  formally  proven  that  any  chiral  object 

embedded  in  an  N-dimensional  space  is  achiral  when  embedded  in  any  space  of 

dimension  higher  than  N.  In  other  words,  an  object  is  chiral  only  in  the  lowest 

dimensional  space  where  it  is  embeddable.10  This  property  shows  that  chirality  is  a 

genuine  geometric  feature  which  emerges  if  configuration  space  (and  in  particular  its 

dimensionality) is chosen in a suitable way. Furthermore, the configuration space of N-

particle systems can show aspects directly related to the measure of chirality, as shown 

in ref. 25, and then the approach presented in this paper is far from being conclusive. 

Finally, in order to achieve a self-consistent theory, the problem of chirality measure for 

simple and complex systems, has to be faced. In particular, our considerations have to 

be  related  to  the  metric  properties  of  chirality  and  to  the  mechanisms  capable  of 

preserving chirality. For a comprehensive discussion of these topics see ref. 26. 

REFERENCES 
1. Gottfried, K., Weisskopf V.F.( 1984a) Concepts of Particle Physics. New York, Oxford University Press. 
(c) Barron, L. D. (1996b) Physical Origin of Homochirality in Life. New York, ,American Institute of 
Physics. 

2. Buda, A. B., Auf der Heyde, T., Mislow, K. (1992a) Quantification of chirality. Angewandte Chemie, 

International Edition English, 31, 989-1007. Weinberg, N., Mislow, K. (1995b) A unification of chirality 
measures. Journal of Mathematical Chemistry 17, 35-53. Mislow, K. Molecular chirality. (1999c) Topics 
in Stereochemistry, 22, 1-82. Le Guennec, P. (2000d) Two dimensional theory of chirality, I. Absolute 
chirality. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 41, 5954-5985. 

 
22 

NAME OF THE AUTHOR(S) 

3. Barron, L. D. (1986) True and false chirality and absolute asymmetric synthesis. Journal of Americal 

Chemical Society, 108, 5539-5542. 

4. Katzenelson, O., Zabrodsky, H., Avnir, D. (1996a) Chirality of large random supramolecular structures. 

Chemistry A European Journal, 2, 174-181. Katzenelson, O., Avnir, D. (2000b) Quantitative 
chirality/enantioselectivity relations in large random supramolecular structures. Chemistry A European 
Journal, 6, 1346-1354. 

 5. Klein, F. (1920) Vorlesungen über die Entwicklung der Mathematik im 19. Jahrhundert. Berlin, Springer. 

6. Curie, P. (1894) Journal of Physics (Paris) (3), 3, 393. 

7. Kaku, M. (1993) Quantum Field Theory. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 

8. Binney, J., Merrifield, M. (1998) Galactic Astronomy. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press. 

9. Okun, L. B. (1985a) Particle Physics. Chur, Harwood Academic Publisher. Quack, M. (1994b) On the 
measurement of CP-violating energy differences in matter-antimatter enantiomers. Chemical Physics 
Letters, 231, 421-428. 

10. Mezey, P. G. (1995a) Rules on chiral and achiral molecular transformations I. Journal Mathematical 

Chemistry, 17, 185-202. Mezey, P. G. (1995b) Rules on chiral and achiral molecular transformations II. 
Journal Mathematical Chemistry, 18, 133-139. 

11. Barron, L. D. (1986) Symmetry and molecular chirality. Chemical Society Reviews, 15, 189-223. 

12. Eliel, E. L., Wilen, S. H., Mander, L. N. (1994) Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds. New York, John 

Wiley and Sons. 

13 Ruch, E. (1972a) Algebraic aspect of the chirality phenomenon in chemistry. Accounts on Chemical 
Research, 5, 49-56. King, R. B. (1999b) Chirality algebra and the right-left classification problem. 
Advances in Biochirality. Lausanne, Elsevier, 13-34 pp. 

14. Zabrodsky, H., Peleg, S., Avnir, D. (1993a) Continuous symmetry measures. 2. Symmetry groups and the 
tetrahedron. Journal of Americal Chemical Society, 115, 8278-8289. Zabrodsky, H., Avnir, D. (1995b) 
Continuous symmetry measures. 4. Chirality. Journal of Americal Chemical Society, 117, 462-473. 
Katzenelson, O., Edelstein, J., Avnir, D., (2000c) Quantitative chirality of helicenes. Tetrahedron: 
Asymmetry, 11, 2695-2704. Petitjean, M. (2003d) Chirality and symmetry measures: a trasdisciplinary 
review. Entropy, 5, 271-312. 

15. Lord Kelvin (1904) Baltimore Lectures on Molecular Dynamics and the Wave Theory of Light. London, 

C. J. Clay and Sons, 619 pp. 

16. The issue of energy conservation in a chiral transformation is a question of debate: if we have a CP-

violation related to chiral transformation it is legitimate to search for tiny energy differences between 
enantiomers. 

17. Gilmore, R. (1994) Lie Groups, Lie Algebras and Some of Their Applications. Malabar, Krieger 

18. Capozziello, S., Lattanzi, A. (2003) Algebraic structure of central molecular chirality starting from Fischer 

19. Prelog, V., Helmchem, G. (1982) Bases of the CIP system and proposal for a revision. Angewandte 

Publishing Company. 

projections. Chirality, 15, 466-471. 

Chemie, 94, 614-631. 

20. Capozziello, S., Lattanzi, A. (2004) Description of chiral tetrahedral molecules via an Aufbau approach. 

Journal of Molecular Structure (Theochem), 671, 205-209. 

21. Itzykson, C., Zuber, J. B. (1980) Quantum Field Theory. New York, McGraw-Hill. 

22. Capozziello, S., Lattanzi, A. (2006a) Spiral galaxies as chiral objects? Astrophysics and Space Science, 

301, 189-193. Capozziello, S., Lattanzi, A. (2006b) Spiral galaxies as enantiomers: chirality, an underlying 
feature in chemistry and astrophysics. Chirality, 18, 17-23. 

23. Binney, J., Tremaine, S., (1987) Galactic Dynamics. Princeton, New Jersey, Princeton University Press. 

24. Capozziello, S., Lattanzi, A. (2004) Quantum mechanical consideration on the algebraic structure of 

central molecular chirality. Chirality, 16, 162-167. 

 

TITLE OF THE ARTICLE 

 23 

25. Mezey, P. G. (1987) Potential Energy Hypersurface, Amsterdam, Elsevier. 

26. Mezey, P. G. (1991a) A Global Approach to Molecular Chirality in New Developments in Molecular 

Chirality. Ed. Mezey, P. G., Dordrecht, Kluwer, 257-287 pp. Mezey, P. G. (1998b) Generalized chirality 
and symmetry deficiency. Journal Mathematical Chemistry, 23, 65-84. Mezey, P. G. (1998c) The proof of 
the metric properties of a fuzzy chirality measure of molecular electron density clouds. Journal of 
Molecular Structure (Theochem) 455, 183-190. Mezey, P. G. (1998d) Mislow’s label paradox, chirality-
preserving conformational changes and related chirality measures. Chirality, 10, 173-179. 

