 

 

 

(abstract of the report at ESR2007 conference) 
 
Polynomially scaling spin dynamics simulation algorithm based on 
adaptive state space restriction 
 

Ilya Kuprov, Nicola Wagner-Rundell, P.J. Hore 

Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, 
Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, 
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QZ, UK. 

The conventional spin dynamics simulations are performed in direct products of 
state  spaces  of  individual  spins.  In  a  general  system  of  n  spins,  the  total  number  of 
elements in the state basis is  4n≥
. A system propagation step requires an action by an 
operator  on  the  state  vector  and  thus  requires 
  multiplications.  It’s  obvious  that 
with  current  computers  there’s  no  way  beyond  about  ten  spins,  and  the  calculation 
complexity scales exponentially with the spin system size. 

24 n≥

 
We  demonstrate  that  a  polynomially  scaling  algorithm  can  be  obtained  if  the 
state space is reduced by neglecting unimportant or unpopulated spin states. The class 
of  such  states  is  surprisingly  wide.  In  particular,  there  are  indications  that  very  high 
multi-spin orders can be dropped completely, as can all the orders linking the spins that 
are remote on the interaction graph. 

 

 

The  picture  above  contains  a  schematic  representation  of  a  triples  restricted 
calculation (straight lines  denote  interactions), which  includes  all the spin  states  up  to 
Z8L S I± ± ).  The  interaction  graph  is  expanded  into  a 
the  directly  linked  triples  (e.g. 
complete  set of connected subgraphs,  each subgraph  is treated quantum  mechanically, 
and  the  resulting  equations  are  recoupled.  This  procedure  excludes  spin  orders  higher 
than three and makes full use of the interaction topology. 
 

The  computational  cost of  the  propagation  step  for  a  ktuples-restricted  densely 
)2kO n
(
.  In  cases  of  favourable  interaction 

connected  n-spin  system  with  k
topologies (narrow graphs, e.g. in protein NMR) the asymptotic scaling is linear. 

n(cid:2)   is 

