January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

The structure and dynamics of solvated electron 
in polar liquids. ¶ 

Ilya A. Shkrob 1) 

Chemistry Division , Argonne National Laboratory,  Argonne, IL 60439 

 
 

 

The submitted manuscript has been created by UChicago Argonne, LLC, Operator of Argonne National Laboratory (“Argonne”). Argonne, a 
U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science laboratory, is operated under Contract No. DE-AC-02-06CH11357. The U.S. Government retains 
for itself, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide license in said article to reproduce, prepare derivative 
works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.   

¶ Work performed under the auspices of the Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of 

Chemical Science, US-DOE under contract number DE-AC-02-06CH11357. 

(1) e-mail: shkrob@anl.gov, tel: 630-2529516 

 

1. 

 

 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

1. INTRODUCTION 

 

In this chapter, the recent progress in understanding of the nature and dynamics of excess 

(solvated)  electrons  in  molecular  fluids  composed  of  polar  molecules  with  no  electron  affinity 

(EA), such as liquid water (hydrated electron, 

) and aliphatic alcohols, is examined. We have 

hyde

recently  reviewed  the  literature  on  solvated  electron  in  liquefied  ammonia  [1]  and  saturated 

hydrocarbons  [2]  and  we  address  the  reader  to  these  publications  for  a  brief  introduction  to  the 

excess electron states in such liquids. We narrowed this review to bulk neat liquids and (to a much 

lesser  degree)  large  water  anion  clusters  in  the  gas  phase  that  are  useful  reference  systems  for 

solvated  electrons  in  the  bulk.  The  excess  electrons  trapped  by  supramolecular  structures 

(including single macrocycle molecules [3,4]), such as clusters of polar molecules [5,6] and water 

pools of reverse micelles [7,8] in nonpolar liquids and complexes of the electrons with cations [9] 

in concentrated salt solutions, are examined elsewhere. 

 

This  discourse  echoes  the  themes  addressed  in  our  recent  review  on  the  properties  of 

uncommon  solvent  anions.  [10]    We  do  not  pretend  to  be  comprehensive  or  inclusive,  as  the 

literature on electron solvation is vast and rapidly increasing. This increase is currently driven by 

ultrafast  laser  spectroscopy  studies  of  electron  injection  and  relaxation  dynamics,  and  by  gas 

phase  studies  of  anion  clusters  by  photoelectron  and  IR  spectroscopy.  Despite  the  great 

importance of the solvated/hydrated electron for radiation chemistry (as this species is a common 

reducing  agent  in  radiolysis  of  liquids  and  solids),  pulse  radiolysis  studies  of  solvated  electrons 

are  becoming  less  frequent  perhaps  due  to  the  insufficient  time  resolution  of  the  method 

(picoseconds)  as  compared  to  state-of-the-art  laser  studies  (time  resolution  to  5  fs  [11]).  The 

welcome  exception  are  the  recent  spectroscopic  and  kinetic  studies  of  hydrated  electrons  in 

supercritical  [12,13]  and  supercooled  water.  [14]  As  the  theoretical  models  [12]  for  high-

 

 

2. 

-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

temperature hydrated electrons and the reaction mechanisms for these species are still debated, we 

will exclude such extreme conditions from this review. 

 

Over  the  last  15  years,  there  was  rapid  progress  in  understanding  the  properties  of 

solvated/hydrated  electron.  The  advances  were  made  simultaneously  in  many  areas.  First,  it 

became possible to study the energetics and IR spectra of relatively large ammonia and water (and 

now  methanol  [15])  anion  clusters  in  the  gas  phase.  Very  recently,  pump-probe  studies  of  such 

clusters have begun. [16,17] Second, resonance Raman spectra of solvated electrons in water and 

alcohols  were  obtained;  these  spectra  provide  direct  insight  into  their  structure.  [18-22]    Only 

magnetic  resonance  (electron  paramagnetic  resonance  (EPR)  and  electron  spin  echo  electron 

modulation (ESEEM)) studies carried out in the 1970s and the 1980s have provided comparably 

detailed  picture  of  electron  localization.  [23]  Third,  there  were  multiple  studies  of  ultrafast 

electron localization in water, alcohols, ethers, and ionic liquids following either photo- [24-28] or 

radiolytic [29] ionization of the solvent or electron detachment from a solvated anion (e.g., [30]) 

Numerous  pump-probe  studies  of 

  [11,31-35]  and  solvated  electron  in  alcohols  [36]  and 

hyde

ethers,  such  as  tetrahydrofuran  (THF),  [37]  have  been  carried  out.  These  studies  addressed  the 

initial  stages  of  electron  localization  that  are  still  not  fully  understood.  Forth,  theoretical 

(dynamic) models of electron solvation rapidly grew in sophistication and realism. In addition to 

one-electron  models,  both  adiabatic  and  nonadiabatic,  such  as  path  integral,  [38-40]  mixed 

quantum-classical (MQC) molecular dynamics (MD), [41-43] mobile basis sets, [44-46] ab initio 

and density functional (DFT) approaches have been developed, chiefly for small and medium size 

water  anion  clusters.    [47-49]  Recently,  these  many-electron  approaches  began  to  be  applied  to 

solvated electrons in bulk liquids, using Car-Parrinello (CP) [50] or Born-Oppenheimer MD and 

hybrid  MQC/MD:DFT  calculations.  [51]  Meanwhile,  the  one-electron  MQC  MD  methods  are 

 

 

3. 

-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

advancing  towards  more  accurate  representation  of  nonadiabatic  transitions,  decoherence  effects 

[52]  and  quantum  effects  involving  solvent  degrees  of  freedom.  [53]    Fifth,  these  methods  are 

presently applied to solvents of medium and low polarity, such as THF [54] and the alkanes, [2,4] 

where the electron dynamics and energetics are qualitatively different from those in water, and to 

dielectrons in water. [55] 

    

While the dynamic studies of electron solvation are very important for understanding its 

chemistry, interpreting these dynamics is conditional on having the accurate picture of the ground 

state of the solvated electron. The point that is made in this review is that the current paradigm of 

the solvated electron as "a particle in a box" that informed the studies of the solvated electron for 

over 60 years [56-60] needs to be reassessed, despite its many successes. In place of this paradigm 

we suggest another conceptual picture, which is nearly as old as the "particle in a box" view of the 

electron  (see  Ref.  1),  suggesting  that  the  solvated  electron  is,  in  fact,  an  unusual  kind  of  the 

solvent multimer anion in which the excess electron density occupies voids and cavities between 

the  molecules  in  addition  to  frontier  p-orbitals  in  the  heteroatoms  in  the  solvating  groups.  We 

argue  that  such  a  view  does  not  contradict  the  experimental  observations  for  the  ground  state 

electron  and,  in  fact,  accounts  for  several  observations that have not been rationalized yet using 

the  one-electron  models,  including  the  dynamic  behavior  of  the  excess  electron.  The  emerging 

picture  of  the  solvated  electron  is  complementary  to  the  familiar  one-electron  models,  retaining 

and  rationalizing  the  desirable  features  of  the  "particle  in  a  box"  paradigm  and  adding  new 

features  that  are  lacking  in  this  class  of  models.  In  this  respect,  the  multimer  anion  picture  is 

different  from  more  radical  suggestions  [61]  that  postulate  a  different  atomic  structure  for  the 

"solvated electron."  

 

 

4. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

2. THE CAVITY ELECTRON 

 

In  the  standard  picture  of  electron  solvation  in  polar  liquids,  the  s-like  excess  electron 

occupies  a  (on  average,  nearly  isotropic)  solvent  cavity  that  is  stabilized  through  (i)  Pauli 

exclusion of the solvent molecules (repulsive interaction) by the electron filling the cavity and (ii) 

point-dipole  attractive  interactions  with  the  polar  groups  (such  as  HO  groups  in  water)  of  4-8 

solvent  molecules  that  collectively  localize  and  trap  the  electron  inside  the  cavity.  Only  the 

species  in  which  some  electron  density  is  located  inside  this  cavity  (or  the  interstitial  voids 

between the solvent molecules) can be rightfully called the "solvated electron."  All such species 

exhibit  a  characteristic  broad,  asymmetric  absorption  band  in  the  VIS  (visible)  or  NIR    (near 

infrared) most of which is from s-p excitation of the s-like ground state electron to three nodal p-

like  (bound)  excited  states  (for  electrons  in  deep  traps  in  polar  solvents)  or  free  p-waves  in  the 

conduction band (CB), in less polar and nonpolar solvents. Since the cavity is slightly anisotropic, 

these  p-like  states  are  nondegenerate,  and  the  VIS-NIR  band  is  a  superposition  of  three 

homogeneously  broadened  p-subbands.  The  more  anisotropic  is  the  cavity,  the  greater  is  the 

energy splitting between the centroids of these three subbands. To the blue of this composite s-p 

band, there is usually a Lorentzian "tail" extending towards the UV, due to the transitions from the 

ground state directly into the CB of the liquid. Some other excitations (s-d) might also contribute 

to this "tail" absorbance, according to the theory. [44-46,62] So characteristic is this "a bell and a 

tail" composite spectrum that most of the "solvated electrons" in liquids have been identified by 

this  feature  alone.  Another  distinguishing  property  of  the  solvated  electron  is  pronounced 

temperature dependence of this spectrum, [13,14] with systematic red shift of the absorption peak 

and  broadening  of  the  absorption  line  with  the  increasing  temperature.  Solvated  electron  is,  in 

fact,  one  of  the  best  molecular  "thermometers"  in  chemistry.  These  trends  are  commonly 

 

 

5. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

rationalized  as  an  increase  in  the  volume  occupied  by  the  electron  as  the  cavity  expands  due  to 

weakening of bonds between the solvent molecules, although there are experimental observations 

(such as the lack of spectral shift for 

 in supercritical water as the density changes from 0.1 to 

hyde

0.6 g/cm3 [13] and much greater sensitivity of the absorption maximum to the changes of density 

that  are  induced  by  pressure  than  temperature  decrease)  that  hint  at  the  complex  nature  of  the 

change  observed  that  is  not  captured  by  the  existing  models  of  electron hydration. In particular, 

the recent suggestion that the energetics of solvation is solely a function of water density [12] does 

not appear to be supported experimentally. [13,14] 

 

Negative EA is not a sufficient condition for the formation of the cavity electron: [10] the 

dimers  and  multimers  of  the  solvent  molecules  should  also  have  negative  EA,  lacking  a way of 

accommodating  the  electron  through  the  formation  of  bonded  or  stacked  multimer  anions.  The 

depth  of  the  potential  well  in  which  the  electron  resides  broadly  correlates  with  the  solvent 

polarity. For such solvents as liquid water and ammonia, the trap is more than 1 eV below the CB 

of the liquid and thermal excitation of the electron into the CB is impossible. Solvated electrons in 

such  liquids  move  adiabatically,  following  fast  molecular  motions  in  the  liquid;  in  low-

temperature solids, such electrons undergo trap-to-trap tunneling in competition with deepening of 

the traps due to the relaxation of the cavity, which may take as long as micro- and milliseconds at 

20-100  K.  In  nonpolar  liquids,  some  of  which  (e.g.,  alkanes)  also  yield  solvated  electrons,  the 

traps are just 100-200 meV below the CB and thermal excitation of the electrons localized in such 

traps  is  sufficient  to  promote  the  electron  back into the CB. Such electrons perpetually oscillate  

between the bottom  of the CB and the solvent traps. Only recently has it been shown how fast are 

these electron equilibria in the alkanes: [2] the typical residence time of the electron in a trapped 

state is under 10 ps (at 300 K) and the typical trapping time of the quasifree CB electron is just 

 

 

6. 

-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

15-30 fs, which is shorter than the relaxation of its momentum. Note that the p-like electrons in 

polar  solvents  are  also  very  close  to  the  mobility  edge  of  the  liquid  [41-43]  and  might  be 

spontaneously emitted into the CB as a result of solvent fluctuations. [63] There is also a class of 

solvated/trapped  electrons  that  coexist  either  in  two  distinct  forms  (such  as  electrons  in  low-

temperature hexagonal ice [64,65] and cation-bound electrons in concentrated ionic solutions and 

glasses)  [9,64,65]    or  in  a  dynamic  equilibrium  with  a  molecular  anion  (a  monomer  or  a  bound 

multimer), which occurs in some liquids (benzene, [66] acetonitrile [67]) or in dilute solutions of 

polar  molecules  in  nonpolar  liquids  (e.g.,  for  clustered  hydroxylic  molecules  in  dilute  alkane 

solutions  [5]).    Many  modes  of  electron  localization  are  known  and  perhaps  even  more  are  still 

unknown. 

 

For  molecules  lacking  permanent  polar  groups  (e.g.,  alkanes)  or  having  the  dipole 

oriented  in  such  a  way  that  the  positively  charged  end  of  the  dipole  is  looking  outwards  (e.g., 

ethers, amides, esters, and nitriles) the electron is solvated by the alkyl groups, and the trapping 

potential originates chiefly through the polarization of C-C and C-H bonds. [2]  The exact origin 

of this potential is poorly understood; it appears that polarizability of these bonds, in the absence 

of  percolation  of  the  electron  density  onto  the  aliphatic  chains,  is  insufficient  to account for the 

energetics observed.  The likely mechanism for electron trapping in such liquids, in the framework 

of multielectron approach, is examined in Refs. 2 and 4. 

3. EXCITED STATES, PRECURSORS,  DYNAMICS 

3.1 "Hot" s-like and p-like states 

For polar molecules with XH groups (X=N, O), the origin of the trapping potential is well 

understood:  it  is  electrostatic  interaction  of  the  s-like  electron  residing  inside  the  cavity  and 

 

7. 

 

 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

dangling (or "non-hydrogen-bonding") XH groups at the wall of the cavity; the wavefunction of 

the electron "washes" the protons in such groups and instantly responds to their rapid motion. The 

migration  of  the electron occurs either as the result of such molecular motions (in liquids) [68], 

tunneling to neighboring voids appearing as the result of solvent fluctuations, or repeated thermal 

emission  to  CB  and  relocalization.  This  relocalization  can  be  induced  directly  by  1-  [63]  or  2-

photon  [31,32]  excitation  of  the  electron  into  the  CB,  or  even  by  photoexcitation  of  the  s-like 

electron into the p-like excited state, as the manifold of these p-states is close to the CB. [63] As 

for  the  existence  of  other  than  s-  and  p-like  cavity  states  (such  as  2s  and  d-states),  while  these 

states are periodically invoked in the literature (e.g., for vitreous ethers) there seem to be no recent 

corroborations of their existence, except for the electron bubbles in liquid 4He. Importantly, these 

are all virtual states: once the electron is excited into one of these states, many new states appear 

as  the  solvent  accommodates  to  the  excitation.  These  occupied  states  are  classed  into  p-  and  s-

state manifolds, although such a classification is somewhat misleading, as the wavefunction of the 

lowest  ("s-like")  state  in  an  anisotropic,  fluctuating  cavity  has  substantial  p-  and  d-  characters. 

[44-46] The best understood of these excited states of the cavity electron are the so-called "hot" s-

like states that relax adiabatically to the fully thermalized, fully solvated s-like state by damping 

their  excess  energy  into  the  solvent.  These  are,  basically,  s-like  states  that  are  structurally  and 

electronically  very  similar  to  the  ground  state  of  the  electron  but  reside  in  a  slightly  modified 

cavity. Such states are produced in all situations when the electron is excited or ejected into the 

liquid preceding the formation of a fully thermalized s-like electron on the picosecond time scale. 

The spectral manifestation of the relaxation for these "hot" states is the so-called "continuous blue 

shift" of the s-p band that occurs on the time scale of 300-1000 fs in water [24-29,69,70] and even 

slower in alcohols and diols (a few picoseconds [25,71,72] or even a few tens of picoseconds, [29] 

in cold liquids).  Only this type of dynamics was observed in photoionization of liquid water and 

 

 

8. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

electron  photodetachment  in  the  course  of  charge  transfer  to  solvent  (CTTS).  [30]  We  have 

recently shown [28] (Fig. 1) that this process is bimodal: there is a rapid blue shift of the entire 

spectrum  on  the  sub-picosecond  time  scale  (that  is  not  conserving  the  shape  of  the  spectrum, 

contrary to the frequently made assumption [24-27,69-72]; Fig. 1a) and a slower narrowing of the 

spectral  envelope  to  the  red  of  the  maximum  that  looks  similar  to  vibrational  relaxation  in 

photoexcited molecules. During this delayed narrowing, the position of the absorption maximum 

is  "locked"  within  20  meV  from  the  equilibrium  position  (Fig  1b).  The  time  constants  for  this 

narrowing are 560 fs for H2O and 640 fs for D2O, whereas the time constant for the initial blue 

shift  is  <  300  fs.  Inability  to  distinguish  between  these  two  regimes,  due  to  sparse  spectral 

sampling and reliance on prescribed spectral evolution, might explain considerable scatter of time 

constants for "continuous blue shift" in the literature. Typically, such a shift (with the conserved 

envelope  of  the  spectrum  plotted  as  a  function  of  excitation  energy)  is  postulated  rather  than 

observed  directly,  as  there  are interfering absorbances and side processes occurring on the same 

time scale. Interestingly, the "hot" s-like electrons generated by 2 x 6.2 eV photoionization exhibit 

a  short  lived  (<  100  fs)  absorbance  in  the  region  where  H2O  has  the  third  overtone  of  the  O-H 

stretch mode (the 1.2 mm band in Fig. 1a that is not seen for heavy water) indicative of a strong 

vibronic coupling between the short-lived, energetic "hot" s-like state and the solvent. [28] 

Place Figure 1 here 

 

Apart  from  these  "hot"  s-like  states,  other  light-absorbing  states  were  identified  using 

decomposition  analysis  of  transient  absorption  spectra.  There  are  as  many  such  spectral/kinetic 

decompositions  as  there  are  authors,  and  relatively  few  common,  agreed  upon  features  have 

emerged  from  such  analyses.  The  most  likely  culprit  is  the  core  assumption  made  in  these 

decomposition analyses that a small number of states with well-defined, time independent spectra 

 

 

9. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

(or a species with prescribed "continuous blue shift" spectral evolution) suffices to account for the 

observed  dynamics.  The  validity  of  such  an  assumption  is unobvious for a species like solvated 

electron that is a statistical average over many solvent configurations. Only few general remarks 

are  thus  possible.  There  appears  to  be  no  evidence  that  p-like  states  are  generated  as  detectable 

intermediates in the course of ionization or electron photodetachment, though such states may be 

generated  by  s-p  and  s-CB  excitation  of  solvated  electrons  and  large  water  anion  clusters.  The 

most likely reason for that is the extremely short lifetime of these p-like states (see below). In bulk 

liquids, these p-like states are predicted to exhibit diffuse p-CB absorption bands centered at < 1 

eV. [73] The initial relaxation of these p-like states in bulk water is expected to occur very rapidly 

(10-30  fs);  the  inertial  component  of  this  relaxation  is  very  pronounced  and  it  is  expected  to 

exhibit a large isotope effect. For medium size water anion clusters in the gas phase, such p-like 

states are readily identified using angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy, as the photoelectrons 

generated  from  these  states  carry  orbital  momentum.  [16,17]  Two  general  schemes  were  put 

forward  for  the  subsequent  dynamics  of  the  "relaxed"  p-like  states:  (i)  relatively  slow  adiabatic 

internal  conversion  (IC)  and  (ii)  very  fast  nonadiabatic  IC.  In  both  of  these  scenarios  the  p-like 

states  convert  to  a  "hot"  s-like  state  that  subsequently  undergoes  adiabatic  relaxation.  In  the 

adiabatic  IC  scenario,  the  lifetime  of  the  relaxed  p-like  states  is  100-300  fs  [31-34];  this  time 

increases to ca. 2 ps for methanol. [36]  In the rapid, nonadiabatic IC scenario, this lifetime is on 

the  order  of  50  fs,  and  the  300-400  fs  component  is  interpreted  as  the  initial  stage  in  the 

thermalization of the "hot" s-like state. [11] For n=25-50 water anion clusters,(

)-
nOH 2

, the time 

constant for IC  scales as 

1-n  decreasing with the increased cluster size n from 180 to 130 fs for 

H2O  and  400  to  225  fs  for  D2O.  [16]  Extrapolating  these  estimates  to  water  bulk  (

ﬁn

) 

suggests that the time constant for IC is < 50 fs. While the validity of such extrapolation may be 

 

 

10. 

¥
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

questioned  [16,17,74],  as  it  is  not  even  fully  established  that  such  clusters  trap  the  electrons 

internally,  the  recent  measurements  of  emission  lifetime  of  the  p-like  states  in  liquid  water  also 

give  an  estimate  of  30  fs.  [18]  Photon  echo  and  resonant  transient  grating  measurements  of 

Wiersma  and  co-workers  [11]  using  5  fs  pulses  suggested  50-70  fs  time  scale for the IC. These 

ultrafast  measurements  indicate  the  involvement  of  850  cm-1  libration  mode  in  the  solvent 

dynamics  of  photogenerated  p-like  states;  the  same  modes  show  the  largest  resonance  Raman 

enhancements.  A  large  isotope  effect  of  1.4  on  the  lifetime  of  the  fast  (35 fs) component in the 

kinetics observed after s-p excitation by Barbara et al. [31,32] also implicates the involvement of 

these libration modes in the relaxation or IC of the p-like electron.  The short lifetime of these p-

like  states  readily  explains  the  absence  of  the  expected  p-CB  absorbances  in  various 

photoionization and photodetachment experiments and the observation of Assel et al. [34] that the 

same  photoinduced  absorbances  are  generated  in  the  s-p  and  the  s-CB  photoexcitations:  the 

transient absorption spectra are always dominated by the "hot" s-like states. 

 

Nonadiabatic  MQC  MD  calculations  of  Schwartz  and  Rossky  [73]  for  the 

hyde

  are 

consistent  only  with  the  slow  adiabatic  IC  scenario,  and  only  approximately,  predicting  much 

longer adiabatic relaxation of the p-like states (300 fs) and IC of relaxed p-like states (1 ps) and 

yielding  unrealistically  rapid  relaxation  of  the  "hot"  s-states  (<<  100  fs).  There  is  still  no 

satisfactory formulation of  a dynamic MQC theory rationalizing rapid, nonadiabatic IC suggested 

by the experimental observations. It is likely that such a theory would soon be suggested: there is 

much activity in developing the next generation of MQC MD models (e.g., Ref. 52) that would be 

capable  of  addressing  this  issue.  Very  recently,  Borgis,  Rossky,  and  Turi,  [53]  re-estimated  

nonadiabatic  IC  rates  using  a  kinetic  model  based  on  modified  Fermi  golden  rule  with  either 

classical  or  standard  quantized  version  of  the  correlation  functions  and  obtained  IC  lifetimes  of 

 

 

11. 

-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

30-60  fs  for  water  and  80-160  fs  for  methanol.  For  harmonic  quantization,  even  shorter  p-like 

state lifetimes (a few fs) were computed. The authors caution that their results are very sensitive to 

the  choice  of  model  potentials;  nevertheless,  it  appears  that  the  time  constant  for  IC  would  be 

short  in  models  with  more  realistic  treatment  of  electron-solvent  interaction  and  quantized 

vibrations. The semicontinuum solvation model of Fischer and Zharikov [75] also favors short IC 

times (ca. 130 fs for water). For internally trapping an "octahedral" S6 (n=6) water anion cluster, 

Scherer et al. [62] estimated an IC time of ca. 100 fs. It seems that the case for rapid, nonadiabatic 

IC  for 

hyde

  is  growing  stronger,  whereas  no  new  models  or  experiments  favoring  the  slow, 

adiabatic  IC  scenario  are  appearing.  If  the  former  scenario  is  correct,  transient  absorbances  that 

were attributed to p-CB bands (with the life times of a few 100s of ps) in Refs. 31-34 should be 

reinterpreted  as  those  originating  from  the  s-p  bands  of  "hot"  s-like  states  undergoing  the  first 

stage of their bimodal relaxation dynamics. 

3.2 "Weakly bound" and  "dry" electrons, relocalization, attachment. 

 

Apart from these s- and p-like states, other short-lived, excited states were postulated by 

various authors. Such states go under the vague name of "weakly bound" (wb) electrons meaning 

a  state  that  is  localized  yet  not  completely  solvated;  [24,25,72]  it  is  assumed  that  such  wb 

electrons in some way are structurally different from the strongly bound (sb) electrons observed at 

a  later  stage  of  the  solvation  process  (the  "hot"  and  the  relaxed  s-like  states).  In  laser 

photoionization of water, some of these intermediate wb states (with lifetime of ca. 110 fs) were 

claimed to be the electrons coupled  to the OH radical (yielding large transient absorbances near 

the  O-H  stretch  of  the  water),  [27]  though  no  such  states  have  been  observed  in  electron 

photodetachment  from  hydroxide  anion.  [76]  For  water,  there  is  no  evidence  that  these  wb 

 

 

12. 

-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

electrons are more than artifacts of multiexponential kinetic analyses (see discussion in Ref. 28). 1 

What is certain, however, is that the localization of the electron is preceded by the formation of 

short-lived delocalized states capable of extremely fast scavenging reactions with certain solutes 

(such as Cd2+ and selenate and nitrate anions) [79-81] that are also known as scavengers of "dry" 

electrons  generated  in  radiolysis  of  water.  The  evidence  for  such  states  is  indirect  (there  is  no 

spectroscopic  signature);  nevertheless,  the  existence  of  these  states  can  be  deduced  from  the 

occurrence of long-range scavenging (electron attachment) that occurs on the time scale < 50 fs. 

The typical static scavenging radii for s-like and  p-like electrons by such solutes are 0.5 and 0.8-1 

nm,  respectively;  whereas  the  CB  electrons  generated  via  s-CB  excitation  have  radii  of  3-5 nm. 

[63,79-81]  Beyond  these  estimates,  little  is  known  about  the  nature  of  "dry"  or  CB  electrons  in 

polar  liquids.  The  recent  ultrafast  photoemission  studies  of  amorphous  ice  on  metals  suggest 

extremely short lifetime (< 20-50 fs) and rapid scattering for these CB states. [82,83]  By contrast, 

CB electrons in low temperature ice-Ih are readily observed using dc and GHz conductivity, over 

many nanoseconds. [84] 

 

In liquid ethers, such as THF, Schwartz and co-workers [37,54,85] observed theoretically, 

using  nonadiabatic  MQC  MD  model,  a  relocalization  of  photoexcited  s-like  electrons  that 

proceeds  via  the  formation  of  disjoint  and  multicavity  states.  Relatively  large  cavities  occur 

naturally in these poorly packed liquids as the result of solvent fluctuations. The interaction of the 

solvent  molecules  with  the  electron  is  so  weak  that  these  nascent  cavities  have  comparable 

binding energies to the relaxed cavities that are already occupied by the excess electron. [54] The 

"tail"  in  the  absorption  spectrum  originates  from  weak  transitions  from  the ground state to such 

                                                 
1 It should be stressed that multiphoton pump-probe studies are frequently carried out at high excitation density; this 
may result in a bulk thermal spike that considerably changes both the electron thermalization and geminate 
recombination dynamics. [77,78] It seems likely that irreproducible reports of unusual spectral features and exotic 
short-lived intermediates may be traced to the effects of such thermal spikes. 

 

 

13. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

disjoint and multicavity states rather than s-CB transitions. The classification of such states into s- 

and p- is not particularly useful due to the great anisotropy of the solvation cavity and numerous 

crossings between the excited states. Even the excited states that remain localized in their parent 

cavity  after  their  relaxation  may  fleetingly  occupy  the  neighboring  cavities.  Experiments  on 

relocalization  of  solvated  electrons  in  THF  [37]  are  consistent  with  the  picture  of  population 

transfer into these disjoint cavities that occurs bypassing the CB of the liquid; both the experiment 

and the theory indicate that ca. 30% of photoexcited s-like electrons relocalizes into such states (in 

the  experiment,  this  process  competes  with  geminate  recombination).  [37,85]  It  is  not  known 

whether  such  a  mechanism  can  operate  in  H-bonded,  well-packed  solvents  such  as  liquid  water 

and alcohols, but one cannot entirely exclude such a possibility, especially at high temperature. 

 

Packing of the solvent molecules in an organic liquid has another important effect on the 

dynamics  of  electron localization: there could be more than one type of electron-trapping cavity 

and  the  interconversion  between  such  cavities  could  be  relatively  slow,  especially  in  viscous 

liquids.  In  aliphatic  alcohols,  the  relaxation  of  "hot"  s-like  states  is  much  slower  than  in  water 

(e.g.,  12  ps  for  methanol  [24,25]),  and  the  wb  electrons  can  be  observed  directly  on  the  sub-ps 

time  scale  (recombining  or  converting  to  a  "hot"  s-like  state  on  the  picosecond  time  scale). 

Spectrally distinguishable IR-absorbing wb state is observed most clearly in ethylene glycol at 300 

K;  the spectral evolution is consistent with 2.5 ps decay of this wb state without relaxation to a 

"hot" s-like state. [72] Mostafavi and co-workers [72] suggested that wb electrons in the diols are 

trapped  electron  species  that  are  partially  solvated  by  methylene  groups;  the  wb  electrons  are 

observed before the conformational dynamics allow the OH groups to arrange properly around the 

solvation  cavity.  Such  a  picture  is  also  suggested  by  ab initio calculations for methanol clusters 

[86] indicating possible participation of methyl groups. This rationale implies that there should be 

 

 

14. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

no  "wb  electrons"  in  liquid  water  (indeed,  no  such  species  in  liquid  water  is  suggested  by  the 

existing    theoretical  models  or  reliably  observed  experimentally).    The  situation  is  different  in 

low-temperature hexagonal ice where rotations of water molecules are hindered;  the wb electrons 

with life time of several milliseconds are readily observed in the D2O ice below 20 K [64,65]. The 

most likely trap site for these wb electrons is the so-called positively vested water vacancy (with 

three dangling OH groups interacting with the electron). [84] 

 

In polar solids, the existence of wb electrons is beyond doubt, being richly documented in 

pulse  radiolysis  studies  of  vitreous  alcohols,  water-alcohol  glasses,  and  salt  glasses  at  low 

temperature. [64,65]  Arrested molecular motions in such solids, long-range tunneling, and trap-

to-trap downhill hopping of the electron readily explain the dynamics of wb electrons observed in 

these low-temperature glasses. [65] In fact, the hypothesis that the IR-absorbing wb electrons are 

partially or entirely trapped by the alkyl groups have been suggested by Shida et al. 35 years ago, 

[87]  and  this  hypothesis  is  supported  by  the  observed  correlation  of  the  position  of  the  IR 

absorption  peak  with  the  length  of  the  aliphatic  chains  and  the  similarity  of  this  band  to  the 

absorption  band  of  trapped  electrons  in  vitreous  alkanes  [65,66]  and  small  clusters  of  alcohol 

molecules in alkane liquids. [5,6] Ultrafast laser studies of liquid alcohols and diols thus recreate 

the  familiar  features  of  electron  dynamics  in  low-temperature  glasses,  albeit  on  a  much  shorter 

time scale. It seems, therefore, that obtaining detailed structural data on these long-lived (> 1 ms 

in  n-propanol    at  77  K  [65])  wb  states  in  such  solids  would  be  preferable  to  the  more  involved 

studies  of  essentially  the  same  wb  states  on  the  picosecond  time  scale,  in  room  temperature 

liquids. 

 

 

The relatively unaddressed issue is the dissociative electron attachment (DEA) involving 

  photoexcited solvated electrons. DEA (presumably, involving protonated phosphate groups in the 

 

15. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

sugars) involving low-energy electrons (a few eV) has been implemented in inducing irreversible 

DNA  damage;  [88]  DEA  in  water  (involving  a  short-lived  electron  precursor,  such  as 

subexcitation  electron)  has  been  suggested  as  the  main  source  of  prompt  H2  in  radiolysis  of 

aqueous solutions. [89] DEA involving photoexcited solvated electron was observed in solid and 

liquid  alcohols  [36]  and  reverse  micelles  [87]  but  not  in  neat  water,  where  the 

H

- + HO

•

 

resonances  are  relatively  high  in  energy.  Given  that  DEA  involving  "precursor"  states  has  been 

postulated for many radiolytic systems in order to account for the prompt bond breaking observed 

in  such  systems,  more  studies  of  the  DEA  involving  energetic  electron  states  are  merited,  as 

presently there is no other way of accessing such states in bulk solvents. 

 

Concluding this section, we note that though the main intermediates of electron solvation 

have  been  identified,  many  controversies  remain.  Phenomenological  approaches  in  interpreting 

these dynamics resulted in proliferation of mutually exclusive kinetic schemes providing limited 

insight into the physics and structural aspects of the electron dynamics. In our opinion, subsequent 

advance  in  understanding  these  dynamics  can  only  be  made  by  direct  comparison  of  the 

experimental  dynamics  with  theoretical models. Unfortunately, the current state of these models 

does  not  allow  such  a  comparison.  In  the  following,  we  will  focus  on  the  ground  state  of  the 

solvated  electron,  as  better  understanding  of  this  ground  state  is  the  likely  key  to  developing 

theoretical models that can make this direct comparison possible.  

4. THE CAVITY ELECTRON REVISITED 

Studies  of  electron  solvation  are  popular  with  chemical  physicists  largely  due  to  the 

perceived simplicity of the problem. The latter notion rests upon the mental picture of the solvated 

electron as a single quantum mechanical particle confined in a classical potential well: "a particle 

 

16. 

 

 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

in a box." This picture was first suggested by Ogg in 1946 and subsequently elaborated by Cohen, 

Rice, Platzmann, Jortner, Castner, and many others. First such models were static, but in the mid-

1980s it became possible to treat the (classical) dynamics of the solvent molecules explicitly using 

computer models and MQC MD and path integral approaches flourished. The current state-of-the-

art  dynamic  models  are  the  descendants  of  these  one-electron  models.  Despite  their  great 

sophistication, such models still rest on the initial ad hoc assumption that the cavity electron and 

the  valence  electrons  in  the  solvent  molecules  may  be  treated  wholly  separably.  Yet  this  basic 

assumption is unobvious, and as such, it has been the subject of much debate in the late 1960s and 

the early 1970s (that was eventually resolved in favor of the one-electron approximation). Indeed, 

there  are  multiple  experimental  observations  that  are  not  accounted  for  by  these  one-electron 

models. 

 

For example, the one-electron models incorrectly predict (even at a qualitative level) the 

Knight shifts in 1H and 14N NMR spectra of ammoniated electron, 

ame

 [1], and solvated electrons 

in  amines  (Sec.  4.1).  The  same  problem  arises  in  the  explanation  of  magnetic  (hyperfine) 

parameters obtained from  2H ESEEM spectra of trapped (hydrated) electrons in low-temperature 

alkaline  ices.  [23]  The  recent  resonance  Raman  spectra  of 

  [18-20]  also  appear  to  be 

hyde

incompatible  with  the  one-electron  models,  as  all  vibrational  bands  (including  the  HOH  bend) 

undergo substantial downshift that indicates weakening of the bonds (Sec. 4.2). Surprisingly, the 

experimental methods that provide the most direct insight in the structure of the solvation cavity 

appear  to  be  the least compatible with the one-electron models. The latter models, however, do 

capture the essential physics of electron solvation, given their historical success in explaining the 

absorption  properties,    the  energetics,  the  dynamics,  and  the  spectral  evolution  of  the  electrons. 

These two lines of reasoning suggest that the one-electron models adequately describe the electron 

 

 

17. 

-
-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

wavefunction  inside  the  cavity  ("the  particle")  but  err  in  their  description  of  the  electron 

wavefunction extending beyond the cavity ("the box").  Both the hyperfine constants (that is, the 

spin density in the solvent molecules) and the vibrational frequencies of the solvent molecules are 

the properties of "the box." The "dissenting" experimental results, therefore, indicate that electron 

solvation significantly modifies the properties of these solvent molecules, and this salient feature 

is not included in the current MQC models. 

4.1  Magnetic resonance  

 

The  way  in  which  this  solvent  modification  occurs  is  suggested  by  the  pattern  of 

hyperfine constants for 

 (which is one of the few solvated electron species sufficiently stable 

ame

to  obtain  its  NMR  spectrum).  The  Knight  shift  KX   of  NMR  lines  is  due  to  the  contact  Fermi 

(isotropic) hyperfine interaction of the excess electron with the magnetic nuclei (X) in the solvent 

molecules;  it  is  the  measure  of  spin  density  f

  in  the  s-type  atomic  orbitals  centered  on  a 

s 0( )

2

X

given  nucleus X: 

XK

. This shift can be converted into the sum 

aX

 of isotropic 

f

X

s

( ) 20

X

hyperfine coupling constants (hfcc's) for all nuclei of type X. In ammonia, this calculation gives 

+110 G for 14N nuclei and -5.7 G for 1H nuclei. Given that the atomic hfcc for the electron in the 

N 2s orbital is +550 G, ca. 20% of the total spin density of the excess electron is transferred into 

these  N  2s  orbitals.  [1]  Even  more  is  expected  to  be  transferred  to  N  2p  orbitals,  and  this 

accounts for the negative sign of proton coupling constants: the spin density in the hybridized H 

1s  orbital  is  negative  due  to  the  spin  bond  polarization  involving  the  filled  N  2p  orbital;  this 

inversion  is  typical  of  p-radicals.  The  negative  sign  of  the  isotropic  hfcc  for  protons  was 

demonstrated  by  dynamic  nuclear  polarization  experiments  and  then  confirmed  by  direct  NMR 

 

 

18. 

-
S
(cid:181)
S
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

measurements. Note that only positively valued constants are obtained in the one-electron models 

for the s-like state, as such models do not include spin bond polarization effects. 

 

A similar situation exists for "hydrated" electron trapped in low temperature alkaline ice. 

It  was  2H  ESEEM  studies  of  this  species  that  prompted  Kevan  [90]  to suggest the well-known 

octahedral model of electron solvation (the so-called "Kevan's model") in which the electron is 

stabilized  through  dipolar  interactions  with  six  HO  groups  pointing  to  a  common  center. 

Following the original interpretation of these ESEEM spectra by Kevan et al. [90] (which gave 

positively valued isotropic hfcc's for the protons), it was subsequently demonstrated that isotropic 

hfcc's  of  the  protons  at  the  cavity  wall  (roughly  0.2  nm  from  the  center)  are,  in  fact,  negative: 

»a

-0.92 G. [91] These negative hfcc's hint at nonzero spin density in the O 2p orbitals of water 

molecules. Tight-binding ab initio models of small anion water and ammonia clusters suggested 

the same. [92] However, given the many approximations made in these models, these dissenting 

results  were  not  given  due  consideration  at  a  time  when  the  conceptual  picture  of  the  solvated 

electron  was  still  evolving.  The  consensual  picture that emerged in the mid-1970s was that the 

solvated  electron  is indeed a "particle in a box," to a very good approximation. The competing 

view that the solvated electron is a multimer anion was suggested for 

 by Symons, [93] who 

ame

estimated  that  the  spin  density  is  divided  between  6  ammonia  molecules  in  the  first  solvation 

shell  (with  hfcc  of  12  G)  and  12  molecules  in  the  second  solvation  shell  (ca.  3  G).    A  more 

detailed  accounts  of  magnetic  resonance  studies  of  ammoniated  and  hydrated  electron  given  in 

Refs. 1 and 23, respectively. In retrospect, the main reasons for rejection of the anion picture of 

electron  solvation  (that  has  been  around  since  1953  [94])  was  the  insistence  of  the  proponents 

that all of the excess electron density resides on the solvent molecules, their inability to explain 

 

 

19. 

-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

the  observed  energetics  and  absorption  properties  of  the  solvated  electron,  and  their  denial  of 

cavity formation. 

 

The  latter  was  especially  damaging,  as  there  is  abundant  evidence  that  such  cavity 

electrons  do  exist  in  molecular  fluids.  [95]  Furthermore,  the  existence  of  the  cavity  logically 

follows from the occurrence of charge sharing between several solvent molecules: although only a 

small  fraction  of  the  negative  charge  resides  on  each  solvent  molecule  forming  the  cavity, 

Coulomb repulsion between these partially charged molecules assists in opening of the cavity. The 

latter can be formed through this mechanism even when the occupancy of the cavity is relatively 

small  (as  is  the  case  in  the  alkanes  [4]).  The  conflict  with  these  incontrovertible  experimental 

observations is resolved by making the assumption that only a fraction of the total negative charge 

is localized on the solvent molecules; the rest is localized inside the solvation cavity. This view, 

first suggested by Symons [93] and Kevan, [96] partakes of the best features of the cavity and the 

multimer anion models.  

4.2  Vibrational spectroscopy 

 

Magnetic  resonance  is  not  the  only  piece  of  evidence  indicative  of  the  excess  electron 

density in the solvent molecules. The hydrated electron exhibits a second absorption band at 190 

nm [97] that originates through the perturbation of O 2p orbitals in the solvating water molecules; 

obviously,  such  a  feature  cannot  be  treated  using  the  standard  one-electron  models.  Further 

evidence is suggested by the recent resonance Raman (RR) observations. [18-22] The vibrational 

peaks  of 

hyde

  (which  demonstrate  resonant  enhancements  over  105)  all  exhibit  significant 

downshifts  relative  to  these  Raman  peaks  in  neat  water.  In  RR  spectroscopy,  only  those 

vibrational  modes  that  are  significantly  displaced  upon  electronic  excitation  show  resonance 

 

 

20. 

-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

enhancement;  thus,  this  spectroscopy  provides  a  probe  of  the  water  molecules  in  the  immediate 

vicinity of 

hyde

. The RR peak position for the  ehyd

 in H2O (vs. those for bulk water), in cm-1, are:  

librations at 410 (vs. 425-450), 530 (vs. 530-590), 698 (vs. 715-766); the H-O-H bend at 1610 (vs. 

1640); and the H-O stretches at 3100 (vs. 3420).  [18,19] Thus, the downshift of the bend mode, 

which exhibits a narrow, symmetric line, is ca. 30 cm-1, and the downshift of the stretch mode is 

200-300 cm-1.  Similar RR downshifts were observed for solvated electrons in alcohols, with the 

downshift of the O-H stretching mode increasing with the solvent polarity. [21] For methanol, the 

O-H  torsion  peak  is  downshifted  by  180  cm-1  and  the  O-H  stretch  is  downshifted  by  340  cm-1, 

which  is  greater  than  the  downshift  of  the  O-H  stretch  in  liquid  water.  This  large  downshift  is 

readily  explained  by  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  solvation  OH  groups  (from  4  to  6)  in 

methanol,  as  suggested  by  ESEEM  spectroscopy  (see  Ref.  23  for  a  review)  which  results  in 

greater  penetration  of  the  electron  density  into  the  O  2p  orbitals  (see  below).  Normal  mode 

analysis  of  enhancement  factors  for  RR  peaks  indicates  that  all  enhanced  modes  are 

predominantly  O-H  in  character;  the  C-H  stretching  bands  that  have  no  OH  character  are  not 

observed  and  the  largest  enhancements  are  for  libration  modes.  So  far,  all  RR  observations  are 

consistent  with  the  notion  that  the  electron  in  water  and  alcohols  is  solvated  by  dangling  OH 

groups, and the electron-solvent coupling is mediated primarily by these OH groups; there is no 

evidence  that  sb  electrons  are  solvated  by  CH  groups  of  the  alcohols.  A  more  speculative  idea 

suggested by Stuart et al. is that the alignment of these OH groups changes from pointing straight 

towards the center of mass (X) of the electron to dipole coupling to the alcohol molecule, as the 

carbon number increases from 1 to 4 (with the X-O-H angle increasing by 30o, respectively. [21] 

These  downshifts  are  such  a  general  feature  of  the  RR  spectra  that  there  must  be  a 

common  mechanism  for  these  downshifts  in  all  solvents.  Observe  that  the  disruption  of  the  H-

 

21. 

 

 

-
-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

bond structure cannot account for these RR results: weakening of the H-bonds results in O-H band 

upshifts, and the H-O-H bending mode in water does not change even when this liquid is heated to 

600 K or saturated with salts (in fact, halide anion solvation in alcohols upshifts the O-H stretch 

by 50 cm-1). [21] It has been concluded [18,19] that the only way of explaining these substantial 

downshifts is by assuming partial occupancy of solvent antibonding orbitals.  

 

Most recently, Mizuno et al. presented a femtosecond version (250 fs time resolution, 160 

cm-1 spectral resolution) of the RR experiment to probe the O-H band of the electron as it hydrates 

following  2  x  4.66  eV  photon  excitation.  Mizuno  et  al.  [22]  conclude  that  the  precursor  of  the 

hydrated electron that undergoes "continuous blue shift" on the time scale of 1-2 ps also yields a 

downshifted  O-H  stretch  signal  whose  resonance  enhancement  follows  the  efficiency  of  Raman 

excitation  as  the  absorption  spectrum  of  the  s-like  state  shifts  to  the  blue  (thus  indirectly 

confirming its identity as a "hot" s-like state). The comparison of anti-Stokes and Stokes Raman 

intensities indicates that the local temperature rise is < 100 K at 250 fs. This estimate agrees with 

the estimates based on the evolution of the spectral envelope during the thermalization, using the 

dependence of the absorption maximum of thermalized electron on the bath temperature. [26,69] 

4.3  Substructure of the s-p absorption band 

The s-p absorption band of the solvated electron can be thought of as three overlapping, 

homogeneously broadened s-p transitions. Variation of the Raman depolarization ratio across the 

O-H  stretch  band  and  significant  deviation  of  this  ration  from  1/3  for  the  O-H  stretch  and 

libration  bands  indicate  that  the  p-like  states  are  nondegenerate  (which  does  not  exclude 

considerable homogeneous broadening of the lines). [18] The analyses of the spectral envelopes 

using RR data also suggest that inhomogeneous broadening is much stronger than homogeneous 

broadening, both for the water and the alcohols. [18,21] These observations are inconsistent with 

 

 

22. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

the  recent  suggestions  of  Wiersma  and  co-workers  [11]  that  the  electron  spectrum  is  a  single 

inhomogeneously  broadened  line  (which  is  also  in  striking  disagreement  with  all  existing 

dynamic  models  of  electron  solvation).  Still,  at  the  present  there  is  no  further  experimental 

evidence other than the RR results that distinct p-subbands do exist. Ultrafast laser experiments 

[34,35,98] that were specifically designed to demonstrate this subband structure using polarized 

transient  hole  burning  (PTHB)  yielded  no  conclusive  evidence  for  this  structure.  PTHB 

spectroscopy is a form of pump-probe spectroscopy that examines the ground-state dynamics of a 

system  by  first  exciting  a  subset  of  members  of  an  ensemble  with  polarized  light  and  then 

probing  at  a  later  time  the  dynamics  of  the  remaining,  unexcited  members  with  light  polarized 

parallel or perpendicular to the original excitation polarization. [35,99] If the three p-like states 

interchange  roles  slowly  (as  the  solvation  cavity  deforms  in  response  to  solvent  motion),  then 

PTHB  should  show  different  dynamics  for  these  two  probe  polarizations.  When  the  lowest-

energy transition along the long axis of the cavity is excited with polarized light, until the cavity 

reorients, there would be less absorption by the remaining electrons when probing with light of 

the  same  polarization  at  the  excitation  energy  but  the  remaining  electrons  would  continue  to 

absorb  at  higher  energies.  The  parallel  and  perpendicularly-polarized  THB  signals  should 

become  identical  once  solvent  motions  have  scrambled  the  three  p-like  states  and  memory  of 

which transition dipole moment pointed which direction in space is lost. MQC MD simulations 

of  Schwartz  and  Rossky  [99]  predicted  that  pumping  the  lowest-lying  transition  and  probing 

either the same or the higher-lying transitions should give an anisotropy that persists for 1 ps, as 

it takes this long for the water molecules to rearrange enough that the cavity changes shape and 

thus scrambles memory of the transition dipole directions. Reid et al. [98] reported this persistent 

anisotropy,  but  subsequent  studies  [34,35]  did  not  confirm  the  presence  of  a  long-lived 

anisotropy.  Explaining  this  striking  inability  of  the  PTHB  experiment  to  demonstrate  the 

 

 

23. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

predicted effect remains an open problem, and solving this problem requires reexamination of the 

origin of the absorption spectrum and the dynamics of the 

. The discrepancy may be due to 

hyde

strong  homogeneous  broadening  of  the  absorption  spectrum  of  the 

hyde

  or  extremely  fast 

interchange of the p-like orbitals. [35]  We suggest, [100] however, that the failure might be with 

the very concept of the excess electron as "a particle in a box." 

 

5. THE HETERODOXY: MULTIMER ANION PICTURE OF ELECTRON SOLVATION 

In  a  series  of  recent  publications  on  the  excess  electrons  in  ammonia  [1]  and  water, 

[23,51] we addressed these issues by developing multi-electron models of electron solvation and 

demonstrating how such models account for the known properties of the solvated electrons. Our 

models are inspired by recent ab initio and DFT studies of large, internally trapping water anion 

clusters. [47-49] What follows from these latter studies is that the electron is localized by several 

dangling  OH  groups;  in  the  medium  size  water  clusters  (n=17-24),  the  cavity  is  typically 

tetrahedral. Examination of the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMO's) of these clusters 

suggests that part of the electron density is contained in the frontal orbitals of the dangling OH 

groups.  Computations  of  Kim  et  al.[47]  and  Domcke  et  al.[61]  suggest  that  small  internally 

trapping clusters (n<10) have some of their vibrational bands downshifted with respect to neutral 

water clusters. Recent calculations of vibrational properties of water anion clusters that trap the 

electron  externally,  by  dipole  binding  to  the  so-called  AA  (double  acceptor)  water  molecule  at 

the  surface  of  the  cluster,  [101,102]  suggest  that  the  main  cause  for  these  red  shifts  is  donor-

acceptor stabilization between the unpaired electron and O-H s * orbitals. [101] This is, basically, 

another  way  to  describe  the  mechanism  suggested  by  Tauber  and  Mathies  for 

hyde

  [18]    and 

Symons for 

ame

. [93] It thus appears that most of the physics which is necessary to address the 

 

 

24. 

-
-
-
-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

problems  discussed  in  Sec.  4  is  already  contained  in  such  ab  initio  and  DFT  models.  The 

problem with this inference is that the small and the medium size water anion clusters in the gas-

phase  have  quite  different  structure  from  the 

  in  the  bulk  water,  and  this  makes  direct 

hyde

comparison  impossible.  Furthermore,  it  is  well  understood  that 

  is  a  dynamic  entity,  a 

hyde

statistical average over many solvent configurations that cannot be adequately represented by any 

given  structure;  a  quantitative  description  of  the 

  within  the  multielectron  approach  has  to 

hyde

address  this  inherent  variability.    One  path  to  this  goal  is  by  using  Car-Parrinello  molecular 

dynamics (CPMD), and such a calculation for the 

 in the room temperature and supercritical 

hyde

water  has  been  implemented  by  Boero  et  al.  [50]  Unfortunately,  CPMD  is  a  computationally 

demanding  approach,  and  this  requires  the  use  of  small  solvent  cells  of  a  few  tens  of  water 

molecules; the solvated electron fills the substantial part of these cells. Since the solvent cell also 

has net negative charge, diffuse positive charge has to be spread on the neighboring cells, further 

reducing  the  fidelity  of  the  model.  To  speed  up  the  computation,  CPMD  calculations  involve 

pseudopotentials; the use of such pseudopotentials has to be justified. For these or other reasons, 

the results of the CPMD calculation [50] look quite different from both MQC MD calculations 

for electron in liquid water and ab initio and DFT calculations for gas-phase water anion clusters. 

To  further  complicate  the  assessment  of  the  CPMD  results,  the  computation  of  magnetic 

resonance  parameters,  distribution  of  charge,  absorption  spectra,  and  PTHB  dynamics  requires 

high-quality local expansion of the wavefunction which is difficult to achieve using plane wave 

sets that are used for the CPMD calculations. 

Hence  we  suggested  a  different  approach  that  is  less  computationally  demanding  but 

appears  to  successfully  capture  the  essential  physics  of  the  problem.    [51]  Our  approach 

capitalizes on the remarkable success of MQC models to account for the electron properties. [38-

 

 

25. 

-
-
-
-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

46] MQC MD was used to generate a dynamical trajectory of the s-like 

, and then temporally 

hyde

well-separated snapshots from this trajectory (100 fs per frame) were extracted and became the 

input  for  DFT  and  single-excitation  configuration  interaction  (CIS)  calculations.  In  these 

calculations, only one or two complete solvation shells for the excess electron were considered 

explicitly;  the  remaining  atoms  in  the  simulated  solvent  were  replaced  by  point  charges,  a 

procedure that is referred to as matrix embedding (this approach has been used to study neutral 

water  [103]  and  hydrated  radicals  [104]).  Significant  sharing  of  spin  and  charge  of  the  excess 

electron by O 2p orbitals in the first-shell water molecules was observed (ca. 20%).  This hybrid 

MQC  MD:DFT(CIS)  approach  can  account  for  (i)  the  energetics  and  the  equilibrium  optical 

spectrum  of  the 

hyde

  in  the  visible  and  the  UV;  (ii)  the  EPR  and  ESEEM  spectra  and  (iii)  the 

vibrational  (resonance  Raman) spectrum of the 

. Although the true multielectron picture of 

hyde

the 

hyde

 is complex, on average, the radial density of the HOMO and the three lowest unoccupied 

molecular orbitals (LUMO)  resemble the s-like and p-like orbitals predicted by the one-electron 

models. For some observables (e.g., the optical spectrum), the fine details of this orbital structure 

do not matter.  For other observables (e.g., the spin density maps provided by EPR and ESEEM 

spectroscopies and the resonance Raman spectrum), this level of approximation is inadequate. 

Place Figure 2 here. 

The  typical  HOMO  of  the  hydrated  electron  is  shown  in  Fig.  2  (on  the  left) next to the 

average  radial  wavefunction  (on  the  right).  While  there  is  considerable  density  in  the  O  2p 

orbitals  (with  the  negative  frontal  lobes  accounting  for  12%  of  the  total  density),  the  ensemble 

average wavefunction is hydrogenic. The most probable position of the electron is at 0.175 nm, 

which is within the cavity radius of ca. 0.226 nm (the mean distance between the center of mass 

 

 

26. 

-
-
-
-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

X  of  the  electron  and  the  nearest  protons  in  dangling  OH  groups).  The  mean  X-O-H  angle  is 

close to 16% so the OH groups are oriented towards the cavity center. Ca. 50-60% of the density 

is contained within the cavity, with only 5% contained beyond the first solvation shell. Mulliken 

population analysis indicates that the excess charge and spin densities are localized mainly on the 

H and O atoms in the dangling OH groups. The radius of gyration of the electron is estimated as 

0.275 nm (vs. 0.204 nm in the MQC MD model and experimental estimate of 0.25-0.26 nm) and 

the semiaxes of the gyration ellipsoid (the measure of cavity anisotropy) are 0.15 nm x 0.16 nm x 

0.17  nm.  This  anisotropy  splits  the  energies  of    the  lowest  unoccupied  orbitals.  The  computed 

DOS function (Fig. 3a) exhibits two features near the bottom of the CB.  Feature (i) results from 

the  HOMO  (the  s-like  orbital)  that  is  located  ca.  -1.69  eV  below  the vacuum energy (the DOS 

maximum  is  at -1.8 eV vs. -1.75 eV given by the CPMD calculation). [50] Feature (ii) derives 

from the three lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals, which have centroids at 0.42, 0.65, and 0.86 

eV,  respectively,  that  correspond  to  the  three  nondegenerate  p-like  states  observed  in  one-

electron models. The histograms of the corresponding transition energies show three distinctive 

p-subbands  with  centroids  at  2.11,  2.34,  and  2.55  eV  (Fig.  3b).  For  comparison,  path  integral 

calculations [38-40] using the same pseudopotential as for our MQC MD calculations gave peak 

positions at 2.1, 2.5, and 2.9 eV. The absorption spectra calculated using the CIS method are very 

similar to those calculated using the MQC MD method. The three p-subbands correspond to the 

three  lowest  excited  states  that  have  nearly  orthogonal  transition  dipole  moments.  Each  one  of 

these subbands carries an integral oscillator strength of ca. 0.3. In Fig. 4, isodensity contour plots 

of  the  Kohn-Sham  LUMO  is  shown.  The  familiar  dumbbell  shape  of  the  ‘p-like  orbital’  is  not 

readily  recognizable,  although  the  three  lower  unoccupied  states  do  exhibit  p-like  polarization, 

each  orthogonal  to  the  others.  Only  a  fraction  of  the  total  ‘p-like  state’  density  (ca.  20%)  is 

contained  inside  the  cavity  and  the  p-character  of  these  electronic  states  is  achieved  mainly 

 

 

27. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

through  the  polarization  of  the  frontal  O  2p  orbitals  in  the  OH  groups  forming  the  cavity:  the 

phase of the electron in these orbitals on one side of the cavity assumes a positive sign, while the 

phase  of  the  electron  in  the  O  2p  orbitals  straight  across  the  cavity  in  the  direction  of  the 

transition  dipole  moment  assumes  a  negative  sign  (Fig.  4).    There  is  also  both  positive  and 

negative  excess  electron  density  in  the  interstitial  cavities  between  the  water  molecules  of  the 

first and the second solvation shells.  The gyration ellipsoid for these p-like orbitals is 0.18 nm x 

0.22 nm x 0.33 nm making them nearly twice the size of the gyration ellipsoid for the HOMO, so 

the  'p-like'  states  extend  further  out  of  the  cavity  than  the  ‘s-like’  ground  state.  This  readily 

accounts for the experimental observation that s-p excitation of the electron causes relocalization, 

albeit with a low probability. [63] The complex orbital structure of the p-like orbitals may also be 

important  for  understanding  the  mechanism  for  rapid,  nonadiabatic  IC  involving  these  orbitals 

(Sec.  3.1).  Indeed,  the  orbital  momentum  carried  by  the  polarized  cavity  should  be rapidly lost 

via small-amplitude motions (librations?) of the water molecules. 

Place Figures 3 and 4 here. 

 

A novel feature that is not captured by one-electron models is a band of HOMO-1 orbitals 

that are composed of 1b1 orbitals ( O 2np orbitals) of the water molecules in the first solvation 

shell  (Fig.  3a).  Our  calculations  suggest  that  the  onset  of  this  band  starts  5.75  eV  below  the 

vacuum  level.    The  presence  of  this  peak  suggests  that  there  should  be  an  electronic  transition 

from the occupied O 2p orbitals into the HOMO at ca. 210 nm.  The experimentally observed UV 

band  of  the 

hyde

  peaks  at  190  nm  with  an  onset  around  220  nm.  By  placing  the  unit  negative 

charge at the center of the cavity, one can demonstrate that this feature originates through a Stark 

shift of the eigenvalues towards the midgap, by ca. 1.1 eV.   

 

 

28. 

-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

Using DFT calculations, it is possible to calculate hyperfine constants and then simulate 

1H  EPR  and  2H  ESEEM  spectra  of  the 

hyde

.  The  correspondence  between  such  simulated  and 

experimental  [91]  spectra  is  very  good,  with  all  of  the  salient  features  discussed  above 

reproduced.  The  residual  discrepancy  is  for  17O  nuclei:  the calculated second moment (

2M ) of 

the EPR for the 37% oxygen-17 enriched sample studied by Schlick et al., [105] is 2250 G2 vs. 

the reported experimental estimate of 134 G2. This is not a failure of the particular DFT model: 

all  ab  initio  and  DFT  models  of  the 

  give  large  estimates  for  isotropic  hfcc's  on  oxygen 

hyde

atoms. The estimate of Schlick et al. [105] is compromised by their subsequent observation [106] 

of a strong spectral overlap between one of the resonance lines of the 17O- radical and the narrow 

EPR  signal  from  the  “electron,”  which  had  a  peak-to-peak  width  (

ppBD

)  of  18±1  G.    In  16O 

glasses, the two narrow EPR signals from  ehyd

 and 16O- are spectrally well separated, but because 

the signals overlap in  17O enriched samples, the EPR spectrum in such  17O enriched samples is 

very complex. We used our calculated hfc tensors to simulate the EPR spectrum of an oxygen-17 

enriched  sample.    The  EPR  line  decomposed  into  two  distinct  spectral  contributions,  a  narrow 

one with  D Bpp

» 23 G and  M2

» 135 G2 (in good agreement with the estimates of Schlick et al. 

[105]) and a very broad line with  D Bpp

» 89 G and  M2

» 1980 G2.  For a sample with 37%  17O 

enrichment, there is a ca. 10% probability that the first solvation shell would have no 17O nuclei. 

The  narrow  line  arises  from  such  isotopic  configurations,  so  that  the  electron  is  only  weakly 

coupled to the 17O nuclei in the second solvation shell.  The isotope configurations that include at 

least one 17O nucleus in the first solvation shell, on the other hand, are responsible for the broad 

line. Small-amplitude movements of water molecules in the frozen samples would cause efficient 

spin  relaxation  for  this  line.  The  narrow  EPR  line  was  recognized  as  a  signal  originating  from 

 

 

29. 

-
-
-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

hyde

  from  its  long  relaxation  time,  using  microwave  saturation  of  the  resonance  signals.  Broad 

resonance  lines  were  attributed  to  the  17O-  radical;  this  criterion  eliminates  strongly  coupled 

water  anion  configurations.  We  believe,  therefore,  that  the  EPR  results  for  oxygen-17  enriched 

samples do not contradict the MQC MD:DFT model. 

To examine the vibrational spectra of the 

, we calculated IR and Raman spectra of the 

hyde

embedded  clusters  retaining  only  the  first  solvation  shell,  as  such  calculations  do  not  include 

resonant  enhancement.    Although  the  absolute  positions  of  the  vibrational  features  calculated 

using  the  embedded  neutral  water  and  water  anion  clusters  do  not  match  experiment,  the 

downshifts of these bands in the presence of the excess electron are well described by the hybrid 

calculation:  there  are  downshifts  of  the  librational,  the  H-O-H  bending  and  the  O-H  stretch 

modes. The calculated downshift for the H-O-H bending mode is ca. 50-60 cm-1 (as compared to 

the  experimental  estimate  of  30  cm-1  [18])  and the calculated downshift for the O-H stretching 

modes is 80-180 cm-1 (vs. 200-300 cm-1 for the band center). [18] Electrostatic interactions alone 

cannot account for these downshifts, as placing the unit negative charge at the center of the cavity 

does not cause such large shifts.  

Interestingly,  the  multielectron  model  also  accounts  for  the  "failure"  of  the  PTHB 

experiment:  since  part  of  the  transition  dipole  moment  is  carried  out  by  O  2p  orbitals  in  water 

molecules, their rapid reorientation quickly destroys the correlation. The slow reorientation of the 

cavity  is still observed, but it is predicted to have little weight in the corresponding correlation 

functions. Direct calculation of PTHB dynamics using the method used by Schwartz and Rossky 

[99]    and  the  transition  dipole  moments  calculated  using  the  CIS  model  indicates  that  (i)  the 

anisotropic PTHB signal is very small (less than 2-5% of the isotropic contribution) and (ii) this 

 

 

30. 

-
-
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

signal fully decays in 250 fs. As the earliest delay time at which the PTHB signal is observed is 

ca. 200 fs, [35] the lack of the signal is readily rationalized. 

For  ammonia,  [1]  the  DFT  calculations  suggest  that  small  clusters  that  exhibit  internal 

trapping of the electron automatically yield large positive Knight shifts on  14N nuclei and small 

negative  Knight  shifts  on  1H  nuclei.    In  a  typical  n=18  cluster,  the  spin  density  was  mainly 

contained  between  three  dangling  NH  bonds,  but  the  diffuse  s-like  orbital  enveloped  the  entire 

cluster.  The  isotropic  hfcc's  for  14N  nuclei  of  the  three  nearest  molecules  are  16-20  G.  The 

"second  solvation  shell"  molecules  have  hfcc's  ranging  from  +1.9  to  +6.6  G,  depending  on  the 

proximity  to  the  central  cavity.  The  sum  totals  of  isotropic  hfcc’s  for  14N  and  1H  nuclei  are 

aN

+117  G  and 

aH

-4.1  G,  respectively,  in  good  agreement  with  the  experiment.  These 

calculations  strengthen  the  case  for  extensive  sharing  of  spin  density  by  N  2p  orbitals  by 

ammonia molecules in the first and the second solvation shells.  

Even more extensive delocalization might occur for solvated electrons in alkane liquids. 

In one-electron models, the degree of the delocalization is determined by the binding energy of 

the electron. In alkanes, where the binding energy is 50-200 meV, the s-like electron (even in the 

one-electron  models)  spreads  well  beyond  the  hard  core  radius  of  the  cavity.  [2,4]  This  is  in 

contrast to the electron in water that is still largely confined inside the solvation cavity. Thus, the 

problem  of  adequate  description  of  the  interaction  of  the  electron  and  the  solvent  molecules  is 

even  more  important  for  the alkanes. In our recent study, we demonstrated that the most likely 

way  in  which  the  nitriles  and  the  alkanes  "solvate"  the  electron  is  through  the  formation  of  a 

cavity in which the electron is mainly contained in the C 2p orbitals of the methyl (methylene) 

groups forming the solvation cavity. [4] For alkanes, the spin density spreads along the aliphatic 

chain,  with  alternating  occupancy  of  C  2p  orbitals  receding  towards  the  ends  of  the  chains 

 

 

31. 

»
S
»
S
January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

removed from the cavity.  Such a structure for the excess electron in the alkanes further erases 

the distinction between the solvent stabilized multimer radical anion and the cavity electron.  

One can ask a question, does such a distinction exist at all in the solvents of low polarity? 

The  same  question  can  be  brought  to  a  focus  by  the  following  thought  experiment  (“electron 

encapsulation”).  [3,4]  Suppose  that  the  entire  first  solvation  shell  of  the  solvated  electron  is 

replaced  by  a  single  supramolecular  structure  (the  “cage”)  that  has  the  internal  cavity  lined  by 

polar groups. The cage is suspended in a liquid with low binding energy for the excess electron. 

Assuming that the cage traps the excess electron, what is the result of this capture? Should one 

regard the resulting species as a “solvated electron” or as a molecular anion? We have recently 

addressed  this  problem  experimentally  [4]  and  theoretically,  [3,4]  for  hydrogenated  calixarene 

and polynitrile rings, and the answer appears to be that no firm criteria exist for classification of 

such borderline species. Multimer solvent anions (electron residing on the molecules) and cavity 

electrons (electrons residing in the voids between the molecules) are two realizations of the same 

structural motif; the real "solvated/encapsulated" electron is always in between these two extreme 

cases.  

5. CONCLUDING REMARKS 

To  conclude  this  review,  despite  rapid  progress,  many  outstanding  questions  about  the 

solvated  electron  remain  unanswered.  The  structure  and  the  behavior  of  these  unusual  species 

turned  out  to  be  much  more  complex  than  originally  believed.  Further  advances  will  require 

greater focus on the quantum chemical character of the "solvated electron" explicitly treating the 

valence  electrons  in  the  solvent  and  more  realistic  dynamic  models  of  the  solvent  degrees  of 

freedom  and  electron-solvent  interactions.  Developing  a  many-electron,  dynamic  picture  of  the 

 

 

32. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

"solvated electron" presents formidable difficulty, yet this is a task that cannot be avoided, as the 

potential of one-electron models to address the problems is inherently limited. The simplicity of 

the solvated electron (that is its major attraction to chemical physicists) is imaginary; the solvated 

electron is an orbitally complex, nanoscale solvent multimer anion. The ideal object imagined by 

Ogg  nearly  60  years  ago,  "the  particle  in  a  box,"  has  distant  relation  to  the  species  observed 

experimentally. 

Below we provide a short list of the important problems concerning the solvated electron 

in polar media (author's choice, no particular order): 

- Why is the lifetime of p-like states of hydrated electrons so short? What is the structure of these 

p-like states? Are there other cavity states in water? disjoint states? multicavity states? How to 

prove their (non)existence experimentally? 

- Can the electron be "simplified" by restriction/removal of the solvent degrees of freedom? Can 

it be encapsulated? 

-  How  does  the  nature  of  the  solvated  electron  changes  from  one  liquid  to  another?  Does  it 

become more of a multimer anion as the polarity decreases? How does one describe the dynamic 

behavior of such a multimer anion species? 

-  What  is  the  nature  of  wb  ("weakly  bound")  electrons  observed  on  the short time scale? Does 

such a species exist in liquid water? Are the wb electrons in alcohols partially solvated by their 

alkyl groups? Are these the same species that are observed in low-temperature solids? 

- How do photoinduced relocalization and photoejection of the electron occur? Is there indeed a 

"conduction band" in polar liquids? Does the light-induced relocalization of the electron involve 

 

 

33. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

this  "conduction  band?"  What  kind  of  species  is  the  "dry"  electron?  Is  there  actually  such  a 

species? Can it be an excitonic state of the solvent? 

- How does water vibrate around the hydrated electron? What is the effect of these vibrations on 

the  absorption,  electronic,  and  dynamic  properties  of  the  solvated  electron?  What  is  the 

mechanism  for  relaxation  of  "hot"  s-like  electron  on  the  sub-picosecond  and  picosecond  time 

scales? 

-  How  do  water  anion  clusters  in  the  gas  phase  relate  to  the  solvated  electrons observed in the 

bulk? How does 2D electron localization in layers of polar molecules on metal and metal oxide 

surfaces [83] relate to 3D localization in the bulk? 

- What is the structure and the dynamics of hydrated/solvated electron in hot/supercritical water? 

in  dispersed  clusters  of  polar  liquids  in  nonpolar  liquids?  in  microheterogeneous  media  (e.g. 

water clusters in zeolite cavities)? in mixed solvents? on surfaces? 

- Can the solvated/trapped/encapsulated electron be used for molecular electronics and quantum 

computing? It is the tiniest capacitor known in chemistry and the electron degrees of freedom are 

largely  decoupled  from  the  nuclear  ones.  Can  the  solvated  electron  be  the  organic  chemistry 

substitute for quantum dots? 

 

We hope that this review will foster interest in these problems. This work was performed 

under  the  auspices  of  the  Office  of  Basic  Energy  Sciences, Division of Chemical Science, US-

DOE  under  contract  number  DE-AC-02-06CH11357.  The  author  thanks  M.  C.  Sauer,  Jr.  for 

technical assistance and R. Mathies and D. M. Bartels for useful discussions and communicating 

to the author prepublication versions of their recent papers. 

 

 

34. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9.  

10. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

REFERENCES 
 

I. A. Shkrob (2006) J. Phys. Chem. A 110: 3967. 

I. A. Shkrob and M. C. Sauer, Jr. (2005) J. Chem. Phys. 122: 134503. 

  I. A. Shkrob and J. A. Schlueter (2006) Chem. Phys. Lett. 431: 364 . 

I. A. Shkrob and M. C. Sauer, Jr. (2006) J. Phys. Chem. A 110: 8126. 

I. A. Shkrob and M. C. Sauer, Jr. (2005) J. Phys. Chem. A 109: 5754. 

G. A. Kenney-Wallace and C. D. Jonah (1982) J. Phys. Chem. 86: 2572. 

A.  Bernas  et  al.  (1990)  Excess  electrons  in  dielectric  media,  eds.  C. Ferradini and J.-P. 
Jay-Gerin, CRC Press, Boca Raton, pp. 368; A. Bernas et al. (1996) Can. J. Chem. 74: 1 
and references therein. 

Y.  J.  Lee  et  al.  (2004)  J.  Phys.  Chem.  B  108:  3474;  D.  Laria  and  R.  Kapral  (2002)  J. 
Chem. Phys.  117: 7712. 

R. Spezia et al. (2003) Phys. Rev. Lett. 91: 208304; (120) J. Chem. Phys. 120: 5261 and 
references therein. 

I. A. Shkrob and M. C. Sauer, Jr. (2004) Charged Particle and Photon Interactions with 
Matter, ed. Y. Hatano and A. Mozumder, Marcel Dekker, New York; pp. 301. 

11.  M. S. Pshenichnikov et al. (2004) Chem. Phys. Lett. 389: 171; A. Kummrow et al.(1999) 
Z. Phys. Chem. 212: 153; (1998) J. Phys. Chem. A 102: 4172; M. F. Emde (1998) Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 80: 4645. 

C. Nicolas et al. (2003) J. Chem. Phys.  118: 9698; A. Boutin et al. (2005) Chem. Phys. 
Lett.L 409: 219. 

D. M. Bartels et al. (2005) J. Phys. Chem. A 109: 1299 and references therein. 

Y. Du et al. (2007) Chem. Phys. Lett., in press. 

A. Kammrath et al. (2006) J. Chem. Phys.  125: 171102. 

J. R. R. Verlet et al. (2005) Science 307: 93; A. Kammrath  (2006) J. Chem. Phys.  125: 
076101. 

17. 

A. E. Bragg et al. (2004) Science 306: 669; (2005) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127: 15283 

18.  M.  J.  Tauber  and  R.  A.  Mathies  (2003)  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  125:  1394;  (2002)  Chem. 

Phys. Lett. 354: 518; (2001) J. Phys. Chem. A 105: 10952 

19.  M. Mizuno and T. Tahara (2003) J. Phys. Chem. A 107: 2411. 

20.  M. J. Tauber and R. A. Mathies (2002) Chem. Phys. Lett. 354: 518. 

21. 

C. M. Stuart et al. (2007) J. Phys. Chem. B, submitted; (2004) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124: 
3414. 

22.  M. Mizuno et al. (2005) J. Phys. Chem. A 109: 5257. 

23. 

I. A. Shkrob (2006) J. Phys. Chem. A; http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0607228 

 

 

35. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

C Pepin et al. (1997) J. Phys. Chem. A 101: 4351. 

J.-P. Jay-Gerin (1997) Can. J. Chem. 75: 1310. 

A. Hertwig et al. (2000) J. Phys.: Cond. Mat. 12: A165; (1999) Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
1: 5663; (2002) Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 4: 4412. 

R. Laenen et al. (2000) Phys. Rev. Lett. 85: 50; (2001) J. Mol. Str. 598: 37; A. Thaller et 
al. (2004) Chem. Phys. Lett. 398: 459. 

28. 

R. Lian et al. (2005)  J. Phys. Chem. A. 109: 1510. 

29.  M. A. Lewis and C. D. Jonah (1986) J. Chem. Phys.  90: 5367. 

V. Lenchenkov et al. (2001) J. Phys. Chem. A 105: 1711. 

C. Silva (1998) Phys. Rev. Lett. 80: 1086. 

K. Yokoyama (1998) J. Phys. Chem. A 102: 6957. 

Y. Kimura et al. (1994) J. Phys. Chem. 98: 3450; J. C. Alfano (1993) J. Chem. Phys.  98: 
5996. 

34.  M. Assel et al. (1999) J. Chem. Phys.  111: 6869; (1998) J. Phys. Chem. A 102: 2256. 

35.  M. C. Cavanagh et al. (2004) Chem. Phys. Lett. 396: 359. 

C.  Silva  et  al.  (1998)  J.  Phys.  Chem.  A  102:  5701;  P.  K.  Walhout  (1995)  Chem.  Phys. 
Lett. 232: 135. 

I.  B.  Martini  et  al.  (2002)  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  360:  22,  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  124:  7622; 
(2001) J. Phys. Chem. B 105: 12230. 

J. Schnitker and P. J. Rossky (1986) J. Chem. Phys. 86: 3471; (1988) Phys. Rev. Lett. 60: 
456. 

A. Wallqvist et al. (1986) J. Chem. Phys. 86: 6404. 

G. Martyna and B. J. Berne (1988) J. Phys. Chem. 92: 1721. 

P. J. Rossky and J. Schnitker (1988) J. Phys. Chem. 92: 4277. 

F. Webster et al. (1991) Comp. Phys. Comm. 63: 494; (1991) Phys. Rev. Lett. 66: 3172. 

B. J. Schwartz and P. J. Rossky (1995) J. Mol. Liq. 65/66: 23; T. H. Murphrey and P. J. 
Rossky (1993) J. Chem. Phys.  99: 515; E. Neri ate al. (1991) Phys. Rev. Lett. 67: 1011. 

  D.  Borgis  and  A.  Staib  (1994)  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  230:  405;  (1996)  J.  Chim.  Phys.  93: 
1628. 

45.       A.  Staib  and  D.  Borgis  (1995) J. Chem. Phys.  103: 2642; (1996) J. Chem. Phys.  104: 

9027; (1996) J. Phys.: Cond. Mat. 8: 9389. 

D. Borgis and A. Staib (1996) J. Chem. Phys.  104: 4776. 

   K. S. Kim et al. (1996) Phys. Rev. Lett. 76: 956; (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119: 9329; 
H.  M.  Lee  and  K.  S.  Kim  (2002)  J.  Chem.  Phys.  117:  706;  H.  M.  Lee  et  al.  (2003)  J. 
Chem. Phys. 118: 9981; (2003) J. Chem. Phys. 119: 187. 

48. 

  Khan, A. (2006) J. Chem. Phys. 125: 024307; (2005) Chem. Phys. Lett. 401: 85; (2003) J. 
Chem. Phys. 118: 1684; (2003) J. Chem. Phys. 121: 280. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43. 

44. 

46. 

47. 

 

 

36. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

  J.  M.  Herbert  and  M.  Head-Gordon  (2006)  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  128:  13293;  (2005)  J. 
Phys. Chem. A 109: 5217; (2006) Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 8: 68. 

  M. Boero et al. (2003) Phys. Rev. Lett. 90: 226403. 

(2006) 
I.  A.  Shkrob 
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0611176 

et  al. 

J.  Phys.  Chem.  A 

(2007);  preprint  on 

R. E. Larsen et al. (2006) J. Phys. Chem. B 110: 20055 and (2005) J. Chem. Phys.  123: 
234106; O. V. Prezhdo and P. J. Rossky (1996) J. Phys. Chem. 100: 17094 

53. 

D. Borgis et al. (2006) J. Chem. Phys.  125: 064501. 

54.  M.  J.  Bedard-Hearn  et  al.  (2006)  J.  Chem.  Phys.    125:  194509;  (2005)  J.  Chem.  Phys.  

122: 134506; (2004) J. Chem. Phys.  121: 374. 

R.  E.  Larsen  and  B.  J.  Schwartz  (2003)  J.  Chem.  Phys.    119:  7672;  (2004)  J.  Phys. 
Chem.B 108: 11760; (2005) J. Phys. Chem. B 110: 1006 and 9692. 

J. Helbert et al. (1972) J. Chem. Phys. 57: 723; H.Yoshida et al. (1973) J. Chem. Phys. 
58: 3411; B. L. Bales et al. (1974) J. Phys. Chem. 78: 221; (1975) J. Chem. Phys. 63: 
3008. 

Jortner, J. (1959) J. Chem. Phys. 30: 839; N. R. Kestner (1973) in Electrons in Fluids, 
eds. J. Jortner and N. R. Kestner, Springer-Verlag: New York. 

  M. Sprik et al. (1985) J. Chem. Phys. 83: 5802; (1986) Phys. Rev. Lett. 56: 2326; (1989) 
J.  Chem.  Phys.  91:  5665;  (1988)  J.  Chem.  Phys.  89:  1592;  M.  Marchi  et  al.  (1990)  J. 
Phys. Chem. 94: 431. 

  C.  Romero  and  C.  D.  Jonah  (1988)  J.  Chem.  Phys.  90:  1877;  S.  Miura  and  F.  Hirata 
(1994) J. Phys. Chem. 98: 9649. 

  R. A. Ogg (1946) J. Chem. Phys. 14: 114 and 295; (1946) Phys. Rev. 69: 243 and 668. 

V.  A.  Ermoshin  et  al.  (2002)  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  356:  556;  A.  L.  Sobolewski  and  W. 
Domcke (2002) J. Phys. Chem. A 106: 4158; (2003) Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 5:1130; S. 
Neumann  et  al.  (2004)  Phys.  Chem.  Chem.  Phys.  6:  5297;  see  also  M.  C.  R.  Symons 
(1988) J. Phys. Chem.  92: 7260; H. F. Hamelka et al. (1987) J. Phys. Chem. 91: 3150; G. 
W. Robinson et al. (1986) J. Phys. Chem. 90: 4224. 

P. O. J. Scherer and S. F. Fischer (2006) Chem. Phys. Lett. 421: 427. 

D. H. Son et al. (2001) Chem. Phys. Lett. 342: 571; (2001) J. Phys. Chem. A 105: 8269. 

H. A. Gillis and T. I. Quickenden (2001) Can. J. Chem. 89: 80. 

J. Kroh (1991) Pulse radiolysis, ed. Y. Tabata, CRC Press, Boca Raton; pp. 358. 

R.  A.  Holroyd  (2004)  Charged  Particle  and  Photon  Interactions  with  Matter,  ed.  A. 
Mozumder and Y. Hatano, New York; pp. 175. 

I. A. Shkrob and M. C. Sauer, Jr. (2002) J. Phys. Chem. A 106: 9120; I. A. Shkrob et al. 
(2002) J. Phys. Chem. A 106: 9132. 

R. B. Barnett et al. (1988) J. Chem. Phys.  93: 8187. 

C. L. Thomsen (1999) J. Chem. Phys.  110: 3453; D. Madsen et al. (2000) J. Chem. Phys.  
113: 1126 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 

60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

69. 

 

 

37. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

E. Keszei et al. (1995) J. Phys. Chem. 99: 22. 

C. Pepin et al. (1994) J. Phys. Chem. 98: 7009. 

B. Soroushian (2006) J. Phys. Chem. A 110:1705; (2004) Chem. Phys. Lett. 394: 313. 

B.  J.  Schwartz  and  P.  J.  Rossky  (1994)  J.  Chem.  Phys.    101:  6902  and  6917;  T.  H. 
Murphrey and P. J. Rossky (1993) J. Chem. Phys.  99: 515. 

D.  H.  Paik  et  al.  (2004)  Science  306:  672;  L.  Turi  et  al.  (2006)  125:  014308  and 
references therein. 

A. A. Zharikov and S. F. Fischer (2006) J. Chem. Phys.  124: 054506. 

R. Lian et al. (2004) J. Chem. Phys. 120: 11712. 

R. Crowell et al. (2004) J. Phys. Chem. A 108: 9105. 

A. M. Lindenberg et al. (2005) J. Chem. Phys.  122: 204507. 

P. Kambhampati et al. (2002) J. Phys. Chem. A 106: 2374. 

T. W. Kee et al. (2001) J. Phys. Chem. A 105: 8434. 

Y. Gauduel et al. (1998) J. Phys. Chem. 102: 7795.  

I. Andrianov et al. (2005) J. Chem. Phys.  122: 234710; C. Gahl. (2003) Surf. Sci. 532-
535: 108 and (2002) Phys. Rev. Lett. 89: 107402; U. Bowensiepen (2003) J. Phys. Chem. 
B 107: 8706. 

J. Zhao et al. (2006) Chem. Rev. 106: 4402 and references therein. 

J. B. Vebern et al. (1978) Nature 272: 343; J. M. Warman et al. (1980) J. Phys. Chem. 
84: 1240, (1983) J. Phys. Chem. 87:4089 and 4096. 

E.  R.  Barthel  et  al.  (2003)  J.  Chem.  Phys.    118:  5916;  O.  Shoshana  et  al.  (2006)  Phys. 
Chem. Chem. Phys. 8: 2599. 

86.  

L. Turi (1999) J. Chem. Phys.  110: 10364. 

T. Shida et al. (1972) J. Phys. Chem. 76: 3683. 

X.  Pan  and  L.  Sanche  (2005)  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  94:  198104;    X.  Pan  et  al.  (2003)  Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 208102; Y. Zheng et al. (2006) 96: 208101. 

B. Pastina et al. (1999) J. Phys. Chem. A 103: 5841. 

  P. A. Narayana et al. (1975) J. Chem. Phys. 63: 3365. 

A.  V.  Astashkin  et  al.  (1988)  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  144:  258;  S.  A.  Dikanov  and  Yu.  D. 
Tsvetkov (1992) Electron Spin Echo Envelope Modulation (ESEEM) Spectroscopy, CRC 
Press: Boca Raton; pp. 244-251. 

92. 

  M.  D.  Newton  (1975)  J.  Phys.  Chem.  79:  2795;  T.  Clark  and  G.  Illing  (1987)  J.  Am. 
Chem. Soc. 109: 1013. 

93.  M. C. R. Symons (1976) Chem. Soc. Rev. 5: 337. 

  J. Kaplan and C. Kittel (1953) J. Chem. Phys. 21: 1429. 

  E. J. Hart and M. Anbar (1970) The Hydrated Electron, Wiley-Interscience: New York. 

L. Kevan (1978) J. Phys. Chem. 82: 1144. 

70. 

71. 

72. 

73. 

74. 

75. 

76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 

80. 

81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

87. 

88. 

89. 

90. 

91. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

 

 

38. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

97. 

98. 

  S. O. Nielsen et al. (1976) J. Phys. Chem. 80: 2482. 

  P. J. Reid et al. (1994) Chem. Phys. Lett. 228: 658. 

(1989) J. Chem. Phys.  90: 6916. 

100. 

I. A. Shkrob, to be published (2007). 

99.   B. J. Schwartz and P. J. Rossky (1994) Phys. Rev. Lett. 72: 3282; K. A. Motakabbir et al. 

101. 

  J. M. Herbert and M. Head-Gordon (2006) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128: 13293. 

102.  K. D. Jordan and F. Wang (2003) Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 54: 367; N. I. Hammer et al. 
J. Phys. Chem. (2006) 109: 11526; (2005) J. Phys. Chem. A 190: 7896; (2004) Science 
306: 675; (1998) P. Ayotte et al. J. Chem. Phys.  108: 444. 

103.  P. Cabral do Couto (2005) J. Chem. Phys. 123: 054510. 

104.  S.. E. Bradforth and P. Jungwirth (2002) J. Phys. Chem. A 106: 1286 

105.  S. Schlick et al. (1976) J. Chem. Phys.  64: 3153 

106.  S. Schlick and L. Kevan (1977) J. Phys. Chem. 81: 1083. 

 

 

 

39. 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

Figure captions. 

Figure 1. 

Spectral evolution of the "hot" s-like state of hydrated electron generated in two 6.2 eV 

photon ionization of light water. The arrows indicate the trends observed in the direction 

of longer delay times of the probe pulses. Panel (a) demonstrates the evolution between 

500 fs and 1.2 ps, showing considerable blue shift and fast decay of the IR features. Panel 

(b)  shows  the  slow  relaxation  regime  that  is  observed  after  1.2  ps (note the logarithmic 

scale).  In  this  regime,  the  band  maximum  is  "locked"  within  20  meV  and  the  spectral 

evolution  is  due  to  relatively  slow,  isotope  sensitive  narrowing  of  the  spectral  envelope 

on  the  red  side  of  the  spectrum.  This  narrowing  is  likely  to  be  caused  by  vibrational 

relaxation of the "hot" s-like state. See Ref. 28 for more detail. 

Figure 2. 

(On the left) Isodensity map for s-like HOMO of hydrated electron given by MQC MD - 

DFT  calculation;  a  single  snapshot  is  shown  (only  two  solvation  shells  are  shown,  the 

embedding  matrix  of  water  molecules  is  removed  for  clarity).  The  central  s-like  orbital 

(grey)  has  the  opposite  sign to frontier O 2p orbitals in water molecules "solvating" the 

electron.  Ca.  20%  of  the  electron  density  is  in  these  O  2p  orbitals.  Despite  that,  the 

ensemble  average  radial  component  of  the  HOMO  (on  the  right,  solid  line)  closely 

resembles  hydrogenic  wavefunction  (broken  line).  On  average,  ca.  60%  of  the  electron 

density is contained inside the cavity and 90-95% within the first solvation shell. See Ref. 

51 for more detail. 

Figure 3. 

(a) Kohn-Sham density of states (DOS) function for "hydrated electron" (embedded water 

anion clusters). The three core orbitals of water are shifted by 1 eV towards the midgap as 

 

40. 

 

 

 

 

January 5, 2007 

 

version 2 

a  result  of  Stark  shift.  Features  (i)  and  (ii)  originate  from  s-like  HOMO  and  p-like 

LUMO(0,+1,+2)  orbitals.  (b)  The  histogram  of  energy  gaps  between  the  s-  and  p-like 

states. 

 
Figure 4. 
The anatomy of a 'p-like state'. Two isodensity contour maps (±0.01 and ±0.03 a.u.-3) of the same 

LUMO orbital are shown side by side. Unlike the p-like orbitals in one-electron models, LUMO 

states in MQC MD - DFT and CIS models have the lobes pushed outwards between the first and 

the second solvation shells, with < 20% of the spin density residing inside the cavity. This results 

in  considerable  fragmentation  of  the  diffuse  part  of  the  wavefunction.  The  O  2p  orbitals  are 

strongly polarized, with opposite signs of the orbitals attained by water molecules on the opposite 

sides of the cavity in the direction of transition dipole moment. 

 

 

 

41. 

(a)

(b)

1.0

)
t
,

(l

S

0.5

0.0

1

8
6

4

2

8
6

4

)
t
,

(l

S

0.1

  t, ps

 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1.0
 1.1
 1.2

  t, ps

 1.3 
 1.5
 1.7
 1.9
 2.1
 2.3
 2.5
 2.7

H2O, 2 x 6.2 eV  

500

750

1250

1000
, nm

l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
0

0

2

4

6

8

0

2r

4

r

(r)

0
.
4

integral

1

p
p
p
p
r
r
r
1b1 

(a)

1b2 

3a1 

1

'p'  
(ii)

's' 
(i)

(iii)

0
-5
-10
orbital energy, eV

5

(b)

S
O
D

t
h
g
i
e
w

0

-15

(n)

 0
 1
 2

1

3
LUMO(+n)-HOMO gap, eV

2

±0.01

±0.03

