Symptoms of complexity in a tourism system 

Rodolfo Baggio 
 
Master in Economics and Tourism, Bocconi University, Milan, Italy 
School of Tourism, The University of Queensland, Australia 
rodolfo.baggio@unibocconi.it 

Abstract 

Tourism  destinations  behave  as  dynamic  evolving  complex  systems,  encompassing 

numerous factors and activities which are interdependent and whose relationships might 

be highly nonlinear. Traditional research in this field has looked after a linear approach: 

variables  and  relationships  are  monitored  in  order  to  forecast  future  outcomes  with 

simplified  models  and  to  derive  implications  for  management  organizations.  The 

limitations  of  this  approach  have  become  apparent  in  many  cases,  and  several  authors 

claim for a new and different attitude. 

While complex systems ideas are amongst the most promising interdisciplinary research 

themes  emerged  in  the  last  few  decades,  very  little  has  been  done  so  far  in  the  field  of 

tourism. This paper presents a brief overview of the complexity framework as a means to 

understand  structures,  characteristics,  relationships  and  explores  the  implications  and 

contributions  of  the  complexity  literature  on  tourism  systems.  The  objective  is  to  allow 

the reader to gain a deeper appreciation of this point of view. 

tourism destinations, complex systems, chaos, nonlinear analysis. 

 

Keywords 

1 

Introduction 

Tourism  is  one  of  the  most  important  economic  activities  in  the  World.  The  revenue 

generated has become a very important resource and a key factor in the balance of payment 

for many countries and regions and has been a major contributor to their economic growth. As 

a natural consequence, it has become, in the last decades, a discipline studied by a growing 

number  of  researchers,  practitioners,  experts  and  consultants.  Their  main  objective  is  to 

 

1

 
 

 

 

describe  and  understand  the  composition  and  the  dynamics  of  the  sector  and,  based  on  this 

knowledge,  to  be  able  to  foresee  future  behaviours  of  the  system’s  components.  This  is  the 

basis for a great number of decisions, involving single operators as well as governing bodies 

at different levels (Hall et al., 2004). 

The task is not easy, tourism is difficult to measure and analyse. The main reason resides in 

the  fact  that  it  is  an  “industry”  with  no  traditional  production  functions,  no  consistently 

measurable outputs and no common structure or organisation across countries or even within 

the  same  country  (see  for  example:  OECD,  2000).  Moreover,  tourism  activities  traverse  a 

number  of  traditional  economic  sectors  and  are  generally  not  considered,  as  a  whole,  in 

national accounts. 

The World Tourism Organization’s definition of tourism as comprising (UNWTO, 1995): 

the activities of persons travelling to and staying in places outside their usual 

environment for not more than one consecutive year for leisure, business and other 

purposes. 

looks fuzzy if examined with the glasses of a scientist. 

Too  many  different  interpretations  and  too  a  broad  series  of  elements  fall  into  the  terms 

contained into the official definition of tourism. The best proof is that all the official bodies 

responsible  for  “measuring”  this  phenomenon  face  a  real  challenge  when  it  comes  to 

identifying the “units” to be accounted for. Moreover, this definition poses a great challenge 

to all those seeking to model the phenomenon in order to foresee its behaviour. 

The  forecasting  methodology  of  tourism  demand  has  created  numerous  proposals  over  the 

past  decades.  Classical  regressions,  time  series  analysis,  econometric  models,  qualitative 

methods and, more recently, neural network techniques, have been extensively explored and 

have generated innumerable attempts (Song & Witt, 2000; Witt & Witt, 2000).  Nonetheless, 

the  general  accuracy  of  these  models  cannot  be  regarded  as  excellent  and  the  countless 

specific limitations put to them are a good testimony of this. 

Failures in economic forecasting are common since Thomas Malthus predicted in 1798 that 

population  growth  would  overtake  food  production  resulting  in  mass  starvation  in  Great 

Britain. For the tourism sector this failure of forecasting may be particularly serious, given its 

fundamental economic importance for many regions across the world. The great majority of 

the models have at the basis the idea of a simplified, linearised, version of the tourism system 

and  therefore  they  must  comprise  a  fair  amount  of  limitations,  boundaries  and  restrictions.  

 

2

This  condition  is  common  in  a  number  of  disciplines  such  as  physics,  biology,  ecology, 

medicine, sociology, economics. 

In recent years a new approach has emerged. Many scholars believe this approach is able to 

overcome the difficulties of describing “complex” systems and to give better representations 

and better tools to handle the issues involved. This approach starts with the realization that the 

reductionist  hypothesis  born  with  the  origin  of  “modern  science”  is  limiting  too  much  our 

ability  to  describe  the  real  world.  The  methods  devised  by  Galileo,  Newton,  Laplace,  and 

many  others,  can  only  give  us  a  very  limited  power  and,  more  importantly,  are  not  able  to 

return reasonable explanations for a wide number of phenomena. 

In his seminal paper “More is different”, Phil Anderson states (1972: 393):  

The workings of our mind and bodies, and of all the animate or inanimate matter of 

which we have any detailed knowledge, are assumed to be controlled by the same set of 

fundamental laws, which except under certain extreme conditions we feel we know pretty 

well” but “the ability to reduce everything to simple fundamental laws does not imply the 

ability to start from those laws and reconstruct the universe” and “at each stage entirely 

new laws, concepts, and generalizations are necessary, requiring inspiration and creativity 

to just as great a degree as in the previous one. 

These  ideas  have  contributed  to  set  a  new  perspective  in  our  view  of  natural  phenomena,  a 

new view which today is known as “science of complexity” (Waldrop, 1992). While complex 

systems  ideas  are  amongst  the  most  promising  interdisciplinary  research  themes  to  have 

emerged  in  the  last  few  decades,  very  little  has  been  done,  so  far,  in  the  field  of  tourism 

studies. 

Tourism  has  become  an  extremely  dynamic  system.  Economic  globalization,  fast  changing 

customer  behaviour,  development  of 

transportation  and 

information 

technologies, 

modifications in the forms of organisations and labour, all strongly influence the industry. In 

this scenario the intensified marketing efforts of all tourism organizations have led to a more 

effective approach: the destination management approach (Ritchie & Crouch, 2003). 

Many  definitions  have  been  proposed  for  the  notion  of  tourism  destination  (TD),  all  rather 

problematic  for  the  many  and  diverse  aspects  that  are  usually  comprised  in  the  concept 

(Framke,  2002).  Here  we  characterize  a  TD  as  a  geographical  location  (city,  region,  resort 

etc.), with a pattern of attractions, facilities and services, which tourists choose for a visit. In 

many places, a destination management organization (DMO) is responsible for coordinating 

the resources and the companies operating at the location. The main typical responsibilities of 

 

3

a  DMO  are:  policy  enforcement,  strategic  and  operational  planning,  marketing  and 

developing the product offering (coordinating both public and private assets).  

From a structural point of view, a destination can be seen as a system composed by a number 

(usually not too small) of elements which share some kind of relationship. The system 

evolves by responding to external and internal inputs. It may well be considered a complex 

adaptive system. A tourism destination comprises a number of elements, the tourism 

operators, the support structures, public and private organizations and associations etc. All of 

these elements have some kind of relationship among themselves and the possible 

nonlinearities in these relationships are well known and have been described several times 

(Farrell & Twining-Ward, 2004; Faulkner & Russell, 1997). Moreover, we can include in the 

system also elements not traditionally thought as belonging strictly to the tourism sector, but 

whose importance and role in this framework is undoubtedly very high. In this respect the 

McKercher’s (1999) model looks particularly suitable. Its describes the following groups of 

components: 

(cid:131) 

tourists; 

(cid:131)  communication vectors linking tourists to the destination (both “real” and “virtual”); 

(cid:131) 

local destination stakeholders; 

(cid:131) 

tourism-related and non-tourism-related externalities; 

(cid:131)  external tourism agencies; and 

(cid:131)  outputs from the system. 

The main aim of this paper is to give a brief overview of the complexity framework and to 

explore  the  implications  and  contributions  that  the  study  complex  systems  can  give  to  the 

understanding of the tourism destination model. This, it is hoped, will to allow the reader to 

gain  a  deeper  appreciation  of  this  point  of  view.  Some  papers  have  already  discussed  this 

subject (see, for example, Farrell & Twining-Ward, 2004; Faulkner, 2000; McKercher, 1999). 

However, most of the considerations presented are of a qualitative nature. Another objective 

of this work is to provide some quantitative evidence in support of this approach. 

The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. The next section gives an overview of the 

so-called  “science  of  complexity”  and  the  tools  used  to  study  a  complex  system;  where 

possible, examples from the tourism area of studies will be given. Section 3 discusses tourism 

destinations  in  this  framework  giving  some  quantitative  evaluations  of  the  symptoms  of 

 

4

complex  behaviours  in  tourism  systems.  Section  4  discusses  some  implications  of  adopting 

the  “complex  system”  approach  in  considering  a  tourism  destination.  The  last  part  contains 

some conclusive remarks and indications for further research. 

2  Complexity 

Complexity  is  the  study  of  the  structures  which  depend  only  in  part  on  the  nature  of  their 

constituents  and  whose  global  behaviours  and  characteristics  cannot  be  deduced  from  the 

knowledge of their elementary building blocks. Complexity concerns the unforeseen adaptive 

capacities and the emergence of new properties in systems that arise as the quantity and the 

quality  of  the  connections  among  individuals  and  organizations  increase.  The  notion  of 

complexity has numerous meanings in everyday speech. These are usually related to the size 

and the number of a system’s components. From a “technical” point of view, we do not have 

universally  accepted  definitions,  nor  rigorous  theoretical  formalizations,  of  complexity.  A 

rather  intuitive  depiction  of  a  complex  system  may  be  given  as:  “a  system  for  which  it  is 

difficult,  if  not  impossible  to  reduce  the  number  of  parameters  or  characterising  variables 

without losing its essential global functional properties” (Pavard & Dugdale, 2000). 

A system is considered complex if its parts interact in a nonlinear manner. Simple cause and 

effect  relationships  among  the  elements  rarely  exist  and  instead  a  very  little  stimulus  may 

cause  unpredictably  large  effects  or  no  effect  at  all.  This  nonlinearity  of  the  interactions 

among the components is a major originator of a series of properties that are frequently used 

to  characterize  the  complex  behaviour  of  a  system.  It  must  be  noted  that,  despite  what 

happens with the natural language, there is a difference between the concepts of complicated 

and  complex.  In  comparison  to  a  complex  system,  a  complicated  one  is  a  collection  of  an 

often high number of elements whose collective action is the cumulative sum of the individual 

ones. It can be decomposed in sub-elements and understood by analyzing each one of them. 

Any modern machine (a computer, a car, an airplane, a satellite) comprises thousands, or even 

millions,  of  single  pieces  bound  together.  But,  no  matter  how  difficult  it  is,  it  is  always 

possible to break up a complicated system into separate entities and study them individually, 

being sure that the final object will be the (linear) composition of them. 

On  the  contrary,  a  complex  system  can  be  understood  only  by  considering  it  as  a  whole, 

almost independently by the number of parts composing it. A “simple” object made of only 

two  elements,  a  double  pendulum,  a  pendulum  hanging  from  another  pendulum,  is  well 

known to any physics student for its totally unpredictable, chaotic behaviour (under the basic 

 

5

Newtonian laws of motion). A “simple” school of fish, made up of a few dozen members, is 

able  to  adapt  its  behaviour  to  the  external  conditions  without  apparent  organization  but 

following  a  very  limited  number  of  simple  rules  regarding  local  interaction,  spacing  and 

velocity (Reynolds, 1987). 

A special class of complex systems is the one whose structure and components influence and 

are influenced by the external environment and in which the interactions among the elements 

are of a dynamic nature. In a complex adaptive system (CAS), the parts (Stacey, 1996: 10):  

interact with each other according to sets of rules that require them to examine and 
respond to each other’s behaviour in order to improve their behaviour and thus the 
behaviour of the system they comprise. 

Even  in  absence  of  a  “formal  theoretical  definition”  it  is  possible  to  identify  a  number  of 

characteristics  that  may  allow  us  to  recognize  a  complex  adaptive  system  (see  for  example: 

Cilliers, 1998; Stacey, 1996; Waldrop, 1992). 

These main features can be summarized as follows: 

(cid:131)  non-determinism. It is impossible to anticipate precisely the behaviour of a CAS even 

knowing the function of its elements. The dependence of the behaviour from the initial 

conditions  is  extremely  sensitive  and  appears  to  be  extremely  erratic;  the  only 

predictions that can be made are probabilistic;  

(cid:131)  presence  of  feedback  cycles  (positive  or  negative).  The  relationships  among  the 

elements  become  more  important  than  their  own  specific  characteristics  and  the 

feedback cycles can influence the overall behaviour of the system; 

(cid:131)  distributed  nature.  Many  properties  and  functions  cannot  be  precisely  localized,  in 

many cases there are redundancies and overlaps; it is a distributed system; 

(cid:131)  emergence  and  self-organization.  a  number  of  emergent  properties  are  not  directly 

accessible (identifiable or foreseeable) from an understanding of the components. In a 

CAS,  global  structures  may  emerge  when  certain  parameters  go  beyond  a  critical 

threshold. In these cases, generally, a new hierarchical level appears that reduces the 

complexity.  The  system  evolves, 

increasing 

its  complexity  up 

to 

the  next 

self-organization process. One effect of such a characteristic is the capability to show 

a good degree of robustness to external (or internal) shocks. The system is capable to 

absorb the shock and to remain in a given state or regain the state unpredictably fast. 

At  the  critical  points  of  instability  the  system  will  reorganize  through  feedback 

mechanisms. At a global level the system is homogeneous or symmetric; after a self-

 

6

organization process, however, symmetry is lost (breaks), one configuration dominates 

all  others.  From  an  empirical  point  of  view  it  is  virtually  impossible  to  determinate 

why the system prefers one specific configuration instead of possible alternatives; 

(cid:131)  self-similarity. It implies that the system considered will look like itself on a different 

scale, if magnified or made smaller in a suitable way. The self-similarity is evidence 

of  a  possible  internal  complex  dynamics  of  a  system.  A  CAS  is  at  a  critical  state 

between a chaotic state and a completely ordered one, a condition that has been also 

called a self-organized criticality. If parameters N and z, describe a self-similar system, 
they are related by a power-law relationship: N ~ zk. A power law means that there is 

no  “normal”  or  “typical”  event,  and  that  there  is  no  qualitative  difference  between 

large and small fluctuations. 

(cid:131) 

limited  decomposability.  It  is  quite  impossible,  to  study  the  properties  of  a  dynamic 

structure  by  decomposing  it  into  functionally  stable  parts.  Its  permanent  interaction 

with  the  environment  and  its  properties  of  self-organization  allow  it  to  functionally 

restructure itself; only a “whole system” approach can explain CAS characteristics and 

behaviours. 

In  short,  following  Cilliers  (1998),  it  is  possible  to  characterise  a  system  as  complex  and 

adaptive by listing these main properties:  

(cid:131)  a large number of elements form the system; 

range; 

(cid:131) 

there are loops in the interactions; 

(cid:131) 

interactions  among  the  elements  are  nonlinear  and  usually  have  a  somewhat  short 

(cid:131)  complex systems are usually open and their state is far from equilibrium; 

(cid:131)  complex systems have a history, the “future” behaviour depends on the past one 

(cid:131)  each element is unaware of the behaviour of the system as a whole, it reacts only to 

information that is available to it locally. 

Examples  of  complex  adaptive  systems  include  many  real  world  ensembles:  the  patterns  of 

birds  in  flight  or  the  interactions  of  various  life  forms  in  an  ecosystem,  the  behaviour  of 

consumers  in  a  retail  environment,  people  and  groups  in  a  community,  the  economy,  the 

stock-market,  the  weather,  earthquakes,  traffic  jams,  the  immune  system,  river  networks, 

zebra stripes, sea-shell patterns, and many others. Complexity also applies well to the world 

 

7

of  economics.  As  Saari  (1995:  222)  writes,  “even  the  simple  models  from  introductory 

economics  can  exhibit  dynamical  behaviour  far  more  complex  than  anything  found  in 

classical physics or biology.” Many features of an economy present difficulty for the “linear” 

mathematics usually employed.  

The  tourism  sector,  as  an  economic  activity,  shares  many  of  these  characteristics.  A 

destination comprises many different companies and organisations. The relationships among 

them exhibit a wide diversity and have been described in many different ways (Buhalis, 2000; 

Michael, 2003; Pavlovich, 2003; Pavlovich & Kearins, 2004; Smith, 1988), but,  very  often, 

they do not have any linear characteristic nor have they any static trait. The reaction of the 

different stakeholders to inputs that may come from the external world or from what happens 

inside  the  destination  may  be  largely  unpredictable  as  the  outcomes  of  their  conducts. 

Nonetheless, the system as a whole looks to follow some general “laws”. Models such as the 

one by  Butler (1980), although  discussed, criticised, amended and modified (Hall & Butler, 

1995;  Lagiewski,  2005;  McKercher,  2005),  are  generally  considered  able  to  give  a 

meaningful description of a tourism destination and, in many cases, have proved useful tools 

for  managing  their  development.    Obviously,  these  are  only  limited  considerations  and  the 

theoretical work in this field is still in its infancy. Just a handful of researchers have started to 

consider the complex systems approach as a more effective framework for the understanding 

of the many and different phenomena in this field (Farrell & Twining-Ward, 2004; Faulkner 

& Russell, 1997; McKercher, 1999). Much is still to be done, but the hopes are those of being 

able to understand, for example, how crises, disasters or turbulent changes may influence the 

sector, or why, after main crises, such as the 9/11 one, the tourism sector is able to show rapid 

and almost unexpected recoveries (UNWTO, 2002). 

The McKercher’s (1999) model quoted above, for example, looks very promising. It describes 

the main components and the operation of complex tourism systems with the aim of providing 

a  representation  of  the  elements  that  influence  tourism  on  a  wide  range  of  possible  scales: 

national, regional, local and, possibly, single enterprises. In fact, even if the number of actors 

influencing the system changes at each level, the relationships between the different elements 

are  similar.  This  way,  the  author  tends  to  provide  a  framework  better  able  to  explain,  for 

example, the failure of many well designed, controlled and sustainable tourism development 

plans. 

 

8

2.1  Complex systems evolution 

A CAS is a dynamical system. It is, therefore, subject to some kind of evolution which may 

be characterized by two variables: an order parameter and a control parameter. The first one 

represents, in some way, the internal structure of the system, capturing its intrinsic order. The 

second one is an external variable which can be used to induce phase transitions in a system. 

For example, let us consider a certain volume of water close to the boiling point.  

The  order  parameter  is  the  density  difference  between  the  liquid  and  vapour  phases;  the 

temperature the control parameter. By increasing the temperature (providing energy, heath, to 

the system) it is possible to bring the water to the boiling point. At the critical temperature Tc 

= 100 °C, the water starts boiling and the order parameter undergoes an abrupt change. It has 

the value zero in the random state (above the transition temperature) and takes on a nonzero 

value in the ordered state (below the transition). 

More  generally,  the  variation  of  the  order  parameter  can  lead  the  system  to  a  critical  point 

(bifurcation)  beyond  which  several  stable  states  may  exist.  The  state  will  depend  on  small 

random fluctuations that are amplified by positive feedback. It is impossible to determine or 

to control which state will be attained in a specific empirical system; “in practice, given the 

observable  state  of  the  system  at  the  beginning  of  the  process,  the  outcome  is  therefore 

unpredictable.” (Heylighen, 2003: 12). Not even the control parameter (by itself) can be used 

to predict the system dynamics. Nonetheless, it is possible to sketch a general dependency of 

“global conditions” of a system on a control parameter.  

Starting  from  a  completely  ordered  and  stable  system,  an  increase  in  the  control  parameter 

will evolve it. The system passes through a periodic state, then to a situation characterized by 

a  complex  behaviour,  then  to  a  completely  chaotic  state.  This  last  state  can  be  adequately 

described with Wolf (1986: 273):  

In common usage chaos is taken to mean a state in which chance prevails. To the 

nonlinear dynamicist the word chaos has a more precise and rather different meaning. A 

chaotic system is one in which long-term [quantitative] prediction of the system’s state is 

impossible because the omnipresent uncertainty in determining its initial state grows 

exponentially fast in time. 

Most  of  the  real  systems  we  know  live  at  the  boundary  between  complexity  and  chaos.  A 

situation  frequently  called  edge  of  chaos,  where  a  system  is  in  a  condition  of  fragile 

equilibrium, on the threshold of collapsing into a rapidly changing state, which may set off a 

new dynamic phase (Waldrop, 1992). The type of behaviour may depend on the initial state of 

 

9

the system and the values of its parameters, the boundaries are given by the critical values of 

the  parameter.  In  the  critical  regions,  called  attractors,  the  system  is  locally  stable. 

Overcoming  a  critical  state  we  find  a  catastrophic  bifurcation,  then,  as  the  evolution 

continues, the system moves towards a new attractor, waiting for the next perturbation able to 

create a bifurcation. 

The  history  of  a  complex  system  is  usually  depicted  by  drawing  its  movement  in  the  phase 

space. This is a geometrical n-dimensional space, in which the coordinates are the variables of 

the  system.  A  dynamical  system,  at  least  in  theory,  can  be  described  by  a  number  of 

differential  equations  (equations  of  motion)  comprising  a  number  of  variables.  They  are 

chosen in such a way that complete knowledge of all the variables determines the state of the 

system  at  one  time  in  a  unique  way.  The  phase  space  is  the  set  of  all  possible  states  of  the 

system. 

As time evolves, a point representing a system state in the phase space describes a trajectory 

(or orbit). The knowledge of this orbit implies the solution of the equations of motion. Stable 

orbits  (attractors)  mean  stable  system  behaviours.  This  apparent  continuity  in  the  possible 

evolution  of  a  system  (from  an  orderly  phase  to  a  complex  behaviour  to  a  chaotic 

unpredictable  dynamics)  has  led  many  to  think  of    chaos  and  complexity  phenomena  as 

belonging to a “unified” discipline (Chris Langton quoted by Lewin, 1999: 12): 

You are dealing with non-linear dynamical systems. In one case you may have a few 

things interacting, producing tremendously divergent behaviour. That's what you'd call 

deterministic chaos. It looks random, but it's not, because it's the result of equations you 

can specify, often quite simple equations. In another case interactions in a dynamical 

system give you an emergent global order, with a whole set of fascinating properties. 

In  other  words:  chaos  theory  essentially  studies  nonlinear  effects  on  deterministic  systems, 

while complexity theory studies definite patterns on non-deterministic systems. The focus of 

chaos theory is on the manner in which simple systems give rise to complicated unpredictable 

behaviour, while complexity theory focuses on how systems consisting of many elements can 

lead to well-organized and (almost) predictable behaviours. 

2.2  The analysis of complex systems 

The toolbox of the complexity scientist has become today quite crammed. Several techniques 

have  been  developed  to  deal  with  the  task  of  describing  a  complex  system.  Many  originate 
from the work of 19th century scientists, but only modern computational facilities have made 

 

10

it possible to solve them. Following Amaral and Ottino (2004), we can group these tools in 

three main classes: nonlinear dynamics, statistical physics and network theory.  

2.2.1  Nonlinear dynamics 

A striking characteristic of complex systems is the nonlinearity of the interactions among the 

components. The main consequence is that the  equations describing its behaviour  (provided 

they exist) can be solved only in very rare cases.  The work of  Poincaré on the three body 

problem,  at  the  end  of  the  19th  century,  had  shown  that  even  “simple”  Newtonian  systems 

involving  more  than  two  bodies  may  exhibit  very  complicated  dynamics  with  almost 

unpredictable results arising from small variations of the initial conditions. 

Since  then,  a  number  of  mathematical  techniques  have  been  developed  to  approximate  the 

solutions of the differential equations used to describe such systems. Only the availability of 

modern powerful computers, however, made it possible to find “solutions” (which, in nearly 

all  cases,  are  obtained  by  numerical  approximations).  Much  of  the  mathematics  of  chaos 

theory involves the repeated iteration of simple formulas, which would be impractical to do 

otherwise.  

Nonlinear  dynamic  systems  are  capable  of  exhibiting  self-organization  and  chaos.  This 

mechanism is called deterministic chaos, since the equations of motion which generate such 

erratic,  and  apparently  unpredictable  behaviour  do  not  contain  any  random  terms. 

Deterministic  chaos  refers  to  the  irregular  (chaotic)  motion  generated  by  a  system  whose 

evolution is governed by dynamic laws that uniquely determine the state of the system at all 

times  from  a  knowledge  of  the  system’s  previous  history.  The  source  of  irregularity  is  the 

exponential divergence of initially close trajectories in a bounded region of phase-space. This 
divergence can be measured with the aid of the theory proposed by the 19th century Russian 

astronomer  Aleksandr  Mikhailovich  Lyapunov  (Kantz  &  Schreiber,  1997).  In  this  sense, 

chaotic behaviour can be regarded as very complex dynamics. 

This  sensitivity  to  initial  conditions  is  sometimes  popularly  called  the  butterfly  effect, 

suggesting  the  idea  that  chaotic  weather  patterns  can  be  altered  by  a  butterfly  flapping  its 

wings.  A  practical  implication  is  that  it  is  essentially  impossible  to  formulate  long  term 

predictions about the behaviour of a dynamic system: even if it would be possible to fix the 

initial  conditions  to  a  predetermined,  finite  accuracy,  their  errors  would  increase  at  an 

exponential  rate.  Examples  of  systems  exhibiting  nonlinear  (chaotic)  behaviour  are:  the 

atmosphere,  the  solar  system,  plate  tectonics,  turbulent  fluids,  mixing  of  coloured  dyes, 

 

11

economies, stock markets, population growth or the “simple” double pendulum (Gleick, 1987; 

Waldrop, 1992).  

2.2.2  Statistical physics 

Statistical physics (or statistical mechanics) is one of the fundamental fields of physics. It uses 

statistical  methods  for  addressing  physical  problems.  A  wide  variety  of  issues,  with  an 

inherently stochastic nature, are treated in such a way. It provides a framework for relating the 

microscopic  properties  of  individual  atoms  and  molecules  to  the  macroscopic  ones  of 

materials observed in every day life. Thermodynamics, and thermodynamic properties can be 

explained  as  a  natural  result  of  statistics  and  mechanics  (classical  and  quantum).  The  main 

result,  and  power,  of  this  approach  is  in  the  bypass  of  some  classical  mechanics  problems, 

such  as  the  impossibility  of  solving  the  three-body  problem,  by  dealing  with  systems 

composed  by  a  large  number  of  elements,  reasoning  in  terms  of  statistical  ensembles. 

Moreover, it introduced the idea of discrete models and agent-based models (Wolfram, 2002). 

In recent years, our understanding of phase transitions and critical phenomena has led to the 

development  of  two  important  new  concepts:  universality  and  scaling  (Amaral  &  Ottino, 

2004). Many physical systems exhibit universal properties that are independent of the specific 

form  of  the  interactions  among  their  constituents.  This,  for  analogy,  may  suggest  the 

hypothesis that universal laws or results may also show up in other types of complex systems: 

social, economic or biological. The scaling hypothesis, born in the framework of the study of 

critical phenomena, has provided the idea that a set of relations, called scaling laws, may help 

in  relating  the  various  critical-point  exponents  characterizing  the  singular  behaviour  of  an 

order  parameter  and  of  response  functions.  The  predictions  of  the  scaling  hypothesis  are 

supported by a wide range of experimental work, and also by numerous calculations on model 

systems. 

The concept of universality in statistical physics and complex systems has the basic objective 

of  capturing  the  essence  of  different  systems  and  classifying  them  into  distinct  classes.  The 

universality of critical behaviour pushes the investigations on the features of the microscopic 

relationships  important  for  determining  critical-point  exponents  and  scaling  functions. 

Statistical  approaches  can  be  very  effective  in  systems  when  the  number  of  degrees  of 

freedom (and elements described by a number of variables) is so large that an exact solution is 

not practical or possible. Even in cases where it is possible to use analytical approximations, 

 

12

most  current  research  utilizes  the  processing  power  of  modern  computers  to  simulate 

numerical solutions.  

One more important outcome of the use of statistical physics methods is the use of discrete 

models.  The  fundamental  assumption  is  that  some  phenomena  can  be  modelled  in  terms  of 

computer  programs  (algorithms)  rather  than  in  terms  of  analytical  expressions.  Cellular 

automata (see for example: Mitchell et al., 1993; Wolfram, 2002) are an example of discrete 

time and space models developed for a computer utilization. Cellular automata are dynamic 

structures, discrete in space and time. They operate on a uniform, regular lattice, characterized 

by “local” interactions and are made up of many cells, each of which may be in one of a finite 

number  of  states.  A  cell  may  change  state  only  at  fixed,  regular  intervals,  and  only  in 

accordance  with  fixed  rules  that  depend  on  their  own  values  and  the  values  of  neighbours 

within a certain distance. Applications exist in many fields of physical, chemical, biological 

and  social  sciences;  propagation  of  fire,  predator-prey  models  or  the  evolution  of  artificial 

organizations  can  be  represented  with  cellular  automata  (Mitchell  et  al.,  1993;  Wolfram, 

2002).  

2.2.3  Network theory 

Most complex systems can be described as networks of interacting elements. In many cases 

these interactions lead to global behaviours that are not observable at the level of the single 

elements  and  that  share  the  characteristics  of  emergence  typical  of  a  complex  system. 

Moreover,  the  collective  properties  of  dynamic  systems  composed  of  a  large  number  of 

interconnected parts are strongly influenced by the topology of the connecting network. The 

mathematical models of network structures have been developed in graph theory. A graph is a 

generalization  of  the  concept  of  a  set  of  dots  (vertices,  nodes),  connected  by  links  (edges, 

arcs). These, depending on the specific situation may or may not have a direction (the graph is 

directed or undirected). In a directed graph it is possible to track a route from some vertex to 

another, but not in the opposite direction. Links may be associated with numeric values (they 

may  represent  distances,  costs,  energies,  information  exchanges  etc.)  called  weights.  In  the 

last few years, a number of researchers have shed light on some topological aspects of many 

kinds  of  social  and  natural  networks,  (the  WWW,  power  grids,  collaboration  networks, 

networks of words, metabolic networks, economic agents).  

The first mathematical model, which has been used for many years to describe several kinds 

of networks, is due to Erdős and Rényi (1959, 1960). Their model (the ER model) represents 

 

13

a network as a set of nodes connected, two at a time, with probability p. The distribution of 

the nodes degrees k (the number of connections per node) follows a Poisson law with a peak 

〈k〉 (the average degree of the network): 

)(
kP

≈

−

k

e

 

k

k

k

!

The node degrees distribution P(k) and the average degree characterize the network and may 

be used as a distinctive attribute. Other quantities commonly used to describe a graph are: the 

clustering  coefficient  C,  which  measures  how  close  the  neighbourhood  of  each  node  is  to  a 

complete subgraph (part of the graph in which every node is connected to all the others, also 

called clique) and the average length L of a path between any two vertices. 

More recently, a number of investigations started with the works of Watts and Strogatz (1998) 

and  Barabási  and  Albert  (1999)  have  provided  evidence  that,  in  many  cases,  real  world 

networks are quite different from ER graphs. Following these, many other works have been 

published (see the reviews: Albert & Barabási, 2002; Boccaletti et al., 2006; Dorogovtsev & 

Mendes, 2002; Newman, 2003b; Watts, 2004). 

The  distribution  P(k)  of  the  nodes  degrees  can  be  used  to  classify  the  networks  into  three 

broad classes (Amaral et al., 2000): 

(cid:131)  single-scale networks: in which P(k) exhibits exponential or Gaussian tails. This class 

contains  the  random  ER  graphs  and  the  small  world  (SW)  networks  described  by 

Watts and Strogatz (1998). They are characterized by large clustering coefficients and 

short average path lengths. Their degree distribution still follows a poissonian law; 

(cid:131)  scale-free networks: P(k) has a power-law distribution: P(k) ∼ k-γ. The distribution is 

largely uneven, there is no characteristic mean nodal degree (the mean of a poissonian 

ER distribution), but some (few) nodes act as very connected hubs, having a very large 

number of ties, while the majority of nodes have a small number of links. Scale free 

(SF) networks (Barabási & Albert, 1999) are dynamic networks. They grow with the 

addition  of  new  nodes  and  new  links  following  certain  mechanisms;  the  most 

commonly  cited  is  a  preferential  attachment  in  which  a  new  node  has  a  higher 

probability to attach to one of the most connected ones; 

 

14

(cid:131)  broad-scale  networks:  for  which  the  degree  distribution  has  a  mixed  behaviour,  a 

power law regime followed by a sharp cut-off (exponential or Gaussian decay) of the 

tail. 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

Both  SF  and  SW  networks,  very  common  structures  among  the  real  world  networks,  show 

peculiar characteristics such as (Newman, 2003a): 

(cid:131)  robustness: stability of the system to random removal (or failure) of randomly chosen 

elements; but also  

fragility: high sensitivity to targeted attacks to the most connected hubs;  

low  internal  friction:  extent  and  speed  of  disease  (viruses,  but  also  messages,  fads, 

beliefs etc.) transmission are greatly improved with respect to a random ER network, 

in  some  cases  it  is  shown  that  there  are  no  critical  thresholds  at  all  for  these 

phenomena. 

We may expect that the  topology  of the  tourism actors network, like many other social  and 

economic networks, exhibits structures like the ones discussed above. 

3  Tourism destinations as complex systems, the symptoms 

A  tourism  destination  is  a  complex  agglomeration  of  diverse  systems  of  interrelated 

economic,  social  and  environmental  phenomena  and  networks.  As  mentioned  in  the 

introduction,  some  authors  have  proposed  this  interpretation  as  more  effective  in  providing 

insights  in  the  structure  and  the  dynamical  evolution  of  the  system.  The  objective  of  this 

section  is  to  provide,  besides  what  already  qualitatively  discussed  in  the  literature,  some 

quantitative  evidence  for  these  ideas.  The  most  distinctive  characteristics  of  a  complex 

adaptive  system  will  be  discussed:  self-organization  and  self-similarity,  robustness  and 

resilience and edge of chaos behaviours. 

3.1  Self-organization and self-similarity 

In economic and social contests, self-organization is seen through the spontaneous formation 

of  structures  such  as  associations,  consortia  etc.,  that  group  stakeholders  in  order  to  better 

cope with the environment, namely to share experiences, resources and to support one another 

in facing possible adversities. The basic idea is that open systems will reorganize at critical 

points of instability almost independently from external “re-ordering” actions.  

 

15

Modern tourism starts in the second half of the 19th century and its development is strongly 

influenced  by  two  factors:  the  availability  of  free  time  and  the  development  of  faster  and 

cheaper transportation means. In few years the phenomenon assumes an important dimension. 

As  soon  as  the  mass  of  tourists  and travellers starts to be significant,  the system of tourism 

operators, in some cases involving travellers and tourists as well, begins to form associations 

or consortia. All the modern developed tourism destinations have seen this process. In Italy, 
for example, the last decade of the 19th century sees the birth of the local tourism promotion 

associations,  the  pro-loco,  immediately  followed  by  the  foundation  of  the  Touring  Club 

Italiano  (1894),  the  Società  Italiana  degli  Albergatori  (hotel  association,  1894),  the 

Automobile Club Italiano (1898), the Associazione Nazionale per il Movimento dei Forestieri 

(association for the movement of foreigners, 1900). The process continues with the setup of 

the Ente Nazionale per l'Incremento delle Industrie Turistiche (1919), which will later become 

the Italian National Tourist Board (Paloscia, 1994). 

More recently, the same phenomenon has been observed in the transition to the market by the 

countries  formerly  subjected  to  the  authority  of  the  Soviet  regime  (Recanatini  &  Ryterman, 

2001).  After  the  disruption  of  the  USSR,  a  number  of  business  associations  emerge  to 

mitigate the initial output decline. Following the ideas of complexity theories, this process can 

be interpreted as a rational response to coordinate activities in a newly decentralized economy 

to face the initial “disorganization”.  

This self-organization of a tourism destination stakeholders gives a different foundation to the 

initial stages of the Butler’s (1980) lifecycle model. According to this, in the first phases, as 

soon as the tourism phenomenon gains some momentum, we witness the involvement of the 

local  community,  the  build-up  of  facilities  and  infrastructures  and  the  creation  of  tourism 

associations. This behaviour is quite typical of a complex system. Studies (Helbing & Vicsek, 

1999)  have  confirmed  that,  even  in  presence  of  repulsive  exchanges,  a  system  tends  to 

minimize the rate and the intensity of interactions giving rise to the spontaneous formation of 

agglomerations.  In  other  words,  as  individual  entities  are  trying  to  maximize  their  own 

success,  these  systems  tend  to  reach  a  state  with  the  highest  global  success,  which  is  not 

trivial at all. If a system self-organizes at all, it is also (more or less) symmetric and, hence, 

behaves (almost) optimally.  

From  a  more  quantitative  point  of  view,  self-organizing  systems  are  characterized  by  self-

similarity and fractal geometries, in which similar patterns are repeated with different sizes or 

time  scales  without  changing  their  essential  nature.  A  power  law  relationship  in  some 

 

16

statistical parameter is one of the common signatures of a nonlinear dynamic process, which 

is, at a point, self-organized (Komulainen, 2004). Zipf’s law and Pareto law, for example, are 

well known principles, both exhibiting a power law behaviour and are commonly considered 

to be tell-tale signs of self-organization. 

Ulubaşoğlu  and  Hazari  (2004)  have  shown  the  presence  of  Zipf-like  in  tourism  systems.  In 

their work, the authors analyse the international tourist arrivals and find the familiar nonlinear 

rank-size distribution. With the same technique the data for tourist arrivals to Italian provinces 

have been analyzed (ISTAT, 2005). The results are given in figure 1. The comparison of the 

two sets of data show a remarkable similarity (apart from the obvious difference in scale).  

 

 

 

Figure    1:  The  Zipf-like  distributions  of  tourist  arrivals  for  World  countries  (marked  A,  after 

Ulubaşoğlu and Hazari, 2004) and Italian provinces (marked B, after ISTAT, 2005). Apart from the 

obvious scale difference, the overall behaviour is remarkably similar. 

 

3.2  Robustness and resilience 

The  autonomous  reorganization  capabilities  of  a  complex  system,  exercised  to  react  to 

external impulses that may disrupt it, reveal themselves as resilience. The concept, borrowed 

17

from  the  materials  engineering  field,  has  been  applied  by  Holling  (1973)  in  studying 

ecosystems. In this context, resilience represents the ability of a system to absorb disturbance 

and  reorganize  while  going  through  a  change  but  retaining  essentially  the  same  functions, 

structure and characteristics. In a complex system, resilience is thus related to the magnitude 

of a shock that the system can absorb while remaining within a given state, or the degree to 

which  the  system  is  capable  of  self-organization.  This  is  related  to  the  extent  to  which 

reorganization  is  endogenous  rather  than  forced  by  external  drivers.  Resilience  stems  both 

from  the  internal  structure  of  the  system  and  from  the  stimulus  of  private  or  public  policy 

decisions (Mileti, 1999). 

The  dynamics  of  a  system  can  be  represented  by  measuring  some  outcome  at  regular 

intervals.  In  a  tourism  destination,  the  measurements  of  the  days  spent  by  tourists  can  be 

taken  as  a  meaningful  representation  of  the  system.  They  may  be  seen  as  the  result  of  the 

interactions among many of the system’s components: the demand side (tourists), the supply 

side  (infrastructures  available  to  visitors)  plus  a  number  of  internal  and  external  economic 

factors (see for example: Ferro Luzzi & Flückiger, 2003). 

Important concept in the analysis of a time series is the one of stationarity. From a statistical 

point of view its importance is due to the fact that many models used to study a time series 

and to forecast future behaviours are valid only in presence of this characteristic (Chatfield, 

1996). In our case we may extend this concept and give a physical interpretation. Stationarity 

can measure the capability of a system to continue its evolution absorbing possible external 

(or  internal)  shocks.  This  can  be  true  for  the  whole  series  of  for  the  parts  that  satisfy  this 

requirement.  In  other  words,  if  a  tourism  system,  in  its  measurable  expression,  exhibits  a 

consistent  stationarity,  at  least  for  a  reasonably  long  period  of  time,  it  means  that,  in  that 

period  of  time,  the  system  is  able  to  recover  disturbances  in  a  relatively  fast  way.  Possible 

deviations  from  this  behaviour  will  be  seen  as  structural  breaks  in  the  time  series,  with  a 

sensible  change  in  the  series  trend  and/or  level.  In  this  case,  we  may  conclude  that  the 

resilience of the system was not enough to react to shocks of the magnitude experienced. 

Different  techniques  can  be  used  to  measure  this  kind  of  effect.  Structural  time  series 

modelling (Harvey, 1989), for example, is used by Eugenio-Martin et al. (2005) to show that 

some part of the tourism demand in Scotland has been hardly affected by international crises. 

More than that, a number of proposals has been made to determine whether a time series can 

be considered exhibiting substantial stationarity. This set of statistical tests comprises the well 

known  Dickey-Fuller  test  (Dickey  &  Fuller,  1979),  both  in  the  simple  (DF)  and  the 

 

18

augmented  (ADF)  version,  and  the  variations  proposed  by  Phillips  and  Perron  (PP  test: 

Phillips & Perron, 1988) and by Zivot and Andrews (ZA test: Zivot & Andrews, 1992) and 

the  more  recent  test  by  Lee  and  Strazicich,  (LS  test:  Lee  &  Strazicich,  2003)  based  on 

Lagrange multipliers. Metes (2005) provides a good description of the tests and a comparison 

of their applicability, limitations and power. 

The main idea behind these tests is that, after having allowed for a weak trend stationarity, the 

time series is checked against the hypothesis of  modifications or breaks in the trend (or the 

level)  that  can  shock  the  system  preventing  it  from  returning  to  the  previous  behaviour  and 

permanently moving it away from its past track. Several examples of this kind of studies can 

be  found  in  the  literature.  Aly  and  Strazicich  (2002)  use  the  LS  test  to  examine  the  annual 

tourist night visits to Egypt and Israel. They conclude that, in spite of shocks from terrorism, 

war and regional instability, visits by tourists remains a trend-reverting series. Narayan (2005) 

applies a modified ZA test proposed by Sen (2003) and shows that visitor arrivals in Fiji from 

Australia, New Zealand and the USA are trend-reverting at the 10% level or better, implying 

that  shocks  (due  to  internal  political  instabilities)  to  visitor  arrivals  have  only  a  transitory 

effect.  

Figure 2: Tourist overnights time series for the period 1954-2004: Italy and Elba island (source: Italian 

Statistics Bureau, ISTAT and Elba Tourist Board) 

 

 

19

Time series such as those shown in figure 2 (overnights for Italy and Elba Island, a renown 

Italian  tourism  destination),  like  many  others  we  could  draw  for  a  tourism  destination,  are 

intrinsically not stationary, thus implying a dynamical evolution of the system. Removing the 

main trend and correcting seasonality effects, it is possible to assume that we are left with a 

quantity which represents the internal dynamics of the system’s components. By applying the 

tests  quoted  above  it  is  possible  to  analyse  the  response  of  the  system.  Tab.  1  shows  the 

results for the two series. 

Table 1: Stationarity tests results for Italy and Elba overnights time series. Data is for the period 1954-
2004 [(1), (2), (3) indicate 10%, 5%, and 1% significance in the rejection of the unit root hypothesis].  

 
Destination  ADF 
Italy 
Elba 

-3.168 (2)
 -1.287 

Test 

PP 
-3.195 (2)
-3.652 (3)

ZA 
-3.529 (2)
-4.779 (3)

LS 
-9.462 (3) 
-5.565 (1) 

The results clearly suggest the rejection of the hypothesis of unit roots in the time series, thus 

confirming the basic stationarity of the systems’ behaviours. The only conflicting result is the 

ADF  test  for  Elba,  but  this  test  is  known  in  literature  as  performing  poorly  in  presence  of 

possible  structural  breaks  such  as  the  ones  that  can  be  seen  in  the  Elba  series  (Lee  & 

Strazicich,  2003;  Phillips  &  Perron,  1988;  Zivot  &  Andrews,  1992).  These  results  can 

therefore  be  interpreted  as  indication  of  a  substantial  resilience  of  the  tourism  systems 

analysed.  Moreover,  a  system  (Italy)  and  one  of  its  subsystems  (Elba)  exhibit  the  same 

behaviour; an evident symptom of self-similarity. 

3.3  On the edge of chaos 

A tourism destination is an evolving, growing, system. Since the proposal by Butler (Butler, 

1980)  a  fair  amount  of  studies  have  given  confirmations  and  examples  of  his  model 

describing the life cycle of such systems (see for example: Butler, 2005a, 2005b). To preserve 

its  existence,  a  CAS  must  interact  with  the  environment,  continually  maintaining  a  flow  of 

energy into and out of the system. Open systems that evolve and grow by absorbing energy 

and matter from the external world and dissipating the resulting entropy, are called dissipative 

structures  (Prigogine  &  Nicolis,  1977).  They  evolve  in  unstable  environments;  the  more 

ordered  and  complex  a  system  becomes,  the  more  entropy  it  must  dissipate  to  maintain  its 

 

 

 

 

20

existence. Each system has an upper limit on the amount of entropy which can be dissipated. 

When  the  flux  from  the  environment  increases  beyond  that  limit,  the  system  goes  into  a 

chaotic state. At a critical point, the system faces a bifurcation: it can break down, ceasing to 

exist as an organized system, or it can undergo a spontaneous reordering (a self-organization). 

In  a  dissipative  system,  disequilibrium  is  a  necessary  condition  for  growth  (Prigogine  & 

Nicolis, 1977). On the other hand, managing a system typically aims at stabilizing it trying to 

avoid abrupt changes. An organization is therefore “oscillating” between a stable ordered state 

and  a  chaotic  one,  this  complex  state  has  been  also  called  the  edge  of  chaos  (although  the 

usage of this term is questioned by some, see for example: Mitchell et al., 1993). 

It is possible to visualize this state by using a phase space plot, in which the behaviour of the 

system is rendered through the drawing of the parameters that characterize the system itself. 

A time series can be used to derive such a plot. Before doing that, we must recreate the phase 

space by using one of the techniques devised for this purpose. The most commonly used is the 

time-lagged  (delay-coordinate)  technique  (Kantz  &  Schreiber,  1997;  Schreiber,  1999).  A 

delay  coordinate  reconstruction  can  be  obtained  by  plotting  the  time  series  versus  a  time-

delayed version of it. For a 2-dimensional reconstruction, it is possible to plot the delay vector 

yn  =  (tn,  tn−V  ),  where  V  is  the  lag  or  sampling  delay:  the  difference  between  the  adjacent 

components of the delay vector in number of samples. The theoretical basis for this procedure 

is  due  to  Takens  (1980).  His  fundamental  theorem  states  that  a  dynamical  system  can  be 

reconstructed from a sequence of observations of the state of the dynamical system and, in the 

general case, the dynamic of the system recovered by delay coordinate embedding is the same 

as the dynamic of the original system.  

As  an  example,  the  time  series  of  quarterly  tourist  overnights  at  Elba  Island  for  the  period 

1954-2005  has  been  considered.  The  series  has  been  logarithmically  transformed  and 

“traditional”  corrections  for  trend  and  seasonality  have  been  applied.  This  way  we  may 

suppose that the pattern left is mainly (if not fully) dependent on the internal dynamics of the 

system. The resulting series is then embedded (with delay = 3) and the resulting phase space 

plot is shown in Figure 3. 

 

 

21

Figure 3: Phase space plot of quarterly tourist overnights for the period 1954-2004, Elba Island (data 

 

source: Elba Tourist Board) 

 

The diagram indicates that the series cycles regularly, but not fully predictably, staying within 

a bounded region of the phase space. This is typical of chaotic systems such as the weather or 

financial markets. The limits of the behavioural range shown in the phase space diagram are 

said to attract the behaviour of the system, and, due to its characteristics, it is called a strange 

attractor. The same basic techniques used here allow deriving also a quantitative measurement 

of chaoticity. This is given by the Lyapunov characteristic exponent (LCE).  

The  LCE  of  a  dynamical  system  is  a  quantity  that  characterizes  the  rate  of  separation  of 

infinitesimally  close  trajectories  in  phase  space.  Quantitatively,  two  trajectories  with  initial 
separation δX0 diverge according to: δX(t) ≈ eλt δX0. The rate of separation can be different 

for  different  orientations  of  the  initial  separation  vector.  Thus,  there  is  whole  spectrum  of 

Lyapunov exponents. Their number is equal to the number of dimensions of the phase space. 

The largest LCE determines the general behaviour of the system. If it is negative, the system 

follows  a  stable  trajectory,  if  it  is  null,  the  system  is  in  a  steady  state,  if  it  is  positive  the 

system exhibits unstable and chaotic behaviour (Sprott, 2003). In most cases, the calculation 

of Lyapunov exponents cannot be carried out analytically and numerical techniques must be 

 

22

used. In cases like ours, when only a 1-dimensional time series is given, the highest LCE can 

be estimated with the method proposed by Wolf et al. (1985) and Rosenstein et al. (1993). 

The result for Elba time series is: LCE = 0.0192 (embedded with delay = 3 and dimension = 

4). Being positive, we may assume that the series represents a chaotic system. Nonetheless, 

the  value  is  quite  small.  As  a  comparison  a  logistic  map  has  LCE  = 0.69  and  a  Lorenz 

attractor has LCE = 0.91 (Sprott, 2003). It is therefore possible to conclude that the chaoticity 

level of our tourism system is present but not very high. 

4 

Implications for the management of a tourism destination 

Far from being definite proofs, the results and the considerations presented so far have given 

evidence (both measurable and qualitative) for the presence of a number of characteristics that 

are typical symptoms of the complexity of a system. This approach to a tourism destination 

has its main outcome in explaining, at a conceptual level, a great part of the variability in the 

behaviour  of  these  systems.  In  dealing  with  such  a  system,  the  “manager”  may  better 

understand the reasons of a limited, and sometimes inexistent, capacity of accurate prediction 

of future evolution which affects greatly the ability to manage and control it. 

First  of  all,  the  techniques  presented  here  can  be  used  to  assess  the  complexity  and  chaotic 

characteristics of a destination. Once evaluated, these can provide important indications for a 

destination management organisation. Significant issue, basis for most of the activities aiming 

at defining policies and plans for the development of a tourism destination, is the capability of 

forecasting, with the best possible approximation, its future behaviour and outcomes in terms 

of  tourists’  fluxes  and  receipts.  One  of  the  most  important  characteristics  of  a  complex 

system, as said above, is its unpredictability, at least with the linear techniques we are used to. 

Nonetheless, it is still possible to manage and understand complex systems, at least on some 

levels.  Large  scale  behaviours  at  system  level  might  still  be  foreseeable  if  it  is  possible  to 

describe the overall dynamics of the system including the presence of any attractors and their 

basins (the regions of phase space in which they act). This can be accomplished by using a 

number  of  modelling  approaches  based  on  simulation  models  and  nonlinear  time  series 

analysis. Once the attractors of a complex system have been identified, it can be possible to 

determine whether changes in a control parameter can produce sudden shifts in behaviour, or 

at  least  establish  a  probability  distribution  for  their  occurrence  (Hansell  et  al.,  1997). 

Simulation methods prove the feasibility of this approach (Smith & Johnson, 2004) and help 

 

23

in  better  capturing  the  complex  behaviours  of  many  systems  composed  of  human 

organisations (Berry et al., 2002).  

In recent years quite a number of these simulations have been used to describe different types 

of systems. Agent-based modelling (ABM) has proved its capabilities in a wide range of areas 

and  has  been  proposed  successfully  for  applications  both  in  economic  (Tesfatsion  &  Judd, 

2006)  and  social  sciences  (Bonabeau,  2002;  Macy  &  Willer,  2002).  In  ABM,  a  system  is 

represented  by  a  collection  of  autonomous  decision-making  units  called  agents.  Each  one 

independently estimates its situation and decides on the basis of a given set of rules. Agents 

may perform different tasks, depending on the system they represent. Repetitive interactions 

between agents produce different configurations of the system’s state. Essential to the method 

is  the  extensive  usage  of  computational  capabilities.  Agent-based  models  are  especially 

appropriate  when  aggregate  behaviour  depends  on  structures  of  relations,  so  that  no  single 

representative element can fully describe the system under study. 

The  technique  has  been  used  as  effective  decision-making  support  for  planning  urban 

transportation and for analyzing disease spread scenarios (Toroczkai & Eubank, 2005) or in 

studying  travel  demand  patterns  (Zhang  &  Levinson,  2004).  More  importantly,  ABM  has 

been effectively employed as tool providing the bases for the analysis and the development of 

policies  in  complex  and  uncertain  socio-economic  systems  (Bankes,  1993,  2002).  Tourism 

has seen only a very few attempts at using these techniques in simulating the behaviour of a 

tourism  destination  (Walker  et  al.,  1998)  or  in  supporting  strategic  management  decisions 

(Buchta & Dolnicar, 2003). The discussion and the evidence provided above may be seen as a 

foundation  to  this  way  of  reasoning,  but  definitely  more  work  is  needed  both  from  a 

theoretical and a practical point of view. 

It is possible to summarise what presented so far by saying that, once established what kind 

and  what  level  of  complexity  a  destination  has,  simulation  methods  can  be  used  to  provide 

medium or (relatively) long term evolution scenarios. The more traditional (linear) forecasting 

methods, with their limited validity, can give useful short-term predictions, as they have up to 

now.  Their  usefulness  will  mainly  reside  in  contributing  to  the  identification  of  main 

evolutionary paths and, especially, in applying small “corrections” to the system behaviour to 

try to steer it clear from undesired regimes. 

One more implication of the complexity approach is the understanding that all the attempts to 

maintain  stability  may  only  work  for  a  short  period  of  time.  Seeking  stable  equilibrium 

 

24

relationships  is  considered  to  be  detrimental  for  the  development  of  the  system,  since 

evolution  and  growth  can  only  be  possible  in  regions  of  the  phase  space  at  the  boundary 

between order and chaos (Rosenhead, 1998):  

Rather than trying to consolidate stable equilibrium, the organisation should aim to 

position itself in a region of bounded instability, to seek the edge of chaos. The 

organisation should welcome disorder as a partner, use instability positively. In this way 

new possible futures for the organisation will emerge, arising out of the (controlled) 

ferment of ideas which it should try to provoke. Instead of a perfectly planned corporate 

death, the released creativity leads to an organisation which continuously re-invents itself. 

Members of an organisation in equilibrium with its environment are locked into stable 

work patterns and attitudes; far from equilibrium, behaviour can be changed more easily. 

For  a  tourism  destination,  as  well  as  for  other  types  of  organisations,  it  is  possible  state 

(Stacey,  1993,  1996)  that  the  systems  do  not  only  adapt  to  their  environments,  but  help  to 

create them and their success can come from contradiction as well as consistency. We have 

seen  that  long-term  planning  is  almost  impossible,  therefore  it  is  possible  to  conclude  that 

success  may  stem  from  being  part  of  a  self-adapting  process,  rather  than  from  an  explicit 

‘vision’  and  revolutionary  as  well  as  incremental  changes  may  form  the  basis  to  build 

organisational success. Managing a complex system requires, therefore, an adaptive attitude, 

more than a rigid deterministic, authoritarian style.  

The proposal of using adaptive management to deal with a system derives from the work of 

1970’s  ecologists  (Holling,  1978).  It  calls  for  an  experimental  path  to  management.  The 

method builds on the idea of exploring alternative possibilities, implementing one or more of 

them,  monitoring  the  outcomes,  testing  the  predictions  and  learning  which  one  most 

effectively  allows  to  meet  the  management  objectives.  The  cycle  then  closes  by  using  the 

results of the actions to improve knowledge and adjust subsequent management activities. 

Since  then,  it  has  been  adopted  in  different  situations,  including  tourism  systems,  with 

encouraging results (Farrell & Twining-Ward, 2004). For example, Agostinho and Teixeira de 

Castro  (2003)  analyse  a  Brazilian  experience  and  provide  tangible  data  showing  that  an 

adaptive,  self-organizing,  management  system  produce  better  performance  with  respect  to 

more  traditional  schemes  and  Reed  (1999)  reports  on  the  achievements  obtained  in 

collaborative planning of a Canadian destination. Even if the difficulties and the risks of this 

approach have been well highlighted (see for example: Caffyn & Jobbins, 2003), it looks to 

 

25

be  one  of  the  only  reasonable  alternative  to  successfully  steer  a  contemporary  tourism 

destination in achieving its goals and objectives. 

5  Conclusive remarks 

For  decades,  researchers  and  practitioners  have  approached  tourism  management  and 

planning  activities  by  using  a  reductionist  approach  and  have  thought  that  such  a  complex 

systems could have been understood by looking at its principal components. This paper has 

provided  some  evidence  to  the  idea  that  tourism,  and  its  main  representative,  a  tourism 

destination, is a complex adaptive system. Quantitative considerations have been presented to 

improve the so far mainly qualitative treatments in the literature on this subject. 

The usage of complexity theory in the analysis of a tourism destination aims at giving better 

insights into the nature and the evolutionary behaviour of the system. This point of view has 

several implications for the ways in which a destination may be managed. It is argued that a 

shift in management attitude is needed and that dynamic and adaptive methods may be better 

suited to deal with such systems. 

One of the main consequences of the complex nature of these organisations in an inability to 

predict accurately the environment and the effects on the evolution of a tourism destination. 

However,  it  is  firm  conviction  of  the  author  that  the  linear  methods  developed  so  far  for 

forecasting,  planning  and  managing  retain  their  validity  provided  the  limitations  of  the 

methods  are  fully  understood.  The  different  perspective  presented  here  can  be  helpful  in 

providing  more  elements  for  the  analysis.  A  combination  of  traditional  methods  with 

dynamical  numeric  simulations  is  deemed  able  to  provide  a  number  of  “reasonable”  future 

scenarios. They could offer more effective tools to define policies and lines of action aiming 

at the balanced development of a tourism destination. 

The main limitations of this work are in the theoretical bases of complexity theories. Still a 

young  and  evolving  discipline,  it  has  not  been  able,  yet,  to  produce  universally  accepted 

frame  of  reference  and  methods.  The  hope  is  that  in  a  near  future,  some  advancement  may 

give better tools and conceptual constructions. Work is under way to meet this objective. 

 

 

Acknowledgments  

The author wishes to thank Magda Antonioli Corigliano, Chris Cooper and Noel Scott for the 

valuable discussions and support during the preparation of this paper. 

26

6  References 

Agostinho, M. E., & Teixeira de Castro, G. (2003). Co-Creating a Self-Organizing Management 

System: A Brazilian Experience. Paper presented at the Complexity, Ethics and Creativity 
Conference, London School of Economics (17-18 Sept.2003). 

Albert, R., & Barabási, A.-L. (2002). Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Review of Modern 

Physics, 74, 47-91. 

Aly, H., & Strazicich, M. C. (2002). Terrorism & Tourism: Is the impact permanent or transitory? 

Time series evidence from some MENA countries. Economic Research Forum. Retrieved 
September, 2005, from http://www.erf.org.eg/html/btrade1.pdf. 

Amaral, L. A. N., & Ottino, J. M. (2004). Complex networks - Augmenting the framework for the 

study of complex systems. The European Physical Journal B, 38, 147-162. 

Amaral, L. A. N., Scala, A., Barthélémy, M., & Stanley, H. E. (2000). Classes of small world 

networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences of the USA, 97, 11149-11152. 

Anderson, P. W. (1972). More is different. Science, 177 (4047), 393-396. 

Bankes, S. C. (1993). Exploratory Modeling for Policy Analysis. Operations Research, 41(3), 435-

449. 

512. 

Bankes, S. C. (2002). Tools and techniques for developing policies for complex and uncertain 

systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences of the USA, 99 (suppl. 3), 
7263-7266. 

Barabási, A.-L., & Albert, R. (1999). Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286, 509-

Berry, B. J. L., Kiel, L. D., & Elliott, E. (2002). Adaptive agents, intelligence, and emergent human 

organization: Capturing complexity through agent-based modeling. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of the Sciences of the USA, 99, 7187-7188. 

Boccaletti, S., Latora, V., Moreno, Y., Chavez, M., & Hwang, D.-U. (2006). Complex networks: 

Structure and dynamics. Physics Reports, 424(4-5), 175-308. 

Bonabeau, E. (2002). Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for simulating human systems. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences of the USA, 99, 7280-7287. 

Buchta, C., & Dolnicar, S. (2003). Learning by Simulation - Computer Simulations for Strategic 

Management Decision Support in Tourism. International Journal of Tourism Sciences, 3(1), 
65-78. 

Buhalis, D. (2000). Marketing the Competitive Destination of the Future. Tourism Management, 21, 

97-116. 

Butler, R. W. (1980). The Concept of a Tourist Area Cycle of Evolution: Implications for 

Management of Resources. Canadian Geographer, 24 (1), 5-12. 

Butler, R. W. (Ed.). (2005a). The Tourism Area Life Cycle, Vol. 1: Applications and Modifications 

(Vol. 1).  Clevedon, UK: Channel View. 

Butler, R. W. (Ed.). (2005b). The Tourism Area Life Cycle, Vol. 2: Conceptual and Theoretical Issues 

(Vol. 2).  Clevedon, UK: Channel View. 

Caffyn, A., & Jobbins, G. (2003). Governance Capacity and Stakeholder Interactions in the 

Development and Management of Coastal Tourism: Examples from Morocco and Tunisia. 
Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 11(2&3), 224-245. 

Chatfield, C. (1996). The Analysis of Time Series (5th ed.).  New York: Chapman & Hall. 

 

27

Cilliers, P. (1998). Complexity and Postmodernism: Understanding Complex Systems.  London: 

Dickey, D. A., & Fuller, W. A. (1979). Distribution of the Estimators for Autoregressive Time Series 

with a Unit Root. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74, 427-431. 

Dorogovtsev, S. N., & Mendes, J. F. F. (2002). Evolution of networks. Advances in Physics, 51, 1079-

Erdös, P., & Rényi, A. (1959). On random graphs. Publicationes Mathematicae (Debrecen), 6, 290-

Routledge. 

1187. 

297. 

Erdös, P., & Rényi, A. (1960). On the evolution of random graphs. Publications of the Mathematical 

Institute of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 5, 17-61. 

Eugenio-Martin, J., Sinclair, M. T., & Yeoman, I. (2005). Quantifying the Effects of Tourism Crises: 

An Application to Scotland. Journal of Travel and Tourism Marketing, 19 (2/3), 23-36. 

Farrell, B. H., & Twining-Ward, L. (2004). Reconceptualizing Tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 

31(2), 274-295. 

Faulkner, B., & Russell, R. (1997). Chaos and complexity in tourism: in search of a new perspective. 

Pacific Tourism Review, 1, 93-102. 

Ferro Luzzi, G., & Flückiger, Y. (2003). An Econometric Estimation of the Demand for Tourism: the 

Case of Switzerland. Pacific Economic Review, 8(3), 289-303. 

Framke, W. (2002). The Destination as a Concept: A Discussion of the Business-related Perspective 
versus the Socio-cultural Approach in Tourism Theory. Scandinavian Journal of Hospitality 
and Tourism, 2(2), 92-108. 

Gleick, J. (1987). Chaos: Making a New Science.  New York: Viking. 

Hall, C. M., & Butler, R. W. (1995). In Search of Common Ground: Reflections on Sustainability: 

Complexity and Process in the Tourism System: A Discussion. Journal of Sustainable 
Tourism, 3(2), 99-105. 

Hall, C. M., Williams, A. M., & Lew, A. A. (2004). Tourism: Conceptualizations, Institutions, and 
Issues. In A. A. Lew, C. M. Hall & A. M. Williams (Eds.), A Companion to Tourism (pp. 3-
21). Oxford: Blackwell. 

Hansell, R. I. C., Craine, I. T., & Byers, R. E. (1997). Predicting Change in Non-linear Systems. 

Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 46, 175-190. 

Harvey, A. C. (1989). Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter.  Cambridge: 

Cambridge University Press. 

Helbing, D., & Vicsek, T. (1999). Optimal self-organization. New Journal of Physics, 1, 13.11-13.17. 

Heylighen, F. (2003). The science of self-organization and adaptivity [Electronic version]. In 

Knowledge Management, Organizational Intelligence and Learning, and Complexity - The 
Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems. Oxford: EOLSS. 

Holling, C. S. (1973). Resilience and Stability of Ecological Systems. Annual Review of Ecology and 

Holling, C. S. (Ed.). (1978). Adaptive Environmental Assessment and Management.  New York: John 

ISTAT. (2005). Annuario Statistico Italiano.  Roma: Istituto Nazionale di Statistica. 

Kantz, H., & Schreiber, T. (1997). Nonlinear Time Series Analysis.  Cambridge: Cambridge 

Systematics, 4, 1-23. 

Wiley and Sons. 

University Press. 

 

28

Komulainen, T. (2004). Self-Similarity and Power Laws. In H. Hyötyniemi (Ed.), Complex Systems - 

Science on the Edge of Chaos (Report 145, October 2004). Helsinki: Helsinki University of 
Technology, Control Engineering Laboratory. 

Lagiewski, R. M. (2005). The Application of the TALC Model: A Literature Survey. In R. W. Butler 

(Ed.), The Tourism Area Life Cycle: Applications and Modifications (Vol. 1, pp. 27-50). 
Clevedon, UK: Channel View. 

Lee, J., & Strazicich, M. C. (2003). Minimum Lagrange Multiplier Unit Root Test with Two Structural 

Breaks. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), 1082-1089. 

Lewin, R. (1999). Complexity, life on the edge of chaos (2nd ed.).  Chicago: The University of 

Chicago Press. 

Macy, M. W., & Willer, R. (2002). From Factors to Actors: Computational Sociology and Agent-

Based Modeling. Annual Review of Sociology, 28, 143-166. 

McKercher, B. (1999). A Chaos Approach to Tourism. Tourism Management, 20, 425-434. 

McKercher, B. (2005). Destinations as Products? A Reflection on Butler's Life cycle. Tourism 

Recreation Research, 30(3), 97-102. 

Metes, D. V. (2005). Visual, Unit Root and Stationarity Tests and Their Power and Accuracy. 

Summer NSERC student report. Retrieved November, 2005, from 
http://www.stat.ualberta.ca/~wiens/reprints/metes.pdf. 

Michael, E. J. (2003). Tourism micro-clusters. Tourism Economics, 9(2), 133-145. 

Mileti, D. (1999). Disasters by Design: A Reassessment of Natural Hazards in the United States.  

Washington, DC: Joseph Henry Press. 

Mitchell, M., Hraber, P. T., & Crutchfield, J. P. (1993). Revisiting the edge of chaos: evolving cellular 

automata to perform computations. Complex Systems, 7, 89-139. 

Narayan, P. K. (2005). Testing the unit root hypothesis when the alternative is a trend break stationary 
process: an application to tourist arrivals in Fiji. Tourism Economics, 11(3), 351-364. 

Newman, M. E. J. (2003a). Random graphs as models of networks. In S. Bornholdt & H. G. Schuster 

(Eds.), Handbook of Graphs and Networks (pp. 35–68). Berlin: Wiley-VCH. 

Newman, M. E. J. (2003b). The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM Review, 45, 167-

256. 

OECD. (2000). Measuring the role of tourism in OECD economies.  Paris: OECD. 

Paloscia, F. (1994). Storia del turismo nell'economia italiana.  Rome: Petruzzi. 

Pavard, B., & Dugdale, J. (2000). The contribution of complexity theory to the study of socio-technical 
cooperative systems. Third International Conference on Complex Systems, Nashua, NH, May 
21-26. Retrieved October, 2005, from http://www-svcict.fr/cotcos/pjs/. 

Pavlovich, K. (2003). The evolution and transformation of a tourism destination network: The 

Waitomo Caves, New Zealand. Tourism Management, 24(2), 203-216. 

Pavlovich, K., & Kearins, K. (2004). Structural Embeddedness and Community-Building through 

Collaborative Network Relationships. M@n@gement, 7(3), 195-214. 

Phillips, P. C. B., & Perron, P. (1988). Testing for a Unit Root in Time Series Regression. Biometrika, 

75, 335-346. 

Prigogine, I., & Nicolis, G. (1977). Self-Organization in Nonequilibrium Systems.  New York: Wiley. 

Recanatini, F., & Ryterman, R. (2001). Disorganization or Self-Organization? The Emergence of 

Business Associations in a Transition Economy (Policy Research Working Paper No. 2539): 
The World Bank.  

 

29

Reed, M. G. (1999). Collaborative Tourism Planning as Adaptive Experiments in Emergent Tourism 

Settings. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 7(3&4), 331-355. 

Reynolds, C. (1987). Flocks, herds, and schools: a distributed behavioral model. Computer Graphics, 

21, 25-34. 

Ritchie, J. R. B., & Crouch, G. I. (2003). The Competitive Destination: A Sustainable Tourism 

Perspective.  Oxon, UK: CABI Publishing. 

Rosenhead, J. (1998). Complexity Theory and Management Practice. Science as Culture.  Retrieved 

December, 2005, from http://www.human-nature.com/science-as-culture/rosenhead.html. 

Rosenstein, M. T., Collins, J. J., & De Luca, C. J. (1993). A practical method for calculating largest 

Lyapunov exponents from small data sets. Physica D, 65, 117-134. 

Saari, D. G. (1995). Mathematical Complexity of Simple Economics. Notices of the American 

Mathematical Society, 42(2), 222-230. 

Schreiber, T. (1999). Interdisciplinary application of nonlinear time series methods. Physics Reports, 

Sen, A. (2003). On unit-root tests when the alternative is a trend-break stationary process. Journal of 

Business and Economics Statistics, 21, 174-184. 

Smith, D. M. D., & Johnson, N. F. (2004). Evolution Management in a Complex Adaptive System: 

Engineering the Future (Preprint arxiv/cond-mat/0409036): ArXiv e-prints archive. Retrieved 
January, 2006, from http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0409036. 

Smith, S. L. J. (1988). Defining Tourism, A Supply-Side View. Annals of Tourism Research, 15, 179-

308, 1-64. 

190. 

Song, H., & Witt, S. F. (Eds.). (2000). Tourism Demand Modelling and Forecasting: modern 

econometric approaches.  Oxford: Pergamon. 

Sprott, J. C. (2003). Chaos and Time-Series Analysis.  Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Stacey, R. D. (1993). Strategic Management and Organisational Dynamics.  London: Pitman. 

Stacey, R. D. (1996). Complexity and Creativity in Organizations.  San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler. 

Takens, F. (1980). Detecting strange attractors in turbulence. In D. Rand & L.-S. Young (Eds.), 

Dynamical systems and turbulence - Lecture Notes in Mathematics (Vol. 898, pp. 366-381). 
Berlin: Springer. 

Tesfatsion, L., & Judd, K. L. (2006). Handbook of Computational Economics, Volume 2: Agent-Based 

Computational Economics.  Amsterdam: North-Holland. 

Toroczkai, Z., & Eubank, S. (2005). Agent-Based Modeling as Decision-Making Tool. The Bridge, 

35(4), 22-27. 

Ulubaşoğlu, M. H., & Hazari, B. R. (2004). Zipf’s law strikes again: the case of tourism. Journal of 

Economic Geography, 4, 459-472. 

UNWTO. (1995). Concepts, Definitions, and Classifications for Tourism Statistics. Technical Manual 

No. 1.  Madrid: World Tourism Organization. 

UNWTO. (2002). Tourism proves as a resilient and stable economic sector.  Retrieved July, 2004, 
from http://www.world-tourism.org/newsroom/Releases/more_releases/june2002/data.htm. 

Waldrop, M. (1992). Complexity: The Emerging Science and the Edge of Order and Chaos.  London: 

Simon and Schuster. 

Walker, P. A., Greiner, R., McDonald, D., & Lyne, V. (1998). The Tourism Futures Simulator: a 
systems thinking approach. Environmental Modelling and Software, 14(1), 59-67. 

Watts, D. J. (2004). The "New" Science of Networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 30, 243-270. 

 

30

Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics of 'small world' networks. Nature, 393, 

440-442. 

Witt, S. F., & Witt, C. A. (2000). Forecasting tourism demand: A review of empirical research. In C. 
A. Tisdell (Ed.), The economics of tourism (Vol. 1, pp. 141-169). Cheltenham, UK: Edward 
Elgar Publishing, Ltd. 

Wolf, A. (1986). Quantifying chaos with Lyapunov exponents. In A. V. Holden (Ed.), Chaos (pp. 273-

290). Princeton: Princeton University Press. 

Wolf, A., Swift, J. B., Swinney, H. L., & Vastano, J. A. (1985). Determining Lyapunov exponents 

from a time series. Physica D, 16, 285-317. 

Wolfram, S. (2002). A New Kind of Science.  Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media. 

Zhang, L., & Levinson, D. (2004). An Agent-Based Approach to Travel Demand Modeling: An 

Exploratory Analysis Transportation Research Record. Journal of the Transportation 
Research Board, 1898, 28-38. 

Zivot, E., & Andrews, D. W. K. (1992). Further Evidence on the Great Crash, the Oil-Price Shock and 
the Unit-Root Hypothesis. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 10(3), 251-270. 

 

 

31

