Why our human-sized world behaves classically, not quantum-mechanically  
A popular non-technical exposition of a new idea  

C. L. Herzenberg 

 
 
Abstract 
This article provides a popular, largely non-technical explanation of how large objects 
can behave classically while smaller objects behave quantum mechanically, based on the 
effect of the presence of cosmic expansion velocities in extended objects. This article is 
intended to provide a more accessible presentation of concepts introduced in earlier 
papers that address this long-standing enigma in physics. 
 
Key words: quantum-classical transition, cosmic expansion, Hubble expansion, 
uncertainty principle, quantum behavior, classical behavior, Hubble velocity 
 
 
What is this about (and why does it matter)?  
 
Ordinary objects that we deal with in everyday life have specific, definite locations and 
motions that can be described with considerable precision. We can identify where these 
‘macroscopic’ objects are located and how they are moving quite accurately and predict 
their motion and future locations in detail, using classical mechanics. This is not the case 
for extremely small objects, like atoms and elementary particles. These very small objects 
seem not to be characterized by such precise locations and motions, and instead their 
locations and motions need to be described by probabilities. The theory that provides this 
description is called quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics gives us excellent 
information about some aspects of the microworld, but it is very different from classical 
mechanics.(1) 
 
The fact that the everyday reality of our human-sized world is governed by classical 
mechanics while the microworld of atoms and elementary particles appears instead to be 
governed by quantum mechanics has been something of a mystery for many years, and 
may be considered a foundational problem in quantum physics. We understand when we 
are supposed to use one theory and when we are supposed to use the other, but why there 
are two different theories of mechanics and why they separate where they do, is not 
nearly so clear. 
 
Why should there be these two different descriptions, with the objects that we deal with 
in everyday life being very well described by classical mechanics; while, on the other 
hand, quantum mechanics is highly successful in describing very small objects, such as 
atoms and elementary particles? It would seem reasonable to expect that more 
fundamental laws of physics would be independent of the size of the physical objects that 
they describe.   
 

 

 

1 

It is generally thought that quantum mechanics is the more fundamental theory, and that 
it must approach classical mechanics in the limit, just as wave optics includes the 
geometrical optics of light as a limiting case. So why does the world appear classical to 
us, in spite of its supposed underlying quantum nature? If quantum mechanics were 
assumed to be universally valid, it would seem that locality would have to be derived.(2,3) 
It might also be expected that there would be intermediate conditions under which 
classical physics and quantum physics would overlap or substantially agree, and that 
quantum mechanics would merge into classical mechanics for objects of intermediate 
sizes.(2,3) 
 
Many efforts have been made to understand in detail how quantum mechanical 
descriptions relate to classical descriptions of the behavior of matter, and under what 
circumstances an object subject to quantum mechanical laws could behave classically. 
Some of these research efforts have been quite successful, but none so far has produced a 
really simple and straightforward explanation of the quantum-classical transition. 
 
A remarkable feature of the quantum-classical transition is that it is so robust, - it does 
not seem to matter what kinds of quantum pieces you put together or how you assemble 
them, as long as the assembly is big enough, you get this classical behavior. Why exactly 
is it that when you put lots of small systems together, somehow, as a whole, they behave 
classically? This also is a fundamental question that we have really not understood very 
well in the past.(4) 
 
How the state of quantum systems can become effectively classical is of significance for 
the foundations of quantum physics, and also potentially of importance for many recent 
applications of practical interest. 
 
So the question that we want to explore is, why can large objects’ location and motion be 
described with precision, whereas the location and motion of small objects cannot be? 
What makes large objects ‘sharp’ and small objects ‘fuzzy’? And what is it that 
establishes the threshold between ‘large’ and ‘small’, that is, between objects that behave 
classically and those that behave quantum mechanically? 
 
 
Let’s visualize what’s going on (first!): 
 
Physical objects seem to have the characteristics of both particles and waves. Classical 
mechanics describes the particle properties of objects, while quantum mechanics 
describes the wave properties of objects. (It is not that particles such as electrons are 
waves, but that the laws of motion in the microworld are wave-like in character.) Wave 
properties seem to predominate for small objects. 
 
To be more specific, quantum mechanics describes objects in terms of probability waves. 
Strangely enough, quantum mechanics would describe an object that is completely at rest 
as a wave extending uniformly throughout space; this leads to a probability distribution 

 

2 

that is the same everywhere and is constant throughout all space. Accordingly, an object 
at rest, behaving quantum mechanically, would be equally likely to be located anywhere.   
 
And in quantum mechanics, an object moving at constant velocity would be described by 
a wave of uniform amplitude, and would also be equally likely to be located anywhere. 
Thus, in the simplest quantum mechanical description, an unconstrained object would be 
equally likely to be found anywhere at all in the universe. But human-sized objects are 
not found anywhere throughout space with equal probability, they are localized at 
particular positions. It is clear that quantum mechanical descriptions such as these clash 
with our experience and do not properly describe the objects of our familiar everyday 
world. But, why not? Why don’t macroscopic objects seem to behave quantum 
mechanically? 
 
Since ordinary macroscopic objects are localized instead of spread out, it would seem that 
classical reality could emerge from the substrate of quantum physics if quantum systems 
were forced into states described by localized wave packets.(5) So, how can objects be 
localized within a quantum mechanical world? It is possible to localize objects in 
quantum mechanics, but to do so necessarily causes changes in their motion. In quantum 
mechanics, any object that is localized would necessarily also be in motion along every 
direction associated with its localization. In particular, an initially localized object 
without further constraints would be represented in quantum mechanics by a localized 
wave packet with waves in motion spreading outward away from its position. A free 
object in quantum mechanics cannot be localized without also exhibiting this type of 
spreading or expanding motion away from its position of localization. 
 
If such an expanding motion were already always intrinsically present, could that account 
for the localization of large objects? 
 
Could we somehow make provision for an expansion of all macroscopic objects enough 
to permit their localization? Perhaps what is needed is an expansion of space within the 
volume of every large object? 
 
But, - we know that space is expanding, our whole universe is expanding. Such an 
expansion might be what saves our classical world from quantum behavior!(2,3) 
 
Can it be that the expansion of the universe makes our world of classical physics 
possible? 
 
 
To find out if this could really work, let’s continue with an easy approach using the 
uncertainty principle: 
 
A very important feature of quantum physics that seems to be truly distinct from classical 
physics is that in quantum physics there is an intrinsic uncertainty about what is going on. 
In classical physics, if you are uncertain about something, it’s just because there is 
information that you don’t know, or don’t know precisely enough. 

 

3 

 
One approach to exploring the transition between quantum mechanics and classical 
mechanics would seem to be to examine phenomena that might increase or decrease 
uncertainties in the location and motion of physical objects. Phenomena that might 
produce or affect uncertainties in the positions or motions of objects might therefore be 
considered as potentially having a role in creating the quantum-classical transition. 
 
Everything we deal with directly in our lives is macroscopic and behaves classically; we 
never get to experience quantum behavior directly, simply because the objects that 
exhibit it are too small. As a result, most of us think and visualize in terms of the classical 
behavior of objects, because our life experiences have been with large objects. 
Accordingly, we try to develop an understanding of quantum behavior from a classical 
(macroscopic) point of view. Let’s now adopt this approach. 
 
There is an easy way of analyzing the quantum behavior of objects, at least in an 
approximate way, from a human-sized macroscopic point of view. That is by using the 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle tells you about 
the uncertainties that must always be present due to wave behavior, without requiring a 
detailed mathematical analysis of the waves.  
 
What are these uncertainties? We usually think of uncertainties in measurements as due 
to crudeness or errors, or more generally to lack of knowledge on our part. However, in 
quantum mechanics there are intrinsic uncertainties that are not associated with the 
crudeness of our instruments or our sloppiness or our ignorance. These intrinsic 
uncertainties are present due to the wave nature of matter. (Think about trying to modify 
a wave pattern. For example, if you have a wave packet and squash it to make it smaller 
and more localized and more precisely positioned, then the wavelengths will be squeezed 
smaller and so the motion and momentum associated with the wave packet will change.)  
 
The leading idea of Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle is that there will always be some 
uncertainties, no matter how carefully you control or make measurements on a quantum 
mechanical object.  
 
What Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle tells you about are the relationships between 
different uncertainties. These are the uncertainties associated with particular 
characteristics of an object, like its position or its in momentum. (The object’s 
momentum is the product of its mass and its velocity.) Specifically, the uncertainty 
principle tells you that the product of the uncertainty in an object’s position and the 
uncertainty in the object’s momentum cannot be reduced below a particular limit. More 
specifically, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle states that the uncertainty in the position 
of an object, times its uncertainty in momentum, must always be larger than or equal to a 
small fixed universal quantity that is a constant of nature. Heisenberg found that the 
product of the uncertainties in momentum and position must be greater than a lower limit 
of h/4π. (Here, the quantity h is Planck’s constant, a very small natural constant 
characterizing quantum behavior.)(6) 
 

 

4 

So, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle tells you that you can control an object and make 
measurements on it as carefully and precisely as you possibly can, but the best that you 
can possibly do is to have an object whose simultaneous uncertainties in position and in 
momentum (or velocity) have a product equal to a limiting minimum value.  
 
For clarity, let’s suppose for now that we are going to control an object and perform 
measurements on its motion with the highest precision possible, which is the best 
precision that Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle will allow. Then the product of the 
uncertainty in momentum times the uncertainty in position will be equal to the smallest 
possible value, which is h/4π. 
 
Under these circumstances, if the uncertainty in momentum (or velocity) is made smaller, 
then the uncertainty in position must necessarily become larger; while if the uncertainty 
in momentum or velocity associated with the object is allowed to be larger, then its 
uncertainty in position can become smaller. To attain improved precision in the position 
of an object, there has to be a corresponding decrease in precision in the velocity of the 
object. Under these circumstances, the uncertainty in an object’s position could be 
reduced in the presence of an increased uncertainty in its velocity. 
 
So, under these circumstances, if the object is permitted to have a sufficiently large 
uncertainty in momentum (or velocity), then its uncertainty in position could be reduced 
to as small a value as desired. How small an uncertainty in position would be required so 
that a quantum object would appear to be behaving like a classical object? To prevent a 
quantum object from being so spread out that it does not behave like a macroscopic 
object, we could specify that it should have an uncertainty in position comparable to or 
small compared to its own size. (Then this object would have only a little bit of quantum 
fuzziness, not be spread out all over the map.) 
 
Reducing the uncertainty in position to a value small compared to the object’s size could 
take place if the associated uncertainty in velocity were permitted to be adequately large. 
 
But let’s return to the question of how there can be uncertainties, and how we can 
visualize them. How can there be uncertainty in location of an object? In a classical 
picture, if the object were hopping around with casual disregard for the classical laws of 
physics, that might perhaps give a visual idea. What about uncertainty in momentum or 
velocity? Erratic changes in velocity with time would seem to suffice. But since we 
regard both space and time as aspects of space-time, it would seem that there could be 
uncertainty in the velocity associated not only with changes in the velocity as a function 
of time but also with changes in the velocity as a function of space. If the velocity 
exhibits changes with time or space not accounted for by the customary forces that we 
consider applied to an object, it would appear that such changes might introduce 
uncertainties that could affect quantum behavior. 
 
Let’s think about what would be implied by such spatial changes in velocity within an 
extended object, and their effect on the associated uncertainty in position. 
 

 

5 

If such spatial differences in velocity within an object were to affect quantum behavior so 
as to cause it to become classical, it would seem that there would have to be an intrinsic 
velocity spread within objects that would be larger for large objects than it is in small 
objects, in order for large objects to be able to behave classically. How can there be a 
spread in velocity that is bigger for large objects and smaller for small objects? 
 
Suppose that there were already an intrinsic spread of velocities within any extended 
object. Well, there is. At least, there may be, if Hubble’s law governing the velocity of 
expansion in an expanding universe is fully applicable at all distances. Could this play a 
role in providing an intrinsic uncertainty in velocity for such an object? 
 
So cosmology could be giving us a clue. We live in an expanding universe, in which 
every point in space is moving away from every other. According to Hubble’s law of 
expansion, the velocity of recession between any two positions in the universe is 
proportional to the distance between them. The expansion of the universe on 
cosmological scales has been very well established for many years, and provides the basis 
for much of our present understanding of cosmology.(7)  
 
Thus, all physical objects in our expanding universe are immersed in an expanding spatial 
environment. The expansion of the universe is thought to be a property of space itself, so 
it seems reasonable that the universe may be expanding at all scales of distances, even at 
very small separation distances. And we know that for cosmological expansion, the 
recession velocity between positions increases linearly with the distance between the 
positions. The recession velocities between locations at very small distances from each 
other would be extraordinarily small, but because the Planck constant that is present in 
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle is also an extraordinarily small quantity, we need to 
consider the fact that even very small velocities may be large enough to have a significant 
effect on positional uncertainties. The spread of Hubble expansion velocities within 
extended objects might thus affect the uncertainties in the position of all objects. 
 
A feature of the Hubble expansion is that the magnitude of the Hubble expansion 
(recession) velocity increases with distance. Thus, the larger the object, the greater the 
spread of Hubble velocities will be within it. Larger objects would have a bigger spread 
of recessional velocities within their spatial extent, - and this could lead to smaller 
positional uncertainties for these large objects. 
 
Calculations do appear to indicate that the distinction between quantum and classical 
behavior may be based in part on the presence of cosmic expansion velocities within the 
spatial regions occupied by extended objects. The range of magnitudes and directions of 
the extraordinarily small cosmic recessional velocities within an extended object taken 
together with the Heisenberg uncertainty relation appears to require an uncertainty in 
spatial position dependent upon the size of the object. Specifying that such an uncertainty 
in position be smaller than the size of the object defines a critical size that may provide a 
fundamental limit distinguishing the realm of objects governed by classical laws from 
those governed by quantum mechanics.(2,3) 
 

 

6 

 
Let’s put some numbers in and check if this explanation can really work: 
 
So, let’s suppose that we have cosmic expansion velocities present within the space 
occupied by an object. If these Hubble expansion velocities have an effect on the 
uncertainty in position of the object, how large or small would the uncertainties in 
position be? If we use the spread in Hubble expansion velocities present in an extended 
object to calculate the uncertainty in position of that object using Heisenberg’s 
uncertainty principle, we can find out. 
 
(For those who want to delve deeper, an approximate expression that can be derived for 
the uncertainty in position is: ∆x ≈ h/(4πmHoL), where ∆x is the uncertainty in position, 
m is the mass of the object, L is the object’s approximate linear size, and Ho is the Hubble 
constant, which is the proportionality factor that relates Hubble expansion velocities to 
separation distances.)(2,3) 
 
The results tell us that very small-sized objects with small masses will have large 
uncertainties in their positions, and so will behave quantum mechanically; however, large 
objects with large masses will have small uncertainties in position because of the 
presence of larger Hubble expansion velocities within their extent, so they will behave 
classically. 
  
How big are the Hubble expansion velocities? At cosmological distances, Hubble 
velocities are very large, reaching as the velocity of light, but at ordinary human-sized 
distances they would be miniscule, unmeasureably small. Within an object that is about a 
centimeter in size Hubble expansion velocities would be of the order of 10-18 centimeters 
per second, undetectably small. If such velocities are present, we would have no direct 
way of knowing about it, as there would be no detectable motion of the object, which 
would seem to be completely at rest. 
 
Let’s put in the numbers for a piece of ordinary matter that is about a centimeter on each 
side. The Hubble expansion velocities in this object would be minute, of the order of 10-
18 centimeters per second. These tiny velocities would be unobservable, far too small to 
detect. And yet, the presence of these extraordinarily small Hubble expansion velocities 
within the volume occupied by this object would be able to reduce the uncertainty in 
position of this object to roughly 10-9 centimeter. This uncertainty in position is even 
smaller than the size of individual atoms, and is extremely small compared to this 
object’s physical size. Such an object would therefore have a very well-defined position. 
Since any object larger than this would have to encompass an even larger spread of 
Hubble expansion velocities, we could expect that all objects with sizes in the range of 
centimeters and larger would be forced by this effect to behave classically. 
 
On the other hand, if we put in the numbers for smaller samples which have smaller 
masses, we find out that the Hubble velocity spread within them does not reduce the 
positional uncertainty nearly as much. When we get down to object sizes of about 0.1 
mm (or to masses of about a microgram), the uncertainty in position of these objects turns 

 

7 

out to be in a range comparable to the size of the objects themselves. Objects in this 
intermediate range of matter thus might be able to start to exhibit quantum fuzziness 
about them, so that their behavior could go either way, depending on other environmental 
influences.(5) 
 
For objects with masses of the order of a microgram we find that this effect therefore 
leads to a rough limiting threshold between quantum mechanical and classical behavior. 
This is not unreasonable as an approximate threshold that would provide an upper limit 
for quantum behavior, as there are other effects such as decoherence effects that can 
contribute toward bringing about classical behavior in quantum systems.(5) 
 
For objects smaller than this range, the spread of Hubble expansion velocities would 
necessarily be even smaller. Thus, the positional uncertainty would be even larger than 
the size of the object, and that would rule out classical behavior. That is, for objects 
smaller than about a microgram, the effect on positional uncertainty consequent to 
cosmic expansion within the object’s volume would be inadequate to allow localization 
of such an object. Accordingly, any such smaller sample of matter would be expected to 
exhibit quantum mechanical behavior as an entire object, unless its behavior is 
sufficiently affected by other environmental influences to bring about classical behavior.     
 
We need to bear in mind that these are only rather rough estimates, but they seem to be at 
least roughly in a range to provide an upper limit on quantum behavior and account for 
the quantum-classical transition between true quantum behavior and the classical 
behavior of the macroscopic objects that we deal with in everyday life.  And this effect 
will systematically provide for the classical behavior of all large objects. 
 
Observationally, there is not a sharply-defined dividing line or border between 
macroscopic objects whose physical behavior can be described by the rules of classical 
mechanics, and the microscopic and submicroscopic objects that usually require quantum 
descriptions. Effective classical behavior can extend down to the level of medium-sized 
molecules. (Most molecules except the very small ones seem to have well-defined spatial 
structures.) Generally speaking, the separation seems to occur in the vicinity of 10-6 
centimeters. At smaller distances, around 10-7 centimeters, clear quantum effects like 
quantum tunneling occur reproducibly. At larger sizes, there are viruses as large as 10-5 
centimeters. So, effectively around 10-6 centimeters is very roughly where the domain 
fully governed by quantum mechanics seems in practice to begin. 
 
The effect of Hubble expansion velocities would not by itself bring a quantum-classical 
transition down quite to these lower levels; rather, it sets a somewhat higher limit above 
which quantum behavior would be unable to occur. But the presence of Hubble 
expansion velocities has the powerful effect of setting a threshold above which no 
quantum behavior would take place for individual objects.  Some degree of classical 
behavior observed at smaller distances may result from decoherence in interactions with 
the environment.  
 

 

8 

We have noted that one remarkable feature of the quantum-classical transition is that it is 
so robust, - it does not seem to matter what kinds of quantum pieces are put together or 
how they are assembled; as long as the assembly is big enough, it results in classical 
behavior.(4)  Why exactly is it that when you put lots of small systems together, somehow, 
as a whole, they behave classically? The effects of Hubble expansion could provide the 
needed explanation. So another important aspect of the contribution of Hubble expansion 
velocities to the quantum-classical transition is that, since it depends only on size and 
mass, not on detailed composition or other effects, this effect can explain systematically 
why the transition from quantum to classical behavior is so robust. 
 
 
So, we conclude. . . . . 
 
Thus, it appears that the presence of Hubble expansion velocities may be introducing 
uncertainties in the motion of large objects that are sufficiently large that, in accordance 
with Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, the uncertainties in position become small 
enough that these objects will appear to behave classically. Hubble expansion velocities 
present within an extended object seems to have the effect of setting a threshold above 
which quantum behavior for the entire object will not take place. 
 
So, it seems that the presence of cosmic expansion velocities in matter may be what 
makes our world of classical physics possible. The reason that we live in a classical world 
rather than in a quantum world may well be because we live in an expanding universe. 
 
 
References 
 
1. David Bohm, Quantum Theory (Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs NJ, 1959). 
 
2. C. L. Herzenberg, “Becoming classical: A possible cosmological influence on the 
quantum-classical transition,” accepted for publication, Physics Essays, December 2006. 
 
3. C. L. Herzenberg, “The role of Hubble time in the quantum-classical transition,” 
submitted for publication, Physics Essays, September 19 2006. 
 
4. Hideo Mabuchi, “The Quantum-Classical Transition on Trial,” Engineering & Science 
No. 2, pp. 22-29 (2002). 
 
5. Wojciech H. Zurek, “Decoherence and the Transition from Quantum to Classical,” 
Physics Today, October 1991, pp. 36-44. 
 
6. Wikipedia, “Uncertainty principle,” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncertainty_principle 
. 
7. Wikipedia, “Hubble’s law,” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hubble_expansion .  
 
 

 

9 

