The optical near-field 

of an aperture tip 

A. Drezet, M. J. Nasse, S. Huant and J. C. Woehl 

Laboratoire de Spectrométrie Physique, Université Joseph Fourier Grenoble et CNRS, 

38402 Saint Martin d’Hères, France 

We use fluorescent nanospheres as scalar detectors for the electric-field 

intensity  in  order  to  probe  the  near-field  of  an  optical  tip  used  in 

aperture-type  near-field 

scanning  optical  microscopy 

(NSOM). 

Surprisingly, the recorded fluorescence images show two intensity lobes 

if the sphere diameter is smaller that the aperture diameter, as expected 

only  in  the  case  of  vector  detectors  like  single  molecules.  We  present  a 

simple but realistic, analytical model for the electric field created by light 

emitted  by  a  NSOM  tip  which  is  quantitative  agreement  with  the 

experimental data.  

A  crucial  step  towards  the  development  of  nanoscale  optoelectronic  devices  from 

building  blocks  like  single  molecules,  semiconductor  nanocrystals,  or  quantum  dots  is 

the  study  of  their  behavior  under  optical  stimulation.  On  these  length  scales,  near-field 

effects  and  diffraction  phenomena  play  a  major  role  both  for  the  interaction  of  such 

subwavelength structures with incident light as well as for the communication pathways 

 

 

 

  1 

between  them.  While  diffraction  phenomena  are  among  the  most  important  and 

intensively studied effects in optics with a wide range of applications in other domains of 

physics (1-3), an analysis of the situation is not always straightforward. Diffraction by an 

object  bigger  than  the  wavelength  of  the  incident  electromagnetic  radiation  can  be 

described  using  either  classical,  scalar  theory  (4)  or  an  electromagnetic  approach  based 

on Maxwell's equations (5). Diffraction by objects (or apertures) comparable to or much 

smaller  than  the  wavelength  of  the  incident  radiation,  however,  is  more  difficult  to 

analyze,  and  only  few  analytical  solutions  for  specific  geometries  are  known.  With  the 

increasing research activity in nano-optics in recent years (11), the open question of how 

light passes through a subwavelength aperture and interacts with the sample has attracted 

a  lot  of  interest.  An  answer  to  the  problem  is  not  only  of  fundamental  importance  for 

image interpretation and optical resolution in near-field optics, but also for the detection 

and  addressing  of  single  nano-objects  (single  molecules  (12-16),  semiconductor 

nanocrystals  (17),  luminescent  centers  in  quantum  well  structures  (17a),  and  quantum 

dots  (18,19)),  and  for  applications  in  fields  like  single  photon  sources  (20,21)  and 

quantum optics (19). 

In  order  to  address  the  question  of  how  light  is  diffracted  by  a  subwavelength 

aperture,  we  use  a  near-field  scanning  optical  microscope  (NSOM)  tip  in  illumination 

mode (22-24) as a model system, i.e. a tapered, optical single mode fiber covered with a 

thin (100 nm) Al coating presenting a small, circular aperture at the tip apex. The electric 

field close to the aperture is imaged using fluorescent nanospheres which, depending on 

their size, yield qualitatively different fluorescence images. A frequently cited model for 

  2 

interpreting  such  images  is  the  Bouwkamp  solution  (25)  for  a  circular,  subwavelength 

hole  in  a  conducting  screen  (which  we  will  refer  to  as  a  Bethe  (6)  aperture  in  planar 

geometry)  illuminated  by  an  incident  plane  wave,  which  seems  to  be  a  rather 

questionable model for an optical fiber tip (a Bethe aperture in conical geometry). Often, 

elaborate  numerical  calculations  for  specific  tip-sample  configurations  are  carried  out 

(26-28)  which,  however,  depend  on  the  choice  of  boundary  conditions  as  well  as  the 

discretization and iteration procedures used.  It appears therefore important to develop a 

simple  but  realistic,  analytical  description  of  the  tip's  electromagnetic  field,  and 

especially  of  its  electric  field  component  since  it  dominates  the  interaction  with 

fluorescent  nano-objects.  In  previous  work,  we  have  given  an  analytical  description  of 

the electromagnetic far-field of a NSOM tip (29,30). We now present a simple, analytical 

model for the electric field component close to the tip which correctly takes into account 

its  conical  geometry,  and,  in  contrast  to  the  solution  for  the  planar  Bethe  aperture, 

accurately reproduces the experimental results.  

It  is  well  known  that  fluorescent  molecules,  when  in  resonance  with  the  excitation 

light,  are  selective  detectors  for  the  incident  light  polarization  since  their  fluorescence 

intensity is proportional to (µ·E)² where µ is the molecular transition dipole moment and 

E  the  electric  component  of  the  excitation  field.  This  property  has  been  used  to 

characterize,  for  example,  the  squared  electric  field  components  in  the  focus  of  a  high 

numerical  aperture  lens  (31)  or  near  an  optical  fiber  tip  (12,14).  The  analysis  of  the 

acquired  images,  however,  requires  an  exact  knowledge  of  the  molecular  transition 

dipole  moment  in  all  three  directions.  This  is  not  the  case  with  nanospheres  of  small 

  3 

diameter  which  contain  a  large  number  of  fluorescent  molecules  that  are  uniformly 

distributed  throughout  the  sphere  volume.  Since  their  transition  dipole  moments  are 

randomly  oriented,  the  fluorescence  intensity  of  such  an  ensemble  of  N  incoherently 

emitting molecules is proportional to 

I

N

(cid:181) ∑

=
1

i

(
Eµ
i

i

)

2

N
3

2

2

E

 

sphere

volume

where  µ  is  the  typical  value  for  the  molecular  transition  moment.  Fluorescence  labeled 

nanospheres  act  therefore  as  isotropic  volume  detectors  of  the  average  electric  field 

intensity  and  can  be  used  to  produce  an  intensity  map  of  the  electric  field  without  any 

further knowledge of orientational parameters (32). In contrast to single molecules which 

are  vector  detectors,  fluorescent  nanospheres,  in  the  limit  of  very  small  sizes,  act  as 

scalar detectors of the electric field. It is clear that details in the electric field distribution 

of a NSOM tip can only be picked up when the sphere diameter is significantly smaller 

than that of the optical aperture. This behavior is shown in Fig. 1A et B which presents 

the recorded fluorescence images for two different ratios of sphere and aperture diameter. 

When  the  sphere  is  bigger  than  the  tip  aperture  (Fig.  1A),  the  recorded  fluorescence 

profile is smooth and presents no substructures, while two fluorescence lobes appear in 

the case where the sphere is smaller than the tip aperture (Fig. 1B). As can be seen, all 

observed  nanosphere  fluorescence  images  have  the  same  orientation  and  shape  which 

means that the nanospheres probe the optical tip and not vice-versa. 

To explain the observed intensity distribution, we have developed a simple model for 

the  electric  field  around  the  metal  coated  aperture  tip.  Our  model  is  based  on  the 

  4 

m
»
(cid:215)
assumption  that  the  electric  field 

E

exp(

t

)

  produced  by  the  tip  is  essentially  static 

iw

(satisfying  the  potential  condition 

0E =

)  and  is  completely  characterized  by  the 

electric charge distribution located on the metal coating of the tip apex.  If we call (x,y) 

the  aperture  plane  and  z  the  tip  axis  (with  the  incident  light  polarized  along  x  and 

propagating in the z direction), we can assume a surface charge density σ of the form 

,(

z
),

=

f

z
),(

cos

 

for any point [x,y,z] = [ρ,f

,z] on the metal coating, where  f

 is the angle with respect to 

the  polarization  plane.  The 

cos

  dependence  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  linearly 

polarized,  optical  LP0,1  mode  in  the  single  mode  fiber  is  mainly  coupled  to  the 

fundamental,  transverse  electric  (TE)  mode  of  the  conical  wave  guide  preceeding  the 

aperture  zone  (33,  34).  This  guided  mode  will  induce  polarization  charges  in  the 

surrounding  metal  coating  at  the  tip  apex  showing  the  same 

cos

  dependence.  In  the 

simplest case, we can assume a linear, ring-like charge density 

l

)(

=

l

cos

0

 

concentrated  at  the  rim  of  the  tip  aperture  of  radius  a  (Fig.  2A).  A  map  of  E2  and  the 

squared electric field components is presented in Fig. 3A for the (x,y) plane at z = 0.3a 

from  the  aperture  plane.  This  ring  model  produces  two  intensity  lobes  for  the  total 

electric  field  and  is  therefore  able  to  qualitatively  explain  the  experimentally  observed 

emission  lobes  from  Fig.  1B.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not  satisfactory  because  i)  it  does  not 

obey Maxwell's boundary conditions on the metal, and ii) it implies a logarithmic energy 

divergence at the aperture rim. This latter point is forbidden by the classical analysis of 

light diffraction by an edge or a corner (35). 

  5 

-
·
(cid:209)
f
r
f
r
s
f
f
f
f
In our problem, the edge-corner condition naturally leads to the requirement that the 

electric  surface  charge  density  increases  not  faster  than  (1/r)ⁿ    where  r  is  the  distance 

from the rim (Fig. 2B) and where n = 1 – π / (2π - β) is a function of the corner angle β 

(5). We must therefore impose 

=s

g

z
/),(

nr

cos

 

(g has no singularity at the rim), and we suppose g = σ0 = const since the variation of g is 

negligible  for objects, like the tip  apex, with a size on the order of or smaller than one 

wavelength. The angle β and the tip angle α are related by α = π - 2β. The electric field 

produced  by  such  a  surface  charge  distribution  is  represented  in  Figs.  2B  and  3B  and 

shows the same intensity lobes as the simpler ring model. It is interesting to note that the 

image  representing  E2  is  entirely  dominated  by  the  x  and  z  components  of  the  electric 

field, and carries direct information on their squared maximum values in the image plane: 

the  x  component  is  highest  in  the  image  center  (where  the  z  component  is  negligible) 

while  the  z  component  is  highest  in  the  lobe  centers  (where  the  x  component  is  very 

weak). A comparison with the Bouwkamp solution for a planar Bethe aperture (Fig. 3C) 

shows strong, qualitative differences with respect to the presented models. This model is 

unable to even qualitatively account for the experimentally observed fluorescence images 

from Fig. 1B. 

On the basis of the proposed surface charge model, we can simulate the fluorescence 

images  of  nanospheres  obtained  by  NSOM  by  integrating  the  electric  field  intensity  in 

over  the  sphere  volume.  Fig.  1C  shows  such  a  simulation  for  a  sphere  to  aperture 

diameter ratio of 0.37. The image is obtained for an optical tip with an aperture of radius 

  6 

f
r
a = 300 nm, a 100 nm metal coating and a cone angle α of 30 degrees. The simulation 

assumes that the tip keeps its vertical position constant while scanning over the sphere. 

This is in good agreement with the experimental fact that the topographic image does not 

vary  significantly  over  the  small  fluorescent  region  of  the  nanosphere  (36).  For  the 

simulation, a sphere on the sample surface is considered as an (ideal) volume detector for 

the  electric  field  intensity  as  discussed  above.  As  a  confirmation  of  the  experimental 

observations,  the  emission  lobes  disappear  and  merge  into  one  spot  when  the  sphere 

diameter becomes several times larger than the aperture diameter. 

Fig. 4A presents simulated line scans along the symmetry axis of fluorescence images 

with  increasing  axial  distance  ∆z  (i.e.  the  distance  between  the  aperture  plane  and  the 

closest  point  on  the  sphere  surface)  for  fluorescence  imaging  of  the  smallest 

commercially  available  fluorescent  nanospheres  with  a  diameter  of  20  nm  by  a  typical 

NSOM tip (optical aperture of 100 nm in diameter, cone angle α of 30 degrees, 100 nm 

Al  coating).  As  can  be  seen,  the  separation  between  the  two  lobes  decreases  with 

increasing  axial  distance.  This  can  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  two  lobes  are 

essentially due to the Ez component which decays rapidly with increasing distance from 

the aperture rim. It can be noted that this near-field effect is a general feature since both 

the ring model as well as the surface model give rise to a very similar behavior (see the 

dotted  and  solid  lines  shown  in  Fig.  4A).  Fig.  4B  presents  the  variation  of  the  contrast 

ratio  Imax/Icenter  between  the  maximum  intensity  on  top  of  the  lobes  versus  the  center 

intensity with increasing axial distance. The dependence is very strong for the first 20 nm 

but  levels  out  at  large  distances  from  the  tip  aperture.  (In  this  case,  the  differences 

  7 

between the surface model and the ring model are much more pronounced.) It should be 

emphasized that this ratio is a direct experimental measure for the squared ratio of the z 

versus  x  components  of  the  electric  field  (as  discussed  earlier)  in  the  limit  of  small 

nanospheres.   

On the basis of the surface model, we propose to use the lobe separation and contrast 

ratio Imax/Icenter from fluorescence images of small nanospheres to determine in situ both 

the aperture radius a and the axial (feedback) distance ∆z under the actual experimental 

conditions.  In  addition,  the  polarization  of  the  incident  light  can  be  deduced  from  the 

symmetry  axis  passing  through  the  lobes.  For  the  experiment  presented  in  Fig.  1B,  we 

have determined the aperture radius and axial distance to be a = 300 nm and ∆z = 18 nm. 

In this case, the experimental profiles of fluorescence intensity along the symmetry axis 

are in perfect agreement with the simulated curve (see Fig. 1D).   

Our models differ strongly from the Bouwkamp solution for the diffraction of a plane 

wave  by  a  Bethe  aperture  in  planar  geometry.  As  seen  in  Fig.  3,  the  Ez  component  is 

dominant for the surface and ring models, whereas the Bouwkamp field is dominated by 

the Ex component. The Ez term never dominates the Ex component even in the context of 

the complete solution as given by Meixner-Andrejewski (7) and to which the Bouwkamp 

expression is the first order approximation in powers of k = ω/c. A planar Bethe aperture 

illuminated  by  a  plane  wave  is  not  an  adequate  description  for  the  optical  tip  because 

both geometry and incident wave topology are very different from the real situation.  

In  addition,  experimental  far  field  measurements  prove  the  existence  of  an  electric 

dipole term (37) which is present in our models but is completely missing in all solutions 

  8 

for the Bethe aperture in planar geometry. More precisely, the measurements show that 

there are effective electric (Peff) and magnetic dipoles (Meff) located in the aperture plane 

which  are  related  by  the  equation 

M

=

ˆ2
Pz

eff

e

 ff

  (where  zˆ   denotes  the  propagation 

direction  in  the  fiber).  A  modal  analysis  based  on  an  expansion  in  conical  transverse 

electric  and  magnetic  modes  justifies  these  observations  only  if  an  electrostatic  and 

magnetostatic  field  is  present  in  the  aperture  zone.  However,  all  solutions  to  the  Bethe 

problem yield only a magnetostatic but no electrostatic (zero order) term. It can be added 

that our models do not analyze the magnetostatic field of the fiber tip, but that it can be 

easily obtained in a similar manner. The existence of this component and its influence on 

the  electric  field,  however,  can  be  safely  ignored  in  the  present  case  which  is  based  on 

electric dipole transitions. 

We  have  presented  a  simple,  theoretical  model  for  the  electric  field  of  light 

transmitted by a conical NSOM tip. Our model is able to explain, both qualitatively and 

quantitatively, the recorded fluorescence images of nanospheres that are small compared 

to the aperture diameter. The widely admitted Bouwkamp solution for the planar Bethe 

aperture  fails  to  explain these  images  even  qualitatively.  Several  interesting  differences 

between  these  models  can  be  noted,  in  particular  a  much  stronger  z  component  in  our 

model as compared to the Bouwkamp solution. We plan to address this distinctive feature 

by  NSOM  imaging  of  fluorescent  molecules  under  polarization  detection.  Fluorescent 

nanospheres  are  valuable  objects  since  they  act  as  isotropic  volume  detectors  for  the 

squared electric field intensity. Together with the proposed model, they can be used for 

an  in  situ  determination  of  both  tip  aperture  and  axial  distance  under  the  actual 

  9 

·
experimental conditions which is significant for practical purposes. We also plan to use 

these objects in order to establish a detailed electric field intensity map of a NSOM tip in 

all  three  dimensions.  Based  on  the  proposed  model,  it  is  possible  to  determine  the 

orientation  of  single  molecule  emitters  in  all  three  dimensions  from  recorded 

fluorescence  images,  which  has  important  implications  for  the  addressing  of  single 

molecules  and  optical  nanomanipulations.  It  is  also  clear  that  the  electric  field 

distribution  at  the  fiber  tip  has  a  direct  influence  on  the  excitation  properties  of  single 

nano-objects  located  underneath  the  tip  that  can  be  used  for  potential  photonic 

nanosources and quantum optical experiments in the near-field domain (19). 

 10 

References 

1. D. L. Freimund, K. Aflatooni, H. Batelaan, Nature 413, 142 (2001). 

2. O. Nairz, B. Brezger, M. Arndt, A. Zeilinger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 160401 (2001). 

3. M. Arndt et al., Nature 401, 680 (1999). 

4. M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1959). 

5. J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley, New York, ed. 2, 1975). 

6. H. A. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 66, 163 (1944). 

7. J. Meixner, W. Andrejewski, Ann. d. Physik 6, 157 (1950). 

11. Proceedings of Near-Field Optics 7, Rochester, NY, August 11-15, 2002. 

12. E. Betzig, R. J. Chichester, Science 262, 1422 (1993). 

13. J. K. Trautman, J. J. Macklin, L. E. Brus, E. Betzig, Nature 369, 40 (1994). 

14. N. F. van Hulst, J. Veerman,  M. F. García-Parajó, L. Kuipers, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 

7799 (2000). 

15. J. Michaelis, C. Hettich, J. Mlynek, V. Sandoghdar, Nature 405, 325 (2000). 

17a. H. F. Hess, E. Betzig, T. D. Harris, L. N. Pfeiffer, K. W. West, Science 264, 1740 

16. W. E.  Moerner, M. Orrit, Science 283, 1670 (1999). 

17. A. Naber et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 210801 (2002). 

(1994). 

18. M. Brun et al., Solid State Commun. 121, 407 (2002). 

19. J. R. Guest et al., Science 293, 2224 (2001). 

20. Ch. Brunel, B. Lounis, Ph. Tamarat, M. Orrit, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 2722 (1999). 

21. B. Lounis, W. E. Moerner, Nature 407, 491 (2000) . 

  11 

22. D. W. Pohl, W. Denk, M. Lanz, Appl. Phys. Lett. 44, 651 (1984). 

23. E. Betzig, J. K. Trautman, T. D. Harris, J. S. Wliner, R. L.Kostelak, Science 251, 

1468 (1991). 

24. E. Betzig, J. K. Trautman, Science 257, 189 (1992). 

25. C. J. Bouwkamp, Philips Res. Rep. 5, 321 (1950). 

26. L. Novotny, D. W. Pohl, P. Regli, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 11, 1768 (1994). 

27. O. J. F. Martin, C. Girard, A. Dereux, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 526 (1995). 

28. C. Chicanne et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 097402 (2002). 

29. A. Drezet, J. C. Woehl, S. Huant, Phys. Rev. E 65, 046611 (2002). 

30. A. Drezet, J. C. Woehl,  S. Huant, Europhys. Lett. 54, 736 (2001). 

31. B. Sick, B. Hecht, U. P. Wild, L. Novotny, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 7799 (2000). 

32. Strictly speaking, the electric field E in the above-mentioned equation denotes not 

only the incident excitation field but also the perturbation and reaction of the sphere, a 

second-order effect that can be neglected in this analysis. 

33. L. Novotny, thesis, ETH Zürich (1996).  

34. B. Knoll, F. Keilmann, Opt. Commun. 162, 177 (1999). 

35. J. Meixner, Ann. d. Physik  6, 1 (1949). 

36. This behavior is easily explained by the fact that the fluorescence image is generated 

by the optical aperture alone while the topographic image is due to interaction with the 

entire NSOM tip, including its metal coating. 

37. C. Obermüller, K. Karrai, Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 3408 (1995). 

38. K. Karrai, R. D. Grober, Appl. Phys. Lett. 66, 1842 (1995). 

 12 

39. Supported by grants from the Volkswagen Foundation (Program "Physics, Chemistry 

and Biology with Single Molecules"), the Institut de Physique de la Matière Condensée, 

and the CNRS. 

 

 13 

A 

B 

1 µm 

C 

1 µm 

D 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0 

2 

1 
3 
5 
Distance (µm) 

4 

6 

Fig. 1. Fluorescence images of nanospheres of different size taken by a NSOM tip. The 

images show carboxylate-modified, yellow-green fluorescent nanospheres (Molecular 

Probes) with diameters of (A) 500 nm ± 5% and (B) 220 nm ± 5% , respectively, which 

are deposited from basic solution (pH 10-11) on a PMMA layer spin-coated onto a clean 

glass cover slide. A few hundred µW of the 514.5 nm line of an Argon ion laser are 

coupled into a single mode optical fiber with a tapered, metal coated end presenting an 

optical aperture (typical transmission of 10-3 to 10-2) which excites the sample, held at 

nanometer distance using a feedback loop with tuning fork detection (38). The emission 

 14 

is collected in the far field above the sample surface using an Al mirror and, after 

removal of residual excitation light using color glass filters (Schott) and interference 

filters, detected by (A) a low dark count avalanche photodiode module (EG&G) or (B) a 

channel photomultiplier (PerkinElmer) in photon counting mode. The integration time 

for each point in the image is 100 ms and 50 ms, respectively. (C) Simulated 

fluorescence image of a 220 nm diameter sphere scanned by a 600 nm diameter aperture 

tip (indicated by the overlaid circle) at an axial distance of ∆z = 18 nm between the 

aperture plane and the closest point on the sphere surface. (D) Horizontal cross-section of 

(C) together with fluorescence intensity profiles from the four nanospheres (different 

symbols) shown in (B). The theoretical and experimental curves are in perfect agreement.

 15 

A 

B 

z 

x 

β 

r 

r 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2. Cross-section of an optical fiber tip with the associated electric field lines and a 

logarithmic intensity map. The polarization of the incident light propagating in the fiber 

core (z direction) is oriented along the x axis. The electric field is generated by 

polarization charges in a perfect metal coating modeled by (A) a linear charge 

distribution around the aperture rim, and (B) a surface charge distribution on the lateral 

and inner surface of the metal coating surrounding the tapered fiber (aperture diameter 

2a). The parameters r (distance from the aperture rim) and the cone angle β are indicated 

in the figure. The electric field lines in the immediate vicinity of the metal surface show 

artefacts mainly due to the numerical discretization procedure, which become, however, 

insignificant at larger distances.

 16 

A 

B 

C 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

E2 

Ex

2 

Ey

2 

Ez

2 

Fig. 3. Intensity maps for the electric field (E2, Ex

2, Ey

2, and Ez

2) at a distance of z = 0.3a 

from  the  tip  aperture  of  radius  a  (the  images  in  each  column  share  the  same  colorbar).  

Electric  field  created  by  (A)  a  ring-like  charge  distribution  on  the  rim  of  the  optical 

aperture as illustrated in Fig. 2A, (B) a surface  charge distribution as illustrated in  Fig. 

2B, and (C) a planar Bethe aperture (Bouwkamp solution). The images on the first line 

 17 

correspond  to  those  that  would  be  obtained  using  a  pointlike,  scalar  detector  for  the 

electric field (e.g. an idealized, infinitely small fluorescent nanosphere). As can be seen, 

only the first two models are able to produce two lobes for the E2 distribution. The last 

three lines correspond to fluorescence images predicted for pointlike vector detectors for 

the  electric  field  (e.g.  single  fluorescent  molecules)  oriented  along  the  x,  y,  and  z 

direction,  respectively.  While  the  E2  intensity  map  in  the  case  of  the  surface  model  is 

similar  to  the  image  in  Fig.  1C,  the  latter  was  obtained  by  averaging  the  electric  field 

intensity over the sphere volume in all three dimensions for each point of the image (the 

closest point on the sphere surface is at z = 0.06a, and the sphere center at z = 0.43a from 

the aperture plane). 

 18 

A 

100 nm 

B 

1.5 

Imax/Icenter 
2 

2.5 

3 

Imax 

Icenter 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
)

m
n
(
 
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

 
l
a
i
x
A

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

100 

Fig. 4. Theoretical evolution of characteristic parameters for fluorescence imaging of 

nanospheres with increasing axial distance ∆z. (A) Cartography of the fluorescence 

intensity in the (x,z) plane and lobe separation distance as a function of ∆z. The solid and 

dotted lines mark the intensity maxima with increasing axial distance for the surface and 

ring charge model, respectively. (B) Variation of the contrast ratio between maximum 

intensity on top of the lobes (Imax) versus the center intensity (Icenter, see insert) as a 

function of ∆z (same scale as in A). 

 19 

