 

Lung Nodule Detection in Screening Computed 
Tomography 

Ilaria Gori, Roberto Bellotti, Piergiorgio Cerello, Sorin Cristian Cheran, Giorgio De Nunzio, Maria Evelina Fantacci, 
Parnian Kasae, Giovanni Luca Masala, Alessandro Preite Martinez and Alessandra Retico  

 Abstract–A  computer-aided  detection  (CAD)  system  for  the 
identification  of  pulmonary  nodules  in  low-dose  multi-detector 
helical  Computed  Tomography  (CT)  images  with  1.25  mm  slice 
thickness  is  presented.  The  basic  modules  of  our  lung-CAD 
system,  a  dot-enhancement  filter  for  nodule  candidate  selection 
and  a  neural  classifier  for  false-positive  finding  reduction,  are 
described. The results obtained on the collected database of lung 
CT scans are discussed. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

L 

UNG cancer is one of the most relevant public health issues. 
Despite  significant  research  efforts  and  advances  in  the 
understanding  of  tumour  biology,  there  was  no  reduction  of 
the mortality over the last decades. 
  Lung  cancer  most  commonly  manifests  itself  with  the 
formation  of  non-calcified  pulmonary  nodules.  Computed 
Tomography  (CT)  is  the  best  imaging  modality  for  the 
detection  of  small  pulmonary  nodules  [1],  particularly  since 
the  introduction  of  the  helical  technology.  However,  the 
amount of data that need to be interpreted in CT examinations 
can  be  very  large,  especially  when  multi-detector  helical  CT 
and thin collimation are used, thus generating up to about 300 
two-dimensional images per scan, corresponding to about 150 
MB.  In  order  to  support  radiologists  in  the  identification  of 
early-stage  pathological  objects,  researchers  have  recently 

                                                           
Manuscript received November 17, 2006. This work was supported in part by 
Centro Studi e Ricerche Enrico Fermi and Bracco Imaging S.p.A.. 
I. Gori is with Bracco Imaging S.p.A., Milano, Italy and Istituto Nazionale di 
Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Pisa, Pisa, Italy (e-mail: ilariagori@gmail.com). 
R. Bellotti is with Dipartimento Interateneo di Fisica, Università di Bari, Bari, 
Italy,  Istituto  Nazionale  di  Fisica  Nucleare,  Sezione  di  Bari,  Bari,  Italy  and 
TIRES  -  Center  of  Innovative  Technologies  for  Signal  Detection  and 
Processing, Università di Bari, Bari, Italy (e-mail: roberto.bellotti@ba.infn.it). 
P.  Cerello  is  with  Istituto  Nazionale  di  Fisica  Nucleare,  Sezione  di  Torino, 
Torino, Italy (e-mail: cerello@to.infn.it). 
S.  C.  Cheran  is  with  Dipartimento  di  Fisica,  Università  di  Genova,  Genova, 
Italy  and  Istituto  Nazionale  di  Fisica  Nucleare,  Sezione  di  Torino,  Torino, 
Italy (e-mail: cheran@to.infn.it). 
G. De Nunzio is with Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Lecce, Lecce, Italy 
and  Istituto  Nazionale  di  Fisica  Nucleare,  Sezione  di  Lecce,  Lecce,  Italy  (e-
mail: giorgio.denunzio@unile.it). 
M.  E.  Fantacci  is  with  Dipartimento  di  Fisica,  Università  di  Pisa,  Pisa,  Italy 
and Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Pisa, Pisa, Italy (e-mail: 
fantacci@df.unipi.it). 
P.  Kasae  is  with  Istituto  Nazionale  di  Fisica  Nucleare,  Sezione  di  Cagliari, 
Cagliari, Italy (e-mail: parnian.kasae@ca.infn.it). 
G.  L.  Masala  is  with  Struttura  Dipartimentale  di  Matematica  e  Fisica, 
Università di Sassari, Sassari, Italy and Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, 
Sezione di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy (e-mail: giovanni.masala@ca.infn.it). 
A. Preite Martinez is with Centro Studi e Ricerche Enrico Fermi, Roma, Italy 
(e-mail: ale@incal.net). 
A. Retico is with Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy (e-mail: alessandra.retico@pi.infn.it). 

begun to explore computer-aided detection (CAD) methods in 
this area. 
  Among  the  approaches  that  are  being  tried  to  reduce  the 
mortality  of  lung  cancer  is  the  implementation  of  screening 
programs for the subsample of the population with higher risk 
of  developing  the  disease.  The  First  Italian  Randomized 
Controlled  Trial  that  aims  to  study  the  potential  impact  of 
screening on a high-risk population using low-dose helical CT 
was recently started [2]. A CAD system for small pulmonary 
nodule  identification,  based  on  the  analysis  of  images 
acquired  in  this  trial,  was developed in the framework of the 
MAGIC-5 collaboration funded by Istituto Nazionale di Fisica 
Nucleare (INFN) and Ministero dell’Università e della Ricerca 
(MIUR). The system is based on a dot-enhancement filter for 
the  identification  of  nodule  candidates  and  a  neural  network 
based classification module for the reduction of the number of 
false-positive (FP) findings per scan. 
 

 
Fig. 1.  Some examples of pulmonary nodules. 
 

 

II.  THE CAD SYSTEM 

Pulmonary  nodules  may  be  characterized  by  very  low  CT 
values  and/or  low  contrast,  may  have  CT  values  similar  to 
those  of  blood  vessels  and  airway  walls  or  may  be  strongly 
connected to them (see Fig. 1). 

The  strategy  we  adopted  focuses  first  on  the  detection  of 
nodule  candidates  by  means  of  a  3D  enhancing  filter 
emphasizing spherically-shaped objects. As a second step, the 
reduction of false-positive findings by means of a voxel-based 
neural approach is implemented. The two steps of the analysis 
are applied only on the lung volume identified by means of a 
segmentation  algorithm  that  defines  the  internal  region, 
according to the procedure proposed in [3]. 

The  automated  nodule  candidate  detection  should  be 
characterized by a sensitivity value close to 100%, in order to 
avoid  setting  an  a  priori  upper  bound  to  the  CAD  system 
performances.  To  this  aim,  lung  nodules  are  modelled  as 
spherical objects and a dot-enhancement filter is applied to the 

 

3D  matrix  of voxel data. The filter attempts to determine the 
local geometrical characteristics of each voxel, by computing 
the  eigenvalues  of  the  Hessian  matrix  and  evaluating  a 
magnitude  and  a  likelihood  functions  specifically  configured 
to discriminate between the local morphology of linear, planar 
and  spherical  objects,  the  latest  modelled  as  having  3D 
Gaussian  sections  [4],  [5].  To  enhance  the  sensitivity  of  this 
filter to nodules of different sizes, a multi-scale approach was 
followed.  According  to  the  indications  given  in  [4],[6],[7],  a 
Gaussian  smoothing  at  several  scales  was  implemented.  In 
particular, the Gaussian smoothing and the computation of the 
Hessian  matrix  were  combined  in  a  convolution  between  the 
original  data  and  the  second  derivatives  of  a  Gaussian 
smoothing  function.  This  procedure  is  based  on  an  a  priori 
knowledge  of  the  size  range  of  the  nodules  to  be  enhanced. 
The  range  and  the  number  of  intermediate  smoothing  scales 
must be determined empirically on the basis of the dataset of 
available  CT  scans.  Once  a  set  of  N  filtered  images  is 
computed, each voxel of the 3D  space matrix is assigned the 
maximum  magnitude  x  likelihood  value  obtained  from  the 
different  scales,  multiplied  by  the  relative  scale  factor, 
according  to  [4],  [7].  A  peak-detection  algorithm  is  then 
applied  to  the  filter  output  to  detect  the  local  maxima  in  the 
3D  space  matrix.  The  final  filter  output  is  a  list  of  nodule 
candidates sorted by the value the filter function assigned. The 
list is empirically truncated so to keep the sensitivity close to 
100%, therefore accepting a large number of false positives. 

 

 

 
Fig. 2.  Some examples of false positive findings generated by 
the dot-enhancement filter. 

 
Most FP findings are crossings between blood vessels (see 
Fig. 2). To reduce the amount of FP/scan, we have developed 
a procedure we called voxel-based neural approach (VBNA). 
Each voxel of a region of interest (ROI) is characterized by a 
feature vector constituted by the grey level intensity values of 
its  3D  neighbours  (see  Fig.  3)  and  the  eigenvalues  of  the 
gradient and the Hessian matrices [8]. A feed-forward neural 
network is trained and tested at this stage assigning each voxel 
either to the nodule or normal tissue target class. A candidate 
nodule  is  then  characterized  as  “CAD  nodule”  if  the  number 
of  pixels  within  its  ROI  tagged  as  “nodule”  by  the  neural 
classifier  is  above  some  relative  threshold.  A  free  response 
receiver  operating  characteristic  (FROC)  curve  for  our  CAD 
system can therefore be evaluated at different threshold levels. 
 

  Voxel-based  neural  approach  to  false-positive 

 

 
Fig.  3. 
reduction. 
 

III.  DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 

The  CAD  system  was  tested  on  a  dataset  of  low-dose 
(screening  setting:  140  kV,  70÷80  mA)  CT  scans  with 
reconstructed  slice  thickness  of  1.25  mm.  The  scans  were 
collected  and  annotated  by  experienced  radiologists  in  the 
framework of the screening trial being conducted in Tuscany 
(Italy) [2]. The database used for this study consists of 33 CT 
scans, containing 74 internal nodules with diameter between 5 
and 12 mm. Each scan is a sequence of about 300 slices stored 
in  DICOM  (Digital  Imaging  and  COmmunications 
in 
Medicine) format. 

Once the internal region of the lung has been identified and 
the 3D dot-enhancement filter has provided the lists of nodule 
candidates, the VBNA is applied to reduce the amount of FP 
findings.  The  available  dataset  of  74  internal  nodules  was 
partitioned  into  a  teaching  set  of  30  nodules  belonging  to  15 
scans and a validation set of 44 nodules belonging to the other 
18 scans; the partition was defined so that the teaching set is 
representative  of  all  the  nodule  dimensions.  Five  three-layer 
feed-forward  neural  networks  were  trained  on  five  different 
random  partitions  of  the  teaching  set  into  train  and  test  sets. 
The  performances  achieved  in  each  trial  for  the  correct 
classification  of  individual  pixels  are  reported  in  Table  I, 
where the sensitivity and the specificity values obtained on the 
test  sets  and  on  the  whole  teaching  set  in  the  five  trials  are 
shown. 
 

TABLE I 
VBNA: PERFORMACES ACHIEVED BY FIVE NEURAL NETWORKS ON FIVE 
RANDOM PARTITIONS OF TEACHING SET INTO TRAIN AND TEST SETS 

Test set 
sens %   spec % 
78.2   83.8 
80.0   82.8 
77.2   85.3 
74.0   82.3 
77.6   79.3 

 

 

 

Teaching set 
sens %   spec % 
85.6   86.0 
87.5   86.6 
81.7   86.2 
85.6   85.9 
84.8   81.0 

 

 

The  first  three  networks  in  Table  I  provided  the  best 
performances  on  test  sets.  Among  them,  the  second  one  was 
more  balanced  with  respect  to  sensitivity  and  specificity  on 
the test set and achieved the best performance on the teaching 
set. So the VBNA approach has been applied to each ROI by 
using this trained neural network. The FROC curve (see Fig. 
4)  was  evaluated  on  the  whole  dataset,  constituted  by  the 
teaching  set  of  30  nodules  belonging  to  15  scans  and  the 
validation set of 44 nodules belonging to 18 scans. As shown 
in  figure,  a  sensitivity  of  86.5%  at  6  FP/scan  is  measured.  If 
the  sensitivity  value  is  decreased  to  75.7%  a  rate  of  3.8 
FP/scan is obtained. 

 
Fig.  4.    FROC  curve  on  the  whole  dataset  of  74  internal 
nodules in 33 scans. 
 

IV.  CONCLUSIONS 

The  dot-enhancement  pre-processing  is  a  suitable  tool  for 
the  identification  of  nodule  candidates  of  diameter  above  5 
mm and the VBNA is an effective approach to the problem of 
false  positives  reduction.  In  particular  the  VBNA  approach 
provides a very good sensitivity (86.5%) at a low level of false 
positives  (6);  the  sensitivity  is  still  very  high  (75.7%)  at  less 
than 4 false positives per scan. The results obtained so far are 
 

 
 
 

promising,  albeit  a  validation  against  a  larger  database  is 
required. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We  thank  the  researchers  of  the  INFN-  and  MIUR-funded 
MAGIC-5  Collaboration  for  contributing  to  this  work.  We 
acknowledge  Dr.  L.  Battolla,  Dr.  F.  Falaschi  and  Dr.  C. 
Spinelli  of 
the  U.O.  Radiodiagnostica  2  dell’Azienda 
Ospedaliera  Universitaria  Pisana  and  Prof.  D.  Caramella  and 
Dr. T. Tarantino of the Divisione di Radiologia Diagnostica e 
Interventistica  del  Dipartimento  di  Oncologia,  Trapianti  e 
Nuove  Tecnologie  in  Medicina  dell’Università  di  Pisa  for 
providing the annotated database of CT scans. We are grateful 
to  Dr  M.  Mattiuzzi  from  Bracco  Imaging  S.p.A.  for  useful 
discussions.  

REFERENCES 

[1]  S.  Diederich,  M.G.  Lentschig,  T.R.  Overbeck,  D.  Wormanns,  W. 
Heindel,  "Detection  of  pulmonary  nodules  at  spiral  CT:  comparison  of 
maximum intensity projection sliding slabs and single-image reporting", 
Eur. Radiol, vol. 11, pp. 1345-1350, 2001. 

[2]  See the information available on the web site http://www.med.unifi.it  
[3] 

J.  Heuberger,  A.  Geissbühler,  H.  Müller,  "Lung  CT  segmentation  for 
image  retrieval  using  the  Insight  Toolkit  (ITK)",  Medical  Imaging  and 
Telemedicine (MIT), WuYi Mountain, China, August 2005. 

[4]  Q.  Li,  S.  Sone  and  K.  Doi,  "Selective  enhancement  filters  for  nodules, 
vessels,  and  airways  walls  in  two-  and  three-dimensional  CT  scans", 
Med. Phys., vol. 30(8), pp. 2040-2051, 2003. 

[5]  P.  Delogu  et  al,  "Preprocessing  methods  for  nodule  detection  in  lung 
CT", Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, Proceedings of the 19th 
International  Congress  and  Exhibition  (Berlin,  Germany), International 
Congress Series, vol. 1281, pp. 1099-1103, 2005. 
J. Koenderink, "The structure of image", Biol. Cybern., vol. 50, pp. 363–
370, 1984. 

[6] 

[7]  T.  Lindeberg,  "On  scale  detection  for  different  operators",  Proceedings 
of the Eighth Scandinavian Conference on Image Analysis, pp. 857–866, 
1993. 
I. Gori, M. Mattiuzzi, "A method for coding pixels or voxels of a digital 
or  digitalized  image:  Pixel  Matrix  Theory  (PMT)",  European  Patent 
Application 05425316.6. 

[8] 

