Wave packet dynamics in triplet states of Na2 attached 

to helium nanodroplets 

Patrick Claas1, Georg Droppelmann1, Claus-Peter Schulz2, Marcel Mudrich3*, Frank Stienkemeier3. 

1 Fakultät für Physik, Universität Bielefeld, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany  

2 Max-Born-Institut, Max-Born-Strasse 2a, 12489 Berlin, Germany  

3 Physikalisches Institut, Universität Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany 

Mudrich@physik.uni-freiburg.de 

The dynamics of vibrational wave packets excited in Na2 dimers in the triplet ground and excited states 

is investigated by means of helium nanodroplet isolation (HENDI) combined with femtosecond pump-

probe  spectroscopy.  Different  pathways  in  the  employed  resonant  multi-photon  ionization  scheme  are 

identified. Within the precision of the method, the wave packet dynamics appears to be unperturbed by 

the helium droplet environment. 

KEYWORDS  (Word  Style  “BG_Keywords”).  Femtosecond  spectroscopy,  helium  nanodroplets,  wave 

packet dynamics. 

Introduction 

With  the  advent  of  femtosecond  (fs)  laser  techniques  it  has  become  possible  to  directly  observe 

nuclear  dynamics  of  molecules  and  to  chart  the  path  of  chemical  reactions  in  real  time  1-3.  In 

femtosecond  pump-probe  experiments  of  isolated  molecules,  a  pump  pulse  prepares  an  initial  wave 

packet,  i.e.  a  coherent  superposition  of  vibrational  states  which  evolves  in  accordance  with  the  time 

1

 

scales of vibrational (~10-13 s) and rotational (10-10 s) motion. The evolution of the wave packet is then 

probed with a time-delayed probe pulse via excitation to a specific final state which can be selectively 

detected.  To  date,  fs  pump-probe  spectroscopy  is  an  established  technique  with  applications  ranging 

from fundamental studies of the photodissociation dynamics of small molecules to the control of energy 

transfer in biological systems 4,5.  

Real-time  studies  of  molecules  embedded  in  inert  noble-gas  matrices  are  motivated  by  a  variety  of 

new  many-body  effects  prototypical  for  chemistry  and  biology  in  a  condensed  environment,  such  as 

solvational  shifts  of  electronic  states,  electron-phonon  coupling,  matrix-induced  electronic  and 

vibrational relaxation and decoherence, reduced dissociation probability (‘caging effect’), excimer and 

exciplex formation, charge recombination 6. At the same time, these conceptually simple model systems 

are still accessible to theoretical treatment. The pioneering work by Zewail and coworkers using I2 as a 

molecular probe and varying the structural properties of the solvent environment from gas, over cluster 

and liquid to solid, has been extended to a number of halogen molecules as well as Hg2 isolated in rare 

gas  matrices  7-11.  Due  to  the  difficulty  of  implanting  impurities  into  liquid  helium,  no  real-time 

measurements with molecules in bulk liquid or solid helium have been reported until now. In a recent 

publication  from  our  group,  we  presented  for  the  first  time  pump-probe  spectroscopy  of  covalently 

bound K2 dimers attached to superfluid helium nanodroplets 12. Different photoionization schemes were 

applied  to  study  the  influence  of  the  helium  environment  on  the  wave  packet  propagation.  Moreover, 

the desorption dynamics of K2 off the helium droplets was directly observed.  

In  the  present  work,  we  report  on  pump-probe  measurements  of  Na2  dimers  formed  on  helium 

nanodroplets  in  their  triplet  ground  state.  To  our  knowledge,  this  is  the  first  time  that  wave  packet 

dynamics  has  been  observed  in  the  weakly  bound  triplet  manifold  of  alkali  dimers.  Due  to  the  well-

known potential curves, the easily accessible optical transitions and due to their simple preparation in 

molecular  beams,  alkali  dimers  are  among  the  most  thoroughly  studied  systems  in  the  gas  phase  by 

means of fs spectroscopy. The wave packet dynamics of Na2 in singlet states has been investigated in 

detail using multiphoton ionization by the group of G. Gerber  13-19. Various ionization pathways were 

2

 

found  depending  on  laser  frequency  and  intensity  13,14.  At  high  laser  intensities  (1012  W/cm2),  the 

formation  of  a  wave  packet  in  the  electronic  ground  state  X1∑g

+  was  observed  14.  Furthermore, 

interesting effects were studied such as revivals of the wave packet motion, wave packet propagation in 

spin-orbit  coupled  states,  and  the  influence  of  wave  packet  dynamics  on  above-threshold  ionization 

15,19,20. Photoelectron spectroscopy in combination  with fs pump-probe  laser  pulses was found to be a 

sensitive  method  revealing  a  wealth  of  additional  information  not  obtainable  from  the  total  yield  of 

photoions  18,21,22.  Moreover,  using  phase  shaped  fs  laser  pulses,  the  coherent  control  of  molecular 

multiphoton  ionization  was  demonstrated  17,23. Besides fs studies on Na2 dimers, Na3 trimers and Nan 

clusters have been studied in real time 24-26. 

Helium  nanodroplets  are  widely  applied  as  a  nearly  ideal  cryogenic  matrix  for  spectroscopy  of 

embedded molecules and as nanoscopic reactors for building specific molecular complexes 27-29. Alkali 

atoms and molecules represent a particular class of dopant particles due to their extremely weak binding 

to  helium  droplets  with  binding  energies  on  the  order  of  10  K  (7  cm-1).  From  both  theory  and 

experiment  it  is  known  that  alkali  dimers  reside  in  bubble-like  structures  on  the  surface  of  helium 

droplets  30,31. Therefore, spectroscopic shifts of the electronic excitation spectra of alkali dimers are in 

the range of only a few cm-1 with respect to the gas phase 27,28,31,32.  

Collisional,  internal  as  well  as  binding  energies  are  dissipated  by  the  helium  droplet  through 

evaporation of helium atoms, which may cause desorption of the alkali dimers from the droplets. Since 

the amount of internal energy released upon formation of ground state (X1∑g

+) dimers greatly exceeds 

the  one  released  upon  formation  of  dimers  in  the  lowest  triplet  state  a3∑+

u,  the  latter  have  a  higher 

chance to remain attached to the droplets. This leads to an enrichment of the droplet beam with high-

spin dimers and clusters compared to covalently bound systems 31-36. Thus, HENDI opens the possibility 

of spectroscopically studying the triplet manifold of alkali dimers which is difficult to reach by standard 

techniques 31-34.  The alkali-helium droplet complex eventually equilibrates at the terminal temperature 

of  pure  helium  droplets  of  380  mK.  Thus,  only  the  lowest  vibrational  state  v=0  and  a  few  rotational 

states  are  populated  which  provides  well-defined  starting  conditions  for  a  pump-probe  experiment.  In 

3

 

contrast  to  conventional  molecular  beam  experiments,  this  is  true  even  for  the  weakly  bound  triplet 

ground state a3∑+

u with a vibrational constant in the range of 20 cm-1. Upon electronic excitation, alkali 

atoms and molecules mostly desorb from the droplets as a consequence of evaporation of helium atoms 

after energy deposition in the helium droplet. The dynamics of the desorption process has been observed 

for the first time by analyzing the wave packet motion of K2 dimers on helium droplets 12.  

Due to their weak coupling to the surrounding helium environment, alkali dimers on helium droplets 

can be viewed as an intermediate system between free molecules and molecules isolated in conventional 

cryogenic matrices. The wave packet propagation is expected to be only weakly perturbed. The highly 

quantum nature of superfluid 4He droplets vs. normal fluid 3He droplets may affect the coupling of the 

wave packet motion to the droplet. Moreover, exotic high-spin molecules and complexes formed on He 

droplets have been studied in real time 31-36. 

 

Experimental 

The  experimental  setup  is  described  in  detail  in  Ref.  12  and  is  only  briefly  discussed  here.  It 

comprises  three  main  parts:  a  molecular  beam  apparatus  that  provides  Na2-doped  helium  droplets,  a 

laser system to produce pairs of fs laser pulses and a mass selective ion detector. The beam of helium 

droplets  of  mean  size  around  5000  helium  atoms  is  produced  by  expanding  high  purity  helium  into 

vacuum  through  a  nozzle  5  μm  in  diameter  at  a  stagnation  pressure  of  80  bar  and  at  a  nozzle 

temperature of about 23 K. Doping of helium droplets with Na2 molecules in the v=0 triplet ground state 

is  achieved  by  successive  pick  up  of  two  Na  atoms  in  a  vapor  cell.  The  number  of  collisions  of  the 

droplets with free dopant atoms inside the vapor cell is controlled by its temperature. Given the flight 

distance of the droplets of 1 cm inside the vapor cell a temperature T≈485 K (pNa ≈ 4 10-4 mbar) of the 

Na reservoir provides the highest probability for pick-up of two dopant atoms per droplet. 

The  beam  of  doped  helium  droplets  is  intersected  perpendicularly  by  the  laser  beam  inside  the 

detection  volume  of  a  quadrupole  mass  analyzer.  Thus,  Na2

+  dimer  ions  which  have  been  optically 

excited  and  ionized  by  absorption  of  three  or  more  laser  photons  and  which  have  desorbed  from  the 

4

 

helium  droplets  are  detected  mass  selectively.  The  laser  pulses  having  an  average  output  power  of 

around 1.2 W are generated by a Ti:sapphire laser at 80 MHz repetition rate. The pulse width is about 

110 fs corresponding to a spectral width of 135 cm-1 (FWHM). The laser pulses are split into pairs with 

variable delay using a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. 

 

 

Figure  1.  Potential  energy  curves  of  Na2  populated  in  the  fs  pump-probe  experiment  37.  The  arrows 

indicate  pump  and  probe  transitions  leading  to  photoionization  according  to  two  different  pathways: 

One-photon excitation of a wave packet in the c-state followed by resonant two-photon ionization (a) 

and creation of a wave packet in the initial a-state by resonant impulsive Raman scattering followed by 

three-photon ionization (b). Only selected relevant curves of the triplet manifold are included. 

 

Results 

 

The  one-color  pump-probe  experiments  reported  in  this  paper  are  carried  out  in  the  wave  length 

region λ=733-761 nm (13140-13640 cm-1). The excitation scheme leading to wave packet propagation 

5

and subsequent ionization is illustrated in figure 1 using the unperturbed potential curves from Ref. 37. 

The relevant curves are the triplet ground state a3∑+

u, the first excited triplet state c3∑+

g, and the excited 

state  33∑+

u.  The  ionic  continuum  to  which  the  Na2  dimers  are  eventually  ionized  is  not  shown.  The 

arrows  in  figure  1(a)  and  (b)  indicate  two  different  excitation  pathways  leading  to  photoionization 

which  are  identified  in  this  work.  In  both  cases  the  excitation starts from the vibrational  ground state 

a3∑+

u, v=0. In the case shown in (figure 1(a)), the absorption of one photon from the pump pulse creates 

a wave packet by coherent superposition of about 3 vibrational states around v’=10 in the c-state close 

to the classical outer turning point  32.  The wave packet then propagates  inwards. At the inner turning 

point the probe pulse can ionize the excited Na2 in a two-photon step efficiently since the photon energy 

comes  into  resonance  with  the  energy  difference  between  the  c3∑+

g  and  33∑+

u  states.  Thus,  a  Franck-

Condon  (FC)  window  for  the  resonance-enhanced  ionization  opens  at  a  well-defined  internuclear 

distance  and  therefore  the  wave  packet  dynamics  in  the  c-state  is  filtered  out.  The  measured 

photoionization  yield  shows  an  oscillatory  structure  corresponding  to  the  vibrational  motion  of  the 

molecules (cf. figure 2). Since the time between the creation of the wave packet and the first appearance 

of the Na2 ions roughly equals half the period of the wave packet oscillation the measured oscillation 

has a well-defined phase Φ ≈ π at zero delay times. In the second case (figure 1(b)), a wave packet is 

created  in  the  initial  a3∑+

u  electronic  state  by  resonant  impulsive  Raman  scattering  (RISRS)  through 

coherent  superposition  of  about  3  vibrational  states  around  v=1.  This  wave  packet,  initially  centered 

around the minimum of the potential well, propagates towards the inner turning point and is ionized by 

three-photon  absorption.  Therefore,  the  time  delay  between  wave  packet  creation  and  ionization 

approximately equals one quarter of the oscillation period such that one observes a phase at zero delay 

time Φ ≈ π/2. Which one of the two photoionization schemes dominates the ion signal depends on the 

laser wave length and the pulse energy 13,14. 

The raw pump-probe transients of Na2 attached to helium nanodroplets are processed by applying a 

band-pass  filter  which  suppresses  slowly  varying  contributions  to  the  ion  count  rate  as  well  as  high-

frequency noise, as discussed in detail in Ref. 12. The time range 0-600 fs is omitted because the signal 
6

 

is  entirely  masked  by  the  autocorrelation  trace  of  the  copropagating  pump  and  probe  pulses.  Typical 

processed  real-time  pump-probe  transients  at  different  wave  lengths  of  the  femtosecond  laser  are 

displayed in figure 2.   

Figure 2. Pump-probe transients of Na2 on helium nanodroplets at different laser wave lengths.  

 

 

 

The  best  contrast  of  oscillations  in  the  photoionization  signal  is  achieved  at  the  laser  wave  length 

λ=747  nm.  The  signal  is  dominated  by  an  oscillation  with  a  period  of  about  1.5  ps.  An  additional 

superimposed  periodic  signal  is  visible  as  small  peaks  in  between  the  dominating  maxima.  At  wave 

lengths λ=761 nm and λ=733 nm the transient signals have weaker contrast and are clearly dominated 

by a strong oscillation of the same period as observed at λ=747 nm. In a first step the data are analyzed 

in the time domain by assigning index numbers to the most prominent maxima and by performing linear 

regression  of  the  index  numbers  as  a  function  of  delay  time  12.  This  yields  the  oscillation  periods 

T747nm=1484(2) fs, T761nm=1470(6) fs, and T733nm=1468(5) fs and phases Φ747nm=0.496(3)π (368(2) fs), 

Φ761nm=0.52(3)π  (383(20)  fs),  and  Φ733nm=0.78(4)π  (573(26)  fs).  The  numbers  in  parentheses  indicate 

the  experimental  uncertainty  of  the  last  digits.  At  λ=747  nm  and  λ=761  nm,  the  phase  lag  roughly 

equals  Φ=π/2  indicating  that  the  oscillation  is  dominated  by  wave  packet  motion  according  to  the 
7

second scheme described above, in which a wave packet is created in the triplet ground state by RISRS. 

The  additional  weaker  oscillation  at  λ=747  nm  can  be  isolated  by  applying  a  narrow  band  pass  filter 

around  the  frequency  88  cm-1  (T=380(4)  fs)  to  the  data  and  by  repeating  the  analysis  procedure 

described above. The resulting phase is Φ’747nm =1.00(1)π. Thus, this weak oscillation can be attributed 

to the dynamics of a wave packet in the potential of the first excited state c3∑+

g.  

In order to obtain more quantitative information about the exact frequencies and relative amplitudes 

of the contributing frequency components the pump-probe traces are Fourier transformed in the entire 

recorded delay time interval. The resulting  spectrum obtained from the scan recorded at λ=747 nm is 

shown in Figure 3. The spectrum comprises 3 groups of frequencies. The frequencies of the first most 

prominent  group  are  18.1(6)  cm-1,  20.7(7)  cm-1,  and  23.3(5)  cm-1.  These  frequencies  constitute  the 

dominant wave packet oscillation in the triplet ground state a3∑+

u shown in figure 2 and correspond to 

the  vibrational  level  spacing ΔG(v,v+1)=G(v)-G(v+1)  between  neighboring  vibrational  levels  v,  v+1. 

Table 1 compares the measured values of this work (ΔGHENDI) with experimental values obtained from 

fluorescence  spectroscopy  in  the  gas-phase  by  Li  et  al  38  (ΔGexp),  and  theoretical  results  by  Ho  et  al. 

39(ΔGtheo). This comparison shows clearly, that the observed frequency components 1-3 can be assigned 

to  level  spacing ΔG(0,1), ΔG(1,2),  and ΔG(2,3),  respectively.  Frequency  component  4  (45.3(6)  cm-1) 

matches  within  the  error  bar  twice  the  value  ΔG(0,1).  Therefore  it  can  be  attributed  to  coherent 

excitation  of  vibrational  levels  with  Δv=2,  in  particular  ΔG(0,2),  and  ΔG(1,3).  These  results  in 

combination with the fitted phase Φ≈π/2 confirm the interpretation in terms of wave packet dynamics 

induced  in  the  triplet  ground  state  a3∑+

u  by  RISRS,  followed  by  three-photon  ionization  at  the  inner 

turning point of the a-state potential. 

 

8

 

Figure 3. Fourier transform of the pump-probe scan at laser wave length λ=747 nm. The frequency 

components labeled with numbers 1-4 reflect the dynamics of wave packets in the a-state (solid arrows 

in  figure  1)  and  the  component  number  5  reflects  the  wave  packet  dynamics  in  the  c-state  (dashed 

arrows in figure 1). 

 

In order to identify frequency component number 5 (88.0(6) cm-1) it is compared to the values from 

fluorescence  spectroscopy  of  Na2  attached  to  helium  droplets  32.  Accordingly,  at  λ=747  nm  the 

vibrational  states  v’=9-11  of  the  first  excited  state  c3∑+

g  are  populated  when  taking  into  account  the 

spectral width of the laser pulses. The vibrational level spacing, ΔG(9,10)= 88.1 cm-1 and ΔG(10,11)= 

87.2 cm-1 are in good agreement with the value found in this work within the experimental uncertainty. 

Due to the limited spectral resolution of the Fourier spectra, the two frequencies are not resolved and 

presumably both contribute to the observed signal. This agreement in connection with the fitted phase of 

the oscillation Φ’ 747nm ≈ π implies a pump-probe ionization scheme in which the wave packet motion is 

induced  in  the  c3∑+

g  state  by  the  pump  pulse  and  probed  by  the  probe  pulse  at  the  opposite,  inner 

turning point, as previously described. 

 

 

9

(v,v+1) 

(0,1) 

(1,2) 

(2,3) 

ΔGexp 

(cm-1) 

23.67 

20.97 

19.59 

ΔGtheo 

ΔGHENDI

(cm-1) 

22.94 

21.32 

19.62 

(cm-1) 

23.3 

20.7 

18.3 

 

 

 

 

Table 1. Comparison of energy spacings between vibrational levels v in the triplet ground state a3∑+
u 

obtained from gas-phase spectroscopy (ΔGexp) 38, theory (ΔGtheo) 39, and from this work (ΔGHENDI). 

Fourier analysis of the pump-probe transients at λ=733 nm and λ=761 nm essentially reveals only one 

frequency  component  at  about  20  cm-1  which  is  attributed  to  the  dynamics  in  the  triplet  ground  state 

a3∑+

u,  in  analogy  with  the  discussion  above.  The  missing  frequency  component  corresponding  to  the 

dynamics in the c3∑+

g state is probably due to the weak contrast of the signal. Alternatively, the creation 

or the detection of such a wave packet may be suppressed.  

Discussion 

The presented measurements reveal that vibrational wave packets can readily be placed into the triplet 

ground  and  the  excited  c-state.  The  corresponding  Franck-Condon  windows  project  the  wave  packet 

motion  with  high  contrast  to  the  final  ionic  state.  Evaluation  of  the  phases  allows  to  locate  both  the 

radial  position  when  forming  the  wave  packet  as  well  as  the  radial  position  of  the  Franck-Condon 

detection window. In this regard the RISRS process comes out as a peculiar case where the wave packet 

appears to be formed at the center of the ground state potential well, while the ionization step clearly is 

very much enhanced at the inner turning point.   

Vibrational shifts of molecules attached to helium nanodroplets typically lie in the range 0.1-2 cm-1 

(Ref. 27). Since alkali dimers reside on the surface, even smaller shifts might be expected. The results 

reported here give vibrational energies that go along with the gas phase values within the errors of the 

10

experiments.  Accordingly,  earlier  measurements  with  K2  on  helium  droplets  revealed  helium  induced 

shifts of level spacings with respect to the gas phase of less than 1 cm-1 (Ref. 12).  

At all three laser wave lengths, the dominating channel is the multi-photon ionization according to the 

scheme  involving  wave  packet  motion  in  the  triplet  ground  state a3∑+

u induced by RISRS. The wave 

packets induced in the c3∑+

g state give significantly less contrast in the pump-probe transients. This can 

be  interpreted  qualitatively  using  the  following  arguments.  At  λ=747  nm,  the  excitation  of  a  wave 

packet directly in the c-state is considerably suppressed by Franck-Condon principle as indicated by the 

poor  overlap  of  the  initial  wave  function  v=0  in  the  a3∑+

u,  state  with  the  wave  packet  in  the  c-state 

shown in figure 1(a). The change in the radial coordinate followed from the wave packet motion in the 

c-state, however, opens a resonant window to the ionic continuum for the probe step at the inner turning 

points of the states c3∑+

g  and 33Σu

+. 

In  contrast,  the  wave  packet  induced  in  the  a-state  by  RISRS  has  at  the  inner  turning  point  large 

overlap with vibrational states in the potential of the c-state, as illustrated in figure 1(b). Thus, the probe 

transition  to  the  ionic  continuum  is  resonantly  enhanced.  In  default  of  potential  curves  at  higher 

excitation energies, it cannot be determined whether the second stage involved in the probe step is also 

resonant.  However,  since  the  density  of  electronic  states  increases  with  energy,  it  is  likely  that  the 

second stage before reaching the ionic continuum is resonance enhanced as well. In total, this second 

pathway to ionization turns out to be more efficient, even though a two-photon transition is involved. 

Other potential curves have been considered to interpret the observed wave packet dynamics but none 

were found at these particular excitation energies having appropriate symmetries. The same arguments 

can  be  applied  to  the  observations  at  laser  wave  length  λ=733  nm  and  λ=761  nm.  At  λ=733  nm, 

transition probability from a3∑+

u, v=0 to the c-state is higher than at λ=747 nm, however, the probe step 

to the 33∑+

u state is no longer resonant. At λ=761 nm, transition probability to the c-state is even weaker 

than at λ=747 nm. 

 

11

In  the  dominating  RISRS  process,  the  evolution  of  the  vibrational  wave  packet  in  the  ground  state 

drives the internuclear distance into resonant conditions for ionization at the inner turning point. Since 

the vibrational states of the triplet ground state could readily be populated by thermal energies in normal 

gas  phase  experiments,  the  process  observed  in  our  experiment  underlines  the  importance  of  the  low 

temperatures,  having  the  ensemble  of  molecules  only  in  the  vibrational  ground  state.  A  mixture  of 

populated vibrations from a thermal distribution would probably wash out FC windows and hamper the 

observation  of  wave  packet  motions  because  of  direct  resonant  conditions  from  the  electronic  ground 

state.  

Earlier  measurements  with  K2  on  helium  droplets  clearly  revealed  additional  dynamics  due  to  the 

desorption  of  K2  off  the  helium  droplets  12.  At  certain  excitation  energies,  both  the  oscillation 

frequencies and the Franck-Condon windows determining the relative amplitudes of different ionization 

pathways displayed a time dependent variation. In contrast to that, no such dynamics is observed with 

Na2. Both oscillations in the a and in the c-states have nearly constant amplitudes and frequencies in the 

studied time window between 0 and 10 ps. Therefore, either the time scale for desorption of Na2 greatly 

exceeds  the  pump-probe  delay  times  studied  in  this  work.  Alternatively,  the  perturbation  of  the 

dynamics of Na2 by the helium environment is so weak that the desorption process remains hidden.   

 

Conclusions 

In  conclusion,  the  dynamics  of  vibrational  wave  packets  in  triplet  states  of  Na2  on  helium 

nanodroplets  is  studied  by  resonant  multi-photon  ionization  at  different  laser  wave  lengths.  To  our 

knowledge,  this  is  the  first  demonstration  of  wave  packet  propagation  in  weakly  bound  triplet  states. 

Two distinct ionization schemes are identified by analyzing frequencies and phases of the wave packet 

oscillations. The measured vibrational frequencies coincide with the gas-phase values within the error 

bars.  This  reflects  the  fact  that  helium  nanodroplets  only  weakly  perturb  the  vibrational  structure  of 

embedded  molecules  and  therefore  are  very  well  suited  as  matrix  for  spectroscopy.  Clearly,  the  low 

temperature conditions, in particular the presence of only vibrational ground state population, appears to 

12

 

be essential for the observed wave packet dynamics. In contrast to real-time experiments on potassium 

dimers, no dynamics to be attributed to the desorption of Na2 or energy dissipation to the droplet could 

be extracted from the observed oscillations.  

In  the  future,  these  measurements  will  be  extended  to  longer  pump-probe  delay  times  in  order  to 

probe  the  dynamics  on  a  longer  time  scale  and  to  improve  the  frequency  resolution  of  the  Fourier 

spectra. In particular, the effects resulting from the perturbation due to the helium environment may be 

observable.  Also,  quantum  dynamics  simulations  should  be  performed,  introducing  perturbed  Na2 

potential curves to quantify the influence of the helium matrix. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT  (Word  Style  “TD_Acknowledgments”).  Technical  support  with  the  laser 

system from V. Petrov is gratefully acknowledged. The work is financially supported by the DFG. 

REFERENCES (Word Style “TF_References_Section”).  

(1)  Zewail,  A.H.  Femtochemistry:  Ultrafast  Dynamics  of  the  Chemical  Bond  (World  Scientific, 

Singapore, 1994), Vols. 1 and 2. 

(2) Femtosecond Chemistry, edited by J. Manz, J. and Wöste, L. (VCH, Weinheim, 1995). 

(3) Femtochemistry, edited by Chergui, M. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1995). 

(4)  Rose,  T.S.;  Rosker,  M.  J.;  Zewail,  A.H.  Femtosecond  real-time  observation  of  wave-packet 

oscillations (resonance) in dissociation reactions. J. Chem. Phys. 1988, 88, 6672. 

(5) Herek, J. L.; Wohlleben, W.; Cogdell, R. J.; Zeidler, D.; Motzkus, M. Quantum control of energy 

flow in light harvesting. Nature 2002, 417, 533. 

(6) Apkarian, V.A.; Schwentner, N. Molecular Photodynamics in Rare Gas Solids. Chem. Rev. 1999, 

99, 1481. 

13

 

 

 

(7)  Wan,  C.;  Gupta,  M.;  Baskin,  J.;  Kim,  Z.;  Zewail,  A.H.  Caging  phenomena  in  reactions: 

Femtosecond observation of coherent, collisional confinement. J. Chem. Phys. 1997, 106, 4353. 

(8)  Liu,  Q.;  Wang,  J.-K.;  Zewail,  A.  Femtosecond  dynamics  of  dissociation  and  recombination  in 

solvent cages. Nature 1993, 364, 427. 

(9)  Lienau,  C.;  Zewail,  A.H.  Femtochemistry  at  high  pressures.  Solvent  effect  in  the  gas-to-liquid 

transition region. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1994, 222, 224. 

(10)  Gühr,  M.;  Bargheer,  M.;  Fushitani,  M.;  Kiljunin,  T.;  Schwentner,  N.  Ultrafast  dynamics  of 

halogens in rare gas solids. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2007, in press. 

(11)  Gonzalez,  C.  R.;  Fernandez-Alberti,  S.;  Echave,  J.;  Chergui,  M.  Vibrational  coherence  and 

nonadiabatic dynamics in the condensed phase. J. Chem. Phys. 2002 116 3343. 

(12) Claas, P.; Droppelmann, G.; Schulz, C.P.; Mudrich, M.; Stienkemeier, F. Wave packet dynamics 

of K2 attached to helium nanodroplets. J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2006, 39, S1151. 

(13)  Baumert,  T.;  Grosser,  M.;  Thalweiser,  R.;  Gerber,  G.  Femtosecond  Time-Resolved  Molecular 

Multiphoton Ionization: The Na2 System. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1991, 67, 3753. 

 (14) Baumert, T.; Engel, V.; Meier, C.; Gerber, G. High laser field effects in multiphoton ionization 

of Na2. Experiment and quantum calculations. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1992, 200, 488. 

(15)  Baumert,  T.;  Engel,  V.;  Röttgermann,  C.;  Strunz,  W.T.;  Gerber,  G.  Femtosecond  pump-probe 

study of the spreading and recurrence of a vibrational wave packet in Na2. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1992, 191, 

(16)  Engel,  V.;  Baumert,  T.;  Meier,  Ch.;  Gerber,  G.  Femtosecond  time-resolved  molecular 

multiphoton ionization and fragmentation on Na2: experiment and quantum mechanical calculations. Z. 

Phys. D. 1993, 28, 37. 

14

639. 

 

(17) Assion, A.; Baumert, T.; Helbing, J.; Seyfried, V.; Gerber, G. Coherent control by a single phase 

shaped femtosecond laser pulse. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1996, 259, 488. 

(18)  Assion,  A.;  Geisler,  M.;  Helbing,  J.;  Seyfried,  V.;  Baumert,  T.  Femtosecond  pump-probe 

photoelectron  spectroscopy:  Mapping  of  vibrational  wave-packet  motion.  Phys.  Rev.  A  1996,  54, 

R4605. 

(19)  Assion,  A.;  Baumert,  T.;  Helbing,  J.;  Seyfried,  V.;  Gerber,  G.  Femtosecond  time-resolved 

observation of above-threshold ionization in Na2. Phys. Rev. A 1997, 55, 1899. 

(20) Rutz, S.; Greschik, S.; Schreiber, E.; Wöste, L. Femtosecond wave packet propagation in spin-

orbit coupled electronic states of the Na2 molecule. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1996, 257, 365. 

 (21) Meier, Ch.; Engel, V. Electron kinetic energy distributions from multiphoton ionization of Na2 

with femtosecond laser pulses. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1993, 212, 691. 

 (22)  Meier,  C.;  Engel,  V.  Mapping  of  the  wave-packet  dynamics  in  a  double-well  potential  via 

femtosecond pump/probe photoelectron spectroscopy.  J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 101, 2673. 

(23)  Meyer,  S.;  Meier,  C.;  Engel,  V.  Photoelectron  distributions  from  femtosecond  pump/probe 

excitation with chirped probe pulses. J. Chem. Phys. 1998, 108, 7631. 

(24) Baumert, T.; Thalweiser, R.; Gerber, G. Femtosecond two-photon ionization spectroscopy of the 

B state of Na3 clusters. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1993, 209, 29. 

(25) Reischl, B.; de Vivie-Riedle, R.; Rutz, S.; Schreiber, E. Ultrafast molecular dynamics controlled 

by pulse duration: The Na3 molecule. J. Chem. Phys. 1996, 104, 8857. 

(26)  Baumert,  T.;  Röttgermann,  C.;  Rothenfusser,  C.;  Thalweiser,  R.;  Weiss,  V.;  and  Gerber,  G. 

Femtosecond Probing of Sodium Cluster Ion Nan

+ Fragmentation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992, 69, 1512. 

 

15

(27)  Toennies,  J.P.;  Vilesov,  A.  F.  Superfluid  Helium  Droplets:  A  Uniquely  Cold  Nanomatrix  for 

Molecules and Molecular Complexes. Angew. Chem. 2004, 43, 2622.  

(28) Stienkemeier, F.; Vilesov, A.F. The Electronic Spectroscopy in Helium Droplets. J. Chem. Phys. 

2001, 115, 10119. 

B. 2006, 39, R127. 

1995, 52 16125. 

 (29) Stienkemeier, F.; Lehmann, K.K. Spectroscopy and Dynamics in Helium Nanodroplets, J. Phys. 

(30) Ancilotto, F.; DeToffol, G.; Toigo, F. Sodium dimers on the surface of liquid 4He. Phys. Rev. B 

(31)  Stienkemeier,  F.;  Higgins,  J.;  Ernst,  W.E.;  Scoles,  G.  Laser  Spectroscopy  of  Alkali-Doped 

Helium Clusters. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1995, 74, 3592 

(32)  Higgins,  J.;  Callegari,  C.;  Reho,  J.;  Stienkemeier,  F.;  Ernst,  W.E.;  Gutowski,  M.;  Scoles,  G. 

Helium Cluster Isolation Spectroscopy of Alkali Dimers in the Triplet Manifold. J. Chem. Phys. 1998, 

102, 4952. 

(33) Mudrich, M.; Bünermann, O.; Stienkemeier, F.; Dulieu, O.; Weidemüller, M. Formation of Cold 

Bialkali Dimers on Helium Nanodroplets, Eur. Phys. J. D 2004, 31, 291. 

(34)  Stienkemeier,  F.;  Ernst,  W.E.;  Higgins,  J.;  Scoles,  G.  On  the  Use  of  Liquid  Helium  Cluster 

Beams  for  the  Preparation  and  Spectroscopy  of  the  Triplet States of  Alkali Dimers  and other Weakly 

Bound Complexes, J. Chem. Phys. 1995, 102, 615. 

(35) Schulz, C.P.; Claas, P.; Schumacher, D.; Stienkemeier, F. Formation and Stability of High Spin 

Alkali Clusters, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 92, 013401. 

(36) Vongehr, S.; Scheidemann, A.A.; Wittig, C.; Kresin, V.V. Growing ultracold sodium clusters by 

using heium nanodroplets. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2002, 353, 89. 

 

16

(37) Meyer, W. Private communication (2005). 

(38)  Li,  L.;  Rice,  S.F.;  Field,  R.W.  The  Na2  a3∑+

u  state.  Rotationally  resolved  OODR  3∏g  –  a3∑+
u 

fluorescence spectroscopy. J. Chem. Phys. 1985, 82, 1178. 

(39) Ho, T.-S.; Rabitz, H.; Scoles, G. Reproducing kernel technique for extracting accurate potentials 

from  spectral  data:  Potential  curves  of  the  two  lowest  states X1∑+

g and a3∑+

u of the sodium dimer. J. 

Chem. Phys. 2000, 112, 6218. 

 

 

 

17

