Visualizing the Doppler Effect 

Marcos H. Giménez*, Ana Vidaurre, Jaime Riera, and Juan A. Monsoriu  

Departamento de Física Aplicada, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia,  
E-46022 Valencia, Spain  

ABSTRACT 

The  development  of  Information  and  Communication  Technologies  suggests  some 

spectacular  changes  in  the  methods  used  for  teaching  scientific  subjects.  Nowadays,  the 

development of software and hardware makes it possible to simulate processes as close to reality 

as  we  want.  However,  when  we  are  trying  to  explain  some  complex  physical  processes,  it  is 

better  to  simplify  the  problem  under  study  using  simplified  pictures  of  the  total  process  by 

eliminating some elements that make it difficult to understand this process. In this work we focus 

our  attention  on  the  Doppler  effect  which  requires  the  space-time  visualization  that  is  very 

difficult to obtain using the traditional teaching resources. We have designed digital simulations 

as  a  complement  of  the  theoretical  explanation  in  order  to  help  students  understand    this 

phenomenon. 

KEYWORDS: Digital simulation, Doppler effect. 

                                                           
* Electronic mail: mhgimene@fis.upv.es 

 

 

1

1. INTRODUCTION 

In recent years, Information and Communication technologies (hereafter ICTs) are being 

used  in  many  ways  in  teaching  science.  They  permit  interactivity,  in  agreement  with  the 

constructivism  pedagogical  principles.  The  students  have  to  construct  their  own  body  of 

knowledge so the teacher guides the process providing the student with the necessary tools to get 

it [1]. 

Different works have shown the advantages of digital simulation in the learning process 

[2,  3].  Actually  a  lot  of  online  multimedia  material  for  teaching  physics  is  available  [4]. 

However, one should know that the pedagogical effectiveness is not directly related with the use 

of simulation but with its correct integration in the global instruction plan [5, 6]. As the ICTs are 

now  in  a  developing  process,  research  about  the  new  possibilities  they  offer  in  the  education 

field  is  required.  Recently,  our  working  group  has  developed  several  simulation  programs 

designed  in  such  a  way  that  they  underline  the  visualization of the  physical problem [7,  8]. In 

this way, the teacher is able to obtain the major benefits of the computer-based instruction. 

Learning  based  on  models  is  more  likely  to  aid  comprehension  than  superficial 

memorization.  Mental  models  play  a  very  important  role  in  activities  related  to  the  learning 

process. ICTs offer a good opportunity to develop these ideas through 3D animations immersed 

in virtual environments. 

Wave  motion,  in  general,  and  Doppler  effect,  in  particular,  require  the  simultaneous 

understanding  of  the  spatial  and  time  dependence  [8].  Thus,  the  traditional  teaching 

resourcesblackboard, slides, transparencies are not enough.  If we want to show motion we 

need the real process or the videotape, previously recorded. Both techniques are very useful in 

the  learning  process  because  they  allow  to  establish  connections  between  theory  and  reality. 

 

2

However,  in  some  cases,  it  is  not  possible  to  eliminate some elements that  make it difficult to 

understand the essential aspects of the problem under study. 

This  can  be  solved  using  digital  animations,  now  possible  in  the  ICTs  context.  This 

technique presents the following advantages:  

•  Similarly  to  the  cinema  or  television,  simulations  produce  the  effect  of  a  continuous 

representation in time. This is not possible with slides or transparencies. 

•  They  appear  free  of  noise  and  allow  us  to  identify  the  different  aspects  we  want  to 

emphasize. In this sense simulations can be more efficient than the real process itself.  

We  have  been  working  in  this  field  designing  non-interactive  virtual  animations  that 

illustrate physical concepts as a complement of the theoretical explanation. In the present work 

we present the process we have followed in order to design digital simulations to help students in 

the  understanding  of  the  Doppler  effect.  These  animations  have  been  developed  in  a  virtual 

environment using the program 3D Studio Max and formatted in digital video files. 

 

 

 

2. DIGITAL ANIMATIONS OF THE DOPPLER EFFECT. 

The goal of the simulations here presented is to visualize the Doppler effect. We consider 

a source of sinusoidal wave motion, S, and the observer O. One of them, or both, is in motion so 

that the frequency measured by the observer, ν’, differs from that generated by the source, ν. The 

relation between them is given by the well-known equation: 

=′ νν

v
v

−
−

v
v

O

S

 , 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

 

 

3

respectively. 

characteristics:  

also added. 

where  v,  vS,  and  vO  are  the  propagation  speed,  the  source  speed  and  the  observer  speed, 

As  shown  in  Figure  1,  the  design  of  the  simulations  is  based  on  the  following 

•  Each animation includes the top view where the wave source (dark color sphere) and one or 

more observers (light color spheres) in motion are shown. In many cases, the front view is 

•  The wave fronts are represented as circumferences centered at the point where the wave was 

generated  and  the  radius  increases  proportionally  to  the  propagation  speed.  The  dark  ones 

represent the crests and the light ones the valleys. 

•  The  front  view  shows  the  wave  being  generated  by  the  vertically  oscillating  source,  and 

affecting  the  observes.  In  this  way  the  animation  allows  an  easy  comparison  between  the 

oscillation frequency of the source and the observers. 

This scheme offers students different points of view that cover different concepts related 

with  the  Doppler  effect.  The  simultaneous  representation  of  the  time  and  space  dependence 

improves  the  understanding  of  the  magnitudes  involved:  period,  frequency,  wavelength,  and 

relative motion of the observer respect to the source. The different aspects can be analyzed one 

by  one  or  globally.  The  qualitative  representation  can  be  compared  with  the  mathematical 

expression given by equation (1).    

Following the above scheme, we have developed animations in order to study particular 

situations related with the motion of the source, the observer, or both of them. These situations 

are: 

 

4

•  The source moves to the right with a lower speed than that of the propagation motion and the 

observers stay  at  rest (Fig. 1). The  left-side observer measures a lower frequency than that 

generated  in  the  source.  The  right-side  observer,  on  the  contrary,  measures  a  higher 

frequency than the source does. In addition to the Doppler effect, we can use this example to 

demonstrate the relationship between period and wavelength. 

•  The source is at rest and the observer moves more slowly than the propagation speed (Fig. 2). 

The left-side observer, who moves away from the source, oscillates with a frequency lower 

than that corresponding to the source. The right-side observer, who approaches to the source, 

oscillates with a higher frequency than that of the source. In this example the importance of 

the relative motion can be clearly appreciated. 

•  The source  stays  at rest and  the observer  travels at the same speed as the  generated waves 

(Fig. 3). Then the observer does not perceive the wave motion, and the measured frequency 

is zero according to eq. (1). 

•  The source stays at rest while the observer moves with a higher speed than the propagation 

wave (Fig. 3). The observer oscillates under the action of the generated wave front in inverse 

order; in other words, the frequency is negative, as predicted by eq. (1).  

The proposed scheme can also be applied to other processes related to source motion: 

•  The source moves with the same speed as the generated waves (Fig. 7). The wave fronts are 

all superimposed just in front of the source generating the wave barrier. Typical examples of 

this  phenomenon  are  sound  waves  generated  by  airplanes  (sound  barrier)  and  water 

superficial waves generated by ships. 

•  The  source  moves  with  higher  speed  than  the  generated  waves  (Fig.  8).  A  shock  wave  is 

generated as the envelope of the wave front. 

 

5

3. CONCLUSIONS 

 

The understanding of wave motion requires space-time visualization, which is very difficult 

to obtain using the traditional teaching resources blackboard, transparencies, slides... because 

these techniques only allow to show static images. Some other techniques such as experiments (real 

or  in  video)  mix  different  aspects  involved  in  the  process  and  it  is  difficult  to  show  the  essential 

aspects that the teacher wants to transmit. This problem can be solved with digital animations that 

provide a continuous time representation of the physical phenomenon and, on the other hand allow 

us to “clean” the process showing only the aspects we want to emphasize in order to get a better 

understanding of it. In the present work, we have presented the design of digital animations for the 

explanation of the Doppler effect. The scheme consists basically of showing the top and front views 

of the wave fronts generated by the source. The wave front travels in a homogeneous medium and 

generates  oscillations  in  the  observers.  This  scheme  makes  it  easier  the  understanding  of  the 

Doppler effect and other related problems like sound barrier or shock waves. 

AKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

de Valencia (grant 20020632), Spain. 

This work was supported by Plan de Incentivo a la Investigación form Universidad Politécnica 

 

 

6

REFERENCES 

[1]   T.  Duffy  and  D.  Jonassen,  Constructivism  and  the  technology  of  instruction,  Lawrence 

Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, New Jersey (1992). 

[2]   D.J. Grayson and L.C. McDermott, Use of the computer for research on student thinking in 

physics.  Am. J. Phys. 64, 557-565 (1996). 

[3]   F.  Esquembre,  Computers  in  physics  education.  Comput.  Phys.  Commun  147,  13-18 

(2002).  

[4]  S. Altherr, A. Wagner, B. Eckert, and H.J. Jodl, Multimedia material for teaching physics 

(search, evaluation and examples), Eur. J. Phys. 25, 7-14 (2004). 

[5]   D. Hestenes, Who needs physics education research?, Am. J. Phys. 66, 465-467 (1998). 

[6]   R.N.  Steinberg,  Computers  in  teaching  science:  To  simulate  or  not  to  simulate?.  Am.  J. 

Phys. 68, S37-S41 (2000). 

[7]   A. Vidaurre, J. Riera, M.H. Giménez and J.A. Monsoriu, Contribution of digital simulation 

in visualizing physics processes. Comput. Appl. Eng. Educ. 10, 45-49 (2002). 

[8]   J.  Riera  J,  M.H.  Giménez,  A.  Vidaurre,  and  J.A.  Monsoriu,  Digital  simulation  of  wave 

motion. Comput. Appl. Eng. Educ. 10, 161-166 (2002). 

 

 

7

FIGURE CAPTIONS 

Figure  1.  Two  frames  (separated  by  a  source  oscillation  period)  of  a  digital  animation  of  the 

Doppler  effect  where  the  source  moves  to  the  right  with  a  lower  speed  than  that  of  the 

propagation and the observers stay at rest. 

Figure  2.  Two  frames  (separated  by  a  source  oscillation  period)  of  a  digital  animation  of  the 

Doppler  effect  where  the  source  is  at  rest  and  the  observer  moves  more  slowly  than  the 

propagation speed. 

Figure  3.  Two  frames  (separated  by  a  source  oscillation  period)  of  a  digital  animation  of  the 

Doppler effect where the source and the observer are both in motion. 

Figure  4.  Two  frames  (separated  by  a  source  oscillation  period)  of  a  digital  animation  of  the 

Doppler effect where the source is moving slower than the propagation speed of the generated 

waves while the observer stays at rest. 

Figure  5.  Two  frames  (separated  by  a  source  oscillation  period)  of  a  digital  animation  of  the 

Doppler effect where the source stays at rest and the observer travels at the same speed as the 

Figure  6.  Two  frames  (separated  by  a  source  oscillation  period)  of  a  digital  animation  of  the 

Doppler effect where the source stays at rest while observer moves with a high spped than the 

Figure  7.  Two  frames  (separated  by  a  source  oscillation  period)  of  a  digital  animation  related 

with source motion (wave barrier) where the source moves with the same speed as the generated 

Figure  8.  Two  frames  (separated  by  a  source  oscillation  period)  of  a  digital  animation  related 

with source motion (shock wave) where the source moves with higher speed than the generated 

generated waves. 

propagation wave. 

waves. 

waves. 

 

8

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 
M.H. Giménez et al. 

9

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 
M.H. Giménez et al. 

10

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 
M.H. Giménez et al. 

11

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 
M.H. Giménez et al. 

12

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 
M.H. Giménez et al. 

13

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 
M.H. Giménez et al. 

14

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 
M.H. Giménez et al. 

15

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 
M.H. Giménez et al. 

16

 

