Intra-operative quantification of the surgical gesture in orbital surgery: 

application to the proptosis reduction 

V. Luboz1, P. Swider2, D. Ambard2, F. Boutault3,2, Y. Payan1
 
1.  TIMC-IMAG  Laboratory,  UMR  CNRS  5525,  Faculté  de  Médecine,  38706  La  Tronche, 
France 
2. Biomechanics Laboratory EA 3697 / IFR30, Purpan University Hospital, 31059 Toulouse, 
France 
3. Maxillofacial Surgery Department, Purpan University Hospital, 31059 Toulouse, France   
 
Corresponding author: 
Professor Pascal Swider 
Biomechanics Laboratory EA 3697/IFR30 
Purpan University Hospital 
31059 Toulouse cedex 
France 
Tel: +33 (0)561 497 944 
Fax: +33 (0)561 496 745 
e-mail: swider@cict.fr 
 

 

 

1

 

Abstract: 
Background. Proptosis is characterized by a protrusion of the eyeball due to an increase of the 
orbital  tissue  volume.  To  recover  a  normal  eyeball  positioning,  the  most  frequent  surgical 
technique consists in the osteotomy of orbital walls combined with a loading on the eyeball to 
initiate  tissue  decompression.  The  first  biomechanical  models  dealing  with  proptosis 
reduction, validated in one patient, have been previously proposed by the authors.   
Methods. This paper proposed an experimental method to quantify the intra-operative clinical 
gesture in proptosis reduction, and the pilot study concerned one clinical case. The eyeball’s 
backward displacement was measured by an optical 3D localizer and the load applied by the 
surgeon  was  simultaneously  measured  by  a  custom-made  force  gauge.  Quasi-static  stiffness 
of the intra-orbital content was evaluated.   
Findings.  The  average  values  for  the  whole  experiment  was  16  N  (SD:  3  N)  for  the  force 
exerted  by  the  surgeon  and  9  mm  (SD:  4  mm)  for  the  eyeball  backward  displacement.  The 
averaged quasi-static stiffness of the orbital content was evaluated to 2.4 N/mm (SD: 1.2) and 
showed a global decrease of 45% post-operatively. 
Interpretation.  The  protocol  and  the  associated  custom-designed  devices  allowed  loads, 
induced  displacements  and  macroscopic  stiffness  of  the  orbital  content  to  be  measured 
intra-operatively.  The  clinical  relevance  has  been  demonstrated  in  a  pilot  study.  To  our 
knowledge, no study has been published allowing the clinical gesture in proptosis reduction to 
be quantified intra-operatively. 
Associating  an  enlarged  database  and  validated  patient-related  predictive  models  will 
reinforce  the  surgical  efficiency  and  patient  comfort  contributing  to  diagnosis  and 
intra-operative guidance.   
Keywords: Orbital surgery, Proptosis, experimental method, computer assisted planning,   
   
 
 
 

 

2

1. Introduction 
  Computer  Assisted  Surgery  (CAS)  aims  at  assisting  surgeons  to  improve  diagnosis, 
therapeutic gestures and follow-up implementing rational and quantitative approaches (Taylor 
et  al.,  1996).  The  ultimate  goal  is  to  increase  safety  and  accuracy  leading  to  a  minimally 
invasive  surgery  for  patient  comfort.  In  this  strategy,  numerical  models  can  assist  surgical 
planning  and  techniques  provided  they  are  validated  (Payan,  2005).  Implementing 
patient-related  models  seemed  to  be  a  relevant  strategy  but  a  lack  of  knowledge  in 
physiological  boundary  conditions  and  loads,  and  tissue  material  properties  still  drastically 
limit the reliability of predictive models (Viceconti et al., 2005).   
  Recent  years  showed  the  increase  of  studies  dealing  with  the  in  vitro  or  in  vivo  tissue 
biomechanical  characterization  (Miller  et  al.,  2000;  Ottensmeyer  et  al.,  2004;  Gerard  et  al., 
2005;  Hendriks  et  al.,  2006).  Very  recent  studies  concerned  intra-operative  measurement 
procedures (Jenkinson et al., 2005; Gosling et al., 2006), and this endeavoured to answer the 
need to better identify and quantify the clinical gesture. The clinical relevance of our approach 
has  fallen  in  this  framework  relating  to  maxillofacial  pathologies  and  more  particularly 
proptosis reduction. 

Proptosis is characterized by the increase of the volume of the orbital content mostly due to 
an  endocrinal  dysfunction  (Saraux  et  al.,  1987).  The  protrusion  of  the  eyeball  induces 
aesthetical  problems  and  physiological  disorders  such  as  abnormal  cornea  exposition  and 
pathological  loading  of  the  optic  nerve,  orbital  blood  vessels  and  ocular  muscles.  It  may 
induce  the  alteration  of  visual  acuity  up  to  blindness.  Once  the  endocrinal  situation  is 
stabilized,  a  surgical  reduction  of  the  proptosis  is  usually  needed  to  decompress  the  orbital 
content.  The  commonly  used  technique  is  the  "Bone  Removal  Orbital  Decompression 
(BROD)" (Adenis et al., 2003). It aims at increasing the volume of the orbital cavity with an 
osteotomy (i.e. a bone resection) of the orbital walls (Stanley et al., 1989). The soft tissues are 
partially  evacuated  through  the  osteotomy  to  form  a  hernia  and  the  surgeon  may  manually 
apply a controlled load on the eyeball to favour the decompression process  (see Figure 1c). 
Limited cuts in the outer membrane containing the orbital soft tissues allow the physiological 
liquid to flow towards the maxillary and ethmoid sinus regions. The backward displacement 
of  the  eyeball  to  recover  the  normal  position  is  initiated  and  it  is  fully  reached  after  the 
complete reduction of orbital tissue inflammation.   

This intervention is technically difficult because of the proximity of ocular muscles and the 
optic nerve, the tightness of the eyelid incision, and the narrowness of the operating field. The 
surgery  must  be  minimally  invasive  and  having  specific  tools  to  improve  surgical  planning 
could  be  very  helpful.  The  authors  proposed  predictive  models  leading  to  clinical  rules  to 
assist  in  the  pre-operative  planning  (Luboz  et  al.,  2004,  2005).  Correlations  established 
between predicted results and pre- and post-operative clinical imaging allowed the reliability 
of the approach to be quantified in terms of geometry, volume, and kinematics.   

The missing dimension was the dynamic aspect involving interrelated force and kinematics 
measures  and  such  was  the  framework  of  the  presented  study  where  the  goal  was  to 
investigate 
that  measuring 
simultaneously,  the  load  applied  by  the  surgeon  and  the  resulting  kinematics  of  the  eyeball 
could  provide  patient-related  quantitative  data  to  enrich  the  clinical  knowledge  in  proptosis 

intra-operatively.  We  hypothesized 

the  clinical  gesture 

 

3

reduction. To proceed, a specific custom-made force gage coupled to a navigation station has 
been designed and evaluated in a clinical pilot study. 

 

2. Material and Methods 
  The real-time process of data acquisition concerned the monitoring of the load exerted on 
the  eyeball  and  the  tracking  of  the  induced  displacement.  A  patented  device  and  procedure 
derived from the study (Payan et al., 2005). The total mass of the device was 0.047 kg and the 
design,  material  choice  and  assembly  guaranteed  the  sterilization  procedure  related  to  the 
medical instruments. The intra-operative data monitoring was achieved using a conventional 
laptop (250MHz processor, 64Mo Ram). 
 
2.1 Description of the measurement devices 
  2.1.1 Force measurement 
The  force  gage  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  For  patient  security,  a  titanium  elliptic  corneal 
 
protection for laser treatment was intercalated between the device and the eyeball. The core of 
the  device  was  the  hollow  aluminum  cone  (1)  supporting  the  stainless  steel  membrane  (2) 
clamped with the rigid ring (3). As shown in Figure 1a, the load was initially applied on the 
thin shell (4) and it was transmitted to the membrane (2) through the silicon cylinder (5). The 
strain into the membrane was measured by extensometric strain gages and converted into the 
resulting force Fz1 using a prior calibration procedure. The accuracy of 2% in the range [0 N- 
40  N]  up  to  40  Hz  was  established  using  a  reference  tensile  machine  (Elf  3200 
Böse-Enduratec ®). The force sensor was monitored using a custom-made Labview program 
(National Instruments ®). 
 
 
  The  eyeball  displacement  was  measured  using  the  Polaris  system  (NDI®  Radolfzell, 
Germany) which is a 3D optical localizer device with an accuracy of 0.3 mm in the operating 
field. Thanks to infra red beam reflections monitored by two cameras, the system tracked the 
real-time relative positioning of the rigid body (6) shown in Figure 1 relative to the reference 
frame (O0, x0, y0, z0) of the surgical table in the operating room. The 3 displacements and the 3 
rotations of the force gage were measured, and a matrix transform allowed the component w1 
of the force gage translation vector to be expressed in the local reference frame (O1, r1, θ1, z1) 
(see Figure 1). The measured force Fz1 and the displacement w1 were collinear and no motion 
of  the  patient  head  was  verified  during  the  procedure.  The  3D  localization  was  monitored 
using a custom-made Visual C++ ® program. 
 
2.1.3 Stiffness of the orbital content 
 
 
The  loading  velocity  and  acceleration  imposed  by  the  surgeon  were  low  in  time  and 
limited  in  magnitude,  and  the  mass  of  biological  components  was  very  weak  so  the  kinetic 
energy and structural dissipated energy very slightly contributed to the energy balance of the 
orbital content. If the orbital complex could be considered as a one degree of freedom system 
at  the  macroscopic  level,  equation  (1a)  expressed  the  overall  discrete  stiffness  kz1  of  the 
orbital  content  (soft  tissue,  fat,  muscles)  with  m  for  the  eyeball  mass  and  c  for  the  discrete 
viscous damping coefficient.   

2.1.2 Displacement measurement 

 

4

k

z1

=

F w m w w
−
1

(cid:5)(cid:5)
1

z1

1

(

)

−

(
(cid:5)
c w w
1
1

)     (a)       
k

z1

≈

F w
z1
1

     (b)

   

(1) 

In agreement with kinematics governing equations, the peak of maximal displacement w1 was 

characterized by a nil instantaneous velocity (

0

) and a non-nil but limited acceleration 

1w ≈(cid:5)

(

1w ≠(cid:5)(cid:5)

0 ).  The  damping  term  essentially  conditioned  the  time  delay  between  force  and 

1.   

displacement  signals.  The  inertia  force  was  very  limited  since  it  derived  both  from  the 
multiplication  of  the  acceleration  by  the  very  weak  mass  m  and  from  the  division  by  the 
maximal displacement w
  Finally,  the  real-time  measurement  of  the  peak  of  maximum  displacement  w1  and  of  the 
simultaneous collinear force Fz1 provided a first evaluation of the quasi-static stiffness kz1 of 
the orbital content as shown in equation (1b). 
 
2.2 Clinical study 
  The protocol was evaluated in a pilot study involving one voluntary patient in accordance 
with the hospital welfare regulations and guidelines. The patient showed a bilateral proptosis, 
specifically accentuated in the right eye. A Computed Tomography scan (CT scan) showing 
the decompressed tissue moving towards the ethmoid sinus region is plotted in Figure 1c.   
  The  measurement  process  was  included  into  a  normal  clinical  setting  and  it  induced  no 
significant modification of the surgery procedure. The  force and  displacement  measurement 
process  was  as  follows:  two  series  of  data  acquisitions  were  done  on  the  left  orbit  and  one 
sequence on the right orbit. For each series, data recording was achieved before and after the 
wall osteotomies and three successive loads were applied by the surgeon. 
 
3. Results 
  A  typical  data  set  comprising  recorded  displacements  and  forces  is  shown  in  Figure  2.  It 
shows the intervention on the patient left eye before the osteotomy (Figure 2a) to quantify the 
preoperative  behavior  and  after  the  osteotomy  (Figure  2b)  to  evaluate  the  tissue 
decompression.  The  mean  value  and  standard  deviation  of  displacement  w1,  force  Fz1  and 
quasi-static stiffness kz1 are given in Table 1. The average value for the whole experiment was 
16  N  (standard  deviation  SD:  3  N)  for  the  force  and  9  mm  (SD:  4  mm)  for  the  eyeball 
backward  displacement.  The  averaged  quasi-static  stiffness  of  the  orbital  content  was 
evaluated to 2.4 N/mm (SD: 1.2 N/mm). 
 
In  term  of  applied  force,  the  signal  was  very  repetitive  in  time  and  magnitude.  For  each 
 
test,  the  duration  of  the  test  sequence  was  almost  10  s  in  which  three  loads  of  2  s  were 
applied.  The  force  showed  a  maximum  magnitude up to 20 N and standard deviation lower 
than 4 N. The mean force in the post-osteotomy phase showed a significant decrease: -35% 
for  the  left  eye  and  -11%  for  the  right  eye.  As  shown  in  Figure  2,  repetitive  oscillations  of 
signal were depicted during loads exerted by the surgeon (load 1, 2, 3) and this observation 
was made for each eye and both before and after wall osteotomies. 
 

 

5

  In term of displacement, a mean value up to 11 mm and standard deviation of 5.6 mm were 
recorded.  The  displacement  signal  was  noisier  than  the  force  one  and  both  signals  were 
globally. It was particularly obvious for the post-osteotomy results. Both for pre-operative and 
post-operative data, the pumping effect of the successive transient loads induced an increasing 
backward displacement of the eye-ball. 
 
  The  quasi-static  stiffness  was  evaluated  using  the  simplified  method  presented  in  section 
2.1.2. To derive displacements, an interpolation of the signal (polynomial order 4) was made 
in  the  peak  zone  located  by  grey  zones  in  the  typical  results  of  Figure  2.  The  curve  apex 
provided  the  maximum  displacement  w1  as  far  as  the  associated  time.  The  first  and  second 
polynomial  derivatives  allowed  the  velocity  and  the  acceleration  to  be  computed.  As 
previously  assumed  (section  2.1.2)  null  velocities  were  obtained  and  accelerations  were 
comprised between -10 mm/s2 and - 80 mm/s2. The stiffness was derived using equation (1b) 
using the simultaneous force component Fz1 and previously verifying that the residual terms 
of equation (1a) were negligible. Mean value of kz1 were comprised between 1.3 N/mm and 4 
N/mm showing a standard deviation between 0.7 N/mm and 1.6 N/mm. The damping forces 

(

1w ≈(cid:5)

0 )  were  null  and  the  contribution  of  inertia  forces  were  negligible.  Using  the  inertia 

term  in  equation  (1a),  the  maximal  value  of  40  x  10

-6  N/mm  was  obtained  for 

(cid:5)(cid:5)
w
1

≈ −

2
80 mm s ,

(cid:5)
w
1

≈

15mm

and the eyeball mass m of 7g. 

 
4. Discussion and conclusion 
  Combining a mixed approach involving experimental techniques and a clinical pilot study 
allowed  the  clinical  gesture  in  proptosis  reduction  to  be  investigated.  For  the  first  time,  the 
simultaneous  measurement  of  the  force  and  the  resulting  kinematics  allowed  data  to  be 
quantified intra-operatively. The stiffness of the orbital content was quantified to evaluate the 
surgery outcome. These results were in agreement with our initial hypothesis.   
 
  The  force  exerted  by  the  surgeon  on  the  eyeball  was  quantified  in  a  clinical  setting  with 
satisfactory accuracy. Very repetitive and not very noisy signals were recorded. The Polaris 
system  allowed  the  collinear  translation  to  be  determined.  Measuring  3D  real-time 
displacements  in  a  rather  confined  area  of  an  operating  room  was  challenging  and  the 
displacement signals were much more disturbed. The standard deviation was greater than that 
of  the  force  because  maintaining  permanent  contact  between  the  device  and  the  corneal 
protection  shell  as  far  as  constant  orientation  was  difficult  for  the  surgeon.  The  ergonomics 
will be improved in the next version of the device; the use of a non-invasive guide fixed on 
the patient head has been envisaged.   
  Oscillations inside each load case (Figure 2) were depicted before and after surgery and for 
each  eye.  To  find  an  interpretation  of  these  variations,  a  default  of  the  force  gage  was 
envisaged,  but  the  preliminary  validation  procedure  managed  in  test  bench  eliminated  this 
proposal.  When  pre-operative  and  post-operative  results  were  compared  (figure  2),  the 
synchronicity  of  displacements  referring  to  the  force  were  more  obvious  post-operatively 
when  the  tissue  had  been  decompressed.  So  the  force  oscillations  could  be  explained  by  a 

 

6

loads 

induced  an 

immediate  and  almost  constant 

re-arranging of the orbital content (optical nerve, muscle, fluid transfer) particularly sensitive 
to the pathology level. A third possible explanation was the proprioceptive-motor integration 
of  hand-eye  coordination  of  the  operator  which  could  modify  his  gesture  according  to 
feedback through the force gage.   
 
  The  resulting  backward  displacements  showed  a  trend  to  increase  during  pumping  effect 
due to loading transient application. As shown in Figure 2, the increase was significant after 
the first loading before surgery and more progressive post-operatively. This trend was found 
for all measurements (left eye, right eye, two successive loading applications and acquisition 
sequence).  The 
rearrangement 
pre-operatively  because  of  the  occlusion  of  the  orbit.  On  the  contrary,  the  wall  opening 
(Figure 1c) seemed to permit a more monotone evolution of the mechanical behavior of the 
orbital content essentially due to progressive pressure relaxation and fluid transfer towards the 
ethmoid sinus region. 
 
  This observation was completed by results in term of quasi-static stiffness evaluated during 
the  clinical  procedure.  The  post-treatment  of  value  presented  in  Table  1,  showed  that  the 
pre-operative stiffness increase was +48% for the right eye showing an accentuated proptosis. 
After surgery, this differential value increased up to +60%. The surgery resulted in a stiffness 
decrease of -48% for the left eye and -43% for the right eye. It was noticed that the poroelastic 
FE predictive model previously published [Luboz et al., 2004, 2005] was in good agreement 
with the clinical data of the present study since comprised in the range of standard variation of 
the experimental results. 
  Despite  these  encouraging  results,  it  was  considered  that  the  stiffness  evaluation  in 
quasi-static domain around the amplitude peaks was a first approximation. The interpolation 
of  displacement  around  displacement  peaks,  successive  velocity  and  acceleration  induced 
noticeable  discrepancies  which  enlarge  standard  deviation.  Some  reasonable  theoretical 
assumptions  were  made  concerning  the  limited  influence  of  inertia  and  damping  terms,  but 
the  dissipated  energy  seemed  to  play  a  role  on  the  phase  angle  between  force  and 
displacement.  To  answer  this,  the  next  step  of  the  study  will  be  to  use  the  overall 
displacement  and  force  signals  as  input  measures  into  a  non-linear  inverse  algorithm  to 
identify the equivalent rheological model of the orbital content.   
 
  Finally,  the  clinical  pilot  study  proved  that  the  quantification  of  the  surgical  gesture  was 
realistic in a clinical setting and this result was particularly clinical relevant in orbital surgery. 
The original device and associated protocol also showed a significant interest to help in the 
diagnosis  of  the  pathology  level  and  also  in  the  treatment  follow-up  before  surgery.  The 
measured  force  and  displacement  to  update  predictive  numerical  models  could  be  very 
pertinent  for  surgery  planning  and  intra-operative  guidance  to  conduct  minimally  invasive 
surgery.  The  precondition  to  all  these  promising  projects  will  be  to  enlarge  the  patient 
database.   
 
 
 

 

7

References 
Adenis J. P., Robert P. Y. 1994, Décompression orbitaire selon la technique d’Olivari. J. Fr. 
Ophtalmol. 17, 686-691. 
Gerard J.M., Ohayon J., Luboz V., Perrier P. & Payan Y., 2005. Non linear elastic properties 
of  the  lingual  and  facial  tissues  assessed  by  indentation  technique.  Application  to  the 
biomechanics of speech production. Medical Engineering & Physics. 27, 884-892. 
Gosling T, Westphal R, Faulstich J, Sommer K, Wahl F, Krettek C, Hufner T., 2006. Forces 
and torques during fracture reduction: Intraoperative measurements in the femur. J Orthop 
Res. 24, 333-8. 
Hendriks F.M., Brokken D., Oomens C.W.J., Bader D.L., Baaijens F.P.T., 2006. The relative 
contributions of different skin layers to the mechanical behavior of human skin in vivo using 
suction experiments. Medical Engineering & Physics. 28, 259-266. 
Jenkinson  RJ,  Sanders  DW,  Macleod  MD,  Domonkos  A,  Lydestadt  J.,  2005.  Intraoperative 
diagnosis  of  syndesmosis  injuries  in  external  rotation  ankle  fractures.  J  Orthop  Trauma.  19: 
604-9. 
Luboz V., Pedrono A., Amblard D., Swider P., Payan Y. & Boutault F., 2004. Prediction of 
tissue decompression in orbital surgery. Clinical Biomechanics. 19, 202-208. 
Luboz V., Ambard D., Swider P., Boutault F. & Payan Y., 2005. Computer assisted planning 
and  orbital  surgery:  patient-related  prediction  of  osteotomy  size  in  proptosis  reduction. 
Clinical Biomechanics. 20, 900-905. 
Miller K, Chinzei K., Orssengo G., Bednarz P., 2000. Mechanical properties of brain tissue 
in-vivo: experiment and computer simulation. Journal of Biomechanics. 33, 1369-1376. 
Ottensmeyer M., Kerdok A., Howe R., Dawson S., 2004. The Effects of Testing Environment 
on  the  Viscoelastic  Properties  of  Soft  Tissues.  Lecture  Notes  in  Computer  Science.  3078, 
9-18. 
Payan  Y.,  editor,  2005.  Biomechanics  Applied  to  Computer  Assisted  Surgery.  Research 
Signpost Publisher, ISBN 81-308-0031-4. 
Payan Y., Luboz V., Swider P., Amblard D., 2003. Outil et procédé de mesure de la raideur 
mécanique d'un milieu selon une direction déterminée. Université Joseph Fourier de Grenoble 
/ Université Paul Sabatier de Toulouse. Patent 03/51109, France. 
Saraux H., Biais B., Rossazza C., 1987. Ophtalmologie. Masson editor, 341-353. 
Stanley  R.J.,  McCaffrey  T.V.,  Offord  K.P.,  DeSanto  L.W.,  1989.  Superior  and  transantral 
orbital  decompression  procedures.  Effects  on  increased  intraorbital  pressure  and  orbital 
dynamics. Arch. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 115, 369-373. 
Taylor  R.,  Lavallée  S.,  Burdea  G.  &  Mosges  R.,  1996.  Computer  integrated  surgery: 
Technology and clinical applications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Viceconti  M,  Olsen  S,  Nolte  LP,  Burton  K.,  2005.  Extracting  clinically  relevant  data  from 
finite element simulations. Clin Biomech. 20: 451-4. 
 

 

8

Intra-operative  quantification  of  the  surgical  gesture  in  orbital  surgery:  application  to  the 
proptosis reduction. V. Luboz, P. Swider, D. Ambard, F. Boutault, Y. Payan 
 
 

Captions for table and illustrations 

 
 
Table 1 - Intra-operative results of load Fz1(N), eyeball backward displacement w1(mm), and 
mean quasi-static stiffness Kz1(N/mm) of the orbital content of the patient. 
 
Figure  1  -  Clinical  procedure  and  experimental  device:  (a)  intra-operative  positioning;  (b) 
technological  scheme:  (1)  aluminum  conic  base,    (2)  stainless  membrane  involving  strain 
gages,  (3)  stainless  ring,  (4)  stainless  shell,  (5)  silicon  cylinder,  (6)  polymer  rigid  body  for 
navigation, (7) wires; (c) CT scan of the proptosis and image segmentation 
 
Figure 2 - Intra-operative quantification of the clinical gesture for the left orbit of the patient: 
(a) force and displacement before surgery; (b) force and displacement after surgery 
(―): force Fz1, (- - -): displacement w1 

 

9

Intra-operative quantification of the surgical gesture in orbital surgery: application to the 
proptosis reduction. V. Luboz, P. Swider, D. Ambard, F. Boutault, Y. Payan 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Pre osteotomy 

Post osteotomy 

Fz1(N) 

w1(mm) 

kz1(N/mm)  Fz1(N) 

w1(mm) 

kz1(N/mm) 

left orbit 

17.4    SD 3.9  8.7 SD 3.8 

2.5 SD 1.6 

11.2 SD 3.5 

9.4 SD 2.7 

1.3 SD 0.7 

right orbit 

18.2    SD 2.2  6.7 SD 3.9 

3.7 SD 1.4 

16.2 SD 1.7 

10.2 SD 5.6 

2.1 SD 1.3 

 
 
Table 1 - Intra-operative results of load Fz1(N), eyeball backward displacement w1(mm), and 
mean quasi-static stiffness Kz1(N/mm) of the orbital content of the patient. 

 

 

 

10

Intra-operative quantification of the surgical gesture in orbital surgery: application to the 
proptosis reduction.    V. Luboz, P. Swider, D. Ambard, F. Boutault, Y. Payan 
 
 

z1

Fz1

w1

O1

θ1

r1

O0

y0

z0

x0

(a) 

z1

Fz1

(6)

(4) 

(5) 

(3) 

(2) 

z0

x0

O0

y0

w1

(1) 

(7) 

r1

O1

θ1

(b)

Eyeballs 

(c)

Non operated orbit 

Decompressed tissue 

 

Figure  1  -  Clinical  procedure  and  experimental  device:  (a)  intra-operative  positioning;  (b) 
technological  scheme:  (1)  aluminum  conic  base,    (2)  stainless  steel  membrane  involving 
strain gages, (3) stainless ring, (4) stainless steel shell, (5) silicon cylinder, (6) polymer rigid 
body for navigation, (7) wires; (c) CT scan of the proptosis and image segmentation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11

 
Intra-operative quantification of the surgical gesture in orbital surgery: application to the 
proptosis reduction. V. Luboz, P.Swider, D. Ambard, F. Boutault, Y. Payan 

Fz1(N)  w1(mm) 

(a) 

0 

+5 

 

Fz1(N)  w1(mm) 

(b) 

-25 

-20 

-15 

-10 

-5 

-25 

-20 

-15 

-10

-5 

0 

+5 

+10 

2 

4

load 1

6

load 2

8
load 3

10 

12

time(s)

2 

4

6

8

10 

12
time (s)

load 1 

load 2

load 3 

 

Figure 2 - Intra-operative quantification of the clinical gesture for the left orbit of the patient: 
(a) force and displacement before surgery; (b) force and displacement after surgery 
(―): force Fz1, (- - -): displacement w1 

 

12

