Comment on 
“Chebyshev finite difference method for the effects of variable viscosity 
and variable thermal conductivity on heat transfer to a micro-polar fluid 
from a non-isothemal stretching sheet with suction and blowing”, by S.N. 
Odda and A.M. Farhan [Chaos, Solitons &  Fractals, 2006, vol. 30, pp. 
851-858]

Asterios Pantokratoras
Associate Professor of Fluid Mechanics

School of Engineering, Democritus University of Thrace,
67100 Xanthi – Greece
e-mail:apantokr@civil.duth.gr

In  the  above  paper  the  authors  treat  the  boundary  layer  flow  of  a 
micropolar fluid along a horizontal flat plate with blowing or suction. The 
fluid  viscosity  and  thermal  conductivity  are  assumed  functions  of 
temperature.  The  boundary  layer  equations  are  transformed  into  ordinary 
ones  and  subsequently  are  solved  using  the  Chebyshev  finite  difference 
method.  However,  there  are  some  deficiencies  and  errors  in  this  paper 
which are presented below:

1. In the introduction  it is mentioned that the theory of  micro-polar 
fluids can be used to explain the flow of colloidals, liquid crystals, 
animal blood etc. However the rest of the paper is referred to air, 
water  and  lubrication  oils  and  results  are  presented  only  for 
Prandtl  number  0.7  (air).  These  three  fluids  are  not  micro-polar 
and there is no relationship between them and     colloidals, liquid 
crystals and   animal blood.  The authors used  a theory that is not 
valid for the fluids used (air, water and oils).  

2. In  the  section  governing  equations  it is  mentioned  twice  that  the 
fluid  thermal  conductivity  is  assumed  to  be  an  inverse  linear 
function of temperature whereas the equation used in the paper is  
a linear function of temperature.

3. In  the    transformed  energy  equation  (9)  the  Prandtl  number 
appears  in  two  terms  and  has  been  assumed  constant  across  the 
boundary  layer.  All  the  presented  results  concern  Pr=0.70. 

However,  the  Prandtl  number  is  a  function  of  viscosity  and 
thermal  conductivity  and    these  quantities  are  functions  of 
temperature.  Taking  into  account  that  temperature  varies  across 
the  boundary  layer,  the  Prandtl  number  varies,  too.    The 
assumption of constant Prandtl number inside the boundary layer 
  The 
leads  to  unrealistic  results  (Pantokratoras,  2004, 2005).
problem  can  be  treated  properly  either    considering  the  Prandtl 
number  as  a  variable  in  the  transformed  equations  (Saikrishnan 
and Roy, 2003)  or with the direct solution of the initial boundary 
layer  equations  and  treating  the  fluid  properties  as  functions  of 
temperature (Pantokratoras, 2004, 2005).

4. In  the  section  governing  equations  it  is  mentioned  that  the  mass 
transfer  parameter  is  positive  for  injection  and  negative  for 
suction. It is well known in fluid mechanics that injection thickens 
the  boundary  layer  and  suction      reduces  the  boundary  layer 
thickness  (  White,  1991,  page  251,  Schlichting    and  Gersten, 
2003, pages 297,299). However the opposite happens in figures 5 
and  7    of  Odda  and  Farhan  (2006).  The  positive  mass  transfer 
parameter  (injection)  corresponds  to  thin    profiles  and    negative 
mass transfer parameter (suction) corresponds to thick profiles.   
5. It is known in boundary layer theory that velocity and temperature 
profiles approach the ambient fluid conditions asymptotically and 
do not intersect the line which represents the boundary conditions 
as  happens  in some  profiles  of  figures  2  and  9 (See for  example 
the velocity profile for a moving plate on page 177 by Schlichting 
and Gersten, 2003). Especially the temperature profile in figure 9 
which corresponds to γ=-1 is almost a straight line. It is clear that 
these  profiles,  which  do not  approach  the  horizontal  axis 
asymptotically  and  intersect  it,  are    truncated  due  to  a  small  
calculation  domain  used.  The  authors  used  for  all  cases    a 
calculation  domain  with  ηmax=10.  This  calculation  domain  was 
sufficient  to  capture  the  majority  of  profiles  but  insufficient  to 
capture some temperature profiles. This problem can be solved by 
using a wider calculation domain, greater than 10.

Taking  into  account  the  above  arguments  it  is  clear  that  the  results 
included in the paper by Odda and Farhan (2006)  are wrong both from a 
theoretical and practical point of view.    

 REFERENCES

1. Odda,  S.  N.  and  Farhan,  A.M.  (2006).  Chebyshev  finite  difference 
method  for  the  effects  of  variable  viscosity  and  variable  thermal 
conductivity  on  heat  transfer  to  a  micro-polar  fluid  from  a  non-
isothermal  stretching  sheet  with  suction  and  blowing,  Chaos, 
Solitons and Fractals, available online 24 April 2006.

2.  Pantokratoras,  A.    (2004).  Further  results  on  the  variable  viscosity 
on  flow  and  heat  transfer  to  a  continuous  moving  flat  plate, 
International  Journal  of Engineering  Science,  Vol.  42,  pp.  1891-
1896.

3. Pantokratoras,  A.    (2005).  Forced  and  mixed convection    boundary 
layer flow    along a flat  plate with variable viscosity and variable 
Prandtl  number.  New  results,  Heat  and  Mass Transfer,  Vol. 41,  pp. 
1085-1094.

4. Saikrishnan,  P.  and  Roy,  S.  (2003).  Non-uniform  slot  injection 
(suction)  into  water  boundary  layers  over  (i)  a  cylinder  and  (ii)  a 
sphere,  International  Journal  of  Engineering  Science,  Vol.  41,  pp. 
1351-1365.

5. Schlichting, H. and Gersten, K.  (2003). Boundary layer theory, 9th

ed.,  Springer, Berlin.

6. White, F.  (1991).  Viscous  Fluid  Flow, 2nd  ed.,    McGraw-Hill,  New 

York. 

