Long-term variations in the correlation between NAO and 
solar activity: the importance of North-South solar activity 
asymmetry for atmospheric circulation 

 

Katya Georgieva∗
 
Solar-Terrestrial Influences Laboratory at the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 
 
Boian Kirov, Peter Tonev, Veneta Guineva, 
 
Solar-Terrestrial Influences Laboratory at the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 
 
Dimitar Atanasov
 
Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics, Sofia University 

 
_________________________________________________________________ 
Abstract 
 

General  atmospheric  circulation  is  the  system  of  atmospheric  motions  over  the  Earth  on  the 
scale of the whole globe. Two main types of circulation have been identified: zonal - characterized 
by low amplitude waves in the troposphere moving quickly from west to east, and meridional with 
stationary high amplitude waves when the meridional transfer is intensified. The prevailing type 
of  circulation  is  related  to  global  climate.  Based  on  many  years  of  observations,  certain 
“circulation  epochs”  have  been  defined  when  the  same  type  of  circulation  prevails  for  years  or 
decades.  Here  we  study  the  relation  between  long-term  changes  in  solar  activity  and  prevailing 
type  of  atmospheric  circulation,  using  NAO  index  reconstructed  for  the  last  four  centuries  as  a 
proxy for large-scale atmospheric circulation. We find that when the southern solar hemisphere is 
more active, increasing solar activity in the secular solar cycle results in increasing zonality of the 
circulation,  while  when  the  northern  solar  hemisphere  is  more  active,  increasing  solar  activity 
increases meridional circulation. In an attempt to explain the observations, we compare the short-
term  reaction  of  NAO  and  NAM  indices  to  different  solar  drivers:  powerful  solar  flares,  high 
speed solar wind streams, and magnetic clouds. 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
 
1  Introduction 
 

The  problem  of  solar  influences  on  climate  has  been  discussed  for  already  more  than  two 
centuries (Herschel, 1801), and continues attracting increasing attention. Many studies have been 
published  reporting  correlations  between  solar  or  geomagnetic  activity  and  various  climatic 
parameters. But the results, even when highly statistically significant, are quite contradictory: both 
positive and negative correlations have been found between solar activity and climatic parameters 
(see e.g. Herman and Goldberg, 1978 and the references therein). Sazonov and Loginov (1969), 
based  on  data  since  1884,  suggested  that  the  correlation  between  solar  activity  and  surface  air 
temperature in the 11-year sunspot cycle is negative at low levels of solar activity in the secular 
solar cycle, and positive in periods of high solar activity. In an earlier study (Georgieva and Kirov, 
2000),  we  compiled  all  available  published  results,  and  found  that  the  correlation  between  solar 
activity and surface air temperature in the 11-year sunspot cycle was positive in the whole 18th and 

                                                 
∗ Corresponding author. e-mail: kgeorg@bas.bg 

20th  centuries  and  negative  in  the  whole  19th  century,  for  both  low  and  high  solar  activity,  and 
seemed to change systematically in consecutive secular (Gleissberg) solar cycles(cid:185) (Fig.1).  

 

 

 
Fig.1.  Reported  positive  (grey  bars)  and  negative  (black  bars)  correlations  between  sunspot  number  and 
surface air temperature in the 11-year sunspot cycle; Solid line denotes sunspot number smoothed by 11-
point running average and then 30-point running average (Georgieva and Kirov, 2000). 
 

This  result  is  confirmed  by  measurements  from  individual  meteorological  stations  with  long 
data  records  (Fig.2).  The  figure  was  derived  in  the  following  way:  In  the  time  series  of  each 
station, the intervals with length of at least 30 years were identified with the highest statistically 
significant (positive or negative) correlation between temperature and sunspot number. The whole 
interval 1700-2000 was divided into 5-year bins, and for each bin the percentage of stations was 
calculated  for  which  this  5-year  period  was  a  part  of  an  interval  with  statistically  significant 
positive  or  negative  correlation.  These  numbers  were  then  averaged  by  a  30-year  running  mean 
with  a  step  of  10  years:  e.g.  1700-1730,  1710-1740,  …1970-2000.  Each  such  30-year  period  is 
represented  in  Fig.2  by  a  dark  bar  whose  altitude  is  proportional  to  the  percentage  of  stations 
exhibiting correlations of one sign, and its direction (above or below the x-axis) corresponds to the 
sign of the correlation – positive or negative, respectively. The sunspot data (solid line in Fig.2) 
were treated in the same way: the yearly mean values were averaged by a 30-year running mean 
with a step of 10 years. In meteorology, these averages over 3 full decades are called “normals” 
and are recommended by the World Meteorological Organization for quantifying climate change 
(Guttman,  1989).  We  use  this  type  of  averaging  in  all  following  figures  presenting  long-term 
variations. 

 
Fig.2 demonstrates that all stations which were operating in the 18th century registered positive 
correlations between surface air temperature and sunspot number in the 11-year solar cycle, in the 
19th century in the majority of the stations the correlation was negative, and positive again in the 
20th  century.  Further,  we  related  the  change  in  the  correlation  between  solar  activity  and 
temperature  to  the  change  in  the  north-south  asymmetry  of  solar  activity,  A=(SN-SS)/(SN+SS) 
where SN and SS stand for the total sunspot area in the northern and southern solar hemispheres, 
respectively  (the  white  bars  in  Fig.2):  when  the  southern  solar  hemisphere  is  more  active, 
temperature is higher in sunspot minimum and lower in sunspot maximum; and when the northern 
solar hemisphere is more active, temperature is higher in sunspot maximum and lower in sunspot 

                                                 

(cid:185)  We  should  specify  that  here  and  in  what  follows  we  are  studying  the  correlation  of  atmospheric 
parameters  with  the  sunspot  number  and  not  with  geomagnetic  activity.  The  correlation  between  sunspot 
number and aa index is low in both the 11-year solar cycle (Feynman and Gu, 1986) and recently also in the 
secular solar cycle (Georgieva et al., 2006), however this question is beyond the scope of the present study. 
A couple of useful references are Lawrence and Ruzmaikin (1998) and Cliver et al. (1998). 
 

minimum.  If  this  is  true,  the  secular  change  in  the  correlation  between  solar  activity  and 
temperature implies a secular variation in the north-south solar activity asymmetry(cid:185). 

 

 

Fig.2.  Percentage  of  meteorological  stations  (grey  bars)  measuring positive  (along  the positive  Y-axis)  or 
negative  (along  the  negative  Y-axis)  correlations  in  the  11-year  sunspot  cycle  between  solar  activity  and 
surface  air  temperature;  secular  sunspot  cycle  (solid  line);  north-south  solar  activity  asymmetry,  A=(SN-
SS)/(SN+SS) (white bars) (Georgieva and Kirov, 2000). 
 

Waldmeier  (1957)  suggested  the  following  relation  between  the  north-south  asymmetry  of 
solar activity and the secular solar cycle: solar activity dominates in the northern solar hemisphere 
during  the  ascending  part  of  the  secular  solar  cycle,  in  the  southern  one  during  the  descending 
part, and in epochs of secular minima and maxima the asymmetry is small. However, there wеre 
at least two episodes when this rule did not hold: the secular maximum of the 20th century around 
1950 when the asymmetry had a maximum rather than a minimum (See Fig.2), and the end of the 
Maunder minimum when the activity was clearly increasing while all sunspots were concentrated 
in the southern solar hemisphere. From the supposed dependence of the correlation between solar 
activity  and  temperature  on  solar  asymmetry  (Georgieva,  1998),  we  can  hypothesize  that  solar 
asymmetry  changes  sign  in  consecutive  secular  cycles,  being  positive  in  “even”  cycles  (if  we 
denote the 20th century secular cycle as even) and negative in odd ones; it has maximum positive 
or  negative  values  coinciding  with  the  maximum  of  solar  activity  in  the  odd  and  even  secular 
cycles,  respectively,  and  changes  sign  around  secular  solar  minimum.  Therefore,  we  can  speak 
about a “double secular” solar cycle consisting of two secular, or “Gleissberg” (Gleissberg, 1958) 
cycles – one in which more active is the southern solar hemisphere, and a second one in which 
more active is the northern hemisphere, much like the 22-year magnetic solar cycle consisting of 
two  11-year  cycles  with  opposite  polarities,  which  leaves  no  “anomalies”  in  the  available  data 
(Georgieva  and  Kirov,  2000).  This  double  secular  cycle,  inferred  from  climatic  data,  was 
independently determined by Mursula and Zieger (2001) in geomagnetic data: they found that the 
streamer  asymmetry,  as  determined  from  seasonal  geomagnetic  activity,  changes  its  orientation 
from being shifted towards the southern magnetic heliosphere in the 19th century to being shifted 
towards the northern magnetic hemisphere in the 20th century.  

 
The  reason  for  the  different  reaction  of  surface  air  temperature  to  solar  activity  originating 
from the two solar hemispheres is not clear, and probably temperature is not the only parameter 
whose  correlation  with  solar  activity  depends  on  solar  asymmetry.  In  the  present  paper  we  are 
dealing with large-scale atmospheric circulation. In Section 2 we study the long-term variations in 
the  correlation  between  solar  activity  and  atmospheric  circulation.  In  Section  3  we  compare  the 
short-term reaction of the circulation to different manifestations of solar activity in the last solar 
cycle in which a fleet of spacecraft has been measuring solar and interplanetary parameters. We 
summarize and discuss the results in Section 4. 
                                                 
(cid:185) A useful discussion of the nature of the secular variation and related North-South asymmetry can be found 
in the book by Zeldovich et al. (1983), where also a possible origin of the asymmetry is indicated (the 
interplay between the dipole and quadrupole solar magnetic modes) first pointed out by Ivanova and 
Ruzmaikin (1976). 

2     Long-term variations in atmospheric circulation 
 
2.1  General atmospheric circulation 

 

 

 

Atmospheric  circulation  is  the  system  of  atmospheric  motions  over  the  Earth  on  the  scale  of 
the  whole  globe  (general  atmospheric  circulation),  or  over  a  certain  region  with  its  specific 
features (local circulation). These large-scale atmospheric motions are caused by the differential 
heating  of  the  Earth  surface.  Heated  air  at  the  equator  rises,  creating  low  pressure  there,  and 
proceeds  south  and  north  toward  the  poles.    If  the  Earth  didn’t  rotate,  this  air  would  reach  the 
poles,  descend  and  return  to  the  equator,  so  there  would  be  two  circulation  cells,  one  in  each 
hemisphere.  However,  the  Earth  does  rotate,  so  when  the  heated  air  at  the  equator  rises  to  a 
maximum altitude of about 14 kilometers (top of the troposphere) and begins flowing horizontally 
to  the  north  and  south  poles,  the  Coriolis  force  deflects  it,  and  at  latitudes  of  about  30°  the  air 
already  flows  zonally  (parallel  to  the  equator)  from  west  to  east.  During  its  motion  from  the 
equator,  the  air  cools,  and  a  part  of  it  sinks  back  to  the  surface  creating  the  subtropical  high 
pressure  zone.  Because  the  Earth’s  surface  is  not  uniform,  the  high  pressure  zone  is  not  a 
continuous  belt  but  consists  of  isolated  regions  of  persistent  high  pressure  called  “atmospheric 
centers of action”.  From this zone, the surface air travels in two directions. One part moves back 
to the equator completing the circulation system known as the Hadley cell. Another part moves to 
the poles and is also deflected by the Coriolis force, so at about 60° north and south the surface 
flow is from west to east. There these subtropical westerlies collide with the cold air coming from 
the poles, and the collision results in frontal uplift and creation of the “subpolar lows” - the high-
latitude  centers  of  action.  A  small  portion  of  the  lifted  air  flows  back  to  the  subtropics  after  it 
reaches the top of the troposphere completing the circulation system known as the Ferrel cell. The 
bigger part is directed to the poles where it creates the polar vortex, moves downward to form the 
polar high pressure zone, and flows back to midlatitudes in the Polar cell. 

 
The Hadley cell and the Polar cell are “thermally direct” – they exist as a direct consequence of 
the  latitudinal  differences  in  surface  temperatures.  The  Ferrel  cell  is  “thermally  indirect”  -  its 
existence depends upon the Hadley cell and the Polar cell and comes about as a result of the eddy 
circulations (the high and low pressure areas) of the midlatitudes. The Hadley and Polar cells are 
truly  closed  loops,  but  the  Ferrel  cell  is  not,  the  prevailing  winds  in  it  depend  on  the  passing 
weather  systems.  While  upper-level  winds  are  essentially  westerly  (from  west  to  east),  surface 
winds  can  vary  sharply  and  abruptly  in  direction.  The  predominantly  westerly  winds  there  can 
weaken  or  can  become  meridional  (in  the  north-south  direction),  or  even  easterly  for  days, 
changing weather patterns. Therefore, what happens in the Ferrel cells is decisive of the general 
atmospheric circulation and thus of the terrestrial weather and climate. 

2.2  Circulation epochs 

In  1930’s,  Vangengeim  (1933,  1952)  defined  three  types  of  atmospheric  circulation  in  the 
Atlantic-Eurasian region calculated from the daily atmospheric pressure charts over the northern 
Atlantic-Eurasian  region:  Westerly  (W),  Easterly  (E),  and  Meridional  (C).  Later  Girs  (1964) 
applied  the  same  criteria  to  the  circulation  in  the  Pacific-American  sector  and  also  found  three 
types of circulation there: one zonal (Z) and two meridional (M1 and M2). W and Z - the zonal 
types of circulation (westerly at midlatitudes) – are characterized by low amplitude waves in the 
troposphere moving quickly from west to east. When a meridional circulation type (C or E, M1 or 
M2)  prevails,  stationary  high  amplitude  waves  are  observed  and  the  meridional  transfer  is 
intensified. The difference between C and E and between M1 and M2 is in the different location 
of  the  waves’  crests  and  troughs.  The  circulation  in  the  southern  hemisphere  is  less  studied, 
mostly  because  of  the  lack  of  systematic  observations  over  big  parts  of  the  oceans,  but  it  was 
found that many of the features observed in the northern hemisphere are present there too. Again, 
there  are  two  basic  types  of  circulation  –  zonal  and  meridional,  the  first  one  divided  into  two 
subtypes, and the second one into five (Girs and Kondratovich, 1978). 

Girs  and  Kondratovich  (1978)  compared  the  occurrence  of  the  different  types  of  circulation 
and found that zonal circulation prevailed in the end of the 19th century and in the beginning of the 
20th century, then it was replaced by prevailing meridional types of circulation. Their hypothesis 
was that in periods of long-term increase in sunspot activity the occurrence of meridional forms of 
circulations is increased, while in periods of decreasing sunspot activity more developed are the 
zonal  forms  of  circulation.  However,  the  change  from  prevailing  zonal  to  prevailing  meridional 
circulation coincides with the change in the correlation between sunspot number and surface air 
temperature in the 11-year sunspot cycle, and with the change in the sign of the north-south solar 
activity asymmetry, so we can suspect that the decisive factor is not the level or the direction of 
change of the solar activity, but again the predominantly more active solar hemisphere.  

 
To be able to investigate this possibility, we need longer time series, covering periods of both 
increasing  and  decreasing  solar  activity  for  more  active  northern  or  southern  solar  hemispheres. 
Direct data for atmospheric circulation are available only since the end of the 19th century, and for 
earlier  periods  proxy  data  must  be  used.  A  large-scale  circulation  pattern  exerting  a  dominant 
influence  on  weather  across  much  of  the  Northern  hemisphere  is  the  North  Atlantic  Oscillation  
(Hurrell  et  al.,  2001),  and  the  index  of  the  North  Atlantic  Oscillation  (NAO)  representing  the 
large-scale atmospheric circulation in northern midlatitudes, is probably the index with the longest 
and the most reliable reconstructions (Luterbacher, 1999).  
 
2.3  Long-term correlation between NAO and solar activity 

The  North  Atlantic  Oscillation  is  a  north-south  see-saw  oscillation  between  the  atmospheric 
centers  of  action  in  the  high-latitude  -  Icelandic  Low,  and  in  the  subtropical  Atlantic  -  Azores 
High,  and  is  defined  as  the  difference  between  the  normalized  sea-level  pressure  in  these  two 
centers of action. (The stations used are always Reykjavik in Iceland, and either Gibraltar or Ponta 
Delgada in the Azores). When the high pressure in the Azores High is even higher than average, 
usually the low pressure in the Icelandic Low is even lower than average, and NAO is in positive 
phase characterized by enhanced midlatitude westerly winds across the Atlantic onto Europe. In 
the reverse case, when the two centers of action are weakened (lower than average high pressure 
in the Azores High and higher than average low pressure in the Icelandic Low), NAO is negative 
and zonal circulation is weakened while meridional circulation is enhanced.  

 
The  influence  of  solar  activity  on  NAO  in  the  11-year  sunspot  cycle  has  been  studied  by  a 
number of authors. Kodera (2003) found that the spatial extend of NAO depends on the level of 
solar  activity:  during  low  solar  activity  winters,  the  NAO  signal  in  the  sea  level  pressure  is 
confined in the Atlantic sector, while during high solar activity winters, NAO-related anomalies 
extend over the northern hemisphere, in particular over the polar region and Eurasian continent. 
Ruzmaikin  and  Feynman  (2002)  showed  that  the  influence  of  solar  activity  on  the  Northern 
Annual  Mode  (an  analogue  to  NAO,  see  below)  depends  on  the  phase  of  the  quasi-biennial 
oscillation  (QBO),  and  that  the  influence  of  solar  variability  on  NAM  is  a  part  of  the  possible 
physical link between solar variability and the low-frequency climate variations (Ruzmaikin et al., 
2006). 
 
In  a  previous  study  (Kirov  and  Georgieva,  2002)  we  used  the  monthly  mean  NAO  index  of 
Jones  et  al.  (1997)  spanning  back  to  1821.  Our  conclusion  was  that  the  long-term  variations  of 
NAO are negatively correlated to sunspot activity: the index has a minimum in the period of the 
solar activity maximum of the 20th century, and a maximum in the solar activity minimum in the 
end  of  the  19th  and  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century  with  a  correlation  of  –0.73  (Fig.3).  The 
anticorrelation would have been much higher if we had used the data only since the end of the 19th 
century as earlier the two quantities seem to be actually correlated.  

 

 

 

Fig.3.  Long-term  variations  of  NAO  index  (Jones  et  al.,  1997)  (solid  line),  and  sunspot  number  (dotted 
line): 30-year averages (Kirov and Georgieva, 2002). 
 

A longer NAO reconstruction is now available (Luterbacher et al., 2001) with monthly values 
since 1659 and seasonal values since 1500. To compare with solar activity, we study the period 
since 1611 for which the  group sunspot number is  available as a  measure of the yearly level of 
solar  activity  (Hoyt  and  Schatten,  1998).  NAO  index  is  calculated  as  the  average  of  the  three 
winter months, December, January and February.  In Fig.4, NAO index is presented (solid line) 
together  with  the  group  sunspot  number  Rg  (dotted  line)  and  the  International  sunspot  number 
available since 1700 (dashed line). As described in the Introduction, all variables are presented as 
30-year averages with a step of 10 years. The correlation between the long-term changes of Jones 
et  al.  (1997)  reconstruction  of  NAO  presented  in  Fig.3  and  of  Luterbacher  et  al.  (2001) 
reconstruction used in Fig.4 in the period 1821-2000 is 0.87 with p<0.01. The vertical lines divide 
the period into epochs with positive and negative correlations between the long-term variations of 
NAO and solar activity. (These periods were chosen in such a way as to give the highest positive 
or negative correlation between NAO and solar activity, so they are somewhat  arbitrary). In the 
20th  century  the  correlation  is  negative  in  agreement  with  our  earlier  findings,  but  in  the  19th 
century it is positive, negative again in the 18th century, and positive again in the 17th century. The 
correlation in the last period is not statistically significant, but it should be noted that this is the 
period  of  the  Maunder  minimum  when  sunspot  activity  was  atypical.  The  change  in  the 
correlation between the long-term variations of NAO and solar activity coincides with the change 
in the correlation between surface air temperature and solar activity in the 11-year sunspot cycle, 
which  as  noted  above,  is  supposed  to  coincide  with  the  changes  in  the  long-term  solar  activity 
asymmetry. We can therefore speculate that when the southern solar hemisphere is more active, 
increasing solar activity in the secular solar cycle leads to strengthening of the zonal atmospheric 
circulation, and when the northern solar hemisphere is more active, increasing solar activity in the 
secular solar cycle leads to weakening of the zonal circulation. 

 

Fig.4. Solid line:  NAO index (Luterbacher et al., 2001); dashed line: International sunspot number; dotted 
line: Group sunspot number (Hoyt and Schatten, 1998). 30-year averages. 

 

2.4   Solar activity and the atmospheric centers of action 

As  noted  in  Section  2.1,  the  large-scale  atmospheric  circulation  depends  on  the  position  and 
strength of the atmospheric centers of actions – permanent or semi-permanent areas of persistently 
high  or  low  pressure.  Both  observations  and  models  show  that  these  vary  in  response  to  solar 
activity  in  the  11-year  solar  cycle.  Christoforou  and  Hameed  (1997)  studied  the  solar  cycle 
variations of the semi-permanent Northern Pacific centers of action – the Aleutian Low, active in 
the  cold  part  of  the  year  (mean  latitude  52.5o  N  and  longitude  176o  E),  and  the  Hawaiian  High, 
most pronounced in summer (mean latitude 33.5o N and longitude 203oE), and found that during 
solar maximum conditions Hawaiian High moves northward, and Aleutian Low moves westward 
and weakens (the area-weighted surface pressure increases).  

 
Haigh et al. (2005) and Haigh and Blackburn (2006) compared observations with a simplified 
general circulation model results and found a good agreement between the observed atmospheric 
reaction to the solar cycle and the modeled UV increase: the response to the higher level of solar 
UV in sunspot maximum consists of weakening and poleward expansion of the Hadley cells and a 
poleward shift of the Ferrell cells. In other words, energy input into the stratosphere can lead to 
changes  in  the  tropospheric  circulation,  even  without  any  forcing  below  the  tropopause.  An 
important result is the dependence of the reaction on the distribution of the stratospheric heating: 
low-latitude  heating  forces  Hadley  cells  to  move  poleward,  and  high-latitude  or  latitudinally 
uniform heating forces them equatorward. 

 
In a previous study (Kirov and Georgieva, 2002) we used the pressure, longitude and latitude 
monthly averages of the Northern hemisphere centers of action from 1899 to 1995 calculated by 
Shi  (Hameed  et  al.,  1995;  Shi,  1999)  to  study  their  long-term  variations.  We  found  that  with 
increasing  solar  activity  in  the  secular  solar  cycle,  both  subtropical  centers  of  high  pressure  – 
Azores High in the Atlantic and Hawaiian High in the Pacific – move poleward and weaken, in 
agreement with model prediction for weakening and expansion of the Hadley cells in response to 
increased solar UV (Fig.5).  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.5. Solid lines: Long-term variations in the latitude (left panels) and pressure (right panels) of the Azores 
High (upper panels) and Hawaiian High (lower panels); Dashed line: Long-term variations in sunspot 
number (Kirov and Georgieva, 2005). 
 

 

As  for  the  mid-latitude  centers  of  low  pressure,  the  Aleutian  Low  in  the  Pacific  does  move 
poleward in accordance with the expected poleward shift of the Ferrel cells (Fig.6a). However, the 
latitude of the Icelandic Low in the Atlantic decreases with increasing solar activity in the secular 
solar cycle (Fig.6b). This means that solar UV is not the main solar activity factor influencing this 
center of action. According to the model experiments of Haigh et al. (2005), equatorward shifting 
results from high latitude energy input. The geographic latitude of the Icelandic Low (59.6oN) is 
not  much  higher  than  that  of  the  Aleutian  Low  (52.5o  N),  but  their  geomagnetic  latitudes  differ 
much more (Fig.7).  Therefore, the Icelandic Low is more subjected to auroral processes related to 
solar induced geomagnetic disturbances. 
 

 

 

Fig.6. Solid lines: Long-term variations in the latitude of the Aleutian Low (left panel) and Icelandic Low 
(right panel); Dashed line: Long-term variations in sunspot number (Kirov and Georgieva, 2005). 
 

 
 
 
 
Fig.7. Geographic (solid circles) and geomagnetic 
(dots) coordinates of Icelandic Low and Aleutian Low

 

 

3    Short-term  reaction  of  NAO  and  the  atmospheric  centers  of  action  to  different  solar 
drivers 
 
3.1   Events and data   

In  an  attempt  to  shed  some  light  on  the  possible  reasons  for  the  long-term  change  in  the 
correlation between atmospheric circulation and solar activity, we study the short-term reaction of 
the atmosphere to different solar drivers whose number and intensity vary in the course of the 11-
year solar cycle, and supposedly also on longer timescales.  

 
The  most  obvious  solar  activity  agent  which  can  affect  the  atmosphere  and  possibly  lead  to 
changes in the circulation is solar irradiation, and though total solar irradiation changes by only 
about 0.1% in the 11-year sunspot cycle (Fröhlich, 2006), the UV radiation which is absorbed in 
the  stratosphere  varies  by  2-8%  (Rottman,  2006).  Model  results  of  the  effect  of  increased  UV 
heating in the stratosphere on the tropospheric circulation were briefly described in the previous 
section,  and  a  mechanism  for  the  downward  transmitting  of  the  solar  signal  is  highlighted  for 
example by Kodera (2007). To assess the atmospheric reaction to solar irradiance variations, we 
study the effects of intense (X-class) solar flares. The list of X-class solar flares used in this study 
was obtained from the server of the NOAA Space Environment Center http://www.sec.noaa.gov/ 
ftpdir/indices/old_indices/. 

The  sources  of  the  most  intense  geomagnetic  storms  are  considered  coronal  mass  ejections 
(CME’s) - eruptions of solar plasma and embedded magnetic field from the corona. (Gonzalez et 
al., 2002a). In an earlier study we have found that highly geoeffective are not CME’s in general 
but  magnetic  clouds  –  a  subclass  of  CME’s  distinguished  by  the  increased  magnetic  field 
intensity, low proton temperature or low plasma beta, and a smooth rotation of the magnetic field 
over a large angle for a period of the order of a day (Georgieva and Kirov, 2005; Georgieva et al., 
2006).  This  magnetic  field  rotation,  which  provides  prolonged  periods  of  southward  magnetic 
field  and  hence  geoeffectiveness,  is  especially  interesting  for  our  study,  because  it  is  the  only 
characteristic  known  so  far  which  is  persistently  different  in  the  two  solar  hemispheres, 
irrespective  of  solar  magnetic  polarity  reversals,  and  may  be  the  key  for  understanding  the 
different effects that the two solar hemispheres have on the Earth. The rotating structures on the 
Sun  exhibit  clear  North-South  asymmetry:  they  are  predominantly  left-handed  in  the  Northern 
solar hemisphere and right-handed in the Southern solar hemisphere (Antonucci et al., 1990). On 
their transit from the Sun to the Earth the magnetic clouds preserve the direction of rotation of the 
magnetic structures on the Sun from which they originate (Kumar and Rust, 1996), and therefore 
most  of  the  left-handed  magnetic  clouds  hitting  the  Earth  come  from  the  northern  solar 
hemisphere,  while  most  of  the  right-handed  magnetic  clouds  originate  from  the  southern  solar 
hemisphere. The list of magnetic clouds which we use was compiled from a number of sources: 
Fenrich and Luhmann (1998), Leamon et al. (2002), Vilmer et al. (2003), SOHO LASCO CME 
catalog 
list 
(http://sprg.ssl.berkeley.edu/  ~davin/clouds/cloud_list.html),  completed  by  the  list  of  magnetic 
clouds with identified source regions (Gopalswamy, 2006). The solar wind and IMF parameters 
for all these events were checked from OMNI database of the National Space Science Data Center 
http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/omniweb/, and all events without a clear IMF rotation were excluded. 

(http://cdaw.gsfc.nasa.gov/CME_list/),  WIND  MFI  magnetic 

cloud 

 
In a number of papers, C.Jackman and his group (see e.g. Jackman et al., 2006 for a review) 
presented  the  effects  of  solar  proton  events  on  the  ionization  and  chemistry  in  the  middle 
atmosphere, and the subsequent effects on ozone. As the variations in the ozone concentration are 
related to the thermal regime in the stratosphere and hence to the circulation, we have also studied 
the reaction of the atmospheric circulation to the proton events. The list of solar proton events was 
obtained from the Space Environment Center server (http://www.sec.noaa.gov/alerts/SPE.html). It 
is  well  known  that  solar  proton  events occur  during some  coronal  mass  ejections  (Kahler  et  al., 
1983),  so  their  effects  are  expected  to  be  the  same  as  the  effects  of  CME’s.  Not  all  magnetic 
clouds  in  our  list  produced  solar  proton  events,  and  not  all  solar  proton  events  were  associated 
with magnetic clouds (some were associated with CME’s but not magnetic clouds), but even when 
we removed the overlapping events from both lists, the effects of solar proton events and magnetic 
clouds were undistinguishable, so we are not showing proton events separately. 

 
The geomagnetic activity during the declining phase of the solar cycle can be even higher that 
at sunspot maximum. In this period the main drivers of terrestrial disturbances are the high speed 
solar wind streams originating from solar coronal holes - sources of recurrent geomagnetic storms 
(Gonzalez et al., 2002b). We have compiled a list of high speed solar wind streams from NASA 
OMNI  data  base  (http://omniweb.gsfc.nasa.gov/ow.html)  defining  them  as  interplanetary 
structures with high (>500 km/s) speed with a sharp increase in the speed (no less than 100 km/s 
to no less than 500 km/s in no more that one day) persisting for at least 5 hours, and with high 
proton temperature and low plasma density. Our definition differs from the one of Lindblad and 
Lundstedt (1981) by the requirement for high temperature and low density, and from the one used 
in  compiling  the  ISTP  catalog  (http://pwg.gsfc.nasa.gov/scripts/sw-cat/Catalog_categories.html) 
by the requirement for a sharp increase in the flow velocity.  

 
Our  catalog  of  events  (magnetic  clouds,  high  speed  streams,  etc.)  is  available  online  at 

http://stochastics.fmi.uni-sofia.bg/~stil/. 

 
Care  was  taken  not  to  mix  the  different  types  of  events.  Some  magnetic  clouds  have  high 
speeds,  but  their  interplanetary  signatures  (low  temperature  and  smooth  magnetic  field  rotation) 

are  very  different  from  the  ones  of  the  high  speed  solar  wind  streams  (high  temperature  and 
fluctuating magnetic field components). It is more difficult to distinguish between solar flares and 
magnetic clouds, because some magnetic clouds are indeed associated with solar flares. Therefore, 
all  cases  when  a  solar  flare  was  followed  within  2-5  days  by  a  magnetic  cloud,  were  removed 
from both lists. Finally, we have 113 cases of high speed solar wind, 103 magnetic clouds, and 66 
solar  flares  in  the  period  1995-2003.  The  beginning  of  the  period  was  determined  by  the 
availability  of  solar  and  solar  wind  data  (WIND  and  SOHO  satellites),  and  the  end  –  by  the 
availability of atmospheric data (the project EMULATE). 

 

The  project  EMULATE  (European  and  North  Atlantic  daily  to  MULtidecadal  climATE 
variability) provides the daily gridded sea level pressure data over the extratropical Atlantic and 
Europe (70°-25° N by 70° W-50° E, 5ox5o boxes, available online at http://www.cru.uea.ac.uk/cru/ 
projects/emulate/).  From  this  data  set  we  use  the  boxes  containing  the  Azores  High  (31.6oN, 
32.7oW) and the Icelandic Low (59.6o N, 33.1o W), and calculate their difference as a measure of 
the NAO index. We use this data set rather than the various estimates of NAO in order not only to 
evaluate the changes in NAO but also to be able to attribute these changes to changes in high or 
low latitudes.  

 
The  Northern  Annular  Mode  is  the  hemispheric-scale  analog  of  NAO.  This  is  the  dominant 
pattern of non-seasonal sea-level pressure variations north of 20oN, and it is characterized by sea-
level  pressure  anomalies  of  one  sign  in  the  Arctic  and  anomalies  of  the  opposite  sign  centered 
about 37-45oN. In the high phase of the index, the pressure is below normal in the Arctic and the 
surface westerlies in the north Atlantic are enhanced (Baldwin, 2001). The daily values of NAM 
at  17  pressure  levels  from  1000  hPa  (surface)  to  10  hPa  (~32  km)  are  available  online  at 
http://www.nwra.com/resumes/baldwin/nam.php.  

 
3.2   Solar flares 
 

Fig.8a presents the changes in the NAO index related to strong solar flares. On the day of the 
flare the index jumps up and remains at this higher level for 9 days. Fig.8b demonstrates that this 
increase  in  the  NAO  index  is  due  to  both  reduced  pressure  in  the  Icelandic  Low,  and  increased 
pressure in the Azores  High. In this and the following figures, the superposed epoch analysis is 
employed (Ambroz, 1979): the value on day 0 is the average of all days with events, the values on 
days -1 and +1 are the averages of all days preceding and following the events, respectively, and 
so on. 
 
The changes induced by strong solar flares are seen throughout the troposphere. In Fig.9a the 
NAM-index is plotted at different levels from the surface (1000 hPa) to about 14 km (200 hPa) – 
the  top  of  the  troposphere.  The  pattern  changes  above  200  hPa  and  as  we  are  interested  in  the 
troposphere,  we  will  use  this  boundary  as  the  upper  level  of  our  analysis.  The  two  maxima  in 
NAM  index  (and  probably  also  the  prolonged  maximum  in  NAO  index)  are  due  to  the 
superposition  of  two  cases  mixed  in  Fig.9a  –  for  positive  (Westerly)  and  negative  (Easterly) 
phases of the Quasibiennial Oscillation (QBO). Fig.9b and 9c demonstrate the importance of the 
phase of the QBO for the tropospheric reaction to solar induced disturbances: for QBO Westerly 
(Fig.9b) there is an initial increase in the zonality of the circulation registered at all tropospheric 
levels  on  the  day  of  the  event,  followed  by  a  reduction  in  zonality,  with  the  net  effect  being 
reduced  zonality.  In  QBO  Easterly  (Fig.9b)  the  effect  is  increased  zonality  seen  only  at  the 
lowermost levels with a delay of 6 days. 

 
The fact that in QBO Easterly the effects are only seen at lower levels may seem strange as the 
energy of solar UV is deposited in the stratosphere, but it is in perfect agreement with the results 
of Haigh and Roscoe (2006) about the combined influence on NAO and NAM of QBO and solar 
variability as expressed by F10.7 index which is proportional to solar UV. 

 

 

 

 

 
Fig.8. Left: NAO index relative to days with X-class solar flares; Right: surface pressure anomalies in the 
Azores High (solid line) and Icelandic Low (dashed line) relative to days with X-class solar flares. 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
Fig.9. NAM index at different levels in the 
troposphere between 1000 and 200 hPa:  
a – all cases; b – for QBO Westerly;    c – for QBO 
Easterly. 

3.3   High speed solar wind 

 

 

  

The effect of high speed solar wind is an increased pressure impulse with a duration of about 5 
days, propagating from high to low latitudes (Fig.10a). This high pressure wave reaches the Azores 
with  a  reduced  magnitude  with  a  delay  of  three  days,  when  the  pressure  in  Iceland  has  already 
decreased. The net result is an increase in the pressure difference between low and high latitudes and 
hence in the zonal circulation with a maximum 4 days after the high speed solar wind hits the Earth 
(Fig.10b). 

 
The  influence  of  the  high  speed  solar  wind  streams  can  be  seen  in  the  whole  troposphere. 
Fig.11a presents the NAM index at several pressure levels. Everywhere the reaction is increased 
pressure  difference  between  high  and  low  latitudes,  and  enhanced  zonal  circulation.  The 
maximum  in  NAM  index  is  seen  a  little  later  than  in  NAO  index  which  is  natural  taking  into 
account the different high and low latitude zones on which the two indices are based.   

 

 

  

Fig,10. (a) Pressure anomalies in the Azores High (solid line) and Icelandic Low (dashed line) relative to 
days with high speed solar wind streams; (b) pressure difference between the Azores and Iceland.
 

 

The  differences  between  the  QBO  Westerly  and  Easterly  phases  are  shown  in  Fig,  11b  and 
11c.  For  QBO  Westerly,  the  maximum  in  zonality  is  reached  on  the  seventh  day  after  the  high 
speed solar wind hits the Earth, and NAM index remains elevated for at least one more week. In 
QBO Easterly, this maximum is on the second day, and by the tenth day NAM index has already 
returned to its pre-event value.  

 

 

 

 
 
Fig.11. (a) NAM index at different pressure levels 
for all days with high speed solar wind streams, and  
separately in QBO Westerly phase (b) and in QBO 
Easterly phase (c). 
 
 

 

 

3.4  Magnetic clouds 

Fig.12 presents the reaction of the sea level pressure in the Azores and Iceland, and of their 
difference as a proxy for zonal atmospheric circulation, for cases of encounter of interplanetary 
magnetic clouds.

Fig.12.  Left:  Pressure  anomalies  in  the  Azores  (solid  line)  and  Iceland  (dashed  line)  relative  to  days  of 
encounter  of  magnetic  clouds.  Right:  NAO  index  as  the  difference  in  the  pressure  between  Azores  and 
Iceland relative to the days of encounter of magnetic clouds. 

 

It is obvious that the main reaction is observed at high latitudes, as should be expected taking 
into account that the effect of magnetic clouds is strongest at high latitudes. The pressure at low 
latitudes  practically  doesn’t  react  to  magnetic  clouds.  Consequently,  the  changes  in  NAO  index 
are determined by the high latitude processes. NAO has a prolonged deep minimum starting two 
days  after  the  magnetic  cloud  encounter,  and  reaching  its  lowest  values  five  days  later.  A  more 
careful inspection reveals that on the day of the encounter of a magnetic cloud and shortly prior to 
it  NAO  index  has  a  maximum,  and  the  pressure  in  Iceland  has  a  minimum.  This  maximum  in 
NAO  and  the  minimum  in  Iceland  pressure  vanish  if  we  exclude  the  fast  magnetic  clouds  with 
preceding shocks. Obviously, the shock itself, irrespective of its causes, always leads to a decrease 
in  the pressure  at  high latitudes.  It  should  be noted here  that  according  to  the  criteria  which  we 
have  adopted,  the  beginning  of  the  magnetic  cloud  is  considered  the  beginning  of  the  magnetic 
field rotation, while normally the shock precedes it by a few hours to a day or two. 

 
These  changes  in  atmospheric  circulation  are  best  expressed  at  the  surface  and  close  to  it 
(Fig.13a).  At  higher  levels  (500  hPa  and  above)  no  decrease  is  seen  in  NAM  index  after  the 
encounter of magnetic clouds, and the recovery to normal values observed at lower levels is here 
manifest  as  an  increase  in  the  index.  The  main  contribution  to  this  picture  is  of  the  magnetic 
clouds  encountered  in  QBO  Easterly  phase  (Fig.13c)  whose  effect  is  much  bigger  (compare  the 
scales of Fig.13b and ,13c) and, as in the case of solar flares (Fig.9c), is confined to low altitudes.  

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
Fig.13. (a) NAM index at different pressure levels 
for all days with magnetic clouds, and  separately in 
QBO Westerly phase (b) and in QBO Easterly 
phase (c). 
 
 

 

 
In the case of magnetic clouds, there is one more important parameter which may determine 
the  way  in  which  the  atmosphere  responds  to  the  influence.  As  mentioned  in  Section  3.1,  the 
magnetic clouds differ by their handedness – that is, the direction of rotation of the magnetic field 
inside the structure which in the majority of the cases corresponds to the direction of rotation of 
the magnetic structures in the cloud’s source region on the Sun. A magnetic cloud is “left-handed” 
if, viewed from the Earth, the magnetic field in its source region is twisted counterclockwise, and 
the vector of the magnetic field inside the cloud rotates counterclockwise as measured in either the 
GSE  or  the  GSM  coordinate  system.  The  majority  of  the  left-handed  magnetic  clouds  originate 

from the solar northern hemisphere. Magnetic clouds with clockwise rotation are “right-handed” 
clouds, originating predominantly from the solar southern hemisphere. 

 
In Fig.14 the changes in NAM index are compared for cases of right-handed and left-handed 
magnetic clouds.  It is clearly seen that right-handed magnetic clouds have practically no effect on 
atmospheric circulation at any level, and most of the effects seen in Fig.13a are due to the impact 
of  the  left-handed  clouds.  The  influence  is  more  pronounced  at  lower  levels,  and  consists  of  a 
prolonged  period  of  reduced  zonal  circulation  starting  a  day  after  the  magnetic  cloud  encounter 
and reaching its maximum phase some 3-4 days later. 
 

 

 

Fig.14. NAM index at different pressure levels for all days with (a) right-handed magnetic clouds, and (b) 
left handed magnetic clouds. 
 
 
4. Summary and discussion 
 

Using  an  extended  time-series  of  the  NAO  index  as  a  proxy  for  the  zonality  of  atmospheric 
circulation  in  the  northern  midlatitudes,  we  find  that  the  long-term  correlation  between  solar 
activity and atmospheric  circulation changes in consecutive secular solar cycles and depends on 
the north-south asymmetry of solar activity: when the northern solar hemisphere is more active, 
increasing solar activity in the secular (Gleissberg) cycle leads to decreasing prevalence of zonal 
forms of circulation, while increasing solar activity in secular solar cycles when more active is the 
southern solar hemisphere leads to increasing zonality of atmospheric circulation. 

 
There  are  basically  two  types  of  solar  agents  that  could  affect  the  Earth  and  possibly  its 
atmosphere:  solar  electromagnetic  radiation  and  solar  corpuscular  radiation.  Solar  flares  are  the 
most powerful manifestations of solar irradiance variations. It is supposed that the strength and/or 
the number of active regions are proportional to the sunspot cycle amplitude (Wang et al., 2005). 
Solar  flares  originate  from  solar  active  regions,  so  the  long-term  variations  in  the  sunspot  cycle 
amplitude (that is, the secular solar cycle) is proportional to the number and power of solar flares 
(Mouradian,  and  Soru-Escaut,  1995).  The  same  is  true  about  solar  coronal  mass  ejections  and 
magnetic  clouds  as  a  subclass  of  coronal  mass  ejections:  both  their  number  and  intensity  are 
supposed to be also positively correlated to the secular sunspot cycle (McCracken et al., 2001). As 
for  the  high  speed  solar  wind  streams,  they  originate  from  open  magnetic  field  configurations 
(solar  coronal  holes)  whose  long-term  evolution  is  still  a  matter  of  controversy.  The  long-term 
decrease in the correlation between sunspot and geomagnetic activity implies different long-term 
evolution of solar open and closed magnetic field (Georgieva and Kirov, 2006), therefore in long-
term  studies  coronal  mass  ejections  and  high  speed  solar  wind  should  be  regarded  as  different 
solar drivers rather than generally as solar corpuscular radiation. 

 
The short-term reaction of the atmospheric dynamics to different solar drivers can give some 
hint about the long-term atmospheric variations in response to solar activity. Solar flares lead to 
decreased sea level pressure at high latitudes and increased pressure at low latitudes, therefore to 

increased  pressure  difference  between  low  and  high  latitudes  and  increased  zonality  of  the 
circulation. The effects at higher altitudes depend on the phase of the Quasibiennial Oscillation of 
stratospheric  winds:  in  QBO  Westerly  phase  the  reaction  is  immediate  and  is  seen  at  all 
tropospheric levels. In QBO Easterly the effect is delayed and is confined to lower levels. 

 
High speed solar wind raises an enhanced pressure wave at the surface propagating from high 
to low latitudes, with a net result of the superposition of the waves at high and low latitude being 
an increased  pressure gradient and enhanced zonal circulation a few days after  the encounter of 
the high speed stream. The zonality of the circulation is increased in the whole troposphere, and 
depends on the QBO phase. 

 
The  effect  of  magnetic  clouds  is  increased  pressure  at  high  latitude  and  no  effect  at  low 
latitude, as a result reduced pressure difference between high and low latitudes and reduced zonal 
circulation. The effect is the same in the whole tropospheric depth for QBO Westerly, while for 
QBO  Easterly  at  higher  levels  an  increase  rather  than  a  decrease  in  zonality  is  observed.  The 
influence of the magnetic clouds also depend on their handedness: it is seen only for left-handed 
clouds, while right-handed clouds have no effect on tropospheric circulation. 

 
Based  on  these  findings,  the  following  speculations  can  be  made  about  the  long-term 
dependence of atmospheric circulation on solar activity: At higher solar activity the number and 
intensity  of  solar  flares  is  higher,  so  increasing  solar  activity  leads  to  increased  zonality  of 
atmospheric  circulation.  This  effect  does  not  depend  on  solar  activity  asymmetry  and  should  be 
the same no matter which solar hemisphere is more active.  

 
With increasing solar activity, the number and intensity of magnetic clouds increase, and their 
effect competes with the effect of solar flares. When the southern solar hemisphere is more active, 
the magnetic clouds are predominantly right-handed and as right-handed clouds have no influence 
on tropospheric circulation, therefore the net result is predominantly due to the influence of solar 
flares and is increasing zonality for increasing solar activity. When the northern solar hemisphere 
is more active, the magnetic clouds are predominantly left-handed and their effect is a reduction in 
the zonality of tropospheric circulation. The net result is a superposition of the strengthening of 
the zonal circulation by solar flares versus its weakening by the magnetic clouds.  

 
It  should  be  reminded  here  that  this  study  on  the  effects  of  magnetic  clouds  on  surface  air 
pressure  and  atmospheric  circulation  is  confined  to  the  northern  hemisphere.    It  has  been  found 
that the long-term variation in the atmospheric circulation in the southern hemisphere is opposite 
to the one in the northern hemisphere (Georgieva, 2002), and we have some initial results pointing 
that while the northern hemisphere is only affected by left handed clouds and not by right handed 
clouds, the reverse seems to be true for the southern hemisphere. However, this requires a more 
detailed study. 

 
Little can be said about the century-scale variations in the solar open magnetic field and hence 
of the number and intensity of high speed solar wind streams, but we can suppose that increasing 
solar  open  flux  would  lead  to  enhanced  zonality  of  the  circulation.  The  decreasing  correlation 
between the long-term variations in sunspot and geomagnetic activity and the recent increase in 
geomagnetic  activity  point  at  the  increasing  importance  of  solar  open  flux.  This  increase  in 
geomagnetic activity not related to increasing sunspot activity coincides with the gradual change 
over the past 4 decades of the NAO pattern from the most extreme and persistent negative phase 
in the 1960’s to the most extreme positive phase during the late 1980’s and early 1990’s – a fact 
which supports the role of the solar open flux in enhancing the zonality of the circulation.  

Acknowledgements 

 

 

 

This study was partly supported by EOARD grant 063048. 

 
References 
 
Ambroz, P.Statistical method of superposition of epochs. I - Methodical analysis and some criteria 

of application. Bull. Astron. Inst. Czechoslovakia 30 (2), 114-121, 1979. 

Antonucci, E., Hoeksema, J.T., Scherrer, P.H. Rotation of the photospheric magnetic field: a 

North-South asymmetry. Astrophys. J. 360, 296-304. 1990. 

Baldwin, M. P. Annular Modes in Global Daily Surface Pressure. Geophys. Res. Lett. 28, 4115-

4118, 2001. 

(3), 293-296. 1997. 

Christoforou, P., Hameed, S. Solar cycle and the Pacific `centers of action'. Geophys. Res. Lett. 24 

Cliver, E. W., Boriakoff, V., Feynman, J. Solar variability and climate  change: Geomagnetic aa 

index and global surface temperature. Geophys. Res. Lett. 25 (7), 1035-1038, 1998. 

Fenrich,  F.  R.,  Luhmann,  J  G.  Geomagnetic  response  to  magnetic  clouds  of  different  polarity. 

Geophys. Res. Lett. 25 (15), 2999-3002. 1998. 

Feynman J., Gu X. Y., Prediction of geomagnetic activity on time scales of one to ten years. Rev. 

Geophys. 24, 650-666, 1986.  
irradiance 
Solar 

Fröhlich, C. 

10.1007/s11214-006-9046-5, 2006. 

variability 

since 

1978. 

Space 

Sci.  Rev.  DOI: 

Georgieva, K. Long-term changes in atmospheric circulation, earth rotation rate and north-south 

solar asymmetry. Phys. Chem. of the Earth, Parts A/B/C 27 (6-8), 433-440, 2002. 

Georgieva, K., A Relation Between Solar Activity and Temperature in the Northern Hemisphere 

in the Period 1881-1988, Bulg. Geophys. J. 24, 60-71, 1998. 

Georgieva, K., Kirov, B. Secular cycle of North-South solar asymmetry. Bulg. J. Phys. 27 (2), 28-

Georgieva,  K.,  Kirov,  B.  Helicity  of  Magnetic  Clouds  and  Solar  Cycle  Variations  of  their 
Geoeffectiveness, in: Dere, K., Wang, J.,  Yan Y. (Eds.), Coronal and Stellar Mass Ejections, 
IAU  Symposium  Proceedings  of  the  International  Astronomical  Union  226,  Cambridge 
University Press,  pp. 470-472, 2005. 

Georgieva, K., Kirov, B. Solar activity and global warming revisited. Sun and Geosphere, 1 (1), 

34, 2000. 

12-16, 2006.  

Georgieva, K., Kirov, B., Gavruseva, E. Geoeffectiveness of different solar drivers, and long-term 
variations of the correlation between sunspot and geomagnetic activity. Phys. Chem. of the 
Earth 31 (1-3), 81-87, 2006. 

Gleissberg, W. The eighty-year sunspot cycle. J. Brit. Astr. Assoc., 68, 1148-1152, 1958. 
Girs, A.A. About the creation of a unified classification of the macrosynoptic  processes in the 

northern hemisphere. Meteorologia i gidrologia 4, 43-47, 1964. (In Russian)   
Girs, A.A., Kondratovich, K.V. Methods of long term weather forecasts. Leningrad, 

Gidrometeoizdat, 1978. (In Russian) 

Gonzalez, W. D., Tsurutani, B. T., Lepping, R. P., Schwenn, R. Interplanetary phenomena 

associated with very intense geomagnetic storms. J. Atm. Solar-Terr. Phys. 64 (2), 173-181, 
2002a. 

Gonzalez, W. D., Tsurutani, B. T., Clúa de Gonzalez, A. L. Geomagnetic, storms contrasted 

during solar maximum and near solar minimum. Adv. Space Res. 30 (10), 2301-2304, 2002b. 

Gopalswamy, N., Akiyama, S., Yashiro, S., Michalek, G., Lepping R. P. Solar Sources and 

Geospace Consequences of Interplanetary Magnetic Clouds Observed During Solar Cycle 23. 
J. Atm. Solar-Terr. Phys. In press, 2007. 

Guttman, N.,  Statistical Descriptors of Climate. Bull. American Meteorol. Soc. 70 (6), 602–607, 

1989. 

Haigh, J. D., Blackburn, M., Day, R. The Response of Tropospheric Circulation to Perturbations 

in Lower-Stratospheric Temperature. J. Clim. 18 (17), 3672-3685, 2005. 

Haigh, J. D., Blackburn, M. Solar Influences on Dynamical Coupling Between the Stratosphere 

and Troposphere. Space Sci. Rev., DOI: 10.1007/s11214-006-9067-0, 2006.  

Haigh, J.D., Roscoe, H.K. Solar influences on polar modes of variability. Meteorologische 

Zeitschrift, 15 (3), 371-378, 2006. 

Hameed, S., Shi, W., Boyle, J., Santer, B. Investigation of the centers of action in the northern 
atlantic and north pacific in the ECHAM AMIP simulation.  Proc. I Int. AMIP Sci. Conf.  
WCRP-92, Monterey, California,  221-226, 1995.  

Herman, J.R., Goldberg, R.A. Sun, Weather, and Climate. NASA Scientific and technical 

Information Branch, Washington, DC, 1978. 

Herschel, W. Observations tending to investigate the Nature of the Sun, in order to find the 

Causes or Symptoms of its variable Emission of Light and Heat; with Remarks on the Use that 
may possibly be drawn from Solar Observations. Philosphical Transactions of the Royal 
Society, London, 92, 265-318, 1801. 

Hoyt, D.V., Schatten, K.H. Group Sunspot Numbers: A New Solar Activity Reconstruction. Sol. 

Hurrell, J.W., Kushnir, Y., Visbeck, M.  The North Atlantic Oscillation. Science  291 (5504), 603-

Phys. 181 (2), 491-512, 1998.   

605, 2001.  

Ivanova, T.S., Ruzmaikin, A.A.  Sov. Astron.  20 (20), 227-233, 1976. 
Jackman, C. H., Deland, M. T., Labow, G. J., Fleming, E. L., López-Puertas, M., Satellite 

Measurements of Middle Atmospheric Impacts by Solar Proton Events in Solar Cycle 23. 
Space Science Reviews, DOI: 10.1007/s11214-006-9071-4, 2007.  

Jones, P.D., Jónsson, T., Wheeler, D. Extension to the North Atlantic Oscillation using early 

instrumental pressure observations from Gibraltar and South-West Iceland. Int. J. Climatol. 17 
(13), 1433-1450,  1997. 

Kahler, S. W., Sheeley, N. R., Jr., Howard, R. A., Koomen, M. J., Michels, D. J., McGuire, R. E., 
von Rosenvinge, T. T., Reames, D. V. Associations between Coronal Mass Ejections and Solar 
Energetic Proton Events. Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 15, 699, 1983.  

Kirov, B.,Georgieva, K. Long-term variations and interrelations of ENSO, NAO and solar 

activity. Phys. Chem. of the Earth, Parts A/B/C, 27 (6-8), 441-448. 2002. 

Kodera, K. Solar influence on the spatial structure of the NAO during the winter 1900-1999, 

Geophys. Res. Lett. 30 (4), doi:10.1029/2002GL016584, 2003. 

Kodera, K. The Role of Dynamics in Solar Forcing.  Space Sci. Rev., DOI: 10.1007/s11214-006-

9066-1, 2007. 

Kumar, A., Rust, D.  Interplanetary magnetic clouds, helicity conservation, and current-core flux-

ropes. J. Geophys. Res., 101 (A7). 15667-15684, 1996. 

Lawrence, J.K., Ruzmaikin, A.A. Transient solar influence on terrestrial temperature fluctuations., 

Geophys. Res. Lett., 25, 159-162, 1998. 

Leamon, R. J., Canfield, R. C., Pevtsov, A A. Properties of magnetic clouds and geomagnetic 
storms associated with eruption of coronal sigmoids. J. Geophys. Res., 107 (A9), SSH 1-1, 
CiteID 1234, DOI 10.1029/2001JA000313, 2002.  

Lindblad, B. A., Lundstedt, H. A catalogue of high-speed plasma streams in the solar wind 1975-

78. Solar Phys. 88, 377-382, 1983. 

Luterbacher, J., Schmutz, C., Gyalistras, D., Xoplaki, E., Wanner, H. Reconstruction of monthly 
NAO and EU indices back to AD 1675. Geophys. Res. Lett., 26 (17), 2745-2748, 1999.  
Luterbacher, J., Xoplaki, E., Dietrich, D., Jones, P.D., Davies, T.D., Portis, D., Gonzalez-Rouco, 
J.F., von Storch, H., Gyalistras, D., Casty, C., Wanner, H., 2001. Extending North Atlantic 
oscillation reconstructions back to 1500. Atm. Sci. Lett., 2 (2), 114-124, 2001.  
McCracken, K. G., Dreschhoff, G. A. M., Smart, D. F., Shea, M. A. Possible gleissberg 

periodicity in large fluence solar proton events. In: Proceedings of the 27th International 
Cosmic Ray Conference, 3205-3208, 2001. 

 Mouradian, Z.,  Soru-Escaut, I. The flare productivity of the Sun related to the 11-and 80-year 

activity cycles, Solar Phys., 159 (1), 173-179, 1995. 

Mursula, K., Zieger, B. Long-term north-south asymmetry in solar wind speed inferred from 

geomagnetic activity: A new type of century-scale solar oscillation? Geophys. Res. Lett., 28 
(1), 95-98, 2001. 

Rottman, G., Measurement of Total and Spectral Solar Irradiance.  Space Sci. Rev., 

DOI10.1007/s11214-006-9045-6, 2006. 

Ruzmaikin, A., Feynman, J. Solar influence on a major mode of atmospheric variability. J. 

Geophys. Res. 107 (D14), DOI 10.1029/2001JD001239, 2002. 

Ruzmaikin, A., Feynman, J., Yung, Yuk L. Is solar variability reflected in the Nile River? J. 

Geophys. Res. .111 (D21), CiteID D21114, 11/2006. 

Sazonov, B.I., Loginov, V.F. Solar-tropospheric relations, Leningrad, Gidrometeorologicheskoe 

izdatel’stvo,  1969. (In Russian) 

Shi, W. On the Relationship between the interannual variability of the Northern hemispheric 

subtropical High and the East-West divergent circulation during summer. Ph. D. thesis, State 
University of New York at Stony Brook, USA, 1999. 

Vangengeim G.Y. An attempt to apply synoptic methods in the study and characteristics of 

climate. Izv.GGO, 2-3, 3-16, 1933. (In Russian) 

Vangengeim  G.Y.  Basics  of  the  macrocirculation  method  of  long-term  meteorological  forecasts 

for the Arctic, Tr. ANII, 34, 1952. (In Russian). 

Vilmer, N., Pick, M., Schwenn, R., Ballatore, P., Villain, J. P. On the solar origin of interplanetary 
disturbances observed in the vicinity of the Earth, Ann.s Geophys., 21 (4), 847-862, 2003. 

Waldmeier, M.  Der lange sonnenzyklus. Zeitschr. Astrophts. 43, 149-160. 1957. 
Wang, Y.-M., Lean, J. L., Sheeley, N. R., Jr. Modeling the Sun's Magnetic Field and Irradiance 

since 1713. The Astrophys. J. 625 (1), 522-538, 2005. 

Zeldovich Ya. B. ,Magnetic fields in astrophysics, In: The Fluid Mechanics of Astrophysics and 

Geophysics, pp. 219-222, Gordon and Breach, New York, 1983. 

 
 

