A method for testing handgun bullets in deer

Michael Courtney, PhD
Ballistics Testing Group, Western Carolina University, Cullowhee, NC 28723
Michael_Courtney@alum.mit.edu

Amy Courtney, PhD
Department of Biology, Southwestern Community College, Sylva, NC 28779
Amy_Courtney@post.harvard.edu

Abstract:
Using service handguns to test bullets in deer is problematic because of velocity loss with range and accuracy giving sub-optimal 
shot placement.  An alternate method is presented using a scoped muzzleloader shooting saboted handgun bullets to allow precise 
(within 2” in many cases) shot placement for studying terminal ballistics in a living target.  Deer are baited to a known range and 
path obstructions  are used to place the deer  broadside  to the shooter.  Muzzleloading powder charges provide  a combination of 
muzzle  velocity  and  velocity  loss  due  to  air  resistance  for  a  given  ballistic  coefficient  that  produce  impact  velocities 
corresponding to typical pistol velocities.  With readily available sabots, this approach allows for testing of terminal ballistics of 
.355,  .357,  .40,  .429,  .45,  and  .458  caliber  bullets  with  two  muzzleloaders  (.45  and  .50  caliber).   Examples  are  described 
demonstrating the usefulness  of testing handgun bullets  in deer  for acoustic shooting event reconstruction,  understanding tissue 
damage effects, and comparing relative incapacitation of different loads.
12 December 2006

for 

create 

expense 

Introduction

I.
Testing handgun bullets in deer is desirable because 
the National Academy of Science (NAS) guidelines 
and 
[NAS96] 
considerable 
inconvenience 
researchers  using  domestic 
livestock or laboratory animals.  Deer are abundant 
(overpopulated  in  many  places)  and  comparable  in 
size  to  humans.    The  shooting  of  deer  is  governed 
by  state  laws  (depending  on  jurisdiction)  that  are 
often  less  restrictive  than  the  NAS  guidelines  for 
live  animal  research.    As  long  as  bullet  testing  is 
performed 
in  accordance  with  state  wildlife 
regulations, the shooting of wildlife is exempt from 
NAS  requirements. 
  There  have  been  many 
published  articles  in  hunting  magazines  about  the 
results  of  testing  rifle  and  muzzleloader  bullets  in 
deer. 

Testing bullets in deer represents the easiest way to 
quantify  the  reaction  of  an  unanesthetized  human-
sized  animal  to  a  bullet  wound.    Incapacitation 
effectiveness  can  be  quantified  using  the  time  it 
takes  to  fall  down  or  the  distance  the  deer  covers 
before  falling  down.    The  distance  a  deer  covers 

before  falling  is  a  common  way  for  hunters  to 
describe bullet effects.

Wounding  effectiveness  can  be  quantified  by  the 
diameter  of  the  hole  at  various  penetration  depths; 
location,  extent  and  severity  of  hemorrhaging;  and 
other  observations  of  damaged  tissue  using  the 
naked  eye,  microscope,  or  advanced  techniques 
using  biochemical  indicators  [SHS90a,  SHS90b, 
WWZ04].

Testing  handgun  bullets 
in  deer  also  gives 
opportunity  to  study  the  acoustic  signature  of  a 
bullet  hitting  a  live  animal  target  [COC06e].    The 
sound of a bullet hitting a living target is almost as 
loud  as  the  muzzle  blast  and  can  be  used  to  help 
determine  the  distance  between  shooter  and  target.  
We  anticipate  that  other  uses  of  handgun  bullet 
testing in deer may also be developed.

Deer  have  been  hunted  with  handguns  for  many 
decades.  However, directly testing handgun bullets 
in deer using normal handgun hunting techniques is 
problematic.    The  bullet  loses  velocity  with  flight 

1

distance and can impact with 100-200 fps below the 
muzzle velocity.  In contrast, most self-defense use 
of  service  handguns  is  at  close  range  with  little 
velocity loss.   Consequently, simply  going into  the 
field  and  shooting  deer  with  a  service  caliber 
handgun  demonstrates  the  bullet  performance  at 
lower  velocities  than  occur  in  most  self-defense 
situations.  Few hunters possess the skills to reliably 
get  close  enough  to  deer  (10-15  feet)  so  that 
velocity loss can be neglected.

Shot  placement  is  a  second  difficulty  in  shooting 
deer  directly  with  service  handguns.    Accurately 
placing  shots  is  challenging  at  the  ranges  deer  are 
most  commonly  encountered  in  sport  hunting  (25-
200 yards).  It would also be advantageous to have a 
method of testing handgun bullets in deer where the 
shot angle is well controlled.  

This  is  not  to  say  that  there  is  no  value  in  testing 
handgun  bullets  in  deer  using  service  handguns, 
only that more carefully controlled impact velocity, 
shot  placement,  shot  angle,  and  distance  enable 
more  accurate  conclusions  to  be  drawn  and  better 
comparisons  between  effects  of  different  handgun 
loads.  

Method

II.
Muzzleloaders  are  capable  of  shooting  saboted 
pistol  bullets  in  a  range  of  calibers.    A  .45  caliber 
in-line  muzzleloader  can  accurately  shoot  saboted 
.355, .357, and .40 caliber pistol bullets over a wide 
range  of  velocities  (1000-2000  fps).    A  .50  caliber 
in-line  muzzleloader  can  accurately  shoot  saboted 
.40,  .429,  .451,  and  .458  caliber  bullets  over  a 
similar velocity range.

One  must  develop  a  powder  charge  to  provide  a 
muzzle velocity exceeding the velocity in a service 
pistol so that the velocity loss (due to air resistance) 
between the muzzle and target produces the service 
pistol velocity upon impact at range.  For example, 
to  deliver  a  pistol  bullet  with  a  BC  of  0.135  at  a 
velocity of 1200 fps at 50 yards, one would work up 
a load producing 1385 fps at the muzzle.

those 

expected  under 

Computing  the  muzzle  velocity  required  for  a 
specified  impact  velocity  is  straightforward  with  a 
good  ballistic  calculator.1 
  One  needs  to  use 
temperature  and  humidity  values  reasonably  close 
experimental 
to 
conditions.    In  the  above  example,  decreasing  the 
ambient  temperature  from  59°  F  to  30°  F  reduces 
the impact velocity by 13 fps if the muzzle velocity 
is constant.  The most accurate approach is to both 
compute the needed muzzle velocity and develop a 
load  for  ambient  conditions  similar 
those 
expected for the actual testing.

the 

to 

can  confirm 

the 
that 
Going 
further,  one 
the  expectations 
muzzleloader  velocity  meets 
during the actual shooting of deer by recording the 
event with a microphone placed close to the muzzle 
and  analyzing  the  waveform  to  determine  the  time 
of the target hit.  The time of the target hit and the 
distance  can  be  used  to  compute  the  velocity 
[COE06, COC06e].

Before  choosing  the  muzzleloader-based  approach, 
we  considered  using  Thompson  Contender  pistol 
barrels to accomplish the same result.  Bullets could 
be  loaded  with  higher  muzzle  velocity  than  in 
service  caliber  handguns 
for 
velocity  drop  with  distance),  and  accurate 
placement  could  be  achieved  using  a  scope  and  a 
good rest.  

(to  compensate 

One downside of using TC pistol barrels is that this 
approach  requires  at  least  one  different  barrel  for 
each  caliber  tested,  as  well  as  at  least  one  set  of 
reloading  dies.    In  addition  to  cost,  a  second 
disadvantage of this  method is  that pistol loads are 
more  sensitive  to  small  changes  in  powder  charge 
than muzzleloaders, so developing a powder charge 
is more time consuming.  

The  muzzleloading  approach  also  allows  greater 
hunting  access  in  many  states.    Muzzleloaders  are 
usually  permitted  in  both  the  general  firearms  and 
muzzleloading  seasons,  but  service  handguns  are 
not  ordinarily  permitted 
the  muzzleloading 
                                                
1We like http://www.eskimo.com/~jbm

in 

2

season.      Many  states  do  not  allow  hunting  with
some  service  caliber  handguns  during  the  general 
firearms season.

time  of  flight  (tb)  and  the  time  for  the  sound  to 
return to the microphone from the target (ts).

Figure 1: Sound Waveform of Bullet Hitting Deer

B

C

A

readily 

to  a  bait  pile,  especially 

In  jurisdictions  that  allow  it,  deer  can  reliably  be 
placed at a known and predetermined distance using 
bait  such  as  a  pile  of  apples  or  corn.2    Deer  will 
in 
come 
overpopulated areas.  Placing an obstruction such as 
a  brush  pile  or  a  short  fence  panel  behind  the  bait 
pile is effective at restricting the angles at which the 
deer  approach  the  pile  so  that  the  shooter  usually 
only  has  to  wait  a  short  time  for  the  deer  to  turn 
broadside.  

)
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
a
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
d
n
u
o
s

 1.4

 1.2

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15

 0.2

 0.25

 0.3

 0.35

 0.4

Figure 1: Acoustic waveform of a .40 caliber bullet 
hitting a deer.

time (seconds)

Figure  1  shows  the  sound  waveform  of  the  bullet 
hitting a deer.  Sampling is triggered by the muzzle 
blast  (t  =  0).    The  microphone  is  saturated  by  the 
muzzle blast until t = 0.15 s.  Peaks from t = 0.15 s
until the peak at A represent reverberating echoes of 
the muzzle  blast.  The peak at A records the bullet 
breaking  the  near  shoulder  (tA  =  0.34705  s) 
followed by the sound of the bullet breaking the far 
shoulder  at  B.      The  peak  at  C  is  the  loud  noise 
generated  by  the  temporary  cavitation  of  the  lungs 
striking  the  rib  cage.    Since  the  near  shoulder  is 
close to the surface, the time of initial impact can be 
approximated by tA = 0.34705 s.

Under the ambient conditions (61° F), the speed of 
sound  is  1118.6  fps,  and  the  time  for  the  sound  to 
return  231  feet  from  the  target  is  ts=0.2065  s.  
Subtracting  this  from  the  time  of  impact  tA  = 
0.34705 s gives the bullet flight time tb = 0.1406 s.  

One  can  use  this  bullet  flight  time,  the  measured 
distance (231 feet), ballistic coefficient (0.093), the 
relative  humidity  (50%),  the  air  temperature  (61° 
F),  the  barometric  pressure  (29.98  in  Hg),  and  the 
altitude  (1100  ft)  to  estimate  a  muzzle  velocity  of 
1925  fps  and  impact  velocity  of  1394  fps.    The 
2.1%  increase  from  the  measured  average  muzzle 
velocity (1884 fps) with  this load arises from shot-
to-shot  variations  in  the  muzzle  velocity  and 

Depending on the specific experimental goals, other 
considerations might include shooting only a subset 
of  all  the  wild  deer  that  present  an  opportunity.  
Tags  for  antlerless  deer  are  usually  more  abundant 
in  well-populated  areas,  so  restricting  shots  to 
antlerless  deer  provides  more  uniformity  in  deer 
size while still providing a large number of animals.  
In  contrast,  studying  the  acoustic  response  of  a 
bullet  hitting  a  200+  lb  animal  probably  requires 
waiting for a large mature buck.

1: 

Example 

Distance/Velocity 

III.
determination by sound of target impact
As  described  in  detail  elsewhere  [COC06e],  if  the 
muzzle velocity is known, the distance to the target 
can be determined by the sound of the target impact.  
Conversely,  if  the  distance  and  ballistic  coefficient 
(BC)  are  known,  both  the  muzzle  velocity  and  the 
impact velocity can be determined.

The  goal  was  to  shoot  the  Nosler  135  grain  .40 
caliber bullet  impacting  at 1375 fps  (representative 
of a .40 S&W load).  A microphone was placed near 
the muzzle  to  record both  the muzzle  blast and the 
sound  of  the  bullet  hitting  the  deer.    The  time 
recorded  between  the  muzzle  blast  and  bullet 
striking  the  target  represents  the  sum  of  the  bullet 

                                                
2 In areas that do not allow baiting, this method could be 
employed in an orchard where distances were carefully 
marked.  Alternatively, leaving one tree unpicked would 
concentrate deer at a carefully measured distance.

3

uncertainties 
atmospheric conditions.  

in 

the  ballistic  coefficient  and 

in 

the  deer 

the  above  example 

Example  2:  Tissue  damage  of  135 

IV.
grain Nosler JHP @ 1367 fps (.40 S&W)
The  load  and  distance  from  Example  1  have  been 
used for testing in a number of deer.  The wounding 
is  not 
of 
characteristic  of  this  bullet’s  general  performance 
because  both  shoulders  were  broken.    Hitting  the 
near  shoulder  creates  a  shower  of  bone  fragments 
that  significantly  enhances  wounding  in  the  lungs.  
More  typical  wounding  potential  of  this  bullet  is 
demonstrated  by  a  shot  that  does  not  create  a 
shower of bone fragments by hitting major bone on 
entrance.

The  distance  and  the  load  were  the  same  as  for 
Example  1,  but  the  day  was  considerably  colder 
(30° F) and drier (20% relative humidity).  Using a 
muzzle  velocity  of  1925  fps  (as  determined  in  the 
previous example) gives an impact velocity of 1367 
fps.  Using the average muzzle velocity of 1884 fps 
suggests  an  impact  velocity  of  1337  fps.    These 
shot-to-shot  variations  in  muzzle  velocity  (and 
resulting  uncertainty  in  impact  velocity)  were  our 
motivation  for  developing  the  acoustic  method  to 
enable  better  estimation  of  impact  velocities  on 
each shot.  

The deer shot here was an adult male weighing 177       
lbs.    It  was  shot  broadside  through  the  chest  with 
the bullet slipping between two ribs on the left side, 
penetrating the lungs, exiting the thoracic cavity and 
stopping  just  under  the  skin  on  the  far (right) side.   
Figure  2  shows  the  inside  of  the  thoracic  cavity 
where the bullet entered between two ribs.

The  effects  on  tissue  were  impressive.  The  bullet 
entered just in front of the third rib (counting from 
the  back)  on  the  left  side,  pulverized  a  large  area 
(1.5” diameter) on the inside of the rib cage and in 
the liver, entered the left lung producing a large (> 
1”  diameter)  pulverized  region,  entered  the  right 
lung  producing  a  pulverized  region  that  gradually 
shrank  in  size  to  the  recovered  diameter  of  the 

4

bullet (0.58”), exited the rib cage just in front of the 
11th  rib  (counting  from 
the  back)  and  was 
recovered in the muscles of the right shoulder. The 
direction  of  the  wound  agrees  with  the  account  of 
the  shot  that  the  buck  was  mostly  broadside,  but 
angled  slightly  away  with  his  head  down  eating. 

Figure  2:  Interior  entrance  wound  in  thoracic 
cavity for .40 Nosler JHP at .40 S&W velocity.

Figure 3: Medial (inside) surface of left (near-side) 
lung  showing  damage  much  larger  than  recovered 
bullet diameter (0.58”).

According to the view of handgun bullet wounding 
that  asserts  direct  crush  is  the  only  mechanism 
[PAT89,  MAC94,  FAC88a,  FAC96a],  the  bullet 
wound  should  be  roughly  cylindrical  in  shape,  and 
have  a  diameter  roughly  equal  to  the  recovered 
diameter of the bullet. The volume of this expected 
wound  channel  is  widely  known  as  the  permanent 
cavity  (PC)  and  given  by  the  frontal  area  of  the 

recovered  bullet  times  the  penetration  depth  (12”). 
This gives an expected wound volume of 3.17 cubic 
inches.

What  we  actually  observed  is  closer  to  a  truncated 
cone region of pulverized tissue with a diameter of 
1.5”  on  the  entrance  side,  and  gradually  narrowing 
to 0.58” on the exit side of the rib cage. The actual 
volume of this truncated cone of pulverized tissue is 
an  estimated  12.18  cubic  inches,  or  nearly  4  times 
the  volume  predicted  by  the  PC-only  view  of 
wounding via handgun bullets.

In  addition,  we  observed  a  region  of  severe  to 
moderate  hemorrhaging  along  the  wound  channel 
that  was  5”  in  diameter  at  entrance,  narrowed  to 
roughly 3” in diameter at the medial surface of the 
left  lung  and  gradually  shrank  in  size  to  the  bullet 
diameter  where  the  bullet  exited  the  rib  cage.  This 
region  of  hemorrhaging  has  an  approximately 
truncated cone shape with a volume of 119.3 cubic 
inches.

for 

that 

responsible 

the  ballistic  pressure  wave 
We  believe 
[COC06b,  COC06c] 
this 
is 
hemorrhaging,  though  we  cannot  rule  out  the 
temporary  stretch  cavity  (TSC)  for  some  regions. 
However,  the  5”  diameter  of  hemorrhaging  of  the 
muscular  tissue  surrounding  the  entrance  wound  is 
much  larger  than  the  expected  TSC  at  this  point. 
This  is  the  effect  that  hunters  associate  with  high-
velocity  rifle  bullet  wounds  and  refer 
to  as 
bloodshot  meat.  Since  the  pressure  wave  is  more 
strongly directed  backward  than  the TSC,  it  makes 
sense that  this  hemorrhaging is  due  to  the pressure 
wave.

We  also  observed  mild  hemorrhaging  along  the 
abdominal walls and rear rib cage on the right side. 
This is the area directly opposite from the entrance 
wound,  but  several  inches  caudal  (rearward)  from 
the point where the bullet exited the rib cage. Thus 
this  region was out  of reach of both  the permanent 
crush cavity and the temporary stretch cavity, and it 
seems 
the 
hemorrhaging was the pressure wave.

likely  cause  of 

the  most 

that 

The  deer  ran  54  yards (straight  line  distance)  from 
where it was shot to the point where the carcass was 
recovered.  This  is  in  good  agreement  with  our 
empirical  models  that  predict  the  average  drop 
distance  from  the  peak  pressure  wave  magnitude.3
In spite of the absence of an exit wound, there was 
an obvious blood trail along the path the deer ran.

The  wounds  we  observed  for  the  135  grain  Nosler 
JHP are similar to those observed in studies with the 
115  grain  Triton  Quik-Shok  at  .357  Sig  velocities  
(see Example  3).  In both  cases, there  is  substantial 
tissue  damage  and  destruction  beyond  the  tissue 
crushed  directly  by  the  projectile.  These  two  loads 
generate comparable pressure waves.

The  tissue  damage  observed  from  the  135  grain 
Nosler  JHP  is  markedly  different  from  that  which 
we  have  observed  on  other  occasions  with  lower 
pressure  wave  bullets  such  as  the  147  grain 
Winchester 9mm JHP bullet at 9mm velocity levels. 
The tissue damage due to the 147 grain 9mm bullet 
the  PC-only  view  asserted  by 
agrees  with 
Fackler/IWBA  adherents:  a  nearly  cylindrical 
region  of  crushed  tissue  with  a  diameter  well 
approximated  by  the  expanded  diameter  of  the 
bullet.  There  is  little  tissue  damage  beyond  the 
tissue crushed directly by the bullet.

3: 

Example 

Incapacitation 

V.
comparison of two bullets
The  goal  of  this  experiment  was  to  compare 
incapacitation  effects  of  the  147  grain  Win  JHP  at 
990  fps  with  the  115  grain  Triton  Quik-Shok  at 
1450 fps.

Load  1:  .357  Sig  115  grain  Triton  Quik-Shok  Permanent 
Cavity Volume:4 4.1 cubic inches
Peak Pressure Wave Magnitude:5 986.8 PSI

                                                
3 We have presented an empirical model for incapacitation 
time as a function of pressure magnitude elsewhere [COC06c].  
Our predicted average incapacitation distance for deer is 
simply the incapacitation time in goats times an average speed 
of 10 yards per second.  For example, a time of 5 seconds 
predicts a distance of 50 yards.
4 Estimated using the FBI method: volume of directly crushed 
tissue.

5

Load 2: 9mm 147 Grain Winchester JHP (WWB) 
Permanent Crush Cavity Volume: 4.2 cubic inches
Pressure Wave Magnitude: 305.6 PSI

Since  these  two  bullets  have  comparable  direct 
crush  volumes  and  different  pressure  wave 
magnitudes, they are a good choice for investigating 
that  a  ballistic  pressure  wave 
the  hypothesis 
contributes  to  rapid  incapacitation  by  handgun 
bullets.

The  experimental  plan  for  each  load  was  to  shoot 
five  antlerless  deer  that  were  standing  broadside 
within  a  small  zone  in  the  chest  defined  as  being 
within one inch of the center line (top to bottom), in 
front of the fourth rib (counting from the back), and 
behind the 11th rib.  Antlered deer and deer that had 
previously  dropped  their  antlers  were  excluded 
because  they  demonstrate  a  much  wider  variety  of 
body  condition,  health,  demeanor,  and  behavioral 
patterns than antlerless deer.  

We considered instrumenting the testing area to use 
incapacitation  time  as  our  quantitative  measure  of 
incapacitation.      However,  we  decided  to  use 
distance  to  carcass  recovery  (the  distance  the  deer 
ran  between  being  shot  and  dropping  for  good)  in 
order  to  facilitate  other  researchers  verifying  and 
extending  our  work.6 
  Almost  every  hunter  
considers  drop  distance  as  a  valid  metric  of 
incapacitation  in  deer  and  observations 
  have 
determined  that  fatally  wounded  deer  average  
about  10  yards  per  second  in  their  death  run.7  
Consequently,  one  can  simply  divide  the  average 

                                                                                    
5 On the surface of 1" diameter cylinder centered at wound 
channel [COC06c].
6  Instrumenting  the  area  to  determine  incapacitation  time  is  
expensive  and  the  resulting  method  would  severely  limit  the 
accessibility of the method to other researchers.
7  Of  course,  deer  can  run  faster  than  10  yards  per  second.  
However, no moving object that begins and ends at rest has an 
average velocity equal to its maximum, and no moving object 
that does  not move in a perfectly straight line  has an average 
velocity  equal  to  its  maximum.    Furthermore,  most  animals 
that  are  fatally  wounded  and  rapidly  losing  blood  pressure 
cannot  maintain  the  same  maximum  speed  as  when  in  good 
health.

6

drop  distance  by  10  to  have  an  estimate  of  the 
average incapacitation time.

After  a  deer  was  shot,  the  drop  distance  was 
recorded.    Prior  to  the  experiment,  the  area  was
surveyed  with  a  tape  measure  and  laser  range 
finder.    Results  of  this  survey  were  used  to 
determine the drop  distance  within  2  yards.  When 
necessary,  drop  distances  were  verified  by  GPS, 
laser range finder, and pacing.  It is common that a 
deer doesn’t run in a perfectly straight line after it is 
shot.    Reconstructing  the  precise  path  of  travel  is 
not  always  possible.    For  consistency,  we  use  the 
straight-line  distance  from  the  point  of  the  shot  to 
the point of recovery.  This is always obtainable.

A  necropsy  was  performed  to  determine  whether 
each  deer  represented  a  valid  data  point  and  to 
inspect for internal injuries and signs of wounding.  
Our  experimental  design  excludes  deer  that  were 
determined to be in poor health prior to the shot, as 
well as deer where the shot placement did not meet 
the criteria.  

Powder  charges  were  developed  so  that  the  impact 
velocity at 25 yards was a close match to the muzzle 
velocity  when  fired  from  a  pistol.    (All  deer  were 
shot at between 22 and 27 yards.)  

Different muzzleloading  rifles vary considerably  in 
the  powder  charge  required  to  replicate  a  given 
pistol  load, so  it  is  important  to  develop  a load  for 
the  specific  muzzleloader  actually  used  in  the 
experiment.    For  the  115  grain  Quik-Shok  bullet, 
these loads were accurate (1” at 50 yards) and allow 
for  precise  shot  placement 
from  a  scoped 
muzzleloader  on  a  shooting  bench  if  the  deer 
doesn’t  move.    The  147  grain  Win  JHP  was  more 
problematic, with groups about 6” wide and 2” high 
at  25  yards,  but  we  were  able  to  keep  most  of  our 
shots in the required target region.

A. Predictions based on Strasbourg

The  Strasbourg  goat  tests  [STR93]  observed  an 
average  incapacitation  time  of  9.9  seconds  using  a 

Winchester  147  grain  JHP  bullet  from  a  9mm.8  
Using the rule of thumb that deer run an average of 
10 yards per second after being shot, this allows us 
to predict an average drop distance of 99 yards.  

147  grain  JHP  was  97.6  yards,  in  good  agreement 
with 
the 
the  prediction  of  99.0  yards  from 
Strasbourg tests.9  

Table 1: Distances run by deer before collapse.10
Distance 
(yards)

The  Strasbourg  Tests  did  not  test  the  115  grain 
Triton Quik-Shok at .357 Sig velocities.  However, 
we expected to observe performance comparable to 
that  of  the  115  grain  9mm  bullet  of  the  same 
construction, and  no better  than  the  125  grain .357 
Magnum  Quik-Shot  at  1450  FPS.    Using  the  9mm 
results  from  Strasbourg  predicts  a  drop  distance  of 
48.2 yards.  Using the .357 Magnum results predicts 
a drop distance of 44 yards.  

Bullet
1
2
3
4
5
Mean

Distance 
(yards)
 Tri 115 QS  Win 147JHP
57
0
89
55
162
98
81
63
32
99
49.6(14.6) 97.6(15.7)

Wound  ballistics  experts  [ROL00]  have  suggested 
that  .357  Sig  bullets  will  perform  comparably  to 
9mm  bullets  of  similar  construction.    For  this 
reason,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  expect  the  results 
for the .357 Sig to  be closer  to  those for the 9mm.  
Therefore, the Strasbourg  tests  predict  that  the  115 
grain  Quik-Shok  will  produce  an  average  drop 
distance of 48 yards.

Many  hunters  have  made  anecdotal  observations 
that  deer  routinely  run  50-100  yards  when  hit  by 
rifle  bullets  that  don’t  directly  impact  the  CNS  or 
major  bone  structure,  so  one  might  expect  few 
pistol  loads  to  perform  this  well.    However,  many 
commonly  used  deer  hunting  loads  don’t  create 
pressure  waves  significantly  larger  than  the  most 
effective  handgun 
loads  because  of  excessive 
penetration.    The  Triton  Quik-Shok  load  can  work 
as well as many rifle loads for broadside placement, 
because  it  transfers  energy  much  more  completely 
than many rifle loads.

B. Experimental Results

The distance run by each of the 10 deer is shown in 
Table  1.    The  average  distance  for  the  115  grain 
Quik-Shok was 49.6 yards, in good agreement with 
the  prediction  of  48.2  yards  derived  from  the 
Strasbourg  results.    The  average  distance  for  the 

                                                
8 It has been claimed [FAC94a] that the Strasbourg tests were 
fraudulent. 
  However,  a  review  of  these  claims  finds 
substantial fallacious reasoning and exaggerations [COC06a].

We  considered  the  possibility  of  bias  within  the 
established  parameters  for  shot  placement.    All 
shots  were  within  1”  from  the  horizontal  midline.  
The average shot placement for the 115 grain Quik-
Shok was 6.0 ribs from the rear.  The average shot 
placement for  the  147  grain  Win  JHP  was  7.5  ribs 
from  the  rear,  indicating  that  on  average,  the  Win 
JHP  entered  the  deer  1.5  ribs  further  forward  than 
the Quik-Shok.  This small forward bias should not 
result in a significant difference in performance. (A 
forward bias within  the selection range would tend 
to  result  in  more  rapid  incapacitation  if  any 
difference  at  all.)    Since  any  placement  bias,  if 
present, favored the more poorly performing bullet, 
we believe that our test is logically valid and sound
in  demonstrating 
incapacitation 
effectiveness  of  the  bullet  with  the  higher  pressure 
wave.

the  greater 

We  also  considered  the  possibility  of  bias  with 
regard to animal weight.  The deer shot with the 115 
grain  Quik-Shok  weighed  an  average  of  108(15) 
lbs,  and  the  deer shot  with  the  Win  147 grain JHP 
weighed  an  average  of  101(12)  lbs.10  This  small 
difference  in  average  weight  should  not  bias  the 
results.    Since  any  weight  bias,  if  present,  favored 
                                                
9  A  chi-square  analysis  comparing 
these  results  with 
Strasbourg  suggests  with  90%  certainty  that  the  Strasbourg 
tests are not fraudulent, as claimed by some [FAC94a].
10 The numbers in parentheses represent the uncertainty in the 
mean.

7

the  more  poorly  performing  bullet,  this  test  is  a 
valid  demonstration  of  the  greater  incapacitation 
effectiveness of the  load  creating a higher pressure 
wave.

C. Interpretation and Conclusions

  Comparing 

Even without  reference  to  the Strasbourg  tests,  our 
experiment  in  deer  supports  the  pressure  wave 
hypothesis. 
two  bullets  with 
comparable  permanent  crush  cavity  volumes 
demonstrates that the bullet with the larger pressure 
wave  magnitude  incapacitates  significantly  more 
quickly.

D. Cautions/Limits of Interpretation

the  uncertainty 

With  only  five  data  points,  the  uncertainty  in  the 
average incapacitation time can often be close to 1.5 
seconds,  and 
the  average 
incapacitation  distance  can  be  close  to  15  yards.  
Consequently, unless more data points are used, this 
method is  unlikely to  distinguish  between handgun 
loads with about the same level of effectiveness.  

in 

In addition,  the unobstructed  shot  placement in  the 
side  of  the  chest  might  make  bullets  with  less 
penetration appear adequate for self-defense or law 
enforcement  purposes. 
  We  do  not  advocate 
choosing  self-defense  bullets  only  on  the  basis  of 
performance in deer.  Deer testing can be of benefit 
when choosing between loads that meet penetration 
and other gelatin-based test requirements.

Conclusion

VI.
It  is  not  our  intent  to  suggest  that  testing  handgun 
bullets  in  deer  should  supplant  traditional  methods 
of  bullet  testing  in  gelatin.    However,  live  animal 
information  gained  by 
testing  can  supplement 
testing bullets in inanimate tissue simulants.  

Live  animal  experiments  are  useful  for  exploring 
incapacitation  mechanisms  and  can  be  a  valuable 
addition  to  gelatin  testing  for  understanding  bullet 
performance. 
law 
enforcement  or  self-defense  purposes  should  begin 
by  assuring  that  the  bullet  expands  reliably  and 
meets penetration requirements for the application.  

  Selecting  ammunition  for 

incapacitation  effects. 

We have demonstrated a method that can be used to 
study  the  effects  of  handgun  bullets  in  deer.    We 
describe  examples  of  testing  acoustic,  wounding, 
  Common  bullet 
and 
performance  metrics  such  as  expanded  diameter, 
retained weight, and penetration depth are also easy 
to  determine  for  bullets  that  do  not  exit.    The 
method  presented  is  widely  accessible,  relatively 
inexpensive,  and  might  represent  the  simplest  way 
to  study  bullet  effects  in  live,  unanesthetized 
animals.

REFERENCES/BIBLIOGRAPHY:
[COC06a]  Courtney  M,  Courtney  A:  Review  of  criticisms  of 
ballistic pressure wave experiments, the Strasbourg goat tests, 
and  the  Marshall  and  Sanow  data.  2006  Search  title  at 
arxiv.org.

[COC06b]  Courtney  M,  Courtney  A:  Relative  incapacitation 
contributions  of  pressure  wave  and  wound  channel  in  the 
Marshall and Sanow data set. 2006 Search title at arxiv.org.

[COC06c]  Courtney  M,  Courtney  A:  Ballistic  pressure  wave 
contributions  to  rapid  incapacitation  in  the  Strasbourg  goat 
tests. 2006 Search title at arxiv.org.

[COC06d]  Courtney  M,  Courtney  A:  A  method  for  testing 
handgun bullets in deer. 2006  Search title at arxiv.org.

[COC06e] Courtney M and Courtney A: Using sound of target 
impact  for  acoustic  reconstruction  of  shooting  events, 
submitted to AFTE Journal, 2006.  

[COE06]  Courtney  M  and  Edwards  B:  Measuring  Bullet 
Velocity with a PC Soundcard.  Search title at arxiv.org

[FAC88a]  Fackler  ML:  Wound  Ballistics:  A  review  of 
common  misconceptions.  Journal  of  the  American  Medical 
Association 259:2730-2736; 1988.

[FAC94a]  Fackler  ML:  The  ‘Strasbourg  Tests:’  Another 
Gunwriter/Bullet  Salesman  Fraud?  Wound  Ballistics  Review 
1(4):10-11; 1994.

[FAC96a]  Fackler  ML:  Gunshot  Wound  Review.  Annals  of 
Emergency Medicine 28(1): 194-203; 1996.

[GIK88]  Göransson  AM,  Ingvar  DH,  Kutyna  F:  Remote 
Cerebral Effects on EEG in High-Energy Missile Trauma. The 
Journal  of  Trauma.  28(1  Supplement):S204-S205;  January 
1988. 

8

Microscopic  Study  on  Pigs.  The  Journal  of  Trauma. 
30(3):281-294; 1990.

[SHS90b]  Suneson  A,  Hansson  HA,  Seeman  T:  Pressure 
Wave Injuries to the Nervous System Caused by High Energy 
Missile  extremity  Impact:  Part  II.  Distant  Effects  on  the 
Central  Nervous  System.  A  Light  and  Electron  Microscopic 
Study on Pigs. The Journal of Trauma. 30(3):295-306; 1990.

[STR93] The Strasbourg Tests, presented at the 1993 ASLET 
International Training Conference, Reno, Nevada.

[THG97]    Toth  Z,  Hollrigel  G,  Gorcs  T,  and  Soltesz  I: 
Instantaneous Perturbation of Dentate Interneuronal Networks 
by  a  Pressure  Wave  Transient  Delivered  to  the  Neocortex.  
The Journal of Neuroscience 17(7);8106-8117; 1997.

[TLM05]  Thompson HJ, Lifshitz J, Marklund N, Grady MS, 
Graham  DI,  Hovda  DA,  McIntosh  TK:  Lateral  Fluid 
Percussion  Brain  Injury:  A  15-Year  Review  and  Evaluation. 
Journal of Neurotrauma 22(1):42-75; 2005. 

[WWZ04]    Wang  Q,  Wang  Z,  Zhu  P,  Jiang  J:  Alterations  of 
the  Myelin  Basic  Protein  and  Ultrastructure  in  the  Limbic 
System  and  the  Early  Stage  of  Trauma-Related  Stress 
Disorder  in  Dogs.  The  Journal  of  Trauma.  56(3):604-610; 
2004.

[WOL91]  Wolberg  EJ:  Performance  of  the  Winchester  9mm 
147  Grain  Subsonic  Jacketed  Hollow  Point  Bullet  in  Human 
Tissue and Tissue Simulant. Wound Ballistics Review. Winter 
91:10-13; 1991.

About the Authors
Michael  Courtney  earned  a  PhD  in  Physics  from  the  Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology  in  1995  and  currently  serves  as  Director  of 
the Forensic Science program at Western Carolina University.  As a 
Physics  Professor,  Michael  has  taught  college  level  Physics, 
Statistics,  and  Forensic  Science.    He  has  extensive  experience  in 
analysis of complex systems, instrumentation and measurement, and 
data analysis.  Michael founded the Ballistics Testing Group in 2001 
to  study  incapacitation  ballistics  and  the  reconstruction  of  shooting 
events.  

Amy Courtney earned a MS in Biomedical Engineering from Harvard 
and a PhD in Medical Engineering and Medical Physics from a joint 
Harvard/MIT program.  She was a research scientist for Reebok, Inc., 
and  the  Cleveland Clinic, as well as on  the  Biomedical Engineering 
faculty of Ohio State University.  Her area of specialty is the failure 
of  visco-elastic  biological  tissues  under  applied  force,  pressure,  and 
strain.      Her  strengths  are  experimental  design,  statistical  analysis, 
and  measurement  instrumentation.    She  has  been  a  member  of  the 
Ballistics Testing Group since it was founded in 2001.

[HKO47]  Harvey  EN,  Korr  IM,  Oster  G,  et  al.:Secondary 
Damage  in  wounding  due  to  pressure  changes  accompanying 
the  passage  of  high  velocity  missiles.  Surgery  21:218-239; 
1947.

[LAG16]  LaGarde  LA:  Gunshot  Injuries    ed  2.  New  York: 
William Wood & company, 1916.

[NAS96] Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. 
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. 1996; also 
available online at www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/labrats/
accessed 11/30/06.

 [MAC94]  MacPherson  D:  Bullet  Penetration—Modeling  the 
Dynamics  and  the  Incapacitation  Resulting  From  Wound 
Trauma. Ballistics Publications, El Segundo, CA, 1994.

[MAS92]  Marshall  EP  and  Sanow  EJ:  Handgun  Stopping 
Power:  The  Definitive  Study.  Paladin  Press,  Boulder,  CO, 
1992.

[MAS96] Marshall EP and Sanow EJ: Street Stoppers. Paladin 
Press, Boulder, CO, 1996.

[MAS01]  Marshall  EP  and  Sanow  EJ:  Stopping  Power. 
Paladin, Boulder, CO, 2001.

[NEW92]  Newgard,  Ken,  MD:  The  Physiological  Effects  of 
Handgun  Bullets:  The  Mechanisms  of  Wounding  and 
Incapacitation. Wound Ballistics Review, 1(3): 12-17; 1992.

[OBW94]  Ordog  GJ,  Balasubramanian  S,  Wasserberger  J,  et 
al.:  Extremity  Gunshot  Wounds. 
Identification  and 
Treatment  of  Patients  at  High  Risk  of  Vascular  Injury.    The 
Journal of Trauma 36:358-368; 1994.

I. 

[PAT89]  Patrick  UW:  Handgun  Wounding  Factors  and 
Effectiveness.  FBI  Firearms  Training  Unit,  Quantico,  VA. 
1989.

[ROL00]  Roberts  GK  and  Lazzarini  D,  Preliminary 
Evaluation  of  .357  SIG  JHP  Bullets  Intended  for  Law 
Enforcement Duty, Wound Ballistics Review, 4(4) 2000.

[SHA02]  Shaw  NA:  The  Neurophysiology  of  Concussion. 
Progress in Neurobiology 67:281-344; 2002.

[SHS88]  Suneson  A,  Hansson  HA,  Seeman  T:  Central  and 
Peripheral  Nervous  Damage  Following  High-Energy  Missile 
Wounds 
the  Thigh.  The  Journal  of  Trauma.  28(1 
Supplement):S197-S203; January 1988. 

in 

[SHS90a]  Suneson  A,  Hansson  HA,  Seeman  T:  Pressure 
Wave Injuries to the Nervous System Caused by High Energy 
Missile Extremity Impact: Part I. Local and Distant Effects on 
the  Peripheral  Nervous  System.  A  Light  and  Electron 

9

