Biophysical Journal-Biophysical Letters 

 
This un-edited manuscript has been accepted for publication in Biophysical Journal and is freely available on BioFast at http://www.biophysj.org. The final 
copyedited version of the paper may be found at http://www.biophysj.org." 
DNA Looping Kinetics Analyzed Using Diffusive Hidden Markov Model 
John F. Beausang*, Chiara Zurla†, Carlo Manzo†, David Dunlap††, Laura Finzi†, and Philip C. Nelson* 
*Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19104 USA; Departments of †Physics and 
††Cell Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, 30322 USA 

  Tethered  particle  experiments  use  light  microscopy  to  measure  the  position  of  a  micrometer-sized  bead 
ABSTRACT 
tethered  to  a  microscope  slide  via  a  ~micrometer  length  polymer,  in  order  to  infer  the  behavior  of  the  invisible  polymer.  
Currently,  this  method  is  used  to  measure  rate  constants  of  DNA  loop  formation  and  breakdown  mediated  by  repressor 
protein  that  binds  to  the  DNA.    We  report  a  new  technique  for  measuring  these  rates  using  a  modified  hidden  Markov 
analysis  that  directly  incorporates  the  diffusive  motion  of  the  bead,  which  is  an  inherent  complication  of  tethered  particle 
motion  because  it  occurs  on  a  time  scale  between  the  sampling  frequency  and  the  looping  time.    We  compare  looping 
lifetimes  found  with  our  method,  which  are  consistent  over  a  range  of  sampling  frequencies,  to  those  obtained  via  the 
traditional  threshold-crossing  analysis,  which  vary  depending  on  how  the  raw  data  are  filtered  in  the  time  domain.  Our 
method does not involve such filtering, and so can detect short-lived looping events and sudden changes in looping behavior. 

Received for publication "Staff will complete"  and in final form "Staff will complete"   

Address reprint requests and inquiries to PCN

One mechanism for regulating DNA transcription is for a 
protein  to  bind  to  specific  operator  sites  in  the  DNA 
sequence, thereby enhancing or diminishing the expression 
of adjacent genes.   In an elaboration of this idea,  multiple 
operators  recruit  copies  of  the  repressor  protein,  bind  to 
each other, and bend the DNA into a loop, for example in 
the lambda system (1).  One goal of in vitro DNA looping 
experiments  is  to  determine  the  rate  constants  for  DNA 
loop  breakdown/formation  and  gain  insight  into  how  the 
physical process of looping influences the biochemistry of 
transcription.  The purpose of this paper is to present a new 
diffusive hidden Markov method (DHMM) for determining 
the looping kinetics from data measured in tethered particle 
experiments.  The main advantage of our method is that by 
directly incorporating the dynamics of particle diffusion we 
do not need to  filter the raw  data.  Consequently,  DHMM 
has better time resolution and  more consistent results than 
the traditional threshold-crossing analyses. 

The  tethered  particle  method  (TPM,  Fig.  1)  consists  of 
measuring the Brownian motion of a small bead attached to 
a microscope slide via a short polymer tether, to learn about 
the tether’s behavior (2-6). Our setup uses DIC imaging of 
a  480  nm  diameter  polystyrene  bead  tethered  to  the  slide 
via a 3477 bp DNA construct containing two sets of three 
wild-type  lambda  operator  sites  separated  by  2317  bp,  as 
described previously (7).  The (x,y) coordinates of up to 6 
well-spaced beads are recorded simultaneously  with 20 ms 
time resolution using custom particle tracking software and 
a CCD camera with a 1 ms shutter to reduce blurring.  Bead 
positions  are  first  recorded  for  ~10  minutes  to  ensure 
uniform  behavior.  Upon  addition  of  200  nM  cI  repressor 
protein, dynamic exchanges between  unlooped and looped 
tether lengths—consistent with the known construct length 

and  operator  spacing—are  observed.  After  recording  for 
30-60  minutes,  the  data  are  corrected  for  microscope  drift 
and screened for anomalous sticking events using methods 
described previously (8).   

 

FIGURE  1  Schematic  showing  DNA 
loop  formation  and 
breakdown  in  a  tethered  bead. ρρρρ  denotes  the  plane-projected 
distance from the attachment point to the bead center. 

2 + yt

After  drift  correction,  transitions  are  clearly  visible  when 
the  data  are  plotted  as  the  radial  distance  from  the  anchor 
2 , where t is an index indicating which 
point  ρt = xt
video frame (Fig 2).  The equilibrium distributions of ρ are 
well  understood  (8,  9)  but  the  large  overlap  between 
unlooped  and  looped  distributions  at  small  values  of  ρ 
prevents  us  from  unambiguously  determining  the  state  of 
the DNA at particular times—loop formation is not directly 
observable. Typically, this ambiguity is reduced by filtering 
ρ  (we  find  the  variance  over  windows  of  time  width  W); 
however,  the  time  resolution  is  then  degraded  by  at  least 
the same amount (6, 7). Filtering helps remove false events 
at very short times introduced by natural Brownian motion 
of the bead, but actual events are missed due to the reduced 
time resolution.  Unfortunately, we show below that in our 
system,  looping  lifetimes  determined  by  this  technique 
depend strongly on the chosen value of W. 

Hidden Markov methods (10,11) however, do not require 
such  smoothing.  These  methods  allow  for  analysis  of  the

Biophysical Journal-Biophysical Letters 

 

L01 

Biophysical Journal-Biophysical Letters 

FIGURE 2 Dynamic looping seen in tethered particle time series data. The region from time 200—1200 s shows dynamic looping 
behavior and was used in the subsequent analysis. The (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) indicates a brief 4.5 s sticking event that was omitted from the analysis 
by concatenating the drift-corrected data.   The inset shows the corresponding filtered time series with window size W = 4 s.  Red 
lines are inferred transition sequences for DHMM and threshold-crossing analyses, respectively. Dashed line = 270 nm  threshold. 
Moreover, the next bead location rt+1 depends not only on 
the  present  looping  state,  but  also  on  the  present  bead 
location (if the chosen time step is not much longer than the 
bead  diffusion  time).  For  both  of  these  reasons,  we  must 
modify the usual formulation of HMM. 

 

introduced  by 

unfiltered  data,  once  we  overcome  one  obstacle:  In 
traditional HMM applications, the uninteresting part of the 
observed signal (or “noise”) has no correlations apart from 
those 
the  underlying  hidden  process. 
Unfortunately,  the  tethered  Brownian  motion  of  our  bead 
has  an  intrinsic  time  scale  slow  compared  with  our  20  ms 
sampling  frequency,  but  faster  than  the  looping  lifetime. 
The  basic  physics  is  easily  reproduced  by  a  particle 
diffusing in a harmonic potential well (a problem similar to 
TPM motion), with diffusion constant D = 50,000 nm2/sec 
and spring constant κ = 0.5 x 10-3 pN/nm obtained from fits 
to  the  autocorrelation  of  the  measured  position,  the 
characteristic decay time τD = kBT/Dκ is ~160 ms (12). This 
diffusive  motion  not  only  prevents  efficient  filtering,  but 
also  the  direct  application  of  traditional  hidden  Markov 
methods to TPM.   

some 

More  precisely,  standard  HMM  supposes 

that  an 
observed  signal  reflects  two  processes  (10):  A  hidden 
process  that  generates  a  time  series  {qt}  according  to  an 
autonomous  Markov  process  with 
time-step 
distribution  D(qt+1|qt),  and  an  observed  signal  {rt}  that  at 
each  instant  t,  is  drawn  from  a  probability  distribution    
P(rt|qt), which depends only on the current value of qt. This 
framework  is  appropriate  for  the  case  where  qt  is  the 
internal  state  of  an  ion  channel  and  rt  is  the  instantaneous 
current through the channel. We might be tempted to apply 
it to our case as well, letting qt denote the looping state of 
our  DNA  tether  and  rt  =(xt,  yt).  But  the  ability  to  form  a 
loop  depends  on  the  location  of  the  bead:  For  example,  if 
the  bead  is  too  far  from  the  attachment  point,  then  loop 
formation is impossible until the bead has wandered closer, 
invalidating  the  assumption  made  in  standard  HMM. 

To find the required modification, we first note when no 
cI  protein  is  present,  the  bead  executes  tethered  Brownian 
motion,  and  this  motion  is  itself  a  Markov  process:  The 
bead’s displacement rt+1 depends only on rt, not on earlier 
positions.  We  extracted 
the  “unlooped”  probability 
distribution for the next position, Dun(rt+1|rt), from observed 
time  series  in  a  control  experiment.  Then  we  found  the 
analogous  distribution  Dloop(rt+1|rt)  for  permanently  looped 
tethers.  Our  two  distributions  Dun  and  Dloop  were  thus 
determined phenomenologically, with no attempt to model 
the  dynamical  details  of  tethered  Brownian  motion  near  a 
wall. As functions of rt+1, the distributions Dun and Dloop are 
both  roughly  2D  gaussians  centered  about  a  point  that 
depends  on  rt,  with  widths  that  reflect  the  random 
excursions  of  Brownian  motion  in  one  time  step.  We 
checked  that  simulating  Markov  processes  with  these 
distributions  gave  good  agreement  with  the  control  data, 
both  for  the  probability  distributions  of  the  radial  distance 
ρ,  and  for  the  autocorrelation  functions  of  x  and  y,  two 
nontrivial consistency checks on our data and theory.  

a  heuristic 

joint  distribution 

In order to incorporate the hidden state dependence,  we 
constructed 
function 
DDHMM(qt+1,rt+1|qt,rt),  the  probability  of  observing  qt+1,rt+1 
given  qt,rt,  as  follows.  If  the  DNA  is  initially  unlooped 
(qt=1) and ρt is too large to permit loop formation, then the 
DNA  must 
state:  
DDHMM=Dun(rt+1|rt) for qt+1=1 and DDHMM=0 for qt+1=2. 

remain  unlooped 

final 

the 

in 

Biophysical Journal-Biophysical Letters 

 

L02 

Biophysical Journal-Biophysical Letters 

 

FIGURE  3  Lifetime  results  for  the  threshold  method  for  DNA 
loop formation (points) of the measured data shown in Fig. 2, 
as  a  function  of  filter  window  W.      Dwell  times  between 
threshold crossings in the unlooped/ looped state longer than 
twice  the  filter  dead  time,  i.e.  2W,  were  fit  to  a  histogram  to 
determine  ττττLF  and  ττττLB    (13).  Our  DHMM  method  uses  no 
window;  its  result  is  shown  as  the  dashed  line.  The  shaded 
region corresponds to the error estimate discussed in the text. 

However,  if  qt  =1  and  ρt  is  less  than  the  maximum 
excursion  observed  for  beads  with  a  permanently  looped 
tether  (observed  in  a  separate  experiment  and  verified  via 
Monte  Carlo  simulation  (9)),  then  both  final  states  are 
allowed,  and  we  take  DDHMM=(1-∆t/τLF)⋅Dun(rt+1|rt)  for 
qt+1=1  and  DDHMM=∆t/τLF⋅Dloop(rt+1|rt)  for  qt+1=2.  The  rate 
constant 1/τLF is a parameter  of the  model,  the probability 
per  time  to  form  a  loop  when  permitted.  A  similar 
construction gives the case when the DNA is inially looped 
(qt=2), in terms of a second unknown rate constant 1/τLB for 
loop breakdown.  

We  repeated  the  above  calculation  for  all  pairs  of  data 
points  and  summed  over  all  possible  sets  of  the  hidden 
variables qt (10), resulting in a likelihood function: 
)
...
×

(
r

(
r

r
NN

r
,...
1

DHMM

D

P

1
−

1
−

q

q

)

N

N

N

,

,

 

(
r

,

q

r
12

,

) (
r
Pq
1
1

,

)1
q

DHMM

2
with  two  unknown  fit  parameters, τLF    and τLB,  which  are 
the quantities of interest to us. We evaluated the likelihood 
for various values of the parameters, expressing it as a 2D 
surface  on  a  logarithmically  spaced  grid.  The  resulting 
surface is smooth, so the peak likelihood can be determined 
by  fitting  a  2D  quadratic  in  the  neighborhood  of  the 
optimum lifetimes, including error bars corresponding to a 
range  of  lifetimes  enclosing  the  maximum  with  97% 
confidence.   A coumpter code implementing our algorithm 
is available as supplementary material. 

We  tested  our  DHMM  by  analyzing  multiple  data 
subsets obtained by thinning the data, by either a factor of 
two  (∆t  =  40  ms)  or  four  (∆t  =  80  ms).    All  computed 
lifetimes  and  cross  validation  of  the  likelihoods  between 
independent data subsets agreed within uncertainty.  To test 
the  algorithm  further,  we  generated  a  Monte  Carlo 
simulation of the 40-ms looping data, assuming the values 
of τLB and τLF determined from the experimental data. Then 

= ∑
{ }
iq
D
×

we applied our DHMM method to the simulated data, and 
checked that  it again found the  known  values and that the 
event  detection  corresponded  to  the  time  series  of  the 
hidden  looping  transitions  (which  were  known  in  the 
simulated  data).  In  contrast  to  these  consistent  results,  we 
found  that  the  threshold-crossing  method  resulted  in  a 
lifetime that depends on the filter window size W; see Fig 3 
where  for  simplicity  only  τLF  is  shown.  (Additional  tests 
and  further  mathematical  details  of  the  method  will  be 
discussed elsewhere.)  

We  have  developed  a  new  method  for  assessing  DNA 
looping  rates  from  data  obtained  by  the  tethered  particle 
method.  We  tested  it  on  actual  and  simulated  data  and 
determined  lifetimes  that  were  independent  of  sampling 
frequency.  DHMM should improve TPM as a quantitative 
tool, providing more consistent results with improved time 
resolution compared to the threshold-crossing method.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We thank Rob Phillips for recommending HMM methods for this problem 
and  Seth  Blumberg,  Lin  Han,  Randall  Kamien,  and  Liam  Paninski  for 
useful  discussions.  We  thank  Yale  Goldman  and  the  anonymous  referee 
for  critical  suggestions  on  the  manuscript.    This  work  was  supported  in 
part  by  the  Human  Frontier  Science  Programme  and  NSF  grants  DGE-
0221664,  DMR04-25780,  and  DMR-0404674.  LF  and  PN  acknowledge 
the hospitality of the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, supported in 
part by the National Science Foundation under Grant PHY99-07949.  

REFERENCES 

1.  Ptashne, M. 2004. A Genetic Switch. CSHL Press, New York. 
2.  Schafer,  D.  A.,  J.  Gelles,  M.  P.  Sheetz,  and  R.  Landick.  1991. 
Transcription by single molecules  of RNA polymerase observed by 
light microscopy. Nature 352:444-448. 

3.  Finzi,  L.,  and  J.  Gelles.  1995.  Measurement  of  Lactose  Repressor-
in  Single  DNA-

Mediated  Loop  Formation  and  Breakdown 
Molecules. Science 267:378-380. 

4.  Vanzi, F., S. Vladimirov, C. R. Knudsen, Y. E. Goldman, and B. S. 
Cooperman.  2003.  Protein  synthesis  by  single  ribosomes.  RNA 
9:1174-1179. 

5.  van den Broek, B., F. Vanzi, D. Normanno, F. S. Pavone, and G. J. 
L. Wuite. 2006. Real-time observation of DNA looping dynamics of 
type IIE restriction enzymes NaeI and NarI. Nucl Acids Res 34:167-
174. 

6.  Vanzi,  F.,  C.  Broggio,  L.  Sacconi,  and  F.  S.  Pavone.  2006.  Lac 
repressor  hinge  flexibility  and  DNA  looping.  Nucleic  Acids  Res 
34:3409-3420. 

7.  Zurla,  C.,  A.  Franzini,  G.  Galli,  D.  D.  Dunlap,  D.  E.  A.  Lewis,  S. 
Adhya,  and  L.  Finzi.  2006.  Novel  tethered  particle  motion  analysis 
of  CI  protein-mediated  DNA 
the  regulation  of 
bacteriophage lambda. J Phys: Condens Matter 18:S225-S234. 

looping 

in 

8.  Nelson, P. C., C. Zurla, D. Brogioli, J. F. Beausang, L. Finzi, and D. 
Dunlap.  2006.  Tethered  particle  motion  as  a  diagnostic  of  DNA 
tether length. J. Phys. Chem. B 110:17260-17267. 

9.  Segall, D. E., P. C. Nelson, and R. Phillips. 2006. Volume-exclusion 
effects in tethered-particle experiments. Phys Rev Lett 96:088306. 
10. Rabiner,  L.  R.  1989.  A  tutorial  on  hidden  Markov  models  and 
selected applications in speech recognition. Proc. IEEE 77:257-286. 
11. McKinney,  S.  A.,  C.  Joo,  and  T.  Ha.  2006.  Analysis  of  single-
molecule FRET trajectories using hidden Markov modeling. Biophys 
J 91:1941-1951. 

12. Howard, J. 2001. Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytoskeleton. 

Sinauer Assoc., Sunderland, MA. 

13. Colquhoun,  D.,  and  F.  J.  Sigworth.  1983.  Fitting  and  statistical 
analysis of single-channel records. In Single-Channel Recording. B. 
Sakmann, and E. Neher, editors. Plenum, New York. 191-263. 

Biophysical Journal-Biophysical Letters 

 

L03 

