On the orientation of Roman towns in Italy       
 
 
Giulio Magli 
Dipartimento di Matematica del  Politecnico di Milano 
P.le Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy. 
 
 
As is well known, several Roman sources report on the existence of a town foundation ritual, 
inherited from the Etruscans, which allegedly included astronomical references. However, the 
possible existence of astronomical orientations in the layout of Roman towns has never been 
tackled in a systematic way. As a first step in this direction, the orientation of virtually all 
Roman towns in Italy (38 cities) is studied here. Non-random orientation patterns emerge 
from these data, aiming at further research in this field.  
 
  
1. The planning of a Roman town 
 
During the republican period and the first imperial period (roughly from the V century b.C. to the I 
century a.D.) the Romans founded many towns, or colonies. The foundation of a town was an 
efficient method in order to establish permanent control on a newly conquered land, and a 
consistent amount of people (up to 5000 families) was assigned to the new towns in accordance 
with a legal act called deductio. The urban plan of the settlements was always the same: the layouts 
of the newly founded towns were indeed planned in accordance with the so called castrum (i.e. 
military camp) structure.1 A colony could also be deducted “on” a pre-existing, non-Roman town, 
either conquered or allied;  also in this case however, the layout was usually re-designed in 
accordance with the Roman standards (see e.g. Sommella 1988).  
The city boundaries of a castrum town formed a rectangle, usually not very stretched in one 
direction or the other, so that we can refer generally to this kind of town planning as to a squared 
one. The rectangle was delimited by the walls and the internal streets were organized in a 
orthogonal grid forming the inhabited quarters (insulae). As is well known, orthogonal town 
planning – which has been a common feature of many cultures, for instance the Hindu one - was 
theorized in the classical world by the Greek architect Hippodamus of Miletus around the half of the 
V century, and applied strictly in all Greek colonies (Castagnoli 1971). Beyond any doubts it was 
applied by the Etruscans as well, as it is shown by the excavations at Misa, the unique known 
Etruscan town which was conquered by the Celts and abandoned before the Roman expansion 
(Mansuelli 1965).  
Some authors believe that the Etruscans simply copied the orthogonal plan from the Greeks, but in 
any case it is reasonable to think that the Romans inherited the orthogonal layout from the 
Etruscans, rather than from the Greeks. In addition to the orthogonal layout however, the inspiring 
principle of the Roman castrum was based on the existence of two main orthogonal roads, called 
cardus and decumanus. Thus, in Roman towns, the orthogonal layout was actually  quadripartite: at 
the end of the four main roads, four main gates were located, while the centres of the social and 
religious life (the Forum and the main temple or Capitolium, respectively) were preferably placed at 
(or near) the intersection of the main roads (see e.g. Rykwert 1999). To fix ideas about a Roman 
castrum town, we can look at Fig. 1, where, as an example, the plan of Augusta Pretoria (today’s 
Aosta, founded around 25 b.C.) is shown. 

                                           
1 This terminology is slightly misleading since, as noticed by Castagnoli (1971), it was probably the layout of the towns 
to inspire that of the camps, and not vice-versa. 

 

1

 
2. Astronomical references in written sources and in landscape planning  
 
The foundation of a new town followed a ritual, which has been described by many Roman writers, 
like e.g. Ovid and Plutarch. All these authors refer themselves to the foundation of Rome, so that in 
a sense the foundation of a Roman town might be seen a sort of replica of a primeval foundation. 
This ritual, as is universally known, comprised the observation of the flight of the birds and the 
tracing of the boundaries by ploughing a furrow.  The art of taking auspices from the flight of the 
birds was ruled by the Etrusca Disciplina, the collection of writings of the Etruscan religion, which 
was thought of as having being revealed to humanity by the gods (the books are long lost, but 
accounts on them have survived, for instance in the work De Divinatione by Cicero). A 
fundamental part of all the rituals of the aruspexes was the individuation of the auguraculum, a sort 
of terrestrial image of the heavens (templum) in which the gods were “ordered” and “oriented” 
starting from north in the hourly direction (an intact example of auguraculum  has been found in the 
city of Bantia, see Torelli 1966). The individuation of the templum thus required astronomical 
orientation to the cardinal points (Aveni & Romano 1995, Pallottino 1997); at the corresponding 
“centre” (mundus) a deposit of foundation containing first produces of the fields and/or samples of 
soil from the native place of the founders was buried. Archaeological proofs of such foundation 
rituals have never been found in Rome, where several subsequent rearrangements have probably 
cancelled the traces of the original Roma Quadrata on the Palatino hill (but see Carandini 1997); 
however, proofs of foundation deposits have been discovered in the excavations of the Etruscan 
towns Misa (Mansuelli 1965) and Tarquinia (Bonghi-Jovino 2000), while for the Roman period 
clear traces of the foundation ritual and of his connections with astronomy have been found in Cosa 
and in Alatri (Brown 1980, Aveni & Capone 1985, Magli 2006, 2007).  
Explicit references to the Etruscan ritual are also present in the so called Corpus Agrimensores, the 
collection of technical treatises on the procedures of landscape planning and division. These 
procedures were called  centuriation and consisted in a rigorous geometric division of the lands in 
squared lots of one actus (710 meters) each side (in many places, the “fossil” traces of this 
geometric division are  still visible today, trough aerial photographs and/or present-day cadastral 
maps). Centuriation is very old: the first known to us is that of Tarracina  (today Terracina) which 
goes back as far as the middle of the IV century BC (Castagnoli 1971). The dimensions of a 
centuriation were sometimes really impressive, if not nearly incredible, such as, for instance, those 
of the land division of Tunisia (254 x 110 Kms) made by the Agrimensores of the third Legio 
Augusta in the first half of the first century BC (Decramer & Hilton 1998, Decramer et al. 2001). 
Exactly as in the case of the towns, the orthogonal grid was based on two main roads; their 
intersection was the centre of a coordinate system in which each point was individuated by the 
progressive numbers of  the intersecting lines.  
According to what the Agrimensores say in their treatises, the tracing of the two main roads, and 
consequently the orientation of the whole grid, could occur in accordance with several different 
criteria, and different orientations are actually found in researches on ancient topography. For 
instance, a grid having one main axis disposed along a prominent landscape feature was sometimes 
needed. A good example is the centuriation of Luni (near the coast in Liguria, Italy). The available 
land was comprised in a strip between the sea and the mountains; thus, one of the main axis had to 
be parallel to the average direction of the coast, otherwise an exceeding number of incomplete lots 
would have come out. A grid could also be disposed by putting one of the main axes along a pre-
existing preferred direction, typically that of a main connecting road and/or one of the two main 
roads of a town. Also in this case, indeed, the use of the existing road as one of the two directions, 
or even as one of the two main roads, was practically obliged, otherwise the lots would have been 
crossed by the road/town’s boundaries. Several examples of this kind of orientation can be seen 
along the Via Appia, the road connecting Rome with Capua built around 312 b.C.  

 

2

Interestingly enough, in their texts the Agrimensores look somewhat  “unhappy” of making 
centuriation in accordance of such practical criteria. Indeed, they all explicitly, repeatedly and 
proudly state that their art was inherited from the rituals of the Etruscan Disciplina, and that it was 
thus founded on a symbolic conception of the human landscape; perhaps stretching things a little 
far, one could say that the process of centuriation was connected, at least in their mind, with an idea 
of sacred space. For instance, Frontinus states 
 
Limitum prima origo, sicut Varro descripsit, ad disciplinam Etruscam; quod aruspices orbem terrarum in duas partes 
diviserunt… altera[m] linea[m] a septentrione ad meridianum diviserunt terram…. Ab hoc fundamento maiores nostri in 
agrorum mensura videntur constituisse rationem. Primum duo limites duxerunt; unum ab oriente in occasum, quem 
vocaverunt decimanum; alterum a meridiano ad septentrionem, quem cardinem appellaverunt. 
 
Which means (literal translation by the author): 
 
The first origin of the art of tracing limits, as stated by Varron, comes from the Etruscan Disciplina, where the 
aruspexes divide the earth into two parts…and [in two other parts] with another line from the north along the meridian. 
From this foundations our predecessors took the art of measuring the lands. First, two streets will be traced: one from 
the east, which will be called decumanus, the other on the meridian from the north, which will be called cardus. 
 
Thus, according to the Agrimensores, their discipline included a symbolism connected with the sky, 
and this symbolism was ancient as much as the rules of the Disciplina. It goes without saying that 
indeed many examples of centuriations oriented to the cardinal points do exist:  for instance, the 
centuriation of Augusta Raurica  (Swiss), dated to the first decades of our era, and those of Capua 
(II century b.C) and Nola (beginning I century b.C.) in southern Italy. Further to this, orientation of 
the decumanus to one of the two solstices azimuth of the sun is documented as well, for instance 
near the city of Cartago (the Roman colony at the site of Cartage).  
In spite of this quantity of instances, the existence of astronomical references  in the planning of 
Roman towns has been repetitively negated, or admitted only for functional, rather than symbolic, 
motivations (see e.g. the reference book by Adam 1999). This position assessed after the work by 
Le Gall (1975), who maintained that:  
 

1)  the Agrimensores just  invented the symbolic and sacred content of their science, claiming 

for a derivation from the Etruscan Disciplina 

2)  the astronomical orientation mentioned by them regards in any case only the centuriation 

procedure, and therefore cannot be extended to the towns 

3)  as a consequence, there is no astronomical content in the planning of the roman towns 

 
To sustain his theses Le Gall presented a list of data scattered from York, Brittany (54 degrees of 
latitude north) to Cuicul, Algeria  (36 degrees). However, as we shall see later, data having a wide 
spread in latitude make it difficult to extract significant information on solar orientations. Further to 
this, Le Gall data are extremely few and very heterogeneous: two centuriations, ten towns and two 
military camps. It is therefore clear, at least in the opinion of who writes, that this problem fully 
merits a full, complete reassessment and analysis. The present paper is actually only a first step 
toward this analysis, because it concentrates only on Italy. However, I do believe that the evidences 
I am going to present are at least sufficient to show that astronomical orientation has been in many 
cases a fundamental component in the planning of Roman towns. 
 
3. The orientation of Roman towns in Italy 
 
I have collected (Table 1) the following data: 
 

1)  The orientation of the orthogonal grid of the towns which are certainly of Roman foundation 
in Italy. I do not take in consideration all the Roman towns, but only those (actually, nearly 

 

3

all) in which at least the orthogonal grid, if not the two main roads, is still clearly 
discernible, and I hope to have considered all of the latter (I would, of course,  be grateful of 
the advice on any town eventually missing).   

2)  The orientation of the orthogonal grid of all the towns which are not (or not with certainty) 

of Roman foundation in Italy, but where a orthogonal layout was certainly super-imposed by 
the Romans.   

 
In both cases, by “orientation” I mean the angle formed with due east by that axis which locates 
within the squared angle bisected by due east, counted positively in the anti-hourly (northerly) 
direction . This is not the standard measure of azimuths (customarily measured positively from 
north to east) but, as we shall see in a while, in this way  the data become more easily legible. 
Most of orientations have been extracted from available archaeological maps; in some cases I have 
controlled their value on site using a precision magnetic compass (accounting of course for 
magnetic deviation, but this is nearly zero at the time of writing in Italy) and I actually found them 
reasonably precise (within one degree of difference). Further, for a few of these towns 
archaeoastronomical research is already available, and in these cases the data are usually collected 
with a teodolite and  are consequently much more precise than the average precision which has to 
be generally expected here (not better than plus or minus one degree). These data are marked with a 
“Y” in the last column of Table 1, and the corresponding references are cited in the text below.  
To explain the way in which the data have been arranged, a few technical remarks are necessary (I 
apologize for the details which I am going to discuss, since most of the readers would consider them 
as childish considerations; however I would like to make the paper readable also to readers who are 
not familiar with solar astronomy).  
We are interested here in the yearly movement of the rising sun at the eastern horizon during the 
course of the year. I will completely avoid any consideration which would actually alter the 
“idealized” view I am going to adopt, thus, in particular, I will not take into account atmospheric 
refraction, and the possible existence of a local non-flat horizon. The reason is that this paper of 
course does not aim to a complete archaeoastronomical evaluation of each site, a task which would 
require a huge field-work campaign. My aim here is rather to investigate on the existence or not of 
an “archaeoastronomical phenomenon” which, once proved, would certainly show the need for a 
more complete analysis. Thus, I am going to consider the movement of  the rising sun as the 
idealized movement of a point in a symmetric arc-sector having due east at the centre. It is 
important to remember that the movement of this point does not occur with a constant velocity: it is 
very slow near the solstices, and very fast near the equinoxes; with our choice for the measures of  
angles, the arc-sector spanned in the course of one year is individuated by an angle α and its 
opposite – α ; the value of α of course increases with the latitude of the site (the minimum, at the 
equator, is around 26 degrees). Consider now two orthogonal axes – a cross -  having the same 
centre of the cardinal axes but rotated with respect to them, and search for an angle such that the sun 
will not raise or set in alignment with any of the two axis of the cross, never, during the course of 
the whole year. It is easily seen from Fig. 2 that the answer to this question is as follows. It is 
possible to find orientations of this kind, if and only if the latitude of the site is such that α is less 
than 45 degrees; in this case, one of the axis of the cross must lie within the shaded sector of 
amplitude β=90-2α. It goes without saying, therefore, that any castrum town constructed at a 
latitude such that α is near to, or greater than, 45 degrees, is always oriented to the rising sun in 
some day of the year (this latitude is around 55 degrees). Further, it is certainly preferable to 
compare data which come from sites whose latitude is not too different, so that their reference value 
α is comparable. In particular, if we want to understand  - as a preliminary step – if solar orientation 
actually was there, it is better to work in a strip of latitudes where a sufficient amount of data is 
available and the angle α is reasonably less than 45 degrees (for the data considered in the present 
paper, the value of a varies within a interval of around 5 degrees from 35 to 30). 
 

 

4

For each town the following are reported: 
 

1)  Latitude  
2)  Latin name 
3)  Today’s name, and approximate date of foundation or Roman re-foundation 
4)  Orientation of that axis which lies within 45 degrees from due east, indicated with NE (north 

of east) or SE (south of east) respectively  

5)  Evaluated amplitude at the solstices at the date of foundation. This amplitude is reported  

only for those towns in which one of the axis locates within ten degrees from it.  
6)  Existence of already published  archaeoastronomical research on the town orientation, 

indicated with a Y;  the corresponding references are cited in the text below 

 
The following observations can be easily made: 
 

1)  There are only three northern orientations out of the solar sector. These are today’s Pesaro, 
Rimini and Senigallia, towns which lie relatively close, on the west coast of Central Italy. It 
might be that their orientation was dictated by similar, and special, considerations, which 
anyway await for further investigations. 

2)  Only two towns lie near the summer solstice sunrise line. These are Verona and Vicenza  for 
which deliberate solar orientation has been actually already proved (Romano 1992); also 
these two towns are geographically close and where founded in the same period; also in this 
case, therefore, special considerations – not known at present - should apply  

3)  There is a family of 14 towns located near the cardinal points, in a sector of around 10 

degrees of amplitude on both sides of due east. Of these, 9 lie in the south of east sector.  
4)  There is a family of 9 towns which locates near the winter solstice sunrise line. Of course 

the rising sun follows a southerly oriented path in the northern hemisphere, and therefore all 
such towns, oriented near the solstice line or with slightly  greater azimuth, are oriented to 
the “climbing” sun, at a relative low altitude. Among these towns, two (Bene Vagenna and 
Norba) have been actually already shown to be aligned to winter solstice sunrise (Barale et 
al 2002, Magli 2006)  

5)  Thee is a vacancy of data in the intermediate sectors, in particular, no towns lie in the 19-29 

south of east sector. 

 
Mathematically, we can convince ourselves of the existence of a non-random distribution in 
presence of such a small sample of data inspecting how much the data differ from a binomial 
distribution (other tests, like the chi-square, require more populated samples).  
First of all, we inspect the region around the cardinal points calculating the number of towns which 
should fall in a sector of 20 degrees of wideness. We thus have (38*20/90) ~ 8.4 towns expected, 
with a standard deviation around 2.5. A distribution can be considered to be statistically significant 
(i.e. non casual) from values of the order of the average plus or minus two standard deviations, and 
therefore, in this case, statistical significance starts at ~ 13.4 towns, whence this sector has 14. 
Orientation to cardinal points becomes more clear if only the sector south of east is considered. For 
a 10 degrees sector, we have (38*10/90) ~ 4.2 towns expected with a standard deviation of ~ 1.9. 
Statistical significance therefore starts around 8 towns, and the sector under exam has 9; in other 
words, it is actually this contribution which makes the region around due east statistically relevant. 
Significance also holds for the 30-39 degrees south of east sector cited above, which comprises nine 
towns as well.   
The absence of towns in the sector between 19 and 29 degrees south of east is, of course, significant 
too (the average minus two standard deviations gives zero). Interestingly enough, it may be noticed 
that the solar dates corresponding to these azimuths locate in  two periods which do not contain any 
relevant festivity of the Roman calendar, namely (very roughly, because the effective dates depend 

 

5

on the specific orientation and latitude) the second half of November and the second half of 
January. This observation can be compared with the fact that, instead, dates falling between 10 and 
19 degrees north or south of east may indicate important festivals of the Roman Calendar. In 
particular, in the second half of February (orientations south of east) many important festivals took 
place: the Parentalia (Festival of the deads), the Lupercalia (Festival of Faunus), and the 
Terminalia, festival of the god Terminus, protector of the boundaries and of the city walls. It has 
been actually already proposed that the orientation of Bonomia (Bologna) was chosen in such a way 
that the sun was rising in alignment with the decumanus of the city on the day of Terminalia (Incerti 
1999), and a fieldwork may lead to similar conclusions for other towns of this group as well. On the 
northern side there are of course too few data to draw conclusions; however, the distribution 
between 9 and 25 degrees NE is at least intriguing: only five towns, concentrated in only two 
angles. The corresponding dates fall into the period 10-30 of April which, of course, includes the 
foundation of Rome (21 April). From the archaeoastronomical point of view, this is the unique date 
for which an indubitable astronomical “alignment” is documented among the Romans: it is the 
ierophany which takes place in the Pantheon (see e.g. Belmonte & Hoskin 2002). 
 
Some further comments on these data are in order.  
 
1) The presence of non-random distribution shows that an hypothesis which has been put forward in 
the past, namely that the orientation of Roman towns could have been done towards the rising sun at 
the date of birth of the founder, has no possible validity (this is actually an idea which has nothing 
to do with the Roman mentality and was already rejected by Le Gall). 
 
2) One may ask for the techniques which were effectively used by the surveyors in tracing the 
layout. A very simple and natural way of working with a fixed angle in a wide dockyard consists in 
choosing angles which have a rational tangent (that is, correspond to a rational ratio between the 
two legs of a right triangle). Indeed, in this way different persons working together do not need 
samples of the angle (a procedure which would result in propagating errors): it is sufficient for them 
to know the chosen ratio, and to trace a rectangle using an arbitrary unit of measure, to conform to 
the desired proportions. This method  was, as is well known, used by the Egyptians (for instance, 
the slope of  the Cheop's pyramid corresponds to 14/11) and there are proofs that it was used by the 
Agrimensores for landscape planning (see e.g. Cataldi 2004, Peterson 1992); perhaps proofs can be 
found also for the town’s layout. It should be noted that in such a case astronomical orientation to 
cardinal points would become fundamental independently from the chosen orientation of the grid. 
In fact, to be sure to obtain the desired azimuth (at fixed amplitude of angle) in tracing the legs, the 
surveyors had to construct a "local point grid" oriented on the cardinal directions 
 
3) Perhaps some angles with rational tangent may have been preferred to others for symbolic 
reasons, for instance those corresponding to Pythagorean triangles. This idea has already been 
proposed for the camps (Richardson 2005) and certainly deserves further studies, since much more 
accurate measures would be required as well as wider samples of data.  
 
4) As far as the techniques for finding the meridian are concerned, it looks quite probable that these 
were solar-based and made use of the bisection of the angle formed by the shadows of a post 
(gnomon) at symmetric hours of the day. Indeed, techniques based on the stars2 are usually much 
more precise than  the average precision observed in the Roman world. 
 

                                           
2  There are essentially two possibile methods based on stars: observation of upper and lower culmination of 
circumpolar stars, and  bisection of angles of rise and set of non-circumpolar stars (due to precession, there was no 
``pole star`` - i.e. a star sufficiently close to the north celestial pole -  in Roman times). 

 

6

5) A final comment is in order about the possibility of lunar orientations, although this kind of 
orientation is never documented in the existing texts. The moon has four stations, analogue to the 
solar solstices, which are reached once every 18.6 years. The azimuths of the lunar stations always  
comprise those of the sun solstices, thus the minor lunar standstill has an azimuth which is always 
reached also by the sun, and the major lunar standstill has an azimuth which is never reached by the 
sun. It follows, that there is no way to distinguish an alignment to the minor lunar standstill from a  
solar alignment, while azimuths not belonging to the sun range may lead to major lunar standstills. 
However, the major northern standstill of the moon at the latitude of the two “exceptional” towns 
oriented at 45 degrees NE is around 41 degrees, and thus no hint of lunar orientation appears to be 
present. 
 
 4. Conclusion and perspectives 
 
The results of the present paper show that the orientation of Roman towns in Italy is not random: it 
comprises two “families”, one lying in the sector within ten degrees SE, the other near the winter 
solstice sunrise. Orientation of some towns to the sunrise in dates corresponding to important 
festivities of the Roman calendar, in particular Terminalia, looks also probable.  
The existence of astronomical orientations confirms statements made by many Roman writers 
themselves, and raises the problem of the symbolic meaning of the castrum layout. It is indeed 
worth noticing that the idea of a quadripartite world reflected in a quadripartite human space 
occurred in many cultures, for instance among the Inca (the Inca state was just “the state of the four 
parts”) or the Assires; in the italic context it was merged with astronomical orientation, perhaps by 
the Etruscans: Misa is indeed astronomically oriented to the cardinal points with a good precision, 
while cardinal orientation is barely visible in Greek towns. 
Of course, this problem is open to future investigations. However, I would like to mention two 
examples which point out the symbolic relevance of the “squared” mentality among the Romans.  
The first example is the famous “magic square” graffito which was found in the Pompeii Palestra,  
dated to the period 63-79 a.D. and composed by  a palindrome of five words of five letters (ROTAS 
OPERA TENET AREPO SATOR). I will not, of course, enter here in the important and unsolved 
problem if the graffito is an early testimony of the Christian religion (an interpretation which relies 
on the fact that the words can be rearranged to give a cross composed by the words 
PATERNOSTER together with an A and a O);  what I would like to stress is only that the graffito 
in any case seems to be a symbol connected with the foundation ritual and the structure of the 
castrum. Indeed, the word TENET   forms the image of a castrum,  and the argument of the 
inscription refers to a sower (a SATOR, perhaps called AREPO) who is probably making some  - 
perhaps ritual – ploughing (ROTAS OPERA TENET).  
The second example is connected with the symbolic content of the castrum in its proper meaning, 
namely the military camp. It is the layout of the Trajan forum, constructed around 112 a.D.: the 
architect indeed conceived it as a replica of castrum military camp (see Fig. 3). Recent 
investigations have been carried out on the orientation of the Roman camps and forts (Richardson 
2005) and, although precise indications are also in this case difficult to be obtained due to the 
relative low number of data sample (see Peterson, 2007, and Salt, 2007) there is a clear tendency to 
the orientation to the cardinal points which is hardly justifiable with strategic reasons.  
All in all, in the author’s view it is highly desirable that future research may dispose of a complete 
database of orientations – including temples - in the Roman world, a huge task which however 
would be of fundamental help towards a re-assessment of the (usually neglected) astronomical 
knowledge among the Romans, as well as to a better understanding of his connection with the 
Roman religion and mentality. 
 
 
 

 

7

 
Fig. 1 Plan of Augusta Pretoria (Aosta) 
 

 

 
Fig. 2. The range of the rising positions of the sun at a certain latitude, spanned by the angle α, and 
the sector of possible non-solar orientations of the axes of a castrum town at the same latitude, 
spanned by the angle β=90-2α. See Sec. 3 for details. 

 

 

8

 
Fig. 3 Plan of Trajan’s Forum (left) compared with a Roman military camp (right) (adapted from 
Settis et al 1988). 

 

 

9

 
References  
 
Adam, J.P. Roman Building: Materials and Techniques Routledge 1999  
Aveni, A. & Romano, G., (1994) Orientation and Etruscan Ritual. Antiquity, 68, 545-563,.  
Aveni A. & Capone, G. (1985). Possible Astronomical Reference in the Urban Design of 
Ancient Alatri, Lazio, Italy. Archaeoastronomy 8: 12. 
Barale, P., Codebò, M., De Santis, H., (2002) Augusta Bagiennorum (Regio Ix) Una Città 
Astronomicamente Orientata. Ed. Centro Studi Piemontesi.Torino 
Belmonte, J.A., Hoskin, M. (2002) Reflejo Del Cosmos: Atlas De Arqueoastronomia Del 
Mediterraneo Antiguo.  (Sirius, Madrid.)  
Bonghi-Jovino, M. (2000) Il complesso sacro-istituzionale di Tarquinia, in Roma, Romolo,  
Remo e la fondazione della città, a cura di A. Carandini e R. Cappelli, Roma, Electa pp. 265-270  
Brown F. (1980), Cosa: the making of a Roman Town, Ann Arbor. 
Carandini, A., (1997) La nascita di Roma, Einaudi, Torino;  
Castagnoli,  (1971) Orthogonal town planning in antiquity (Cambridge, MIT press)  
Cataldi, G. (2004) Forma quadrata Italiae. La pianificazione territoriale dell’Italia romana, Atti e 
Memorie della Accademia Petrarca di Lettere, Arti e Scienze. 65°Arezzo, pp. 89-121 
Decramer L., Hilton R. (1998) Nouvelles recherches sur la grande centuriation de l'Africa Nova. 
Cahiers de Métrologie, t. 16, p. 5-50.   
Decramer L., Hilton R., Plas, A.  (2001) Centuriations et orientation solaire.Les bornes 
gromatiques de Tunisie. In "La mesure des longues distances dans le cadre des limitations 
antiques", CNRS, Paris.                  
Incerti, M. (1999) The Urban fabric of Bologna: orientation problems. Atti del Convegno  
Internazionale sulla Città - Firenze 
Le Gall J. (1975). Les romains et l'orientation solaire. MEFRA 87-1975-1, p. 287-320 
Magli, G. (2006) The Acropolis of Alatri: astronomy and architecture. Nexus Network Journal – 
Architecture and Mathematics  8, 1: 5-16. 
Magli, G (2007) Non-orthogonal feautures in the planning of four ancient towns of Central Italy 
Nexus Network Journal - Architecture and Mathematics 9 1: 71-92   
Mansuelli, G.A. (1965) Contributo allo studio dell’urbanistica di Marzabotto, in P.Pass. XX, 314. 
Rykwert , J. (1999) The Idea of a Town: The Anthropology of Urban Form in Rome, Italy, and The 
Ancient World (MIT Press, Cambridge) 
Peterson, J.W.M. (1992) Trigonometry in Roman cadastres. In Guillaumin, J. (ed.) Mathématiques 
dans l’Antiquité (St-Étienne, Université de St-Étienne, Centre Jean-Palerne, Mémoires 11), 185–
203. 
Peterson, J.W.M. (2007) Random Orientation of Roman Camps. Oxford Journal of Archaeology 
26(1). 103-108. 
Pallottino, M. (1997) Etruscologia  (Milano : Hoepli)  
Richardson, A. (2005) The Orientation of Roman Camps and Forts. Oxford Journal of Archaeology 
24(4). 415-426. 
Romano, G. (1992) Archeoastronomia italiana, Padova, Cleup. 
Salt, A.,  The Orientation of Roman Camps, iscience.wordpress.com/2007/02/17/roman-camps/ 
Settis, A., La Regina, A., Agosti, G., Farinella, V. (1988)  La Colonna Traiana Torino : Einaudi 
Sommella, P. (1988) L'Italia antica : l'urbanistica romana  Roma : Jouvence 
Torelli, M. (1966) Un templum augurale d’età repubblicana a Bantia, RAL, XXI 

 

 

10

 
                                             Table 1. Orientation of 38 Roman towns in Italy. 
 
 
 

 

Aosta (25 b.C.) 

Rimini (268 b.C.) 

Parma (183 b.C.) 

Senigallia (284 b.C.) 

Aquileia (II century b.C.) 

Telese (near Benevento) 

Formia   (III century b.C.) 

Near Salerno; greek,  colony in 273 b.C. 

Sorrento, greek, roman plan I century b.C. 

Verona, pre-roman. Roman plan I century b.C. 

Venafro, pre-roman, roman plan II century b.C. 

Ostia  (IV century b.C., data from the first layout) 

Vicenza, pre-roman, roman plan around 135 b.C. 

 
Pesaro (184 b.C.) 

43.55  PISAURUM 
43.42  SENA GALLICA 
44.03  ARIMIMIUM 
45.26  VERONA 
45.33  VICETIA 
41.29  VENAFRUM 
45.44  AUG.PRETORIA 
45.46  AQUILEIA 
41.13  TELESIA 
40.38  SURRENTUM 
41.44  OSTIA 
41.16  FORMIAE 
44.48  PARMA 
46.04  TRIDENTUM 
41.44  ALETRIUM 
42.35  HATRIA 
40.26  PAESTUM 
43.47  FLORENTIA 
41.06  SINUESSA 
43.51  LUCA 
40.49  PUTEOLI 
42.18  FALERII NOVI 
42.50  ASCULUM 
43.47  ALBINTIMILIUM 
41.50  PRAENESTE 
45.32  BRIXIA 
44.30  BONOMIA 
41.41  FERENTINUM 
42.17  PELTUINUM 
45.04  AUG.TAURINORUM 
41.16  MINTURNAE 
41.35  NORBA 
44.33  AUG.BAGIENNORUM  Bene Vagienna (I century b.C.) 
42.06  ALBA FUCENS 
Massa d'Albe ( IV century b.C.) 
40.17  GRUMENTUM 
42.25  COSA 
44.05  LUNI 
43.50  FANUM 

 
44 NE 
44 NE 
37 NE 
36 NE 
34 NE 
28 NE 
26 NE 
19 NE 
19 NE 
17 NE 
17 NE 
17 NE 
8 NE 
8 NE 
Trento (23 b.C.) 
Alatri, pre-roman, Roman plan around II century b.C.  7 NE 
7 NE 
Atri (near Teramo) pre-roman, colony in 289 b.C. 
2 NE 
1 SE 
3 SE 
4 SE 
4 SE 
4 SE 
6 SE 
7 SE 
7 SE 
8 SE 
12 SE 
17 SE 
18 SE 
30 SE 
31 SE 
32 SE 
36 SE 
37 SE 
37 SE 
38 SE 
38 SE 
39 SE 

Near Norma (IV century b.C., layout II century b.C.) 

Palestrina, pre-roman, Roman plan around 90 b.C. 

Ferentino, pre-roman, Roman plan II century b.C. 

Ascoli Piceno, pre-roman, Roman plan 269 b.C. 

Brescia, pre-roman, Roman plan  I century b.C. 

Bologna, pre-roman, Roman colony 189 b.C. 

Fano, pre-roman, Roman plan I century b.C. 

Near Prata D'Ansidonia (I century b.C.) 

Near Ventimiglia ( I century b.C.)  

Grumento Nova ( III century b.C.) 

Near Civita Castellana (240 b.C.) 

Pozzuoli - Rione Terra (194 b.C.) 

Ansedonia ( III century b.C.) 

Firenze (around 59 b.C.) 

Lucca (around 180 b.C.) 

Mondragone (296 b.C.) 

Minturno (296 b.C.) 

Torino (29 b.C.) 

Luni ( 177 b.C.) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
33  
33  
34  
35 Y 
35 Y 
32  
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y 
 
 
34  
32  
32 Y 
34 Y 
32  
31  
33  
34  
33  

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

11

