MINIATURISED SPOTTER-COMPATIBLE MULTICAPILLARY STAMPING TOOL FOR 
MICROARRAY PRINTING 
 
Alexei L Drobyshev1, Nikolai N Verkhodanov1, Alexander S Zasedatelev1,2
 
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, and 2Moscow Institute of Physics and 
Technology, Dolgoprundy, Russian Federation 
 
Address correspondence to: 
Alexei L Drobyshev 
Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology 
Vavilov str. 32, Moscow, 119991 
Russian Federation 
dro@newmail.ru 
 
Key words: microstamping, microarray, tuberculosis, hydrogel 
 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
Novel microstamping tool for microarray printing is proposed. The tool is capable to spot up to 
127 droplets of different solutions in single touch. It is easily compatible with commercially 
available microarray spotters. The tool is based on multichannel funnel with polypropylene 
capillaries inserted into its channels. Superior flexibility is achieved by ability to replace any 
printing capillary of the tool. As a practical implementation, hydrogel-based microarrays were 
stamped and successfully applied to identify the Mycobacterium tuberculosis drug resistance. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Microarray technology is the most successful example of miniaturisation in modern life science. 
Taking advantage of high parallelism resulting form miniaturisation microarrays has become a 
tool of choice in numerous applications (1). However in contrast to microarrays themselves, the 
methods of their manufacturing are generally completely macroscopic. 
Currently the most of microarrays are produced by pin or piezo-jet technology. Both use 384 
(seldom 96) well micrtotiter plates filled with the solutions to be spotted. Pins or piezo 
dispensers are placed in the holder so that they match the pattern of plate, i.e. in case of 384 well 
plate they have 4.5 mm pitch. This imposes some restrictions on the shape, size and density of 
arrays produced in multipin mode. These arrays consist of clusters of spots matching the pattern 
of the microtiter plate they were printed from. For example, no microarray smaller than 4.5 by 
4.5 mm can be printed in multipin mode. If a high density microarray of hundred spots is desired 
it can be produced in single pin mode only. On the other hand in highly parallel mode with 48 
(typically 4 by 12) pins, the resultant array will cover entire 25×75 mm microscopic slide, i.e. 
high density arrays of small or middle size cannot be spotted in highly parallel mode.  
The best known exception from this general trend is the method of in situ synthesis of 
microarray features like light-directed oligonucleotide synthesis (2) of Affymetrix platform. 
Regarded by many as the most sophisticated platform, it requires industrial environment for 
microarray manufacturing; it has strict limitation on the length of synthesised products (generally 
no more than 25 nucleotides) and cannot be used for arrays of antibodies, living cells, etc.  
The less known examples are based on parallel depositing of pre-synthesised species by contact 
(3-6) or non-contact (7-10) method. Contact system exploits a microfluidic chip with array of 
144 nozzles connected to 8 reservoirs (18 nozzles per one reservoir) at the opposite side of the 
chip. Reservoirs and corresponding nozzles are filled with spotting solutions. Then the chip is 
pressed to the printing surface “for less than a few minutes” (5) leaving spots on it. In non-
contact system the array contains 24 or 96 nozzles. Every nozzle is connected through a 
microchannel with its reservoir (one nozzle per reservoir). The pressure pulse is applied 
simultaneously to all the reservoirs causing every nozzle to shoot the droplet. These methods, 
however, require special machinery and are not easily compatible with existing microarray 
spotters available in many biological laboratories.  
Here we propose a spotter-compatible microstamping tool capable to print up to 127 spots within 
3×3 mm area in single touch. The tool is easy to assemble in general biological laboratory with 
the aid of institute workshop. With this tool we stamp a 70-element high density hydrogel-based 
microarray and use it for identification of drug-resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(11). 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Multichannel funnels were purchased form TEGS (Saratov, Russian Federation), as multichannel 
holders of optical fibres. Polypropylene capillaries were drawn manually from BD Micro-Fine™ 
1 ml syringes (Becton Dickinson, USA). Every capillary was inserted into the funnel and 
adjusted so that its outer diameter at the narrow end of funnel (monitored by means of optical 
microscope) was from 0.15 to 0.18 mm and then trimmed at this position by a sharp blade 
(Stanley Works, England). The blade sharpness is essential as it is a major factor affecting the 
quality of printing end of capillary, so the blades should be replaced as soon as necessary. At the 

opposite end every capillary was trimmed to achieve the necessary length (from 65 to 66 mm, 
depending on its position in the funnel). 
The holder for multicapillary funnel was manufactured at the Institute workshop according to the 
Supplementary Figure S1.  
Mycobacterium tuberculosis DNA samples were obtained from Moscow Antituberculosis 
Centre; their sequences were analysed by microarray hybridisation and direct sequencing earlier 
(11). The oligonucleotide-containing spotting solutions for hydrogel-based Multi-Drug 
Resistance TB-Biochip (11) were purchased from Biochip-IMB Ltd (Moscow, RF). The 
composition of solutions was described earlier (12). Additionally every solution contained 10µM 
of Texas Red™ dye (Molecular Probes) for evaluation of gel pad size upon the polymerisation. 
Slides treatment before and after spotting was performed as described earlier (12). DNA target 
preparation, hybridisation and subsequent washing of microarrays were done according to TB-
Biochip-MDR protocol (11). Fluorescent images were acquired by Chip-Detector-01 and 
quantified by ImaGeWare version 2.38 (both Biochip-IMB, RF). For correlation plots mean 
fluorescent intensities were calculated for circle areas of fixed diameter snapped to the 
microarray features and the local fluorescent background was subtracted. Statistical analysis of 
the data was performed with Microsoft Excel and Origin 6.1 (Origin Lab, USA) 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The key element of our printing tool is a glass multicapillary funnel with 127 microchannels 
forming hexagonal array, Figure 1 (A). The funnel was manufactured at industrial environment 
by forming hexagonal array of glass tubes and baking them together. Then this multichannel 
structure was drawn in a special oven to obtain the funnel of desired shape. This technology was 
used earlier for e.g. manufacturing of polycapillary lenses (13).  
At the broad end of funnel the diameter of microchannels is 1 mm with 1.3 mm pitch, at the 
narrow end the diameter is 0.21 mm with 0.27 mm pitch, and the funnel’s length is 64.5 mm. 
These microchannels serve as guides for polypropylene capillaries used for printing, Figure 1 (B) 
and (C). The capillaries are filled with spotting solutions and inserted into microchannels so that 
they protrude from the narrow end of funnel by approximately 0.5 mm. At the broad end of 
funnel the capillaries are blocked from moving out by upper clamp (Figure 1 (A)) which is 
normally tightly attached to the funnel and removed only to access the capillaries. This makes 
the capillary working like a spring: when it touches the surface of substrate with its protruding 
end it shrinks exerting some pressure and forming tight contact necessary to transfer the liquid to 
the surface. 
The entire assembly was placed into Genetix QArray spotter (by means of specially designed 
holder, Supplementary Figure S1) instead of standard pin tool. In the course of printing this 
stamp was brought in contact with slides so that it stamped the pattern formed by array of 
microcapillaries (Figure 1 (D)).  
In order to test the efficiency of stamped arrays in mutation screening by hybridisation analysis 
the funnel was loaded with 70 capillaries filled with hydrogel-based spotting solution with 
oligonucleotide probes for Mycobacterium tuberculosis multi-drug resistance set (11) and 10 μM 
Texas Red™ fluorescent dye. Then the funnel was loaded into QArray spotter and a 70-element 
array was stamped to 10 slides in triplicate with 900 ms contact time. After spotting the tool was 
stored for 10 days at +4°C and successfully used for another spotting again (as demonstrated 
below).  
Spotted slides were polymerised (12) and Texas Red™ fluorescence images were acquired and 
quantified. Relative standard deviation of integral signals from 70 elements was from 21 to 23% 
for different slides.  
Then the microarrays were hybridised with wild type (H37Rv strain) and mutant DNA target 
(Figure 2A and B, respectively). Every microarray contained two replicates hybridised in the 
same volume (only one replicate shown at Figure 2). Clear difference between wild type and 
mutant hybridisation patterns was observed for microarray features corresponding to 531st codon 

of rpoB and 315th codon of katG genes in both replicates (selected area at Figure 2). Each group 
contains features with oligonucleotides matching the same position of target DNA but 
complementary to wild type and all known mutant sequences of particular codon (4 and 7 
different mutations for 531st codon of rpoB and 315th codon of katG, respectively). For wild type 
DNA the strongest signals in both groups are produced by wild type oligonucleotides (first from 
the left in every group). For mutant DNA the strongest signal in rpoB 531 group corresponds to 
substitution of Ser to Leu, for katG 315 group it corresponds to Ser to Thr substitution, in 
agreement with earlier direct sequencing and hybridisation analysis (11). Separately the same 
pair of hybridisations was performed with the microarrays stamped after 10 days storage of the 
tool at +4°C. Both wild type and mutant DNA targets were successfully identified (not shown). 
This proves that our stamping tool provides sufficient printing accuracy for correct detection of 
single nucleotide substitutions in Mycobacterium tuberculosis DNA even without internal 
control like dual colour hybridisation.  
To assess the effect of 10 days storage of the tool quantitatively two microarrays were hybridised 
against wild type DNA target and the hybridisation signals were plotted against that of array 
from Figure 2 (A): the first microarray was stamped in the same batch with the ones from Figure 
2 and second microarray was stamped after the storage (Figure 3 (A), solid triangles and open 
squares, respectively). The correlation coefficients for the data before and after storage were 0.94 
and 0.95, respectively. To assess the source of this variability, a correlation plot of two replicates 
hybridised in the same volume (the array of Figure 2 (A)) was made (Figure 3 (B)). The 
correlation coefficient was 0.993 indicating that the error coming from stamping is much smaller 
than the error from individual hybridisations or 10 days storage of loaded tool at +4°C. 
As the data from Figure 3 (B) demonstrate a good reproducibility of droplets spotted by the same 
capillary, this reproducibility was assessed in a special experiment. The funnel was loaded with 
only one capillary containing hydrogel-based spotting solution with Cy5-labelled oligonucleotide 
marker from TB-Biochip-MDR set and placed into QArray spotter. An array of 1600 droplets 
was spotted with this capillary and polymerised; then Cy5 fluorescence image was acquired and 
quantified. Relative standard deviation of integral signals from randomly selected 7 by 10 
massive of 70 spots was 6%. 
Another important question of tool validation is the maximal number of replicates that could be 
stamped without refilling the capillaries. This number obviously depends on the initial loading of 
capillaries and the average volume of spots. The latter depends on the capillary diameter and the 
wetting of substrate by spotting solution. To study this second factor only one capillary was left 
in the funnel and 3 different solutions were used for spotting: the solution for hydrogel-based 
microarrays (12) (50% glycerol, 4.75% methacrylamide, 0.25% methylenebisacrylamide and 
Cy5-labelled marker oligonucleotide with amino group from TB-Biochip-MDR set in 0.01M 
Na–borate buffer, pH 10.5), 3M betaine with 25% glycerol and 4M betaine. Initial loading of 
capillary was adjusted to be maximal with the resulting spots diameter smaller than 0.27 mm (the 
pitch of printing end of funnel). Then the funnel was placed into QArray spotter and the routine 
for printing of 5000-element (50×100) microarray with 0.27 mm pitch and 900 ms contact time 
was started in single capillary mode on different slides from different batches. For hydrogel-
based spotting solution four maximal achieved numbers of spots were 4150, 4050, 2850 and 
2650 (average is 3425); for 25% glycerol and 3M betaine these numbers were 2500, 2400, 1650 
and 1250 (average is 1950); for 4M betaine these were 3400, 1850, 1200 and 1100 (average is 
1900, rounded to the nearest multiple of 50). The average maximal number of spots for 
hydrogel-based solution is significantly higher than this number for 3M betaine with 25% 
glycerol and 4M betaine (p-values are 0.025 and 0.059, respectively), in agreement with the 
suggestion that the transferred volume decreases with the decrease of wetting of substrate with 
spotting solution. Nevertheless, several hundreds of replicates are confidently achievable for any 
of tested solutions (e.g. for N=500 p-values are 0.005, 0.017 and 0.079 respectively). 
The proposed method of microarray printing combines simplicity and flexibility because of 
ability to add remove or replace capillaries in the funnel if necessary. This ability could be used 

to achieve desired feature size distribution across the array. If desired, better spot size uniformity 
could be also achieved by imposing more stringent restrictions on the diameters of capillaries 
and adjusting proper speed of tool lifting after the stamping (which is impossible in current 
QArray interface). The stamping array could be easily expanded beyond current 127 elements. 
Since the funnel is 3-dimentional structure this expansion will not require any change of 
interconnection layout necessary for planar chip-based microstamping tools.  
Our tool was found to be suitable for stamping of different solutions but it could stamp more 
replicates if the wetting of substrate is low, e.g. due to the presence of glycerol. After spotting 
the tool could be stored and used again without recharging the capillaries. In this case it is 
important that the solution do not dry or crystallise e.g. because of presence of betaine (14) or 
glycerol (12). With QArray spotter it takes no more than 3 seconds per stamping of up to 127 
features, no washing, drying or refilling are required making our multicapillary funnel stamp a 
powerful tool for manufacturing of high density microarrays of small or middle size. 
 
ACKNOLEDGEMENTS 
We are grateful to N. Blow, V.M. Mikhailovich, N.V. Zakharova, O.A. Zasedateleva, E.N. 
Timofeyev, A.V. Chudinov, S.A. Pan’kov, for helpful discussion, to O.G. Somova and O.V. 
Moiseyeva for post-spotting microarray processing, to O.V. Markova, A.Y. Kozlova, E.E. 
Fesenko and O.V. Antonova for the microarray hybridisations. 
 
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT 
Authors declare no competing interests 

REFERENCES 
1. 
2. 

Schena, M. 2000. Microarray Biochip Technology. Eaton Publishing Company, Natick. 
Fodor, S.P., J.L. Read, M.C. Pirrung, L. Stryer, A.T. Lu and D. Solas. 1991. Light-
directed, spatially addressable parallel chemical synthesis. Science 251:767-773. 
Lin, S.C., F.G. Tseng, H.M. Huang, C.Y. Huang and C.C. Chieng. 2001. Microsized 
2D protein arrays immobilized by micro-stamps and micro-wells for disease diagnosis 
and drug screening. Fresenius J Anal Chem 371:202-208. 
Tseng, F.G., S.C. Lin, H.M. Huang, C.Y. Huang and C.C. Chieng. 2002. Protein 
micro arrays immobilized by mu-stamps and -protein wells on PhastGel(R) pad. Sensors 
and Actuators B 83:22-29. 
Lin, S.C., C.E. Ho, F.G. Tseng, Y.C. Tsai, H.M. Huang and C.C. Chieng. 2003. A 
novel protein micro stamper with back-filling reservoir for simultaneous immobilization 
of large protein arrays, pp. 299-302. In Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, IEEE The 
Sixteenth Annual International. Kyoto. 
Lin, S.C., F.G. Tseng, H.M. Huang, Y.F. Chen, Y.C. Tsai, C.E. Ho and C.C. Chieng. 
2004. Simultaneous immobilization of protein microarrays by a micro stamper with back-
filling reservoir. Sensors and Actuators B 99:174-185. 
de Heij, B., M. Daub, O. Gutmann, R. Niekrawietz, H. Sandmaier and R. Zengerle. 
2004. Highly parallel dispensing of chemical and biological reagents. Anal Bioanal Chem 
378:119-122. 
Gutmann, O., R. Niekrawietz, R. Kuehlewein, C.P. Steinert, S. Reinbold, B. De Heij, 
M. Daub and R. Zengerle. 2004. Non-contact production of oligonucleotide 
microarrays using the highly integrated TopSpot nanoliter dispenser. Analyst 129:835-
840. 
Gutmann, O., R. Kuehlewein, S. Reinbold, R. Niekrawietz, C.P. Steinert, B. de Heij, 
R. Zengerle and M. Daub. 2005. Fast and reliable protein microarray production by a 
new drop-in-drop technique. Lab Chip 5:675-681. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10.  Gutmann, O., R. Kuehlewein, S. Reinbold, R. Niekrawietz, C.P. Steinert, B. de Heij, 

R. Zengerle and M. Daub. 2004. A highly parallel nanoliter dispenser for microarray 
fabrication. Biomed Microdevices 6:131-137. 

12. 

11.  Gryadunov, D., V. Mikhailovich, S. Lapa, N. Roudinskii, M. Donnikov, S. Pan'kov, 
O. Markova, A. Kuz'min, L. Chernousova, O. Skotnikova, et al. 2005. Evaluation of 
hybridisation on oligonucleotide microarrays for analysis of drug-resistant 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Clin Microbiol Infect 11:531-539. 
Rubina, A.Y., S.V. Pan'kov, E.I. Dementieva, D.N. Pen'kov, A.V. Butygin, V.A. 
Vasiliskov, A.V. Chudinov, A.L. Mikheikin, V.M. Mikhailovich and A.D. 
Mirzabekov. 2004. Hydrogel drop microchips with immobilized DNA: properties and 
methods for large-scale production. Anal Biochem 325:92-106. 
Bjeoumikhov, A., N. Langhoff, R. Wedell, V. Beloglazov, N. Lebed'ev and N. 
Skibina. 2003. New generation of polycapillary lenses: manufacture and applications. X-
Ray Spectrometry 32:172 - 178. 
Diehl, F., S. Grahlmann, M. Beier and J.D. Hoheisel. 2001. Manufacturing DNA 
microarrays of high spot homogeneity and reduced background signal. Nucleic Acids Res 
29:E38. 

13. 

14. 

FIGURES 

Figure 1. Multicapillary printing tool and spotted arrays. (A) General view of assembly: glass 
funnel with 127 microchannels, 70 of them have inserted polypropylene capillaries filled with 
solution to be spotted, the remaining 57 channels are not used for spotting. The upper clamp is 
normally tightly fixed at the broad end of funnel blocking the capillaries from moving out in 
upward direction. (B) Front view of narrow (printing) end of funnel with 70 channels having 
inserted capillaries and empty channels. (C) Side view of narrow end of funnel with 70 
polypropylene capillaries protruding out of cannels. At figures (B) and (C) the arrows point to 
the same channels. (D) Microphotograph of 70-element microarrays of 4M betaine droplets 
printed with 70-capillary printing tool in single touch in quadruplicate. 

 

Figure 2. Analysis of Micobacteriun tuberculosis drug suspectability by hybridisation on 
stamped microarrays. (A) Wild type DNA sample. (B) Double mutant DNA sample: Ser531 > 
Leu (TCG > TTG) in the rpoB gene, Ser315 > Thr (AGC > ACC) in the katG gene.  

 

A 

60000

50000

40000

30000

20000

10000

35000

30000

25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

0

0

B 

10000

20000

30000

40000

 

 

0

0

10000

20000

30000

40000

 
Figure 3. Correlations of hybridisation signals of wild type DNA target in different experiments. 
(A) Correlation of hybridisation signals for microarrays hybridised separately. Solid triangles: 
microarrays from the same batch. Open squares: microarray from the first batch versus 
microarray from the batch stamped after 10 days storage of the tool at +4°C. (B) Correlation of 
hybridisation signals of two microarray replicates stamped on the same slide and hybridised in 
the same volume. For both plots fluorescent background was subtracted from mean fluorescent 
intensities of microarray features. 

 

Figure S1 

 

