Observation of Enhanced Transformer Ratio in Collinear 

Wakefield Acceleration 

 

C.Jing1, A.Kanareykin1, J.G.Power2, M.Conde2, Z.Yusof2, P.Schoessow1, and W.Gai2 

1. Euclid Techlabs LLC, Solon, OH-44139 

2. High Energy Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL-60439 

 

Abstract:  One  approach  to  future  high  energy  particle  accelerators  is  based  on  the 

wakefield  principle:  a  leading  high-charge  drive  bunch  is  used  to  excite  fields  in  an 

accelerating structure or plasma that  in turn accelerates a trailing  low-charge  witness 

bunch. The transformer ratio R is defined as the ratio of the maximum energy gain of 

the witness bunch to the maximum energy loss of the drive bunch.  In general, 

2R <  

for  configurations  in  which  the  two  beams  traverse  the  accelerator  along  the  same 

trajectory  (collinear  wakefield  acceleration).    A  number  of  techniques  have  been 

proposed  to  overcome  the  transformer  ratio  limitation.  We  report  here  the  first 

experimental  study of the ramped  bunch train (RBT) technique  in which a dielectric 

loaded  waveguide  was  used  as  the  accelerating  structure.  A  single  drive  bunch  was 

replaced  by  two  bunches  with  charge  ratio  of  1:2.5  and  a  separation  of  10.5 

wavelengths  of  the  fundamental  mode.  An  average  measured  transformer  ratio 

enhancement by a factor of 1.31 over the single drive bunch case was obtained in this 

experiment. 

In a wakefield accelerator, the fields generated by a leading, high-charge drive 

bunch (either a single drive bunch or a train of drive bunches) are used to accelerate a 

trailing,  low-charge  witness  bunch.  An  important  parameter  that  influences  the 

performance of a wakefield accelerator is the transformer ratio R  ≡ (maximum energy 

gain of the witness bunch) / (maximum energy loss of the drive bunch) [1].  Therefore, 

to  accelerate  the  witness  beam  to  high  energy  it  is  desirable  to  make  R  as  large  as 

possible.  For  instance,  consider  a  plasma  wakefield  accelerator  in  which  a  10  GeV 

drive bunch decelerating at a rate of 10 GeV/m (due to its self-wake) will be spent in 1 

m.  Over the same distance, the witness bunch will be accelerated by R·10 GeV. (The 

beam loading by the witness beam is neglected since we assume its charge to be low.)  

R  is  less  than  2  under  very  general  conditions:  linear  media;  a  relativistic, 

longitudinally symmetric drive bunch; and identical paths through the system of both 

drive and witness beams [2, 3]. Some of the methods that can be employed to obtain 

2R >   include:  a  triangular  drive  bunch  longitudinal  profile  [4];  a  train  of  Gaussian 

drive  bunches  of  progressively  increasing  charge  (Ramped  Bunch  Train,  RBT)  [5]; 

use of a proton drive beam so that the particles within the bunch can change positions 

during deceleration [6]; and nonlinear plasma dynamics [7].  

In this Letter, we report on the observation of an enhanced transformer ratio in a 

collinear  dielectric-loaded  wakefield  accelerator  [8-10]  by  using  the  RBT  technique. 

However, this  technique  is  also  applicable  to other  accelerators,  most  importantly  to 

beam-driven  plasma  wakefield  accelerators  that  can  now  be  operated  at  extremely 

high gradients [11] but are still  limited to R < 2 [12, 13]. In the RBT technique, the 

individual  bunches  in  the  train  are  symmetric,  but the  charge  of  each  bunch  and  the 

interbunch spacing are determined by requiring that all bunches in the train experience 

the  same  maximum  decelerating  field.  The  RBT  algorithm  to  achieve  maximum 

transformer  ratio  enhancement  has  been  fully  discussed  in  refs.  [14,  15],  which 

emphasized  that  the  two  key  parameters  necessary  to  adjust  in  order  to  effect  the 

transformer  ratio  enhancement  are  the  optimized  charge  ratios  and  the  spacing 

between bunches. 

For a train of N drive bunches, the requisite position dm of the mth bunch relative 

to  the  leading  bunch  is  an  odd  multiple  of  λ0/2,  where    λ0  is  the  fundamental 

wavelength of the structure (dm = (m + 1/2) λ0, m = 1, 2...N-1). Each trailing bunch is 

located  at  an  accelerating  phase  of  the  preceding  bunch  and  its  self-wakefield  will 

cancel  part  of  the  accelerating  field  so  the  trailing  bunch  experiences  a  reduced 

deceleration.  An  optimized  ramped-up  charge  ratio  is  then  able  to  satisfy  the 

requirement that all  bunches  in the train experience the  same  maximum decelerating 

field. The maximum accelerating field induced by the trailing bunch is partly canceled 

by  the  decelerating  field  of  the  preceding  bunch  but  there  is  a  net  increase  in  the 

wakefield  because the charge of each successive bunch is also increasing. As a result 

the  transformer  ratio  increases  with  each  successive  bunch.  Given  the  transformer 

ratio  of  the  first  bunch  R1  (determined  by  the  ratio  of  the  bunch  length  to  the 

accelerating wavelength), the transformer ratio after the nth bunch is  

R
n

=

R
n

−
1

+

(

R
1

−

1)n

1

R−

1

                                                                                          (1) 

(n  =  2,  ...  N)  assuming  a  ramped  charge  relation  Qn=  (1+Rn-1)Q1.  For  example,  if 

R1=2, the transformer ratio increases as Rn=nR1. 

The experiment was carried out at the Argonne Wakefield Accelerator (AWA) 

facility located at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) [16]. The AWA is based on an 

L-band  photoinjector  and  booster  linac;  the  bunch  train  consisting  of  two  drive 

bunches and one witness  bunch  needed  for the experiment are generated by  splitting 

and  delaying  the  UV  laser  pulse  incident  on  the  photocathode  of  the  rf  gun.  The 

interbunch  separations  correspond  to one  rf  period  of  the  linac  (

23=λ

L

cm

)  and  are 

adjusted  using  optical  delay  lines.  The  accelerated  bunches  exit  the  linac  and  pass 

through a wakefield accelerator device and then into a magnetic dipole spectrometer. 

 A Dielectric-Loaded Accelerating (DLA) structure [8] was used to generate the 

wakefields  for  these  measurements.  The  DLA  is  a  dielectric  tube  enclosed  by  a 

conducting cylinder. The device built for this experiment has a total length of 40 cm, a 

vacuum channel radius of 5 mm and an outer radius of 6.34 mm. The permittivity of 

the dielectric is 16. The structure is described in detail in ref. [17]. The structure was 

instrumented  with  a  field  probe  to  detect  the  radial  component  of  the  wakefield  Er. 

The  probe  was  located  82  mm  downstream  of  the  entrance  of  the  DLA  so  that  the 

direct  wakefield  signal  could  be  separated  from  the  reflection  from  the  exit  of  the 

structure (an interval of a few nanoseconds).  

The  fundamental  (TM01)  accelerating  mode  of  this  structure  occurs  at  f0= 

13.625  GHz.  The  AWA  linac  operates  at  1.3  GHz  corresponding  to  an  inter-bunch 

distance d = λL = 10.5λ0 (where λ0 = 22 mm at f0), satisfying the requirement of half 

integer spacing between bunches for transformer ratio enhancement. 

Because of the small rms bunch length of the drive beam available at the AWA 

linac  (and  its  correspondingly  broader  frequency  spectrum)  the  second  higher  order 

(TM02)  accelerating  mode  at  39.25  GHz  for  this  structure  is  also  excited  and 

contributes  an  additional  20%  to  the  wakefield  transformer  ratio  [3].  Leading  and 

trailing  drive  bunches  with  charge  8  nC  and  20  nC  respectively  were  generated  to 

satisfy  the  requirement  of  an  equal  decelerating  field  inside  each  bunch.  Figure  1 

shows a numerical simulation of the longitudinal wakefield based on the parameters of 

the  experiment  (including  the  attenuation  caused  by  dielectric  losses).  Three  modes 

(TM01,  TM02,  and  TM03)  are  considered  in  the  simulation  since  higher  frequency 

modes have very weak contributions to the generated wakefield (<1%) in this case. In 

the  simulation,  the  longitudinal  wakefield  excited  by  the  leading  drive  bunch  (with 

measured rms bunch length of 1.5 mm) has a transformer ratio of 1.8, and 770 ps later 

(equivalent  to  10.5 rf  periods  at f0, or λL), the  second  bunch  (rms  bunch  length  of  2 

mm) arrives at the maximum accelerating phase of the wake from the leading bunch. 

The  larger  charge  of  the  second  bunch  depresses  the  resultant  wakefield  inside  the 

bunch to a negative (decelerating) value. During the experiment, the charge ratio was 

adjusted  so  that  both  drive  bunches  experienced  the  same  decelerating  field,  while 

simultaneously increasing the accelerating field beyond the single drive bunch value. 

A  1  nC  witness  bunch  is  launched  at  1.54  ns  (2  × λL)  after  the  first  drive  bunch  to 

probe  the  accelerating  wakefields  generated  either  by  the  first  drive  bunch  alone  or 

both drive bunches. In Fig. 1, the simulated maximum decelerating fields inside both 

drive bunches are Wd1

- = Wd1+d2

- = 1.6 MV/m, while the maximum accelerating field 

after  the  first  bunch  is  Wd1

+=2.9  MV/m  and  after  the  second  bunch  Wd1+d2

+=4.9 

MV/m;  an  increase  of  a  factor  of  1.7.  Thus,  the  transformer  ratio  increases 

correspondingly, from R1=1.8 to R2=3.  

During  the  experiment,  the  longitudinal  wakefield  from  the  drive  bunch  is 

determined  at  a  given  phase  by  measuring  the  energy  change  of  the  witness  bunch 

[10].  At  the  AWA  facility,  only  one  photoinjector  was  used  to  generate  both  drive 

bunches  and  witness  bunch;  all  bunches  have  the  same  beam  energy  at  the  same 

launching phase. However, the high charge of the drive bunches (8-20 nC) and length 

of the DLA structure (0.4 m) result in energy changes of the witness bunch in the MeV 

range that can be measured in the spectrometer.  

The  bunch  separation  is  adjusted  optically  by  moving  mirrors  on  translation 

stages  in  the  delay  lines.  The  optical  delay/beam  splitting  system  did  not  have  the 

capability of adjusting the bunch delays continuously but rather in 2 mm  increments. 

A key issue in this experiment is the accurate setting of the spacing between bunches 

to find the best approximation (a) to the d1-d2 delay yielding maximum R and (b) the 

witness beam delay resulting in maximum gradient. The initial spacing is roughly set 

up  by  keeping  the  same  launching  phase  for  the  two  drive  bunches  in  the 

photoinjector.  The  final  bunch  spacing  was  obtained  during  the  experiment  by 

measuring  the  energy  of  the  second  bunch  as  a  function  of  the  delay;  the  maximum 

energy increase of the second bunch corresponds to the correct delay. Fig. 2 shows the 

measurement results of the normalized energy change of the second bunch due to the 

interaction  with  wakefields  from  the  first  drive  bunch  as  a  function  of  the  spacing 

between  them.  The  phase  difference  is  converted  to  distance  based  on  the  TM01 

frequency f0. The spacing for the maximum transformer ratio enhancement is indicated 

in Fig. 2, where the measured average energy of the first bunch is equal to the average 

energy of the accelerated second bunch    (W-

d1=W-

d1+d2). 

          Figure 3 shows the observed probe signal and its frequency spectrum. Both the 

lowest accelerating mode (TM01) at f0 and the lowest dipole mode (HEM11, driven by a 

small radial beam offset) at 12.4 GHz are detected; higher order modes are outside of 

the ~2 GHz bandwidth of the electronics. The  measurement waveform clearly shows 

the signature of the launch of the second drive bunch. The slowly varying envelope of 

the  wakefield  signal  results  from  the  finite  bandwidth  of  the  detection  system.  The 

transformer  ratio  enhancement  can  be  estimated  from  the  ratio  of  the  amplitudes 

Wd1+d2

+/Wd1

+  ≈  2.  The  contamination  by  the  HEM11  mode  (and  the  lack  of  a  second 

orthogonally mounted probe in the DLA to completely diagnose it) makes it difficult 

to obtain a more accurate measurement using this technique.  

The use of a witness beam to diagnose the fields provides a direct measurement 

of the transformer ratio enhancement. Fig. 4 shows the energy spectrum of the witness 

bunch under three different beam  configurations.  The  mean energy (averaged over  a 

number of measurements) of the witness bunch alone was 14.79±0.05 MeV; the bunch 

is  accelerated  to  15.40±0.05  or  15.59±0.04  MeV  by  the  first  or  both  drive  bunches 

respectively. The witness bunch was launched at a delay of 1.54 ns with respect to the 

drive bunch, equivalent to 10.5×2× λ0 (or 2×λL) bunch spacing. The delay between the 

witness and drive bunches was further adjusted by finding the highest energy shift of 

the  witness  bunch  while  varying  the  optical  delay  slightly  around  its  nominal  value. 

The average gradient at this delay was 1.67 MV/m, calculated by normalizing the 0.61 

MeV shift of the witness beam caused by the first drive bunch to the 40 cm length of 

the  DLA  structure,  and  the  group  velocity  of  the  wakefield  (0.1c).  The  average 

gradient resulting from both drive bunches was similarly found to be 2.22 MV/m from 

the 0.80 MeV witness  energy change. Since the  decelerating  fields  inside each drive 

bunch  are  equal  (W-

d1=W-

d1+d2),  the  wakefield  transformer  ratio  enhancement  factor 

can be calculated as 

R R
2
1

=

+
W
+
1
d
−
W
+
1
d





d

2

d

2





+
W
1
d
−
W
d
1









=

+
W
+
1
d
d
+
W
1
d

2

=

±
1.31 0.13

.                                                      (2) 

It  is  important  to  note that  achieving  an  over-unity  enhancement  factor  of  the 

transformer  ratio  is  a  significant  result  and  represents  the  first  time  that  an 

experimental demonstration of this effect has been performed. In order to compare the 

experiment  with  the  simulation  results,  it  is  necessary  to take  into  account the  finite 

length of the witness bunch in the experiment by convolving a gaussian of rms width 

1.5  mm  with  the  computed  longitudinal  wakefield,  reordering  the  bins  according  to 

energy and finding the energy centroid of the distribution. The predicted finite bunch 

R  enhancement  at  the  witness  phase  is  (2.95  MV/m)/(1.70  MV/m)=1.73.  The 

difference  between  the  predicted  value  of  1.73  and  measured  value  of  1.31  is  most 

likely  caused  by  the  2  mm  resolution  of  the  optical  delay  adjustment;  a  single  delay 

step  off  the  peak  corresponds  to  a  decrease  in  the  predicted  transformer  ratio 

enhancement factor by 0.43 units.  

In  conclusion,  a  transformer  ratio  enhancement  in  a  dielectric  collinear 

wakefield device was successfully demonstrated here for the first time through the use 

of  a  ramped  bunch  train.  The  measured  transformer  ratio  enhancement  is  a  factor of 

1.31  larger  than  the  single  bunch  case;  based  on  comparison  with  numerical 

simulations the  inferred transformer ratio  in this experiment is 3. Future experiments 

are being planned to achieve R>>2 through the use of a four-bunch train.  

 

References: 

1.  K.L. Bane, P. Chen, P.B. Wilson, SLAC-PUB-3662, Apr., 1985. 

2.  P.B.  Wilson,  Proc.  the  13th  SLAC  Summer  Inst.  On  Particle  Physics,  SLAC 

Report No. 296, pp. 273-295. 

3.  J.G. Power, W. Gai, and P. Schoessow, Phys. Rev. E, 60, (1999) 6061. 

4.  K.L. Bane, P. Chen, and P.B. Wilson, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 32 (1985) 3524. 

5.  P.  Schutt,  T.  Weiland,  and  V.M.  Tsakanov,  Proc.  Nor  Amberb  Conf.,  7(15), 

Armenia, (1989) 12. 

6.  A.G.  Ruggiero,  P.  Schoessow,  and  J.  Simpson,  Proc.  Advanced  Accelerator 

Concepts: 3rd Workshop, ed. F. E. Mills, Madison, WI, (1986), 247. 

7.  J. Rosenzweig, et al. Phys. Rev. A, 39, (1989) 1586. 

8.  G. Flesher and G. Cohn, AIEE Trans. 70 (1955) 887. 

9.  M. Rosing and W. Gai, Phys. Rev. D (1990) 1829. 

10. W. Gai, P. Schoessow, B. Cole, R. Konecny, J. Norem, J. Rosenzweig, and J. 

Simpson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61 (1988) 2756. 

11. M. J. Hogan et al., Physical Review Letters,  95  054802. 

12. R.  J.  England,  J.  B.  Rosenzweig,  and  M.  C.  Thompson.  Proc.  Advanced 

Accelerator Concepts: 10th workshop, (2002) 884. 

13. R. Maeda, T. Katsouleas, P. Muggli, C. Joshi, W. B. Mori, and W. Quillinan. 

Physical Review ST-AB, 7, (2004) 111301. 

14. J.G.  Power,  W.  Gai,  and  A.  Kanareykin,  Proc.  Advanced  Accelerator 

Concepts: 9th workshop, ed. P.L. Colestock and S. Kelley (2001)  605. 

15. J.G. Power, W. Gai, X. Sun, A. Kanareykin, Proc. 2001 Particle Accelerator 

16. M.E.  Conde,  et  al.    Proc.  Particle  Accelerator  Conference  (PAC2005)  

Conference (2001) 114. 

Knoxville, TN, (2006) 1485. 

17. A.  Kanareykin,  W.  Gai,  J.G.  Power  and  P.  Schoessow,  Proc.  Advanced 

Accelerator Concepts: 11th workshop, ed. V. Yakimenko (2004)  272. 

FIG.  1.    Numerical  simulation  of  the  transformer  ratio  enhancement  experiment. 

Dotted curve: beam current profile; Solid curve: longitudinal wakefield.  

 

 

 

 

FIG. 2.  Normalized energy change of the second drive bunch caused by the wakefield 

of the leading drive bunch as a function of their relative separation.  

 

FIG. 3.  The field probe signal from the RBT in the 13.625 GHz DLA structure and its 

frequency spectrum.  

 

FIG. 4.   Typical energy spectra of the witness bunch under three different drive beam 

 

 

configurations.   

