The GOES Microburst Windspeed Potential Index 
 
Kenneth L. Pryor 
Center for Satellite Applications and Research (NOAA/NESDIS)  
Camp Springs, MD  
 
Abstract 

 
A  suite  of  products  has  been  developed  and  evaluated  to  assess  hazards  presented  by  convective 
downbursts  to  aircraft  in  flight  derived  from  the  current  generation  of  Geostationary  Operational 
Environmental Satellite (GOES) (I-M).  The existing suite of GOES microburst products employs the 
GOES  sounder  to  calculate  risk  based  on  conceptual  models  of  favorable  environmental  profiles  for 
convective  downburst  generation.  A  GOES  sounder-derived  wet  microburst  severity  index  (WMSI) 
product to assess the potential magnitude of convective downbursts, incorporating convective available 
potential energy (CAPE) as well as the vertical theta-e difference (TeD) between the surface and mid-
troposphere  has  been  developed  and  implemented.  CAPE  has  an  important  role  in  precipitation 
formation  due  to  the  strong  dependence  of  updraft  strength  and  resultant  precipitation  content  on 
positive buoyant energy.  Intended to supplement the use of the GOES WMSI product over the United 
States  Great  Plains  region,  a  GOES  Hybrid  Microburst  Index  (HMI)  product  has  also  evolved.  The 
HMI  product  infers  the  presence  of  a  convective  boundary  layer  by  incorporating  the  sub-cloud 
temperature  lapse  rate  as  well  as  the  dew  point  depression  difference  between  the  typical  level  of  a 
convective cloud base and the sub-cloud layer. Thus, the WMSI algorithm is designed to parameterize 
the physical processes of updraft and downdraft generation within the convective storm cell, while the 
HMI  algorithm  describes  the  moisture  stratification  of  the  sub-cloud  layer  that  may  result  in  further 
downdraft acceleration, eventually producing a downburst when the convective downdraft impinges on 
the  earth's  surface.  It  is  proposed  to  merge  the  WMSI  and  HMI  algorithms  into  a  Microburst 
Windspeed Potential Index (MWPI) algorithm for implementation in the GOES-R Advanced Baseline 
Imager (ABI).   
 
1.  Introduction 
 
 
A favorable environment for downbursts associated with deep convective storms that occur over 
the central and eastern continental United States includes strong static instability with large amounts of 
convective available potential energy (CAPE).  Previous research (Fujita 1985, Ellrod 1989) has 
identified that over the central United States, especially in the Great Plains region, an environment 
between that favorable for wet microbursts (Atkins and Wakimoto 1991) and dry microbursts 
(Wakimoto 1985) may exist during the convective season in which sub-cloud evaporation of 
precipitation is a significant factor in downdraft acceleration. This intermediate type environment, as 
described by Caracena et al. (2007), is characterized by conditions favorable for both wet and dry 
microbursts:  
1.Significant CAPE.  
2.A deep, dry adiabatic lapse rate layer below the cloud base, which is typically near the 700 millibar 
(mb) level.  
 
downbursts to aircraft in flight derived from the current generation of Geostationary Operational 
Environmental Satellite (GOES) (I-M).  The existing suite of GOES microburst products employs the 
GOES sounder to calculate risk based on conceptual models of favorable environmental profiles for 
convective downburst generation.  Pryor and Ellrod (2004) and Pryor and Ellrod (2005) outlined the 
development a Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) sounder-derived wet 

A suite of products has been developed and evaluated to assess hazards presented by convective 

Accordingly, the GOES Microburst Windspeed Potential Index (MWPI) algorithm, derived 

microburst severity index (WMSI) product to assess the potential magnitude of convective downbursts, 
incorporating convective available potential energy (CAPE) as well as the vertical theta-e difference 
(TeD) between the surface and mid-troposphere. In addition, Pryor (2006a) developed a GOES Hybrid 
Microburst Index (HMI) product intended to supplement the use of the GOES WMSI product over the 
United States Great Plains region. The HMI product infers the presence of a convective boundary layer 
(CBL) (Stull 1988, Sorbjan 2003) by incorporating the sub-cloud temperature lapse rate as well as the 
dew point depression difference between the typical level of a warm season Great Plains convective 
cloud base and the sub-cloud layer. Thus, the WMSI algorithm is designed to parameterize the physical 
processes of updraft and downdraft generation within the convective storm cell, while the HMI 
algorithm describes the moisture stratification of the sub-cloud layer that may result in further 
downdraft acceleration, eventually producing a downburst when the convective downdraft impinges on 
the earth's surface.  Based on validation of the GOES WMSI and HMI products over the Oklahoma 
Panhandle during the 2005 and 2006 convective seasons, Pryor (2006b) noted an inverse 
proportionality between WMSI and HMI values for convective wind gusts of comparable magnitude.   
The statistically significant negative correlation between WMSI and HMI values likely reflects a 
continuum of favorable environments for downbursts, ranging from wet, represented by high WMSI 
values and correspondingly low HMI values, to an intermediate or hybrid regime, characterized by a 
combination of lower WMSI values and elevated HMI values. The inverse relationship between WMSI 
and HMI values associated with observed downbursts underscores the relative importance of 
thermodynamic structure and moisture stratification of the boundary layer in the acceleration of 
convective downdrafts. The increasing influence of thermal and moisture stratification in the 
convective boundary layer on downburst wind gust magnitude becomes apparent with higher HMI 
values. 
 
from a merging the WMSI and HMI, is designed to infer the presence of a CBL by incorporating the 
sub-cloud lapse rate between the 670 and 850 mb levels as well as the dew point depression difference 
between the typical level of a convective cloud base at 670 mb and the sub-cloud layer at 850 mb. In a 
typical dry microburst thermodynamic environment, Wakimoto (1985) identified a convective cloud 
base height near the 500 mb level. In contrast, Atkins and Wakimoto (1991) identified a typical cloud 
base height in a pure wet microburst environment near 850 mb. Thus, an intermediate cloud base height 
of 670 mb was selected for a hypothetical hybrid microburst environment. This selection agrees well 
with the mean level of free convection (LFC) of 670 mb computed from the inspection of twenty 
GOES proximity soundings corresponding to downburst events that occurred in Oklahoma between 1 
June and 31 July 2005. In a free convective thermodynamic environment (i.e. no convective inhibition 
(CIN)), the mean LFC of 670 mb can be considered representative of the upper limit for convective 
cloud base heights that occur in an environment favorable for hybrid microbursts. CAPE has an 
important role in precipitation formation due to the strong dependence of updraft strength and resultant 
precipitation content on positive buoyant energy. The formation of precipitation then enhances 
downdrafts through the loading process. CAPE is an important parameter of consideration due to the 
fact that the precipitation caused by updrafts will subsequently result in the sub-cloud evaporational 
cooling and negative buoyancy that accelerates convective downdrafts. Thus, the Microburst 
Windspeed Potential Index (MWPI), is defined as  
MWPI = (CAPE/100) + G + (T - Td)850 - (T - Td)670  
where G is the lapse rate in degrees Celsius (C) per kilometer from the 850 to the 670 mb level, T is 
temperature in degrees Celsius, and Td is the dewpoint temperature (C).  A climatology of severe storm 
environmental parameters (Nair et al. 2002) has found that a deeper convective mixed layer, as 
represented by large LFCs, predominates in the warm season over the southern Plains. The presence of 
a deep, dry sub-cloud (mixed) layer will enhance evaporational cooling and downdraft intensification 
as precipitation falls below the convective storm cloud base. In fact, Nair et al. (2002) have found that 

(1) 

 

 

 

 

 

Data from the GOES HMI and MWPI was collected over western Oklahoma for downburst 

moderately high LFCs, that coexist with large CAPE over the Great Plains, are associated with an 
observed maximum in severe convective storm occurrence.  Thus, this paper proposes to merge the 
WMSI and HMI algorithms into the Microburst Windspeed Potential Index (MWPI) algorithm for 
implementation in the GOES-R Advanced Baseline Imager (ABI).    
 
2.  Methodology 
 
 
events that occurred on 12 and 13 February 2007 and validated against conventional surface data. 
Images were generated by Man computer Interactive Data Access System (McIDAS) and then archived 
on an FTP server (ftp://ftp.orbit.nesdis.noaa.gov/pub/smcd/opdb/wmsihmiok/).  Cloud-to-ground (CG) 
lightning data from the National Lightning Detection Network (NLDN) was plotted over GOES 
imagery to compare spatial patterns of CG lightning to surface observations of downburst wind gusts.  
The State of Oklahoma was chosen as a study region due to the wealth of surface observation data 
provided by the Oklahoma Mesonet (Brock et al. 1995) and a thermodynamic environment typical of 
the southern Plains region. Atkins and Wakimoto (1991) discussed the effectiveness of using mesonet 
observation data in the verification of the occurrence of downbursts.  Correlation between GOES 
MWPI values and observed surface wind gust velocities was computed for the 12-13 February events 
to determine the significance of a linear relationship between observed downburst wind gust magnitude 
and MWPI values. Next Generation Radar (NEXRAD) base reflectivity imagery (level II) from 
National Climatic Data Center (NCDC) was utilized to verify that observed wind gusts were associated 
with convective storm activity. NEXRAD images were generated by the NCDC Java NEXRAD 
Viewer (Available online at http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/radar/jnx/index.html). Another application of 
the NEXRAD imagery was to infer microscale physical properties of downburst-producing convective 
storms. Particular radar reflectivity signatures, such as the bow echo and rear-inflow notch 
(RIN)(Przybylinski 1995), were effective indicators of the occurrence of downbursts.  
 
3.Case Study:  12-13 February 2007 Downbursts 
 
 
observed over western Oklahoma.  The strongest downburst of the event and associated wind gust of 
47 knots were recorded by the Bessie, Oklahoma mesonet station at 0905 UTC.  Additional strong 
downburst activity was observed during the following evening over extreme southwestern Oklahoma.  
In this case study, it is apparent that GOES MWPI product imagery indicated elevated values in close 
proximity to downburst occurrence.  This study will focus on downburst activity that occurred during 
the evening of 12 February. 

During the early morning and evening hours of 12 February 2007, strong downbursts were 

 

 

Figure1.  GOES MWPI product images at 2200 UTC 12 February 2007 (top) and at 0100 UTC 13 
February 2007 (bottom).  

Figure 1, GOES MWPI product images at 2200 UTC 12 February 2007 and at 0100 UTC 13 

 
February 2007, respectively, displayed the locations of occurrence of two strong downbursts that 
occurred during the evening of 12 February. The 2200 UTC MWPI image displays convective storm 
activity developing over the northwest Texas Panhandle and elevated MWPI values (>10) downstream 
over southwestern Oklahoma.  Between 2200 UTC and 0000 UTC 13 February, the convective storm 
cluster evolved into a quasi-linear convective system.  The 0100 UTC image displays cloud-to ground 
lightning associated with the linear convective system as it tracked through southwestern Oklahoma 
between 0000 and 0200 UTC 13 February and produced strong downbursts at Mangum (34 knots) and 
Altus (36 knots). 

Figure 2.  GOES sounding profile at 2200 UTC 12 February 2007. 
 
Inspection of a GOES sounding profile in Figure 2 over Altus Air Force Base, revealed an "inverted-v" 
profile with minimal CAPE.  The elevated mixed layer depth is more typical of the warm-season 
environment over the High Plains.  The sounding profile, especially the thermodynamic structure of the 
boundary layer, reflected the favorability for downbursts as indicated in GOES MWPI imagery at 2200 
UTC. 
 

 

 

 

Radar reflectivity imagery in Figure 3 was particularly effective in the verification of the 

Figure 3.  NEXRAD reflectivity image at 0025 UTC (top) and 0105 UTC (bottom) 13 February 2007.  
 
 
occurrence of downbursts observed at Mangum and Altus during the evening of 12 February.  The 
Altus Air Force Base (AFB) NEXRAD (KFDR) identified bow echoes over the Mangum mesonet 
station and in close proximity to the Altus station at the time of observance of downburst wind gusts.  

Przybylinski (1995) discussed the importance of the bow echo signature as an identifier of downburst 
occurrence in which the strongest downburst winds are expected to be observed near the bow echo 
apex.   
 
 
Figure 4, meteograms from the Mangum and Altus stations, reflected downburst occurrence by 
displaying sharp peaks in wind speed at approximately 0025 and 0105 UTC, respectively.  Atkins and 
Wakimoto (1991) related this peak in wind speed to downburst observation at the surface by mesonet 
stations.  Interesting to note was an increase in MWPI values downstream of the linear convective 
system through the evening in the region of downburst occurrence.  Thus, MWPI product imagery 
indicated favorable environmental conditions for downburst occurrence associated with the quasi-linear 
convective storm as it tracked through southwestern Oklahoma during the evening of 12 February.  In 
addition, radar reflectivity imagery and surface observation histograms (meteograms) provided 
essential ground truth in the GOES MWPI validation process. 
 

 

 

Validation based on this downburst event indicated a significant correlation (r ~ .62) between 

Figure 4.  Oklahoma Mesonet meteogram at Mangum (top) and Altus (bottom).  
 
4.  Conclusions 
 
 
MWPI values and surface convective wind gusts.  Based on this preliminary validation, the microburst 
windspeed potential associated with each range of risk values is listed in Table 1.  Future validation 
effort will focus on warm season (June-August) downburst events that occur over the High Plains, 
specifically the Oklahoma Panhandle region.  In addition, as outlined in Pryor (2006b), cloud-to-
ground (CG) lightning data from the National Lightning Detection Network (NLDN) will be analyzed 
to investigate and derive a relationship between CG lightning spatial patterns and the observed location 
of peak downburst wind gusts. 
 

Table 1. Downburst risk corresponding to MWPI 
values 

MWPI 

Box Color  Windspeed Potential (kt) 

< 24 

Green  

> or =24 

Yellow 

> or =32 

Red 

> 40 

Orange 

< 35 

35 - 49 

50 - 64 

> 65 

 
 
 

5.  References 
 
Atkins, N.T., and R.M. Wakimoto, 1991: Wet microburst activity over the southeastern United States: 
Implications for forecasting. Wea. Forecasting, 6, 470-482. 
 
Caracena, F., R.L. Holle, and C.A. Doswell, cited 2007: Microbursts-A handbook for visual 
identification. [Available online at http://www.cimms.ou.edu/~doswell/microbursts/Handbook.html.]  
 
Ellrod, G. P., 1989: Environmental conditions associated with the Dallas microburst storm determined 
from satellite soundings. Wea. Forecasting, 4, 469-484. 
 
Fujita, T.T., 1985: The downburst, microburst and macroburst. SMRP Research Paper 210, University 
of Chicago, 122 pp. 
 
Nair, U.S., E.W. McCaul, Jr., and R.M. Welch, 2002: A climatology of environmental parameters that 
influence severe storm intensity and morphology. Preprints, 21st Conf. on Severe Local Storms, San 
Antonio, TX, Amer. Meteor. Soc. 
 
Przybylinski, R.W., 1995: The bow echo. Observations, numerical simulations, and severe weather 
detection methods. Wea. Forecasting, 10, 203-218.  
 
Pryor, K.L., and G.P. Ellrod, 2004: WMSI - A new index for forecasting wet microburst severity. 
National Weather Association Electronic Journal of Operational Meteorology, 2004-EJ3. 
 
Pryor, K.L., and G.P. Ellrod, 2005: GOES WMSI - progress and developments. Preprints, 21st Conf. 
on Wea. Analysis and Forecasting, Washington, DC, Amer. Meteor. Soc. 
 
Pryor, K.L., 2006a: The GOES Hybrid Microburst Index. Preprints, 14th Conf. on Satellite 
Meteorology and Oceanography, Atlanta, GA, Amer. Meteor. Soc. 
 
Pryor, K.L., 2006b:  Electrical behavior of downburst-producing convective storms over the High 
Plains.  Preprints,  23rd Conference on Severe Local Storms, St. Louis, MO, Amer. Meteor. Soc. 
 
Sorbjan, Z., 2003: Air-Pollution Meteorology. Chapter 4 of AIR QUALITY MODELING - Theories, 
Methodologies, Computational Techniques, and Available Databases and Software. Vol. I - 
Fundamentals. EnviroComp Institute (http://www.envirocomp.org/).  
 
Stull, R.B., 1988: An introduction to boundary layer meteorology. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Boston, 649 pp. 
 
Wakimoto, R.M., 1985: Forecasting dry microburst activity over the high plains. Mon. Wea. Rev., 113, 
1131-1143. 
 
Acknowledgements  
 
 
Mesonet for the surface weather observation data used in this research effort.  The author also thanks 
Jaime Daniels (NESDIS) for providing GOES sounding retrievals displayed in this paper.  Cloud-to-
ground lightning data was available for this project through the courtesy of Vaisala, Inc.  

The author thanks Mr. Derek Arndt (Oklahoma Climatological Survey) and the Oklahoma 

