Holophotography with a diffraction grating

José J. Lunazzi
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Institute of Physics
C.P.6165
13083-950 Campinas SP, Brazil

Abstract

Color   encoding   of   depth   is   shown   to   occur   naturally   in   images   of   objects   observed   through 
diffraction gratings under common white light illumination. A  synthetic image is then obtained 
from a single point of view, a phenomenon that can be applied to stereophotography. The image 
can be recorded in a common color photograph, providing a simple method of visual decoding by 
means   of   ordinary   colored   3D   spectacles.   The   fundamental   equation   and   the   photographic 
procedure for maximum fidelity in three-dimensional reproduction are described. The result is a 
photograph   that   has   the   capability   of   registering   all   the   views   of   an   object   in   a   continuous 
sequence, which is called holophotography and was previously obtained by means of a hologram. 
By eliminating the need for a laser and holographic film, a new technique for holography in white 
light is foreseen.

Subject terms: holography; photograph; stereoscopy; color encoding; three-dimensional imaging

Optical Engineering 29(1), 15-18 (January 1990).

CONTENTS

Introduction
Images of a point object observed through a diffraction grating

1.
2.
3. Comparison between holophotography with a diffraction grating and the classical stereo photography
4. Experimental details
5. Photographing diffracted images: holophotography as the registering of a continuous sequence of views
6. Conclusion
7. Acknowledgment
8. References

1. INTRODUCTION

In a previous  paper

1
, it  was  shown  that  a continuous  sequence of  views  of  an object  can be synthesized 
naturally   by   means   of   holography.   Every   view   within   a   restricted   angular   range   can   be   encoded   by   means   of   a 
characteristic wavelength value and be deflected by the hologram and sent to a single observation point.

Since the main mechanism for this phenomenon is diffraction, it is possible, as shown in the present paper, to 
produce an equivalent image by means of a diffraction grating, thus eliminating the need for a laser and holographic 
film or processing. Thus, we can use common color film to obtain a photograph with stereo properties that can be 
observed in 3-D by means of colored glasses. We can also perform animated reconstruction, as described previously 
1
. Briefly, the method is as follows: A synthetic image of a given object, 
for the photograph of a hologram of the object
comprising all possible images obtained by use of a diffraction grating and observable from a single point of view, is 
recorded on color film.

As observed visually, the main characteristic of the synthetic image is a spectral multicolor profiling of shapes 

in the scene, a blurring that resembles a severe degree of chromatic aberration. This blurring is more apparent for 
regions of the object that are more distant from the plane where the chromatic dispersion is generated, constituting a 
way   of   using   color   for   encoding   depth.   There   are   various   ways   of   extracting   the   desired   colors   of   images   for 
stereoscopic   viewing.   We   present   here   the   experimental   setup,   the   fundamental   equations,   and   the   procedure   for 
obtaining maximum fidelity in 3-D reproduction.

2. IMAGES OF A POINT OBJECT OBSERVED THROUGH A  DIFFRACTION GRATING

Figure 1 shows a point object A,  radiating white light to a transmission diffraction grating through which it is 
being observed. The coordinates of A are xA , zA , and the observation coordinates are xF , zF. Coordinate x indicates the 
incidence point at the grating.

Fig. 1. Ray tracing scheme for obtaining a diffracted image. A is the point object; the diffraction grating is at z=0.

The basic equation for diffraction of a light ray generated from point A  impinging on the grating at angle q

 

and emerging from the grating at angle q

' is

sin−sin ' =

j 
d

              (1)

where d is the period of the grating, j is the diffraction order number, and A is the wavelength.

The equation of a line having the same direction as the diffracted ray of light and coincident with it can be 

expressed as

where

z=

z A tan− x x A
T 

T =tanarcsinsin−

j 
d



  (2)

  (3)

Each ray may intersect a second diffracted ray in a  ray tracing extension, giving an intersection point that, 
being common to most rays, provides a virtual image A l  of the point object. By choosing a pair of rays symmetrically 
located at a very small angle  D
, we obtain the images at 
coordinates x, z:

q   on both sides of a central  ray incident a t the angle  q

           x= x Az A  [

T tan−−T −tan 
T −T −

]

,

  (4)

z=

z Atan −x x A
T 

In this way, we can obtain the position of every diffracted image as a function of the coordinates of the observation 
point. deriving the proper q

 value from the expression

      tan'=

xF −x A−z Atan 
−z F

, 

which can be combined with Eq. (1) to give the final expression

arcsinsin−

=arctan 

j 
d

x F− x A−z A tan
−z F



, 

from which q

 can be calculated as a first step for obtaining the x, z values from Eqs. (4).

Table I shows typical calculated values of x,z for the first diffracted order, as a function of q

 values. 
Under these conditions, virtual images generated by light impinging at an angle q =arcsin(l /d) are seen in a direction 
that is perpendicular to the plane of the grating, a given distance closer to the observer than the object. These images 
move   closer   to   or   farther   from   the   grating   as   we   look   around   them.   For   simplicity,   only   first   order   images   are  
considered in this paper, neglecting also the fact that the object may be located outside the x,z plane.

 and D

Table I: Calculated values of the x,z coordinates of the diffracted image as a function of incidence angle q  and beam  
divergence D

q . Considered values are d = 1.7 m m. l = 633 nm, D

q = 1°, zF = 255 mm.

  (5)

  (6)

 ((cid:176))

25

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-25

-x/zA

0.39

0.42

0.40

0.36

0.32

0.44

0.55

0.66

0.86

z/zA

0.30

0.51

0.61

0.70

0.80

0.89

0.98

1.09

1.34

Figure 2 shows a clear image obtained in monochromatic light under the experimental conditions that will be 
described in Sec. 4, within a field of view equal to the angular extension between the extremes of the zero and second  
order images.

Fig. 2. Left: Photograph of a nearly cylindrical object of 12 mm diameter, obtained from the first order image of a diffraction  
grating in white light filtered within a 5 nm bandwidth. Right: Direct (undiffracted) image of the object facing the reflection grating.

3.   COMPARISON   BETWEEN   HOLOPHOTOGRAPHY   WITH   A   DIFFRACTION   GRATING 

q
q
AND CLASSICAL STEREO PHOTOGRAPHY

The wavelength dependence of the image position is the property that allows images of the object to be seen 
from different points of view. In Fig. 3 we show how q
 changes in a two-wavelength case, allowing both wavelengths 
to reach the same observation point. By considering each ray in the figure as an example of the many rays of the same 
wavelength that can be collected in that direction, we can understand how the images of any points lying in that line are 
obtained. The angle of stereopsis is now easily obtained as the difference between the  q
  angles. Typical values are 
shown in Table II.

TABLE II. Valuesof the coordinates of the diffracted imane for three different object points of coordinates x A., zA.  
Two wavelenths were considered, in a situation that corresponds to the experiment in Fig.4(a).

':466nm

l ”:653nm

xA

14

8.5

3

zA

51

30.5

10

x'

-0.7

-0.3

0.1

z'

57

34

11

x”

-7.5

-4.4

-1.2

z”

64

38.5

12

The case of holophotography corresponds to the situation of Fig. 3 if we place in position (x F, zF) the entrance 
pupil of a photographic camera with the image of the reference point O centered on the object field. We consider here, 
for simplicity, that the coordinates of point O are (xF, 0). The image projected on the photographic film at distance i 
will register the images A r' and Ab', of points A r , and Ab, separated by the distance

Ar ' A b'≃

i x r −x b
z r−z F

, 

where xr , and zr , the coordinates of image point  A r , are obtained in the case of red light, while xb , zb, corresponding 
to the image point Ab, are obtained at a shorter wavelength (in blue light, for example).

Fig. 3. Position of the diffracted images according to the wavelength value.

A   double-exposure   stereophotographic   case   is   shown   schematically   in   Fig.   1(a)   of   Ref.   1.   The   distance 
between two corresponding points, as registered in the photographs obtained from positions 1 and 2 by centering the 
camera at the reference point O, corresponds then to the expression

A' A' '=

i d Asin s
d A coss− z F

,

2

where dA=[zA
at which the camera is rotated.

+(xF - xA)

2

1 / 2 
]

is the distance between points O and A, corresponding to our case, with q

s being the angle 

Equations (7) and (8) can now be compared for some typical cases by defining a factor

  (7)

  (8)

l
         Ms=

Ar ' A b''
A' A ''

=

x r −x b
z r−z F

d Acos s−z F
dA sins

.

  (9)

By using the values from Table II, q
s  = 6.3°, and zF= -530mm from Sec. 4, we obtained values 1.15<Ms<1.16 for our 
experience [Fig. 4(a)]. The difference from the unit value in parameter Ms implies that the angle of stereopsis for 
observation   has   changed   proportionally,   representing   a   different   separation   between   planes   when   the   object   is 
observed. This result merits further analysis since it seems more appropriate to consider q

s =7.3° for rendering Ms=-1. 

4. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

A reflecting ruled grating of 595 lines/mm was used in photographing an object at a distance of 530 mm with a 
35 mm camera and a 150 mm focal length objective. The optical axis of the camera was oriented perpendicular to the 
grating. When the white light was filtered, wavelengths were selected by means of interference filters with a 5 nm 
bandwidth. The aperture value of the objective was highly reduced in order to yield a good tolerance for the focal depth 
and corresponded to a D

q  value of approximately 1°. In Fig.2 the object was centered at the coordinate zA=17mm.

Figure 4(a) is a holophotograph of a common steel sewing neddle without its tip, 1.0 mm wide and 62.4 mm 
long, whose extreme coordinates were (3,10) and (14,51), as expressed in millimeters. The precision of the angle 
positioning on the rotating table was 0.02°. The holophotograph is filtered in two waveIengths (466 nm and 553 nm), 
corresponding to the values in Table II, experimentally verified within a precision of 6%. Some widening in the image 
is due to reflections on the filters. The red image is at the left and the blue image is at the center. The corresponding  
nondiffracted image is seen at the right. Figure 4(b) is a double-exposure stereophotograph obtained by performing two 
simple rotations of the camera position around a point corresponding to reference point O of Fig. 3. The rotation values 
(16.1° and 22.4°) were calculated within the scheme of Fig. 3 so as to yield a result very close to that of Fig. 4(a).

        (a)

  (b)

Fig. 4. (a) Photograph of a straight abject (a common sewing needle without its tip) that recedes from the plane of the grating. It  
was obtained from position (xF , zF), interposing red and blue filters alternately. (b) Double-exposure stereophotograph of the zero  
order image obtained as in (a) but from positions 1 and 2 in Fig. 3.

Figure 5 was obtained under conditions similar to those of Fig. 2, but in this case the observation direction is 
not perpendicular to the grating but at an angle of 24°. The object was nearly cylindrical, 12 mm in diameter, and also 
centered at coordinate zA = 17 mm.

Fig. 5. Holophotography produced using common color film by Illuminating in white light an object that is seen through a  
diffraction grating. The3-D effect can be easily observed through colored glasses.

The stereoscopic images were observed in three different ways:
First, the color photographs were observed through absorptive colored filters, yielding a reasonable degree of 
sharpness and depth perception within a depth of a few centimeters  from  the plane of the photograph. The depth 
limitation is due mainly to the limitations of the three-chromatic process of the color film, as described for a similar 
situation in a previous paper

.

1

Second, to observe the images without the limitations of the color response of the photographic film, we 
projected an image of the first diffracted order onto a diffusing screen, 3 m away from projecting lens of 500 mm focal 
length at f:8 aperture. By using colored absorption filters, we obtained a great increase in the perception of depth, up to 
10 cm.

A further improvement was obtained by observing through 5 nm bandwidth interference filters. This required 
great visual effort owing to the reduced luminosity of the image. Images could be seen clearly 30 cm in back or in front 
of the screen; depth reversal was obtained by reversing the filters between the eyes.

In our third observation method, a similar result was obtained by means of a holographic screen that employs 
the   diffraction   effect   to  selectively   distribute   the   images   in  each   direction,   according  to   their   color.   This  will  be 
described in a future paper since it eliminates the need for any glasses, having many important derivations.

In every observation we used common objects, and we noticed no distortion in depth perception, such as a 
difference   in   depth   other   than   that   normal   for   those   objects.   It   seems   to   us   that   the   most   fundamental   rule   in 
stereoscopic observation is to keep the sequence of the different planes. It is of little effect in the analytical result, 
indicating that the relative depth between planes could have been modified. From the visual observation, we can say 
that the 3-D realm of the scene is perfect, as in a conventional hologram.

5.   PHOTOGRAPHING   DIFFRACTED   IMAGES:   HOLOPHOTOGRAPHY   AS   THE 
REGISTERING OF A CONTINUOUS SEQUENCE OF VIEWS

We have seen how a stereophotograph can be obtained with an ordinary photographic camera so as to be seen 
through ordinary colored 3-D spectacles. Ideally, if the color registering technique were perfect in discriminating and 
reproducing  l
  values and the color selection by filtering were also perfect, we could register and observe a stereo 
image, selecting the point of view at will by the choice of the wavelength of the color filter. The situation is equivalent 
to the one we described previously

 for the photographs obtained from holograms.

1

The angle of stereopsis and the object field could be increased by employing gratings with higher spatial 
frequency. The design of holographic optical elements seems highly indicated in order to improve the possibilities of 
these elements as diffractive stereo filters.

The images  obtained in monochromatic  light  can be of good  quality,  but  under  white light  they become 
blurred because the sensitivity of the color registering process does not discriminate between wavelengths included 
within the bandwidth of one of the basic colors of the three-chromatic process. The restitution of color after exposure to 

monochromatic light involves a similar bandwidth. Discrimination of the image by color filters constitutes another 
imperfect process that makes the resulting photograph interesting in many aspects, as shown in Fig. 5, but not very 
precise for obtaining clear images in full depth.

Since we have obtained an imaging three-dimensional process that is limited mainly by the color response of 
the film and filters rather than by geometrical aberrations, it can be improved in many ways. First, a color photographic 
film could be made with more selective bandwidth discrimination. Not only could conventional color photography be 
tried, but one could also try the Lippmann process for color reproduction
, which was previously shown to discriminate 
at least 10 different bandwidths within the visible spectrum
. Second, the observations can be made without any kind of 
spectacles and with a high degree of color selection by means of a color dispersion process, sending each colored 
image to a given position for observation. We have developed one process of this kind, which we will report elsewhere.
We predict that the preceding considerations contribute to a photographic technique that may offer three-
dimensional images of objects being illuminated in white light in a continuous sequence of views, a feat that previously 
was possible only by holographic techniques, where the process of interference of light was of basic importance.

2

3

6. CONCLUSIONS

A photographic process in white light has been shown to share most of the fundamental characteristics of the 
holographic process of image registering but without requiring a two-beam interference process. The requirements of 
coherence length for the illuminating source can then be completely neglected. Owing to the perfect capacity of color 
encoding of views specific to our process, a process of color dispersion can be predicted that, as a complement to this 
process, may send the images to an observer angularly discriminated according to the original distribution of object 
views, allowing for a new process of quasi-holographic images being obtained in white light. Formulas were derived to 
allow calculation of the imaging properties of the registration process.

The author wishes to acknowledge Christiano P. Guerra for his assistance in mounting and photographing the 

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

experiments.

8. REFERENCES

J. J. Lunazzi. "Three-dimensional photography by holography." Opt. Eng. 29(1), (1990).

1
                  http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0703209
2
3
1 in Optical and Electrooptical Information Processing, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. (1965).

G. Lippmann. C. R. Acad. Sci. 14, 961 (1892).
H. Fleisher et al., "An optically accessed memory using the Lippmann process for information storage." Chap. 

Post-printing references of papers by the  same author:

- J. J. Lunazzi, “New possibilities in the utilization of holographic screens”, Proc. Of the SPIE meeting “Practical 
Holography IV”, San Jose-CA-USA, 1992.02.9-14 
- J. J. Lunazzi, P. M. Boone, “3D image projection using large diffraction screen”, SPIE 2333, p.449-453.
- J. J. Lunazzi, M. Diamand, “3D display system based on computer-driven galvanometers”, App.Opt. V34, N22, 
p.4697-4699 (1995)

