A position- and time-sensitive photon-counting detector with delay-
line read-out 

 

Ottmar Jagutzki*a, Volker Dangendorf b, Ronald Lauckb, Achim Czascha, James Milnesc 
 
aRoentDek GmbH, c/o IKF, Universität Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue-Str. 1, 60438 Frankfurt, FRG 
bPhysikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, Abteilung Neutronenphysik, 38116 Braunschweig, FRG 
cPhotek Ltd., 26 Castleham Road, St. Leonards on Sea, East Sussex, TN38 9NS, UK 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
  We  have  developed  image  intensifier  tubes  with  delay-anode  read-out  for  time-  and  position-sensitive  photon 
counting. The timing precision is better than 1 ns with 1000x1000 pixels position resolution and up to one megacounts/s 
processing rate. Large format detectors of 40 and 75 mm  active diameter with internal helical-wire delay-line anodes 
have  been  produced  and  specified.  A  different  type  of  40  and  25  mm  tubes  with  semi-conducting  screen  for  image 
charge read-out  allow for  an economic  and robust  tube design  and for placing  the read-out  anodes outside  the sealed 
housing.  Two  types  of  external  delay-line  anodes,  i.e.  pick-up  electrodes  for  the  image  charge,  have  been  tested. We 
present  tests  of  the  detector  and  anode  performance.  Due  to  the  low  background  this  technique  is  well  suited  for 
applications  with  very  low  light  intensity  and  especially  if  a  precise  time  tagging  for  each  photon  is  required.  As  an 
example  we  present  the  application  of  scintillator  read-out  in  time-of-flight  (TOF)  neutron  radiography.  Further 
applications so far are Fluorescence Life-time Microscopy (FLIM) and Astronomy. 
 
Keywords: photo-multiplier tube, MCP, micro-channel plate, image intensifier, delay-line, photon counting, time- and 
position-sensitive, fast-neutron radiography, image charge, 3d imaging. 
 

1. INTRODUCTION 

 
 
Sealed image intensifier tubes with micro-channel plates (MCP) are widely used to intensify faint photon fluxes in 
the  near-UV,  visible  and  near-infrared  wavelength  regime  [1].  Typically,  first  a  photo-cathode  converts  photons  into 
electrons.  These  photo-electrons  are  multiplied  by  the  MCP  and  eventually  reconverted  to  photons  by  a  phosphor 
screen, preserving the lateral position of the initial photon impact on the photo-cathode. If such an image intensifier tube 
is equipped with double- or triple-stacked MCP operated in saturation, single photons can be imaged and counted. 
 
There are similar photon detection devices, MCP-PMTs, where the photon-initiated electron cloud from the MCP 
stack  is  collected  on  a  metal  anode  and  an  electrical  signal  can  be  picked  up.  A  MCP-PMT  can  be  considered  as  a 
classical photo-multiplier tube, but due to the use of a MCP stack as amplifying stage, a sub-nanosecond time resolution 
can  be  achieved  over  an  extended  area.  Such  devices  are  applied  to  count  and  determine  the  arrival  time  of  single 
photons with  picoseconds’  precision,  e.g.  for  time-of-flight  measurements.  A partitioned  anode  may  even  allow for a 
rather coarse position resolution [2]. On the other hand, the standard read-out technique for image intensifiers with high 
position  resolution  (phosphor  screen  with  CCD  read-out)  does  not  allow  for  the  simultaneous  timing  of  individual 
photons  with  sub-nanoseconds’  precision,  as  typically  needed  for  most  so-called  3d-imaging  applications  (need  for 
precise  timing  combined  with  two-dimensional  imaging  of  single  photons).  Only  if  the  photon  rate  is  lower  than  the 
frame rate of the CCD chip (typically < 1000 Hz) it is possible to correlate individual photon positions with a timing 
signal picked up from the MCP stack and to allow for 3d-imaging. 
Alternatively,  one  can  pulse  the  photo-cathode  or  even  the  MCP  voltage  for  achieving  time  information  on  a 
 
photon-emitting process. But this method can only select a single “time frame”, which requires very intense light bursts 
to  obtain  complete  images  within  a  nanosecond  long  exposure  time  (e.g.  spectroscopic  neutron  imaging  from  high 

                                                           
*jagutzki@atom.uni-frankfurt.de; phone +49 69 798-47001; fax +49 69 798-47107; www.atom.uni-frankfurt.de/jagutzki 

power laser plasmas) or periodic processes with phase-synchronised exposure control of the gated intensifier [3]. Gated 
image intensifiers can be very effective under repetitive or triggered experimental conditions. However, outside the time 
window  no  photons  are  detected  and  multiple  exposure  time  windows  require  either  multiple  independently  gated 
intensified  CCD  cameras  or consecutive  measurements  at  different  exposure  time  windows.  Naturally,  the  number of 
cameras in a system is restricted due to cost and space reasons. 
 
At  low  photon  fluxes  the  integrated  systems  with  intensified  CCD  camera  read-out  are  not  suitable  due  to  their 
rather low DQE (Detective Quantum Efficiency). The reason for this is the unavoidable read-out noise and dark current 
integration of the CCD. Here, in the field of single photon counting, the “ideal” single-photon detector should provide a 
fast  read-out  of  individual  photons,  allocating  to  each  detected  event  its  2-dimensional  position  coordinates  and  its 
arrival time (also called “3d-detection”).  
  We will demonstrate that such devices are feasible with a position resolution of at least 1000x1000 pixels and sub-
nanosecond time precision with negligible dead-time between individual photon hits. Furthermore, the photon detection 
(counting) rate capability should reach the physical limit given by the MCP stack’s single-pulse operation mode (typical 
up  to  few  MHz).  Photon  counting  methods  in  principle  do  not  show  saturation  effects  at  long  exposure  times.  This 
yields  better  contrast  and  image  dynamics  than  usually  obtainable  with  intensified-CCD  approaches,  which  makes 
photon counting imaging techniques superior even if no timing information is needed. 
 
Applications for such photon counting detectors are for example found in fast-neutron radiography, which will be 
exemplarily  discussed  in  more  detail,  Astronomy  [4]  (or  similar  low  photon  rate  survey  tasks)  and  in  Laser-induced 
Fluorescence Life-time Imaging Microscopy (FLIM) [5] or spectroscopy (LIF). In the literature several approaches for 
achieving this goal by replacing the phosphor screen by a structured anode are discussed [5-10]. Like in MCP-PMTs, 
the charge cloud from the MCP stack is collected on a metal or resistive-layer anode without re-conversion to photons. 
In  the  simplest  form,  a  pixel  anode  can  be  used  with  a  separate  timing  electronic  channel  for  each  pixel.  In  order  to 
reduce  the  number  of  electronic  channels  to  a  practically  controllable  amount,  different  anode  types  with  only  few 
specifically shaped electrodes or an anode with several corner contacts on a resistive coating can be used. The so-called 
resistive anode encoder (RAE) is widely used in some commercial systems [11,12].  
 
A special so-called resistive screen (anode) with about 3 orders of magnitude higher area resistance than the RAE 
will be discussed in more detail here. It does not act as a position sensitive anode but produces a time-dependent image 
charge, which can be  picked up  by  a dedicated  structured electrode  outside  the  image  intensifier  tube  [4,13,14].  This 
facilitates  the  tube  construction  remarkably.  However,  it  will  by  difficult  to  produce  larger  image  formats  than 
approximately 50 mm because the increasing thickness of the rear wall eventually leads to an unacceptable geometrical 
spread of the image charge signal. 
 
All these approaches have in common that electrical signals from the distinct anode contacts are picked up and their 
relative  pulse  heights  or  time  sequence  for  each  detected  photon  event  allow  for  the  localisation  of  the  charge  cloud 
centre position. In a proximity-focussed tube with an MCP-based electron amplifier this is in good approximation the 
position of the photon impact on the photo-cathode. These “position signals” can be easily correlated with a fast time 
signal picked up from the MCP stack, which is related to the impact time of the photon on the photo-cathode with sub-
nanosecond precision.   
 
So far, none of these attempts could satisfactorily meet all design goals of the “ideal” (3d) single-photon detector as 
defined  above.  We  consider  the  delay-line  technique  to  be  the  most  promising  read-out  concept  because  very  large 
format  detectors  (e.g.  75  mm  or  even  150  mm  active  diameter)  providing  high  position  resolution  can  be  built. 
Furthermore,  this  method potentially  allows  reaching higher photon  counting  rates  than  read-out  techniques  based  on 
relative  charge  measurement  and  even  correlated  photon  hits  within  few  nanoseconds  can  be  analysed  by  a  special 
triple-layer delay-line anode [15].  
Delay-line anodes of different designs have been used in combination with image intensifier tubes by other groups 
 
[8-10]. For the single-photon detectors with 75 mm and 40 mm active area and internal delay-line anode presented in 
this  paper  we  have  chosen  the  helical-wire  delay-anode  design,  which  has  been  proven  reliable  for  open-face  MCP 
detectors  and  which  are  especially  suited  for  large  delay-line  arrays  (e.g.  large  detector  formats)  [16,17].  For  the 
resistive-screen image intensifier, we have designed economical read-out electrodes on standard PCB material.  
In this paper we investigate the performance of image intensifier tubes equipped with an internal helical-wire delay-
 
line anode array and, alternatively, tubes with a resistive screen and an external pick-up electrode with delay-line read-
out. Furthermore, we show the performance of such image intensifier tubes for fast-neutron radiography, emphasising 
the importance of photon timing information for such a “pure” imaging task.  
  We  conclude  with  an  outlook  on  the  perspectives  of  these  detector  types  in  becoming  the  “ideal”  single-photon 
detector in near future. 

2. THE MCP PHOTO-MULTIPLIER TUBE WITH HELICAL-WIRE DELAY-LINE ANODE 

 
 
Fig. 1 shows a sketch of the PMT with internal helical-wire delay-line anode (DL-PMT). The helical-wire delay-
line (HWDL) anode is placed a few millimetres behind the MCP. Connectors for the wire terminals are guided through 
the  rear  wall  of  the  sealed  tube.  The  remaining  components,  the  MCP  stack  and  the  photo-cathode,  are  fabricated, 
positioned and contacted like in any typical MCP-PMT assembly. Once the technique of producing sealed MCP-PMTs 
of large and variable format  is established, it is rather straightforward to implement a custom anode behind the MCP 
stack.  But  even  if  most  care  is  taken  during  the  production  process,  the  risks  for  having  a  leakage  in  the 
ceramics/glass/metal housing assembly will increase with tube size and with the number of electrical feed-through pins. 
Proper  choice  of  material  and  a  robust  design  is  very  critical  so  that  the  baking  and  scrubbing  processes  during  tube 
production  do  not  affect  the  mechanical  and  electrical  properties  of  the  anode  and  the  quality  of  the  vacuum  is  well 
preserved. 

HELICAL-WIRE DELAY-LINE ANODE

 

   

Fig. 1: Sketch of the PMT with helical-wire delay-line anode (DL-PMT). 

 
Two  DL-PMT  prototypes  of  different  sizes,  entrance  window  materials  and  photo-cathodes  have  been  built  and 
tested. The DL80-PMT is equipped with a low-noise S-20 photo-cathode of 75 mm diameter on fibre optic window. For 
the  DL40-PMT  a  red-enhanced  S-20  photo-cathode  on  fused  silica  window  was  chosen.  The  MCP  stacks  with 
respective sizes consist of three MCP with 10 micron pores and 60:1 L/D (channel length/diameter ratio). Due to this 
choice it was possible to achieve the high gain and excellent single-photon pulse-height distribution (see fig. 2). This is 
an  important  property  of  this  kind  of  detectors:  The  pulses  of  every  photo-electron  must  be  sufficiently  high  for 
allowing a proper discrimination against electronic noise by selecting an appropriate electronic threshold level. It should 
be  noted  that  in  spite  of  the  high  MCP  stack  quality  only  about  75%  of  the  emitted  photo-electrons  are  registered 
because  not  all  of  them  give  rise  to  an  electron  avalanche  in  the  MCP  stack.  Thus,  the  total  detection  efficiency  is 
reduced to approximately 75% of the photo-cathode’s quantum efficiency. 
 
The  HWDL,  the  read-out  electronics  and  the  position  encoding  method  is  described  extensively  in  an  earlier 
publication [16].  In  short, wire  pairs  are wound  around  a  support plate in  form  of  a double-helix. Two perpendicular 
oriented layers allow for a two-dimensional position read-out. The electron charge cloud is collected on the positively 
biased wire of each pair, almost equally shared between the two layers. The induced electrical signals in the wires (each 
wire pair forms a differential delay-line) are transmitted to the terminals and are decoupled by capacitors located outside 
the tube. The four differential signals from the wire array ends are transformed into single-ended 50 Ohm impedance 
signals by adequate circuits. 

 

 

 
Fig.  2:  Pulse-height  distribution  (gain)  of  the  DL40-PMT’s  MCP  stack  at  3000 V  bias  (right)  and  photon  conversion 
quantum  efficiencies  (QE)  of  the  chosen  photo-cathodes/window  materials  as  function  of  the  photon  wavelength 
 
(left).  The  decrease  at  short  wavelengths  for  the  DL80-PMT  (low-noise  S-20)  is  caused  by  the  vanishing 
 
transparency of the fibre optic window for UV-light. The total detection efficiency is about 75% of the photo-cathodes’ 
 
quantum efficiencies. 
 

 
The delay between the signals on both ends of each delay-line is proportional to the position of the charge cloud 
centre’s projection in the respective dimension. The position resolution depends on the time precision for determining 
this delay. In order to measure the relative signal delays with high precision, these signals of about 10 mV mean pulse 
height  and  few  nanoseconds’  width  are  amplified  with  fast  low-noise  amplifiers.  Standard  Constant  Fraction 
Discriminator (CFD) circuits are used to discriminate against electronic noise and to determine the relative signal times 
with 50 ps precision or better.  
 
A fifth, position-independent, timing signal can be obtained from the MCP stack: Due to the momentary drain of 
charge during the electron avalanche emission, a fast voltage drop with positive polarity (few 10 mV signal height on 
50 Ω termination with 1-2 ns width) occurs and is picked up via a capacitor from the MCP stack’s rear side. This signal 
is likewise amplified and electronically processed.  
The  time  sequence  of  these  five  signals  contains  the  information  on  the  lateral  photon  absorption  point  (in  the 
 
photo-cathode)  and  the  detection  time.  This  time  sequence  is  registered  by  a  multi-channel  time-to-digital  converter 
(TDC)  and  the  position  and  time  information  for  each  photon  detection  event  is  computed  by  a  CPU  for  real-time 
visualization and event-by-event storage. 
The DL40 and DL80 HWDL anodes inside the tubes were adopted from standard “open” MCP-delay-line detector 
 
systems as used for the detection of charged particles in a vacuum environment. The tests focussed not so much on a 
detailed  detector  characterisation  but  on  a  feasibility  study:  Can  this  technique  be  extended  to  sealed  photo-tubes 
maintaining the performance characteristics known from the “open” detectors?  
  With the photo-cathode kept at ground potential, a voltage dividing resistor chain provides all necessary voltages 
for the MCP stack and the wire array from a single high-voltage supply via an adequate shielded cable. The voltage-
dividing and signal-decoupling circuits are placed just outside the sealed tube (covered by resin for safety) and deliver 
the timing signals via coaxial cables to amplifier/CFD circuits of type ATR19 and TDCs of types HM1-B and TDC8HP 
[17], which are designed for MCP/HWDL read-out of “open” detectors.  
The  images  presented  in  figures  3  and  4  are  2d-histograms  from  a  PC-memory.  They  were  accumulated  by 
 
measuring each photon’s signal time sequence, calculating the time difference for both dimensions in the PC RAM and 
incrementing  the  corresponding  cell  of  the  histogram  for  every  photon  counted.  The  bin  size  is  given  by  the  TDC’s 
channel  width  of  133 ps  (HM1-B)  or  25 ps  (TDC8HP).  This  corresponds  to  position  bins  from  the  delay/mm  scaling 
function of the respective delay-line: about 0.75 ns/mm for the DL40 and about 1 ns/mm for the DL80. However in the 
following, the “raw” images without position calibration are presented.  
 
Fig. 3 shows images obtained with the DL40-PMT: A shadow mask of 1 mm holes every 3.8 mm  was placed in 
contact with the window and homogenously illuminated (left). The “dark emission” of thermally emitted electrons from 
the red-enhanced S-20 photo-cathode (about 13000 counts/cm²⋅s at room temperature) is shown on the right. The DL80-
PMT’s low-noise S-20 photo-cathode produces < 30 counts/cm²⋅s dark emission. Both values are within expectations. 

 

 

 

Fig. 3: Images (linear gray scale) of the DL40-PMT: shadow of a homogeneously illuminated mask of 1 mm holes every 
 

3.8 mm, placed in contact with the entrance window (a), and dark noise image (b). 

 
It  is  to  note  that  a  PMT  with  standard  S-20  and  other  photo-cathodes  with  large  sensitivity  in  the  red  should  be 
cooled to about -20oC in order to reduce the dark count rate to a tolerable level for photon counting. This is a common 
practise, although it was not applied during the tests presented in this paper.  
 
Fig.  4  shows  the  image  response  of  the  DL80-PMT:  A  shadow  masks  with  1 mm  wide  lines  every  5 mm  (left) 
demonstrates the homogeneous and uniform imaging properties as were expected from tests on similar “open” delay-
line  detectors. Minor non-linearity  can  arise  from  an  imperfect  wire  array  and  from  electrostatic  lens  effects  near  the 
outermost image area.  
 

 
Fig. 4: Image response of the DL80-PMT to illuminated shadow masks: grid lines of 1 mm width every 5 mm (a), NASA test
    mask (b). The field-of-view in (b) is approximately 20x20 mm, both images in linear gray scale. 

 

 

 

 

The  position  resolution  of  the  DL80-PMT  in  combination  with  the  HM1-B  TDC  could  be  determined  with  a 
 
standard NASA mask (right) to a FWHM of about 150 micron. This is in accordance with expectations for the effective 
pixel width of the HM1-B (75 micron with DL80). It corresponds to a RMS or pixel resolution of about 1000x1000. By 
the choice of a “better” TDC (like the TDC8HP) the resolution can be further increased. However, this could not yet be 
demonstrated during the tests on the DL40-PMT with TDC8HP due to the high thermal background (the TDC8HP was 
not yet available during tests of the DL80-PMT).  
 
It  is  expected from  results  on open delay-line  detectors  that  1000x1000  pixels resolution  for  the DL40-PMT  and 
2000x2000 pixels for the DL80-PMT is achieved in combination with the TDC8HP or a similar highly resolving TDC 
with  LSB < 50 ps.  The  photo-electron  rates  during  all  these  tests  where  kept  between  1000 counts/s  and  1 million 
counts/s because higher count rates could not be registered by the TDCs. No saturation effects or image degradation are 
observed  in  this  regime.  Tests  on  the  absolute  time  resolution  could  not  be  done  due  to  the  lack  of  a  pulsed  photon 
source.  However,  since  the  position  is  determined  through  timing  signals,  one  can  expect  that  the  good  imaging 
characteristic coincides with an equally well timing response, as known from the “open” MCP detectors with HWDL. 
 
 

3. THE RESISTIVE-SCREEN IMAGE INTENSIFIER WITH DELAY-LINE READ-OUT 

 
Image intensifiers with optical read-out are an industrial standard product and can be produced very economically 
 
in specialised facilities. Introducing major changes to the tube design (like introducing a dedicated read-out board into 
the  high  vacuum  tube)  usually  requires  major  modification  to  the  production  facility  and  makes  these  tubes  quite 
expensive. Furthermore, once built and sealed, there is no chance to modify or optimize the read-out electrode unless 
one starts producing a new tube. 
 
Therefore,  in 1999, we  have  proposed  and  patented  a  method  to  minimize  the  changes  required  to  a  commercial 
image  intensifier  and  simultaneously  permitting  a  very  flexible  design  of  the  read-out  electrode  [18].  This  method, 
originally proposed by Battistoni et al. [19] and extensively used in various applications with gaseous detectors, uses an 
anode (screen) with a very high surface resistance, which replaces the usual metal-coated phosphor screen of a standard 
optically  read  out  image  intensifier.  This  resistive  layer  with  a  typical  surface  resistance  of  >  1  MΩ(cid:0)  ,  acts  as  an 
electromagnetically transparent window for the signal of the travelling electron cloud as it propagates from the last MCP 
to the resistive screen. While in gaseous detectors these layers are made of resistive lacquer based on carbon and plastic 
material,  the  high  purity  requirements  in  vacuum  image  intensifiers  demand  for  non-outgassing  materials  like 
Germanium.  Fig.  5  shows  a  sketch  of  such  a  Resistive-Screen  Photo-Multiplier  Tube  (RS-PMT).  Apart  from  the 
resistive  screen  and  a  possible  thinner  and  not  necessarily  optically  transparent  output  window  it  is  identical  to  a 
commercial image intensifier with a double or triple MCP stack. 

Fig. 5: RS-PMT tube with resistive screen (here: Germanium layer) replacing the phosphor screen of a conventional image 
intensifier. The position information is obtained by a dedicated pickup electrode (anode) outside the tube housing. 
 

 

 

The resistive layer of Germanium is deposited directly on the output window (glass or ceramics) of the intensifier. 
 
The  read-out  board  is  mounted  outside  the  tube  in  close  contact  to  this  window.  The  spacing  between  the  travelling 
charge  cloud  inside  the  tube  and  the  separated  read-out  electrode  outside  causes  a  geometrical  spread  of  the  induced 
signal on the read-out board. For MCP-based image intensifiers but also for gas detectors like GEMs or RPCs (resistive 
plate  chambers)  this  is  of  great  benefit  because  it  allows  using  rather  coarse  read-out  structures,  e.g.  strips  with  few 
millimetre  pitch,  for  a  delay-line  read-out.  In  recent  years  various  read-out  techniques  using  this  resistive  screen 
technique for image intensifiers were reported in literature [4,14,18].  
 
Also several theoretical studies to calculate the induced charge distribution are available in literature [20-22]. We 
have experimentally studied and optimised the relevant parameters, including the geometrical distribution of the induced 
signals  and  its  dependence  from  the  distance  between  resistive  layer  and  pickup  electrode  and  the  required  surface 
resistance of the layer for maximum signal transmission. Furthermore, we studied the geometrical structure of the signal 
pickup strips of the read-out board. Detailed results of these measurements will be published elsewhere [23]. Here we 
show only one example, which is of some importance for the further development of RS-PMTs.  
Fig.  6  shows  a  one-dimensional  projection  of  the  radial  distribution  of  the  induced  charge  behind  a  1  mm  thick 
 
output window and a 1 mm deep induction gap, i.e. the space between MCP or GEM and the resistive anode screen. The 
FWHM here is 2 mm, which is more or less exactly the value one needs for a read-out board with a strip pitch of 2 mm. 
Larger  distances  will  increase  the  width  of  this  distribution,  which  will  result  in  a  smaller  amplitude  of  the  induced 
charge and cause dispersion of the signal rise-time at the end of the delay lines. Both factors will result in a deterioration 
of the position resolution. Unfortunately, the output windows of image intensifiers have to be of a certain thickness due 
to  the  requirement  of  a  stable  housing  for  the  vacuum  inside  the  tube,  which  is  usually  above  the  optimal  value. 
Nevertheless,  future  developments  must  address  this  issue  and  an  optimisation  of  the  material  and  its  thickness  is 
unavoidable  especially  for  proposed  larger  devices  than  the  presently  planned  tubes  with  40  to  50  mm  sensitive 
diameter. 

%

 
/
 
 
e
g
r
a
h
c
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
r

l

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

 Experiment 4

         (d=1.0 mm)

 Gauss Fit

          X

=18.9 mm 

c
          σ=0.86 mm

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2,0 mm
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

16

18
20
position / mm

22

 
Fig. 6: Radial width of the induced charge signal at 1 mm distance between resistive screen and read-out electrode. 

 
 
In our tests we have used a RS-PMT with 25 mm active diameter, produced by Proxitronic GmbH in Bensheim, 
Germany  [1].  The  position  read-out  electrode  is  a  double-layer  standard  printed  circuit  board  (PCB)  with  orthogonal 
strip  structures  on  both  sides.  The  principle  structure  of  this  electrode  was  proposed  earlier  by  Eland  [24]  and  was 
applied for RS-PMT read-out by Jagutzki et al. [13]. Here we present some modifications to improve its handling and 
performance.  To  ensure  equal  charge  sharing  and  minimum  capacitive  coupling  between  both  sides  of  the  read-out 
board we have optimized the width and the shape of the strips.  
 
Fig.  7  shows  the  front-  and  backside  structure  of  the  optimized  read-out  electrode.  The  strips,  whose  shapes 
resemble a chain of diamonds, are copper-printed on a 0.5 mm thick FR4 board. The strips have a pitch of 2 mm. The 
front side (Fig. 7a) has much smaller pads to avoid electromagnetic shielding of the back side (b) and to ensure equal 
signal  amplitudes  on  both  sides  of  the  read-out  board.  The  diamonds  of  the  front  side  are  located  in  the  open  areas 
between the diamonds of the back side. The structures overlap only at the intersections of the thin strips connecting the 
diamonds, minimising capacitive coupling between both sides of the board. The strips on each side are connected via an 
LC delay-line of 2.5 ns delay per tap. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

(a)  

 
Fig. 7: sections of the strip structure of the front (a) and back (b) side of the position read-out board. The strips have a pitch 
  

of 2 mm and run in orthogonal directions. 

(b) 

 
 
As an example of results obtained with this tube and anode fig. 8 shows an image of a printed optical shadow mask, 
illuminated by a pulsed hydrogen lamp (a) and the projection of an image of a single pinhole with same illumination (b). 
The position resolution obtained with this device and described read-out is 87 micron (FWHM). The resolution on the 
back-side of the board is slightly worse (116µm FWHM). It must be noted that the width of the original pinhole is only 
of  minor  influence  to  this  distribution  because  in  each  light  pulse  from  the  lamp  many  photons  are  converted  in  the 
photo-cathode.  The  delay-line  method  measures  the  centre  of  charge,  therefore,  what  we  see  here,  is  basically  the 
intrinsic resolution of the RS-PMT and the read-out method.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

b

a

 

Fig.  8:  Image  of  an  optical  mask  measured  with  the  RS-PMT  and  delay-line  read-out  (a).  The  mask  on  the  RS-PMT  is
illuminated by a pulsed H2-lamp. The distance between the holes of the mask is 0.7 mm, the holes’ diameter is 0.3 mm. 
 
b) shows the projection of a pinhole. The width of the peak corresponds to 87 µm (FWHM). The resolution on the back 
  
side of the board is slightly worse (116µm FWHM).  
 

 

 

 
  More elaborate tests of this RS-PMT can be found elsewhere [4,25]. In the following chapter we present a practical 
application of a RS-PMT in pulsed fast-neutron imaging for explosives and drug detection. 

4. FAST-NEUTRON RADIOGRAPHY WITH POSITION- AND TIME-SENSITIVE PHOTON 
DETECTORS 

 
 
Energy-resolved fast-neutron radiography is a promising method for element-sensitive imaging of low-Z materials, 
which cannot be resolved by standard X-ray or thermal-neutron techniques. Fast neutrons have a high penetration power 
and,  due  to  the  specific  structures  (resonances)  in  the  neutron  cross  sections  of  elements  like  C,  N  or  O  in  the  MeV 
range, the spatial distribution of those elements, e.g. in air cargo containers or luggage, may be resolved by this method. 
 
A  prerequisite  for  the  application  of  the  method  is  the  possibility  of  obtaining  neutron  transmission  images  in 
selected  narrow  energy  ranges.  In  recent  years  we  have  investigated  various  methods  of  spectroscopic  2d-imaging  in 
pulsed, broad-energy neutron beam illumination by applying time-of-flight (TOF) methods for energy selection [26-28]. 
Here we present some results with the above-described RS-PMT and read-out electrode, which is used to image the light 
emission pattern of a scintillating neutron converter screen with high time resolution (few ns) for each detected neutron. 
 
Fig. 9 shows a schematic view of the detector. The neutron converter is a 10 mm thick BC400 scintillator slab. Out 
of the 20 x 20 cm2 large scintillator an optical system projects a circular area of about 10 cm in diameter to the image 
sensor. The optical read-out consists of a large aperture lens with focal length f = 120 mm, focal/diameter ratio 0.95 (F-
number) and the RS-PMT (same as used in the tests before) as image sensor. 
 

 

 

Fig. 9: Schematic view of the neutron imaging system with an RS-PMT. 

 
  With  this  detector  we  have  performed  measurements  at  the  neutron  beam  facility  of  PTB,  similar  to  the  ones 
described in [26,27]. The neutron beam was produced by a pulsed 12 MeV deuterium beam that strikes a 3 mm thick 
Beryllium  target.  The  distance  between  neutron  source  (Be  target)  and  detector  was  6  m  and  the  sample  was  placed 
directly on the input window in front of the scintillator.  
 
Fig. 10 shows the neutron images of a sample consisting of carbon rods (a) of various diameters (∅) and lengths (l) 
plus  a  steel  wrench.  For  the  radiographic  image  (b)  neutrons  in  the  whole  available  continuous  energy  range  (1 -10 
MeV) were utilized. The carbon rods and the steel wrench are visible in (b). In order to produce the element-sensitive 

 

∅20 mm 
l= 60 mm  l= 40 mm 
 

image (c), the coordinates and the TOF of each neutron are stored in a list-mode file. In the off-line analysis, images for 
defined  TOF  windows  are  collected,  which  correspond  to  the  large  structures  in  the  energy-dependent  neutron  cross 
section (for details see [28]). After appropriate digital image processing one can produce images like 10c, which only 
resemble the distribution of a certain chemical element (here: carbon). Note that the steel wrench, visible in 10b, has 
disappeared from the image. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

∅30 mm 
l= 60 mm 

∅30 mm 
l= 40 mm

(a)   

(b)  

(c) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.10:  Neutron  images  of  various  carbon  rods  and  a  steel  wrench.  (a)  shows  the  configuration  (length  l  and  diameter  ∅ 
of the carbon rods). (b) shows the image in a broad-energy neutron beam (1 – 10 MeV) and (c) the carbon distribution 
 
after utilizing the resonance imaging technique. 
 

 
A  complete  neutron  imaging  system  would  consist  of  a  matrix  with  many  elements  of  such  scintillator/lens/RS-
PMT assemblies for achieving a sufficient large area, which is required for this application [27]. Here, the use of the 
RS-PMT  would  be  of  great  advantage  compared  to  the  DL-PMT  described  above  due  to  its  potential  of  economical 
mass  production.  The  comparably  inferior  position  resolution  is  not  of  importance  in  this  application  because  the 
neutron interaction process and the range of the secondary charged particles limit the available resolution. 
 
 

 

5. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK 

 
 
In summary, the results of these tests confirm that all performance characteristics of open delay-line detectors are 
reproduced in DL-PMT-type photon detectors and that known properties from standard image intensifier tubes (photo-
cathode  response,  gain)  are  also  preserved  for  a  DL-PMT.  It  is  thus  possible  to  design  DL-PMT  tubes  for  a  specific 
application (photo-cathode type, effective detection diameter, etc.) and scale the typical performance parameters from 
experiences  on  existing  detectors.  It  should  be  straightforward  to  increase  the  effective  image  diameter  to  at  least 
120 mm and to implement a Hexanode delay-line type for multi-hit applications [15].  
 
Next-generation TDC circuits will allow increasing the detection rate to more than 1 megacounts/s. Thus it can be 
expected that the “ideal” time- and position-sensitive single-photon detector can soon be realized using DL-PMT-type 
image intensifiers. Due to the superior imaging properties of pulse counting methods it would be desirable to also use 
such detectors for pure imaging applications. This seems feasible for photon rates at least up to 10 megacounts/s.  
 
If the demand for the active area is below 50 mm and if large quantities of tubes are required at reasonable costs, 
the  resistive-screen  image  intensifier  tube  can  be  an  alternative.  The  external  delay-line  anode  shows  the  same 
performance  characteristics  as  the  internal  helical  wire  delay-line  anode.  The  robust  tube  design  will  allow  a 
qualification for harsh environment and the imaging performance is not influenced by strong magnetic fields.  
 
Not  yet  finally  determined  is  a  possible  rate  limitation  of  the  RS-PMT  due  to  charge  build-up  on  the  resistive 
screen.  This  detector  version  has  already demonstrated  its  potential  in  several  applications  and  is  ready  to be  used in 
different photonic fields with similar time and position detection tasks or for pure single photon counting and imaging 
applications. 

REFERENCES 

 
1.  see for example http://www.proxitronik.de or other manufacturers’ home pages 
2.  see http://www.burle.com 
3.  V. Dangendorf, A. Breskin, R. Chechik, G. Feldman, M. B. Goldberg, O. Jagutzki, C. Kersten, G. Laczko, I. Mor, 
   U. Spillmann, D. Vartsky, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 535, 93 (2004) 
4.  J. Barnstedt, M. Grewing, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. A 477, 268 (2002) 
5.  V. Emiliani, D. Sanvitto, M. Tramier, T. Piolot, Z. Petrasek, K. Kemnitz, C. Durieux, and M. Coppey-Moisan, 
  
6.  J. R. Powell, J. R. Howorth, M. B. Ingle, Proc. SPIE 2198, 400 (1994) 
7.  J. S. Lapington, L. B. Boskma, J. Adema, Proc. SPIE 2198, 851 (1994) 
8.  S. E. Sobottka and M. B. Williams, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Science 35, 348 (1988) 
9.  C. Ho, K. L. Albright, A. W. Bird, J. Bradley, D. E. Casperson, M. Hindman, W. C. Priedhorsky, W. R. Scarlett,  

Applied Phys. Lett. 83,  2471 (2003)  

R. Clayton Smith, J. Theiler, S. Kerry Wilson, Applied Optics 38, 1833 (1999) 

(2006)  

10.  X. Michalet, O. H. W. Siegmund, J. V. Vallerga, P. Jelinsky, J. E. Millaud, S. Weiss, Proc. SPIE 6092, 60920M 
  
11.  see http://www. quantar.com  
12.  see http://www.photek.co.uk  
13.  O. Jagutzki, J. S. Lapington, L. B. C. Worth, U. Spillmann, V. Mergel, H. Schmidt-Böcking, Nucl. Instrum. Meth.  
   A 477, 256  (2002) 
14.  J. S. Lapington, J. Howorth and J. Milnes, Proc. SPIE 5881, 588109 (2005) 
15.  O. Jagutzki, A. Czasch, R. Dörner, M. Hattaß, V. Mergel, U. Spillmann, K. Ullmann-Pfleger,  T. Weber, 
    H. Schmidt-Böcking, A. Cerezo, M. Huang, and G. Smith, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Science 49, 2477 (2002) 
16.  O. Jagutzki, V. Mergel, K. Ullmann-Pfleger, L. Spielberger, U. Spillmann, R. Dörner, and H. Schmidt-Böcking,  
   Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 477, 244 (2002)  
17.  see http://www.roentdek.com  
18.  O. Jagutzki, J. U. Spillmann, L. Spielberger, V. Mergel, K. Ullmann-Pfleger, M. Grewing, H. Schmidt-Böcking, 
  
19.  G. Battistoni, P. Campana, V. Chiarella, U. Denni, E. Iarocci, and G. Nicoletti, Nucl. Instrum. Methods 202, 459 

Proc. SPIE 3764, 61 (1999) 

(1982) 

http://www.slac.stanford.edu/econf/C0604032/papers/0201.PDF 

383 (Rome 2002), see also: http://www.arxiv.org/abs/nucl-ex/0301001 

20.  M. S. Dixit, J. Dubeau, J.-P. Martin, K. Sachs, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 518, 721 (2004) 
21.  M. S. Dixit, A. Rankin, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 566, 281 (2006) 
22.  C. Lu, Proc. SNIC Symposium, Stanford (2006) 
  
23.  V. Dangendorf et al., in preparation, to be published in JINST 
24.  J. H. D. Eland, Meas. Sci. Technol. 5, 1501 (1994). 
25.   V. Dangendorf, G. Laczko, C. Kersten, O. Jagutzki, U. Spillmann, Proc. of the Seventh World Conference Vol. 7, 
  
26.  V. Dangendorf, G. Laczko, M. Reginatto, D. Vartsky, M. Goldberg, I. Mor, A. Breskin, R. Chechik, Nucl. Instrum. 
   Meth. A 542, 197 (2005), see also: http://www.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0408074 
27.  I. Mor, MSc-thesis, Soreq (2006), http://jinst.sissa.it/jinst/theses/2006_JINST_TH_002.jsp 
28.  V. Dangendorf, R. Lauck, F. Kaufmann, J. Barnstedt, A. Breskin, O. Jagutzki, M. Kramer, D. Varsky, Proc. Of 
    
   
 
 

International Workshop on Fast Neutron Detectors and Applications (2006), 
http://pos.sissa.it//archive/conferences/025/008/FNDA2006_008.pdf 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

 
 
FRG for the provision of an RS-PMT. 

The  Authors  would  like  to  thank  Jürgen  Barnstedt  from  the  Astronomy  Institute  of  the  University  in  Tübingen, 

