Three-dimensional photography by holography

Jose J. Lunazzi

Universidade Estadual de Campinas
Institute of Physics
C.P. 6165
13083-950 Campinas-SP, Brazil

Abstract
Color   encoding   of   depth  is  shown   to   occur   naturally   in   holograms   that   are 
reconstructed under white light illumination. It can be registered in a common color 
photograph,   allowing   a   simple   method   of   visual   decoding   by   means   of   ordinary 
colored 3-D spectacles. The fundamental holographic equations and the photographic 
procedure   required   for   maximum   fidelity   in   three-dimensional   reproduction   are 
described. The result is a new kind of photograph that shows all of the views of the 
object in a continuous sequence. It permits an animated photographic representation 
and also makes it possible to adjust the degree of depth visualization when observed 
as a stereoscopic representation.

Subject terms: ho1ography; photography; stereoscopy; color encoding; three-dimensional imaging.

Optical Engineering 29/11. 9- 14 (January 1990)

CONTENTS
1. Introduction
2. Spectral encoding of depth
3. Holophotography: storage of multiple views in a single photograph
4. Influence of the wavelength resolution
5. Experimental details
6. Conclusions
7. Acknowledgments
8. References

1. INTRODUCTION

Color   encoding   of   various   properties   of   objects   by   holograms  has   been   demonstrated 
previous1y1-3.  In this paper we describe how a hologram naturally encodes a three-dimensional 
image that, after being photographed, constitutes a perfect anaglyph to be observed through 
colored spectacles*.

The technique employs the well-known effect of blurring by chromatic aberration4  that 
appears   whenever   a   hologram   is   made   by   following   the   classical   procedures   of   Leith   and 
Upatnieks5  or  Denisyuk6.   When illuminated in  white  light,  this hologram  shows an  interesting 
property, visible in the form of a spectral multicolor profiling of shapes in the scene, that we 
demonstrate to constitute the spectral encoding of depth. This effect is more apparent for those 
regions   of   the   object   that   are   more   distant   from   the   plane   of   the   hologram.   The   angular 
displacement   of   an   image   point,   corresponding   to   the   change   in   reconstructing   wavelength, 
permits a color photograph of the scene to register the depth of that point as a spectrum whose 
extension is proportional to the depth value. This horizontal widening of the spectral distribution 
of  colors brings  an  effect equivalent  to the superposition  of parallax  changes  between many 
different   (hypothetical)   points   of   view   in   horizontal   continuous   distribution   around   the 
photographic camera position.

For   one   specific   color   we   obtain   the   scene   that   corresponds   to   one   point   of   view.  A 
photograph of this effect then constitutes the superposition of a continuous sequence of views. 
So,   by   photographing   the   holographic   scene   in   a   single   exposure,   we   obtain   an   anaglyphic 
photograph that can re-create the three-dimensional image of the original object when proper 
color   filters   are   used   for   each   eye.   Selection   of   the   two   stereoscopic   points   of   view   is   then 
accomplished by choosing the wavelength of transmission for the filters. What is performed in 

* J. J. Lunazzi, "Anaglyphic effects in the photography from white light holograms." available upon request to the 

author.

that way is the substitution of the color ability of the film for a depth-encoding property, giving 
images that can be reconstructed as a continuous sequence of many points of view, a property 
that was unique for holograms. Each view is encoded by a specific wavelength value, but even 
with the limitations of color reproduction by the three-chromatic procedure, we can observe this 
property of the photograph by illuminating it with a source whose wavelength can be tuned over 
the visible spectral range. The photograph in this case appears as a living image with changing 
perspective,   giving   the   appearance   of   the   cinematographic   representation   of   an   object   that 
rotates around a vertical axis in the plane of the photograph. This new photographic property 
permits us to consider a kind of stereo photography that offers a continuous variation of points of 
view within the observation angle, for which we propose the term "holophotography."

2. SPECTRAL ENCODING OF DEPTH

The   lateral   coordinate   x'   of   the   holographic   image   of   a   point   a   distance   z     from   the 
holographic film (Fig. 1), assuming also plane waves at the incidence angle R for the reference 
and reconstruction beams, can be expressed as7

where   x  is   the   original   lateral   coordinate  of   the   object   and  R,   and    are   the   reference   and 
reconstruction wavelengths, respectively. By denoting  =  R -  , we can calculate the width x 
of the pattern that corresponds to the illumination of the hologram by the two wavelengths  R 
and  simultaneously:

x'=x

ztan R

,

R−


x=x'−x=

ztan R .




   (1)

  (2)

This proportionality between x  and z indicates that points with differing depths result in images 
in two colors whose widths are proportional to their depths. When photographed from a distance 
not   very   close   to   the   hologram   plane,   the   color   images   of   the   object   at   the   plane   of   the 
photographic film also have widths proportional to the original z coordinate. 

Fig. 1. Position of a point object P and reference (or reconstruction) wave R with coordinate axis located 
at the hologram plane H.

Under white light reconstruction, the hologram of a point object yields an image in the 
shape of a line with continuously changing colors, constituting a spectral sequence. By the same 
reasoning, we see that for a line object in the vertical plane but inclined toward the plane of the 
holographic film, the resulting image  in the final  photograph will  be  a multicolored strip that 
widens for the points farther from the hologram plane.

Assuming now that the reference beam orientation corresponds to a direction of incidence 
located in a horizontal plane (from the left or the right side), it is not difficult to perceive that, in 
this way, depth can be easily color encoded in the color photograph of a hologram under white 
light reconstruction. This effect was conceived previously as blurring4 or chromatic aberration. If 
takes   one   more   step   to   demonstrate   that   the   resulting   image   can   be   compared,   even   for 
extended objects, to a sequence of photographs obtained from many lateral points of view using 
colored filters in a spectral sequence when exposing the photograph. 

We demonstrate this by means of Fig. 2. Figure 2(a) shows a double-exposed photograph 

registering two views of an object consisting of two points, O and A. The first position of the 
photographic   camera   is   chosen,   for   convenience,   as   perfectly   normal   to   a   reference   plane 
containing point O, with point A at a distance z behind it. For its second position the camera is 
moved laterally, keeping point O centered on its field of view and also maintaining a distance H 
from  the   camera   to  point   O.   The  parameter  i   represents  the   constant   distance   between   the 
camera lens and the image plane. By considering simple imaging properties we then obtain

A' A' '=

i z sin s
Hz coss

.

  (3)

Fig. 2. Two cases of stereo photography: (a) conventional technique, in two views by double exposure 
and color filtering, and (b) holophotography, a single exposure with a hologram.

By   the   particular   choice   of   points   and   camera   positions,   we   obtain   a   result   for   the   relative 
position of the image of a point in a two-exposure stereoscopic photograph, which we employ for 
any object point within the object field. The case of Fig.2(a) corresponds to a color photograph of 
a white object in white light but with a red filter interposed in front of the camera for the first 
exposure   and   a   green   filter   for   the   second   exposure.   A   stereoscopic   representation   can   be 
obtained by observing this kind of photograph through ordinary (red and green) spectacles.

For   the   situation   of   photographing   the   hologram,   Fig.2(b),   corresponding   to   a   single 
exposure   of   a   holographic   image   employing   ordinary   color   film,   a   reconstruction   beam 
illuminates the hologram from the same direction as the original reference beam but in white 
light. Suppose the hologram was exposed in red laser light. Then point Ar   from the holographic 
image, corresponding to the red wavelength  r, coincides in the photographic image with the 
image of the reference point O in the hologram plane. Thus, image points A'r and O' coincide in 
the film plane. If z is the depth coordinate of the object point when the hologram was registered, 
a second point A'b is obtained in, for example, blue, from the wavelength b at a position defined 
by zb = z r / b   at an angle . This angle  can be by calculated by simple diffraction conditions 
or by using the equation for the holographic image of a point7:

We then obtain for the separation between image points A'r and A'b in the film the expression

 =arcsin [1−

sin R]

.


R

A' b A'r =

i z b tan  
H z b

,

  (4)

  (5)

from  which  we   can  compare  the   results  of   Figs.   2(a)  and   2(b)  by  equating   Ms,   a   parameter 
indicating stereoscopic magnification, defined as

Ms=

A' b A'r
A' A ''

=

RHz cosStan  
 Hz R/sin S

.

MS = 1  represents an optimum situation in which the photograph from a hologram is equivalent 
to a stereo anaglyphic pair since we are, for the moment, considering only two wavelengths from 
the white light beam. To obtain a result that is independent of the particular coordinate z  of our 
object point, we must satisfy the condition

  (6)

  (7)

S=arccos

R


.

This yields MS = 1 when the angle R of the reference beam satisfies

R=arcsin{

2
sinarctan [ /R

−1]

1 /2

1−/ R

} .

  (8)

We considered many wavelengths in order to find an exact solution for conditions (7) and (8). 
The   sign   of    was   not   considered   as   fundamental   because   switching   it   is   equivalent   to 
interchanging the left and right eye filters, for example.

As an example of an exact solution, we can see in Table I one case that simultaneously 
satisfies both conditions and also gives the value MS = 1. In the other cases of Table I, conditions 
(7) and (8) were not satisfied, and a value of R was chosen such that the resulting angle S is a 
consequence of the R value and of condition MS = 1. In the situations in which conditions (7) and 
(8) were not satisfied, we found that a value for MS very close to unity could be obtained, having 
only   a   slight   dependence   on   the   coordinate   z.     Two   situations   in   Table   I   correspond   to   the 
practical, common case of exposing the hologram with light from a He-Ne laser. Table II shows 
how the angle S was determined for that case, considering the extent of the object to be limited 
in depth to 50 mm in front or in back of the hologram and the distance H for the holographic 
camera as 200 mm. The values of the S angles calculated in this way are smaller than the exact 
values   that   satisfy   conditions   (7)   and   (8)   simultaneously.   They   can   be   calculated   by   the 
expression corresponding to the value MS = 1 for the case z = 0:

S=arcsin

R  


.

  (9)

A direct consequence of this is that one can obtain a higher value by choosing a higher value for 
the reference angle  R. In all cases, we see from Table I that the change in the stereoscopic 
magnification MS  is not more than 15% for the typical situation we have considered, the same 
percentage corresponding to the change in the angle S , also shown in Table II as the extreme 
values giving MS = 1 for z = 50 mm and z = -50 mm.

TABLE I. Selected examples of calculated values for the principal wavelength-dependent 
parameters. Wavelengths are in micrometers; angles are in degrees.

R

0.42

0.42

0.42

0.55

0.45

0.63

0.63



0.78

0.69

0.68

0.63

0.65

0.5

0.5

R

79.5

45

45

45

45

75

45

S

57.5

17.8

17.3

5.1

13.1

14.5

10.7

|

57.5

26.7

25.6

5.8

18.1

11.5

8.4

MS

1

1.07-0.90

1.07-0.90

1.03-0.96

1.06-0.91

0.94-1.11

0.95-1.10

TABLE   II.   Example   of   the   identification   of   the   proper   angle  S  for   approximating   the 
condition Ms = 1.

MS(z=-50)

MS(z=0)

MS(z=50)

S[°]

9.8

10

10.5

11

11.4

1.14

1.08

1.04

1.00

1.04

0.99

0.94

1.00

0.98

0.94

0.89

The stereoscopic angle S could appear, at first sight, as a false analog representation of 
the scene because the camera was in a single position when the scene was photographed. This is 
not so, however, since from Fig. 2(b) we see that different regions of the hologram are being 
used by the different wavelengths, sending many different views of the object to a single point of 
view for the observer of the hologram. In Fig.3 we see the same situation as in Fig. 2(b) but 
indicating the angle H that represents the angular aperture from which the hologram is sending 
optical information of the object point A to the photographic camera. This angle can be compared 
to the stereoscopic angle S by comparing triangles, thus obtaining the expression

H=arctan [

R H tan  
 H z R/

]

.

(10)

which is not very different from the value corresponding to S  in Eq. (9), at least in our case of 
Table I, where the angle  = 8.4° allows us to make a paraxial approximation, and the variation 
due to the influence of the z value can also be considered of little significance.

Fig.3. Comparison between the angle of view from the hologram H and the stereoscopic angle S. 

3.   HOLOPHOTOGRAPHY:   STORAGE   OF   MULTIPLE   VIEWS   IN   A   SINGLE 
PHOTOGRAPH

From the analysis of our technique we observe that the reconstruction in white light of the 
hologram   being   photographed   corresponds   to   a   situation   in   which   the   photographic   film   is 

exposed   simultaneously   to   a   continuous   sequence   of   views,   each   in   a   slightly   different 
wavelength. Although ordinary color photography reproduces color by using the registration of 
only  three   basic   colors,  the  continuous   sequence   of   views   can   be   very   well   observed  in   the 
picture of a hologram. It is necessary only to illuminate the picture in white light and to interpose 
a variable color filter that can select, sequentially, the colors of the spectrum. An interference 
green filter can be tilted to transmit a continuous variation from green to red. The picture than 
becomes  animated,   showing  the   observer   different   views  of   the   same  object   and   giving  the 
appearance of  the  object being  rotated  around  an  axis  located  vertically  in  the  plane  of  the 
picture. It looks exactly like a movie in which the camera has revolved around the object. This 
new effect demonstrates the possibility of exchanging the capability of color reproduction for the 
capability of three-dimensional reproduction, being achieved in a continuous sequence of views. 
The sudden change in the color of the figure is not disturbing to the observer if we take care to 
prevent   the   same   color-changing   light   from   simultaneously   illuminating   any   object   in   the 
surrounding area (the white frame of the picture, for example).

Another unique capability is that of watching a three-dimensional reproduction with the 
possibility of tuning its depth. By using a fixed filter for one eye and a color-variable filter for the 
other eye, we can observe the scene reproduced in variable depth, from zero to a maximum.

4. INFLUENCE OF THE WAVELENGTH RESOLUTION

For   achieving   perfectly   resolved   images,   the   continuous   wavelength   distribution   that 
characterizes this technique of image reproduction requires perfect resolution of the wavelength 
at two stages: first, at the registering on color film, and second, when viewing through the eye 
filters. The presence of the continuous sequence of views differentiates the result from classical 
stereophotography,   which   involves   two   exposures,   each   with   one   color   and   view.   Both 
techniques   can   be   similar   if   only   two   monochromatic   wavelengths   are   employed   for 
reconstructing the hologram or if very narrowband filters (i.e., one red, one green) are interposed 
in sequence while the hologram is being photographed in two exposures.

We can formulate the general case by using a simplified model for the color response of a 
photographic   film,   considering   a   value  F  as   representing   the   wavelength   bandwidth   of   its 
response   after   being   exposed   to   any   monochromatic   radiation   of   wavelength  .   The 
photographed point of coordinate x will then appear to have a horizontal extension:

 x F=

 F z tan  R


,

(11)

derived   as   a   consequence   of   Eq.   (2)     since   we   are   considering   the   common   collection   of   a 
continuous sequence of points within a neighborhood defined by F. For points or vertical lines 
having a dark background, the extreme colors of the spectral response must be seen on each 
side of the blurred image. For vertical borders in that situation, one of the two colors can be 
clearly seen because the spectral distributions do not overlap on any extreme position. Without 
considering any specific value for F, we can just say that it constitutes a limiting factor, due to 
which condition Iz I < 50  mm has been considered in Tables I and II as an empirical limit.

The color response of a film for color reproduction allows us to predict that the range F, 
cannot be independent of , but that it has minimum values at each wavelength that coincides 
with one of its three basic colors. Thus, a better sharpness can be obtained in the 3-D image if 
the bandwidths of the eye filters are made to coincide with those of the basic colors. It can also 
be  easily  understood  that when the bandwidth  of  transmission  E  of  the eye  filter becomes 
larger than F, the sharpness of the image will be reduced.

Another consideration is that the extension F, when considered for the two eyes, does 
not double but remains nearly unaffected because of the mutual superposition of points that 
occurs in the binocular  visualization8.  One improvement that can be made is to have one eye 
filter as selective as possible and the other much more extended in bandwidth. The one permits 
reasonably good resolution while the other collects a more luminous image. The result is as if the 
visual system of the brain, when analyzing the three-dimensional scene, employs the sharpest 
representation   for   defining   the   lateral   coordinates,   and   the   more   extended   information   is 
employed only for the determination of depth. It can also explain the great tolerance that exists 
for the difference in intensities between both images, since we have experienced observation 
with very different color responses, the red image sometimes being very weak, without affecting 
the results.

5. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

One of the first simple observations we made corresponded to the photograph of a white 
light hologram of a simple line object, a 3-D model of the capital letter E as printed in a color 
catalog9. We observed that all lines present spectral dispersion in one direction and no dispersion 
in a direction perpendicular to that one. Thus, the longer parts of the figure, which are oriented 
vertically   in   the   natural   position   far   reading   the   letter,   are   considered   here   as   horizontals 
because it is necessary to rotate the figure by 90° to obtain the stereoscopic effect. These parts 
have  a   sharp   representation,   while   parts  of   the   figure   in   perpendicular   positions   showed   an 
extended spectral distribution. From one extreme to the other of the blurred parts of the figure, it 
is observed that the dispersion of colors widens, continuously increasing and giving a figure like
a prismatic rainbow. From Eq. (2), it can be interpreted that the spectral distribution widens for 
points that are farther from the hologram pIane. Three long horizontal lines, for example, do not 
present dispersion. Since the upper one is the sharpest, it can be identified as coinciding, with 
the   hologram  plane.   The   other   two  lines   appear   more  diffuse  but   have  the   same  width  and 
monochromaticity; they do not coincide with the hologram plane, and dispersion occurs along 
them. In some regions, both lines present dark bands (probably shadows) in which we can see 
the   dispersion   effect   (some   green   and   yellow   colors).   Those   regions   constitute   horizontal 
discontinuities and every detail in the figure confirms our interpretation. On four of the remaining 
lines, nearIy vertical ones, we see regions in which the dispersion is null but increases in the up 
and down directions. The orientations of the red and green lines change sides from the upper 
region to the Iower region, corresponding to points that are in the back of the hologram plane, 
and when the line traverses that plane, it shows points that appear in front of the hologram 
plane. Using colored 3-D spectacles, we can see a clear 3-D image of the letter E.

Although the original hologram was of the reflection (Denisyuk) type, we can apply the 
same reasoning to  it. The only particular effect we observed is that the points of no dispersion 
are represented in reddish color, probably due to the color selection generated by the Lippman- 
Bragg   effect,   other   colors   appearing   only   for   points     that   are   more   deeply   located.   The 
characteristics of this chromatic selection by interference of white light seem to have very little 
effect on the resulting photograph since the two images in the stereo pair need not have exactly 
the same relative intensities. Also, in this case the effect of printing did not noticeably reduce the 
quality of the result.

In another experiment, the hologram was of an object made of fine wire, in a Denisyuk 
configuration with the reference beam incident at 45° from one side and the object very close to 
the  holographic   film  at  the  other  side.  We  used  a  common  He-Ne  laser  and  Agfa  8E75  film, 
processed with Kodak D-19 developer and Kodak R-10 bleaching bath. The image was observed 
in transmission, not in reflected light, and color pictures were exposed (15 min at f:22) in Kodak 
Ektachrome 100 ASA film by using a standard reflex camera with an f = 50 mm objective and 
one   complementary   lens   (+3)   for   approximating   to   a   distance   of   20   cm   to   the   hologram. 
Developed   and   enlarged   to   the   original   size   of   the   object   (9   cmX   12   cm)   in   a   commercial 
standard   color   processing   photographic   laboratory,   the   result   was   a   good-quality   three-
dimensional image of the object, observed by means of standard 3-D red-green spectacles. We 
can see it in Fig. 4, where the effect of the color spreading for line objects is very clear. For a few 
of them, one can observe that the yellow intermediary color is not present between red and 
green, as it show be. The only special care taken in photographing was to observe a position at 
which   the   red   and   green   lines   appearing   on   the   borders   of   the   holographic   image   could   be 
considered as being of nearly equal intensities. The reference beam, for the scene to have its 
natural orientation, must be incident laterally and not from the top or bottom side of the object 
as   is   the   usuaI   case   for   white   light   holograms.  We   also   photographed   this   hologram   in   two 
exposures by interposing in sequence the red and green filters from the spectacles, obtaining  a 
picture in two colors in which some vertical lines could be seen clearly separated.

VIEW THROUGH ENCLOSED "3-D" GLASSES (RED-RIGHT EYE)
Fig. 4. Photograph of the ho1ogram of a wire object located a few
millimeters behind the holographic plate.

As   a   third   experiment,   we   phorographed   a   commercial   hoIogram,   "Rose",   by   Third 
Dimensions Ltd., of the reflection (Denisyuk) type. The image had a maximum depth of 50 mm in 
front or in back of the hologram and was photographed in the same way (60 s, f:32), resuhing in 
a 3-D image with more extension in depth than in the preceding cases. A certain blurring was 
observed corresponding to same parts at the bottom of the scene; nonetheless, the 3-D effect 
was impressive. In all of the photographs, and particularly those from the last case, the effect of 
animation   was   demonstrated   by   projecting   the   photographs   through   a   slide   projector   and 
interposing a green interference filter tilted manually for the purpose of color selection. The rose 
appeared to rotate around an axis in the pIane of the screen, and a dark cavity within the petals, 
for example, was stretched or reduced as a function of the color being selected. The degree of 
apparent rotation was not large, but with little effort, some small parts of the object could be 
seen to appear or disappear from behind others. Depth tuning was also achieved by using  a red 
filter for one eye and, on the other eye, a green interferential filter that was tilted for the tuning.

As a final experiment, we performed with a He-Ne laser the hologram of a white metallic 
object representing our university's emblem, size 14 cm X 12 cm and 25 mm in depth. The size 
of this first hologram was 7 cmX 15 cm, and we projected its conjugate image together with a 
reference beam impinging the holographic film at 50°, making a second hologram 18 cm X 22 
cm that was photographed under white light illumination at a distance of 60 cm in 100 ASA color 
film (2 s, f: I I) (cover photograph). Obliquity in the object position can be noticed because the 
first letters in the word UNICAMP appear in front of the plane of the photograph when observed 
with a red filter on the right eye and a green or blue filter on the left eye. The right-hand side of 
the emblem appears as penetrating in the plane of the photograph. Direct observation of the 
photograph allows one to identify the color spreading of the borders of the image according to 
their original position in depth, and the reversal of the spectral color sequence is very clear in the 
front and back side parts of the object.

6. CONCLUSIONS

A new technique for recording images allows storage of a continuous sequence of views 
from an object in color film, changing the color capability of the photosensitive material to a 
complete 3-D capability. Every perspective within a certain range is sent simultaneously to a 
single   imaging   system,   being   directly   addressed   by   the   parameter  .     This   codification   in 
wavelength has a simple and natural visual way of decoding by means of common colored 3-D 
spectacles. This new kind of photograph can also be shown in artificial animation by means of a 
simple   color   selector.   The   tuning   of   depth   in   the   stereoscopic   image   is   another   interesting 
possibility. Although not perfect when performed with standard He-Ne lasers, an exact solution 
was demonstrated at extreme wavelengths of the visible region. The possibility of achieving a 

high   degree   of   parallax   was   also   demonstrated,   a     situation   that   could   be   experimentally 
performed in the future. The main element in the process is the effect of spectral dispersion, 
which has also been useful in the past for showing how some techniques of coherent optics can 
be similarly performed in incoherent light, employing much simpler equipment10 11. The result is 
also interesting as a new holographic property since it shows that the photograph of a hologram 
keeps   the   three-dimensional   capability   in   a   very   natural   way,   putting   holography   in   closer 
contact   with   photography   as   three-dimensional   image   registering   techniques.   We   can   even 
demonstrate how to obtain very similar results (holophotographs) by purely photographic means, 
which is the subject of our next paper12.

 7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The   author   wishes   acknowledge   financial   support   by   the   Foundation   of   Assistance   to 
Research – FAP of Campinas State University – Unicamp and to express his gratitude to Silvia 
Lunazzi for contributing creative ideas that stimulated this work. She, at the age of 9, had the 
idea of looking at photographs of holograms through colored 3-D glasses.

8. REFERENCES

1 . F. T. S. Yu. "New technique of pseudocolor encoding of holographic imaging." Opt. Lett. 3(2). 
57-59 (1978).

2. F. Quercioli and G. Molesini, "White light-in-flight holography," Appl. Opt. 24(20). 3406-3415 
(1985).

3. A. Olivares-Pérez, L. R. Berriel-Valdos. and A. A. Morales. "Depth pseudocolor of 3D scenes 
using image holography." in  Optics and the Information Age. Proc. ICO-14 Conf., pp. 229-230 
(1987).

4. D. Falk, D. Brill and D. Stork. Seeing the Light, plate 14-1. Harper and Row. New York (1986).

5. E. N. Leith and J. Upatnieks, "Reconstructed wavefronts and communication theory." J. Opt. 
Soc. Am. 52(10), 1123-1130 (1962).

6. Y. N. Denisyuk. Dok. Acad. Nauk USSR 6. 144 (1962).

7. R. J. Collier, C. B. Burckhardt and L. Lin. Optical Holography p.74. Eq.(3.35). Academic Press. 
New York (1971).

8. L. P. Yarovlaskii. "Applied problems ol digital optics." in Electronics and Electron Physics, Vol. 
66, P. W. Hawkis. ed., Academic Press, New York (1986).

9. Hologram by W. Spierings, photographed by W. Furstenberg in the Licht Blicke exhibit catalog, 
p. 105. Deutsches Film-museum Frankfurt am Main. FRG (1984).

10. J. P. Goedgebuer, M. Spajer and J. Ch. Vienot, "Holographic evaluation of the dimensional 
stability of elastic impression silicones used in dentistry." in Holography in Medicine and Biology 
pp. 165-169, G. Von Bally, ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlln (1979).

I I . S. Debrus and M. Françon, "A new method for image processing in incoherent light." in Optica 
Hoy y Mañana, J . Bescos, A. Hidalgo, L. Plaza and J. Santamaria, eds., Proc. ICO-I I Conf., pp. 257-
260 (1978).

12. J . J . Lunazzi "Holophotography by diffraction with a grating." Opt. Eng. 29(1), (1990) (to be 
published in www.arxiv.com).

Post-printing references of papers of the  same author:

-   J.   J.   Lunazzi,   “New   possibilities   in   the   utilization   of   holographic   screens”,   Proc.   Of   the   SPIE 
meeting “Practical Holography IV”, San Jose-CA-USA, 1992.02.9-14 

-   J.   J.   Lunazzi,   P.   M.  Boone,   “3D  image  projection  using  large   diffraction  screen”,   SPIE   2333, 
p.449-453.

-   J.   J.   Lunazzi,   M.   Diamand,   “3D   display   system   based   on   computer-driven   galvanometers”, 

App.Opt. V34, N22, p.4697-4699 (1995)

José Joaquín Lunazzi was born In La Plata,  Argentina, In 1948.  He received his 
M.Sc. degree in 1970 and his Ph.D. degree in 1975, both in physics, from La Plata 
National University. He constructed his first hologram in 1969 as a consequence 
of his interest in stereo photography, which he performed at the age of 14. He 
joined   Camplnas   State   University   in   1976,   working   in   optical   metrology, 
Interferometry and holography. Dr. Lunazzi introduced holographic techniques in Latin America 
and   has   taught   optics   at   every   level,   from   postgraduate   courses   to   courses   for   teachers   at 
secondary and primary levels. He has also taught the use of simple materials in general courses 
for photographers, university students, artists, and the general public.

