1

 

 

 

Stochastic Thermodynamics and Dynamics: 
A Tail of Unexpected 
 
Maria K. Koleva 
Institute of Catalysis, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 
1113 Sofia, BULGARIA 
E-MAIL:  mkoleva@bas.bg 
 
 
The problem of the insensitivity of the macroscopic behavior of any thermodynamical system to partitioning  
generates a bias between the reproducibility of its macroscopic behavior viewed as the simplest form of   
causality and its long-term stability. The overcoming of this controversy goes through certain modification 
of the dynamics that involves self-assembling of the boundary conditions. Subsequently the proposed 
approach justifies parity between the increase and the decrease of the entropy which provides the ground for 
holistic understanding of the thermodynamical systems through launching their ability to transmit and  
create information that is sensitive to coherent functioning of self-assembled logical landscapes. The obtained  
sensitivity gives the advantage of this new approach compared to that of Shannon. According to his definition,  
the information depends only on the overall probability for realization of a given state(s) and thus it does 
not distinguish between  functionally different states provided the overall probability for the realization of  
each of them is equal. 
 

Introduction 
 
The  growing  interest  in  the  stochastic  thermodynamics  has  been  provoked  by  its  recent  application  to 
informational, social and ecological systems. Despite its considerable potential for explanation of various phenomena 
the diversity of dynamical rules strongly challenges its fundamental postulate inferring separation of the time scales 
such  that  to  render  the  insensitivity  of  the  macroscopic  behavior  to  the  particularities  of  the  dynamics  of  the 
constituents.  The  assumed  insensitivity  makes  possible  the  association  of  time-independent  frequencies  with  the 
development of every macroscopic fluctuation. Therefore the time average on every macroscopic time scale becomes 
uniquely  determined  and  time-translational  invariant.  The  importance  of  the  latter  property  is  that  it  provides  the 
reproducibility of the events, both deterministic and stochastic. If considered as broken time-translational invariance, 
the manifestation of each event would ambiguously depend on the moment of its realization even when the conditions 
for  its  performance  remain  unchanged.  This  type  of  reasoning  is  in  conflict  with  the  reproducibility  viewed  as  the 
simplest  form  of  causality  and  by  opposing  straightforward  cause-effect  relationships  it  conditions  the  crucial 
importance of establishing the circumstances which validate the aforementioned postulate. As a primary concern for 
finding  solution  of  this  disparity,  we  will  demonstrate  that  the  general  condition  for  its  validation  confronts  both  the 
classical and the quantum dynamics. 

In order to outline this problem we will start examining the general prerequisite of the target invariance: the 
extensive macroscopic variables (e.g. concentration, temperature) are to be invariant with respect to the partitioning of 
the  system;    at  the  same  time  the  intensive  macroscopic  variables  must  be  additive  regardless  to  the  way  the 
partitioning  is  made.  It  is  beyond  doubt  that  the  independence  from  the  partitioning  justifies  the  uniqueness  of  the 
averaged product and its independence from the details of the dynamics of the constituents. If otherwise, i.e. in the 
case  of  any  dependence  on  the  partitioning,  the  macroscopic  variables  depend  on  the  choice  of  the  auxiliary 
reference  frame  selected  to  define  the  concrete  way  of  partitioning.  So  far  it  has  been  taken  for  granted  that  the 
avoidance of this problem is justified by the assumption that since the macroscopic variables vary much slowly than 
the  fast  dynamical  ones,  the  averaging  over  the  entire  phase  space  (ensembles  in  the  classical  case)  would  take 
place  at  every  location  in  the  system  considered.  Therefore  the  same  averaged  probability  is  assigned  to  every 
constituent.  The  elusive  point,  however,  resides  in  the  lack  of  any  comprehensive  argument  whether  the  averaging 
protocol uniformly converges to an invariant for the spatio-temporal location value. The importance of this issue lies in 
the  fact  that  it  acts  as  a  criterion  that  discriminates  two  fundamentally  different  conducts:  whilst  any  non-uniform 
convergence makes the macroscopic behavior critically dependent on the choice of the auxiliary reference frame and 
thus provokes conflict with time-translational invariance, the uniform convergence implements elimination of any such 
dependence.  This  subject  is  discussed  in  the  next  section  where  key  arguments  for  the  non-uniformity  of  that 
convergence are proposed. Moreover, we will prove that the core of the problem is deeply rooted into the dynamics. 
We  will  go  further  and  will  demonstrate  that  the  modification  of  the  dynamics,  recently  proposed  by  us  [1,2], 
successfully overcomes the above difficulties at the expense of  approaching  the aforementioned postulate by means 
of replacing the averaging over the phase space  with spontaneous synchronization available through the considered 
modification of the dynamics. Moreover, it turns out that the developed approach automatically justifies the launch of 
the thermal equilibrium as universal dynamical process such that in every single collision the dissipation goes from the 

 

2

species  of  larger  energy  to  the  species  of  lower  energy.    Still,  the  major  merit  of  the  proposed  modification  is  its 
consistency with the recent reformulation of the thermodynamics [3] that opens the ground for holistic understanding 
of the thermodynamical systems through launching their ability to transmit and create information through sensitivity to 
coherent functioning of self-assembled logical landscapes. 
 
 

1. The Conflict 
 
As  discussed  in  the  Introduction,  the  generation  of  a  conflict  between  the  thermodynamics  and  the  time-
translational invariance crucially depends on the answer to the question whether the uniform convergence is a generic 
property of the partitioning.  The aim of the present section is to prove that there is no uniform convergence and to 
demonstrate that the problem is to be traced down to the dynamics.  In order to make this proof more evident, we will 
apply  our  argumentations  to  the  process  of  relaxation  of  adsorbed/absorbed  species.  The  generalization  of  the 
problem for the collisions in gases is considered in sec.3.   

The adsorption/absorption is process such that species confined by the surface/volume relax to the ground 
state of potential wells situated at certain locations on a surface/volume.  The transitions through which the relaxation 
proceeds,  dissipate  trough  excitation  of  those  collective  surface/volume  modes  which  match  certain  specific  for  the 
transition and the mode conditions called hereafter resonance conditions. The excited collective modes, in return, act 
as  a  perturbation  on  the  potential  well  and  thus  modify  the  resonant  conditions.  Since  these  perturbations  are 
maintained  by  the  current  spatio-temporal  configuration,  the  question  is  whether  they  drive  any  dependence  of  the 
probability for relaxation on its morphology. To find out, let us have a look on the energy of the excited modes in an 
arbitrary location and at arbitrary instant: 

 
J

(

,
tx

)

≈

exc

∑∫ ∫

ωτ

i

(
)
Add
ωτω

exp

(
(
i
t
τω
−
i

(

,
tx

)
)

−

r
ki

(
)
ω

•

r
x

(

−

r
µ
i

)
)

  

                        (1) 

 
where ωis the frequency of an excited mode; 
iµr is the location of the  −i

th potential well; 

(
)ωA
)txi
(
,τ

well.   

r
)ωk
(

 - its amplitude; 
 is the delay of the mode that  travels from the  −i

 is the dispersion relation of the mode; 

th potential 

The  procedure  that  examines  the  convergence  of  the  partitioning  protocol  is  well  established  and  involves 

)tx,

)θς,

 located at the point (

the following steps: (i) considering an window of arbitrary size  (
, the specification of 
the  margins  of  integration  over  the  frequencies  of  the  excited  modes  ωand  the  delaysτ that  fit  the  window 
considered is to be set; (ii) the second step is establishing whether the averaged over that window dissipated energy 
converges to an invariant for the system value.  The intrigue in this procedure is the revelation of a so far overlooked 
relation between the frequencies and the delays.  Indeed, as explained above, any change of the dissipated energy is 
carried out by those transitions that match the specific for the dynamical process resonance conditions which provide 
correspondence with the excited collective modes.  On the other hand, the excited modes perturb the potential wells 
and  thus  modify  the  resonance  parameters.    Bearing  in  mind  the  general  rule  of  the  dynamics  that  the  resonance 
conditions are highly specific to the process considered, the independence of the delays from one another makes the 
dissipated  energy  fine-tuned  to  the  spatio-temporal  location  which  in  turn  provokes  high  sensitivity  of  the  averaged 
product to the window parameters. That is why the averaging drives amplification of even infinitesimal differences in 
the  dissipated  energy  and  so  intensifies  its  non-uniformity.    Moreover,  the  joint  action  of  the  fine-tuning  and  the 
produced  by  it non-uniformity  brings  about  additional  “scattering”  of  the  delays  which  results  in further  escalation of 
the  non-uniformity.  Hence,  as  follows  from  (1),  the  explicit  dependence  of  the  averaged  product  on  the  window 
parameters  (
to the choice of the auxiliary reference frame that serves to describe the way of partitioning.    

illuminates the assertion that the non-uniformity is straightforwardly related 

 and its location  (

)θς,

)tx,

Yet, it seems that the question about the uniformity of the convergence of the partitioning is a matter of trivial 
mathematical  argumentation  because  the  postulated  in  the  stochastic  thermodynamics  large  gap  between  the 
macroscopic  and  dynamical  time  scales  suggests  that  there  is  “enough  time”  for  performing  all  dynamical 
configurations and so the averaged probability converges to the same value at every location.  That is why at every 
location, the integration over all available delays is executed along with the integration over all available frequencies. 
Though this protocol eventually renders the averaged probability invariant, the current non-uniformity drives a conflict 
with  the  stability  of  the  system.  Indeed,  the  non-uniformity  permanently  propels  sharp  discontinuities  in  the  spatio-
temporal configurations that on exceeding the local thresholds of stability bring about irreversible local defects whose 
unrestrained development would ultimately result in the system breakdown.  

of 

the 

Another argument in favor of the high non-triviality of the subject considered is the relation between the issue 
transmitting 
time  scale  separation  and 

the  velocity  anzatz  which  states 

the  velocity  of 

that 

 

3

matter/energy/information through every media is always bounded. The account for the boundedness of the velocity of 
every motion makes the time for performing all dynamical configurations (time of convergence) subject to the size of 
the  system.  If  so,  the  response  to  every  perturbation  would  be  intensive  variable  which  renders  the  stability  of  the 
system subject to its size – an obvious conflict with our experience.  

To summarize, the issue about the uniform convergence of the averaging protocol brings together the time-
translational invariance and the stability in  a startling puzzle –  along  with the stability of the system  considered, the 
unrestrained  development  of  local  instabilities  violates  the  time-translational  invariance  of  its  macroscopic  behavior.  
This gives rise to the question whether the time-translational invariance and the stability are somewhat coupled.  In 
the next section we will demonstrate that they indeed are counterparts because the general approach [2] that provides 
long-term  stability  automatically  justifies  time-translational  invariance  of  the  macroscopic  behavior.    The  matter  is 
highly  non-trivial  since  it  concerns  the  fundament  of  the  dynamics  –as  the  considerations  in  the  present  section 
convey,  the  core  of  the  problem  is  the  fine-tuning  of  the  dissipation  to  the  current  morphology,  a  fine-tuning  that 
originates from the necessity of meeting highly specific for every process resonance conditions.  
 

 
2.  The Edge of Confinement 
 
The first task of this section  is to delineate  the setting where the elimination of the non-uniformity  links the 
stability and the time-translational invariance into a self-consistent framework. For this purpose, let us first note that 
the  physical  carrier  of  the  non-uniformity  are  the  extra-gradients  produced  by  the  unrestrained  development  of  the 
local  instabilities.  The  stability  of  any  system,  considered  as  a  single  object,  imperatively  requires  synchronous 
smoothing of all extra-gradients. Note that the fulfillment of this condition makes the stability independent from the size 
of  the  system.  The  intrigue  of  this  situation  is  that  together  with  the  stability,  the  same  condition  (synchrony  of 
smoothing) provides lessening of the non-uniformity and so contributes to the independence of the averaged product 
from  the  partitioning.  However,  since  the  synchronous  smoothing  implies  that  all  the  instabilities  fade  away  at  the 
same time, it requires   certain relation between the strength of each local instability and the rate of its weakening. Yet, 
since  the  strength  of  the  instability  and  the  rate  of  its  weakening  are  explicitly  related  to  binding  and  dissipation 
correspondingly,  the  problem  is  unavoidably  reduced  to  the  underlying  dynamics.    It  is  obvious  that  the  target 
synchronous smoothing is provided if and only if the resonance conditions are universal, i.e.  in the sense that they 
are insensitive to the particularities of the dynamical process.  However, this viewpoint runs the following conundrum: 
on the one hand, the fundamental merit of the specificity of the resonance conditions is that it guarantees preserving 
the  identity  of  the  species  during  interaction.  On  the  other  hand,  as  we  demonstrated  above,  the  avoidance  of  the 
unrestrained  development  of  local  instabilities  requires  universality  of  the  resonance  conditions  which,  however, 
automatically discards the identity of the species.  Therefore our goal is to demonstrate that the way to reconciliation 
of these highly contradictive subjects is a new approach to the dynamics. For this purpose, let us first consider the role 
of the dynamics in providing the stability. 

A  general  contemplation  of  the  dynamics  is  to  consider  the  characteristics  of  the  confinement  of  a single 
species in a certain area of apriori settled steady boundary conditions. Viewed from the prospective of the stability, the 
confinement  of  a  limited  number  species  in  an  area/volume  of  finite  size  is  the  major  implement  for  preventing 
accumulation of arbitrary amount of energy/matter in any location. Thus it defines thresholds for the matter/energy to 
be incorporated (adsorbed/absorbed) in a media so that not to destabilize it. Further, since the confinement reduces 
any  long-range  interaction  to  a  short-range  one,  it  makes  the  species  in  different  locations  independent  from  one 
another objects. In turn, this justifies the well-known phenomenon of saturation to be viewed as threshold of the local 
concentration whose surpass yields destabilization. On the other hand, however, as shown above, the surpass seems 
unavoidable  because the specific resonance conditions does not allow smoothing  of the dissipated energy over the 
entire  system.    Thus,  the  core  of  the  problem  is  the  paradigm  about  the  permanency  of  the  boundary  conditions 
because it is it that renders the resonance conditions non-generic.  In order to solve the problem we replace the idea 
of apriori setting of the boundary conditions with the idea of self-assembling of the adsorption potential wells and their 
boundary conditions.  This task needs new viewpoint on the dynamics since the all known so far approaches operate 
at apriori set steady boundary conditions. However, the fundamental flaw of these approaches is that they consider 
action  of  more  than  one  perturbation  always  as  a  linear  superposition  whose  drawback,  however,  is  that  it  allows 
accumulation of arbitrary large amount of energy/matter in every location and thus confronts the stability. In order to 
avoid  accumulation  of  arbitrary  amount  energy  /matter  we  replace  the  idea  of  linear  superposition  with  the  idea  of 
boundedness.  The  latter  implies  that  the  energy/matter  in  every  moment  and  in  every  location  stays  permanently 
bounded. Our next task is to prove that this idea gives rise to universal relation between binding and dissipation which 
automatically eliminates the non-uniformity. We will demonstrate that the elimination of the non-uniformity happens at 
zero binding energy and after that the further relaxation proceeds according to the conventional dynamics. Our next 
task is to delineate the realm of boundedness and the realm of linear superposition.  We will demonstrate that their 
complementarity  provides  both  the  elimination  of  non-uniformity  and  preserving  the  identity  of  the  species  and  the 
interactions among them.  

 

4

The crucial demarcation line between the realm of linear superposition and the realm of boundeness is the 
edge of confinement, i.e. the zero binding energy. Indeed, at zero binding energy each perturbation, regardless to its 
strength, produces radically different effect: it causes either confinement or free movement. The crucial point however, 
is  that  this  effect  is  universal  because    the  details  of  the  perturbation  are  unimportant:  at  zero  binding  energy    de 
Broigle  wavelength  is  arbitrarily  large  which  makes  the  interacting  objects  not  to  “feel”  the  particularities  of  their 
identity. Thus, the interactions at the edge of confinement are universal in the sense that they are insensitive to the 
identity  of  the  interacting  species  and  the  nature  of  the  interactions.  Their  universality  is  conditioned  only  by  the 
requirement  about  the  boundedness  of  the  accumulated  energy  so  that  to  keep  the  system  within  its  thresholds  of 
stability.  The  question  now  is  whether  the  characteristics  of  the  relation  between  the  binding  and  the  dissipation 
subjected to the boundedness are also universal and if so, how they contribute to the solution of the problem about 
the non-uniformity?  

The  study  of  the  problem  starts  with  noticing  that  at  the  edge  of  confinement  the  influence  of  the  excited 
collective modes to the states of zero binding energy cannot be treated as perturbation. We suppose that the excited 
modes  essentially  contribute  to  the  modification  of  the  boundary  conditions  and  thus  induce  new  transitions  which 
dissipate  again  through  excitation  of  collective  modes.    In  turn,  the  collective  modes  spread  the  dissipated  energy 
throughout the system. Obviously, the process stops when the dissipated energy is evenly distributed throughout the 
entire system and all relaxing species are in the same state.  A circumstance that makes this feedback universal is 
that  the  smoothing  out  of  the  identity  of  the  species  and  the  media  renders  the  collective  modes  to  be  “seen”  as 
acoustic-phonon type excitations, i.e. as excitations whose dispersion relation does not depend on the particularities 
of the media but on a single parameter (sound velocity). Then, as it is easy to be seen from (1) the linear dispersion 
relation  eliminates  the  explicit  dependence  on  the  auxiliary  coordinates.  Indeed,  taking  into  account  the  linear 
dispersion relation: 
 
ω
c

(
)
ω =

(2) 

k

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
J exc
 
J

exc

 

(

)tx
,

 becomes: 

(

,
tx

)

≈

∑∫ ∫

ωτ

i

)txg ,
(

dd
τω

exp

(
i
ωτ

)
)
( )
) (
(
GPtxg
τω

,

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

)ωP
(

 and 

where 

 accounts for the current configuration of the non-uniformity; 

 is the distribution of the transition 
( )τG   is  the  distribution  of  the  delays.      The  intrigue  now  is  to  demonstrate  that  
energies  (  dissipated  energy)  and 
( )τG  are not independent from one another but are joined  in a single universal relation that ultimately 
)ωP
(
yields evening of the dissipated energy.  To prove this assertion let us note that the general prerequisite of the lost 
identity  at  the  edge  of  confinement  is  the  lack  of  any  steady  symmetry  of  the  boundary  conditions.  In  our  previous 
work [2,&5.5] we have proved that the statistical properties of the binding at the edge of confinement are identical and 
insensitive  to  the  particularities  of  the  boundary  conditions.  Moreover,  we  have  proved  that  the  eigenvalues  are 
complex  and  are  uniformly  distributed  at  the  unit  circle.  This  immediately  yields  strong  parity  between  the  binding 
energy (real part of an eigenvalue) and the rate of dissipation (the imaginary part of that eigenvalue) – the larger the 
binding energy is the slower its dissipation is. Further, considering that the larger instabilities are more weakly bind, it 
becomes  obvious  that  the  larger  instabilities  dissipate  faster  than  the  smaller  ones.  Therefore,  the  tendency  is  the 
evening  of  the  rates  and  amplitudes  of  all  instabilities  so  that  eventually  their  elimination  to  result  in  uniform 
distribution of all dissipated energy throughout the entire system and all the species to have the same characteristics. 
We call this process spontaneous synchronization in order to distinguish its operational protocol from averaging over 
the  dynamical  variables.  The  greatest  merit  of  the  spontaneous  synchronization  is  that  the  independence  from  the 
partitioning is achieved at permanent respecting the stability of the system.  The further relaxation proceeds according 
to the conventional dynamics. 
 
 
 
So far we have considered the effect of the modification of the dynamics at the edge of confinement only for 
 
the system where species interact with a media. However, the universality of our approach requires justification of its 
successful  operation  in  systems  where  the  only  interactions  are  collisions  among  the  constituents.  It  is  well  known, 
that  the  dissipative  mechanisms  proposed  so  far  are  model-dependent  and  does  not  yield  stable  evening  of  the 
dissipated  energy  throughout  the  system  and  thus  fail  in  providing  the  insensitivity  to  partitioning  as  a  generic 
property.  That is why the application of our approach to the case of collisions is a crucial test for its universality.  

3. Atom as a Network. Thermal Equilibrium 

 

5

 
The  major  difference  with  the  previous  case  is  that  now  the  de  Broigle  wavelength  if  finite  because  the 
species  move  ballistically  between  collisions.  Then  its  size  defines  the  area  within  which  the  interactions  proceed 
under the condition of lost identity. Indeed, inside the latter area, the structure of the species is not well discerned and 
thus  each  species  “feels”  any  other  as  a  structureless  object.  Further,  taking  into  account  the  postulate  about  the 
boundedness of the rate of exchanging matter/energy/information, this structurless object must be considered rather 
as a universal network, i.e. its only active elements are the acoustic-phonon type collective excitations (lost identity). 
Then, the exchanged energy in that process is: 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Vk

J

exc

(

,
tx

)

≈

∫

⎛
d
exp
τωωτ
⎜
i
⎝

(
t

∫

−

d

i

0

)

−

i

 
rω
(
x
•
V

−

r
x
i

)

⎞
⎟
⎠

        

where V is the  velocity of the species.  Thus, the process of dissipation of the kinetic energy to the internal degrees 
of freedom (network) is reduced to the same type spontaneous synchronization as considered in the previous section. 
The peculiarity, however, is that the utilization of the dispersion relation of a  de Broigle wave: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

(5) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

k

=

ω
V

   

 

makes evident that the larger the velocity of the species is the more energy dissipates from the kinetic energy to the 
internal  degrees  of  freedom,  i.e.  to  the  network.  Besides,  since  the  mechanism  of  this  dissipation  is  universal  and 
independent  from  the  identity  of  the  species,  we  may  well  proclaim  that  it  is  the  implement  of  launching  thermal 
equilibrium, i.e. equilibrization of the kinetic energy of all the species. Note, that since the proposed by us mechanism 
is bound to provide the stability of the system, the thermal equilibrium is a manifestation of a long-term stable behavior 
of  a  many-body  system  as  a  single  object.  This  justifies  the  key  difference  between  our  approach  and  the 
conventional  thermodynamics,  namely:  the  latter  considers  the  thermal  equilibrium  as  a  prerequisite  of  establishing 
thermodynamical  equilibrium  viewed  as  the  state  of  maximum  entropy.  Besides,  since  the  edge  of  confinement  is 
additively  decomposed  to  conventional  dynamics,  and  under  the  supposition  of  self-assembling  of  the  boundary 
conditions,  the  final  macro-state  can  be  any  steady  state  that  is  long-term  stable  but  not  necessarily  the  state  of 
maximum entropy! This result opens the door for reversibility of the processes accompanied by entropy change, i.e. it 
substantiates parity between the increase and the decrease of the entropy and thus justifies them as physical ground 
for creating and transmitting  information. Note, that the reproducibility of the information requires return in the initial 
state,  a  circumstance  that  imperatively  demands  parity  between  both  increase  and  decrease  of  the  entropy.  This 
result is in total accordance with our recently proposed major modification of the thermodynamics [3] whose priority is 
to set the grounds for many-body systems not only to transform work into heat but to transmit and create information 
as  well.    A  very  important  point  of  the  new  thermodynamics  is  the  reformulation  of  its  second  law  because  the 
generation  of  any  information  happens  at  the  expense  of  entropy  decrease  which  apparently  violates  the  assertion 
that on the approach to the equilibrium the entropy always monotonically increases. 
 
 
 
 
 
The aim of the  present  study is  to  demonstrate that  the problem  concerning the  insensitivity to partitioning 
goes far beyond the trivial mathematical argumentation and leads to new unexpected results. The non-triviality of the 
matter is that it involves into a complex interplay the fundamental issues  such as reproducibility of the macroscopic 
behavior and ability for creating information with the question of the stability of a system viewed as conditions for self-
organization  of  the  constituents  into  a  single  long-term  stable  object.    Furthermore,  we  proved  that  successful 
resolving  of  the  problems  involves  certain  modification  of  the  dynamics  which  in  turn  makes  the  formation  of  the 
thermal equilibrium a universal dynamical process insensitive to the particularities of the dynamics of the constituents. 
Consequently, it establishes parity between the increase and the decrease of the entropy which launches the ability of 
the  thermodynamical  systems  not  only  to  transform  work  into  heat  but  to  create  and  transmit  information  as  well. 
Moreover,  it  opens  the  ground  for  holistic  approach  to  the  matter  by  means  of  defining  information  so  that  to  be 
sensitive to the functional morphology of a self-assembled logical landscape. We have achieved this goal by defining 
the  information  through  the  properties  of  the  power  spectrum  of  the  state  that  represents  a  logical  unit  [3].    The 
functional  morphology  of  the  logical  landscape,  described  by  eq.(4)  in  [3],  is  mapped  onto  the  properties  of  the 
discrete band of the power spectrum so that any change in it yields change in the structure of the discrete band. The 
obtained  sensitivity  provides  the  major  advantage  of  our  definition  of  information  compared  to  that  of  Shannon.  
According to his definition [4], the information depends only on the overall probability for realization of a given state(s) 
and  thus  it  does  not  distinguish  between  any  functionally  different  states  provided  the  overall  probability  for  the 
realization of each of them is equal.  Yet, the fundamental difference between our approach and that of Shannon is in 

Conclusions 

6

defining the physical  origin of the information and the noise: on the contrary to Shannon who allows  both the noise 
and the information to be created by the same stochastic process, we provide comprehensible physical ground for the 
discrimination  between  information  and  noise  through  associating  the  information  with  causal  relations  and 
deterministic  processes  and  characterizing  the  noise  by  the  stochastic  processes.  The  lack  of  any  physical 
discrimination between the information and the noise gives rise to complementarity between the Shannon information 
and  the  entropy  viewed  as  a  measure  of  disorder.  In  turn,  the  obtained  complementarity  makes  the  information  a 
quantitative characteristic whose value is subject to uncertainty determined by the entropy. The decisive drawback of 
this  duality,  however,  is  that  it  generates  a  conflict  with  the  time-translational  invariance  as  long  as  the  non-zero 
entropy  renders  non-zero  probability  for  deviation  from  any  long-term  steady  behavior  regardless  to  whether  the 
conditions  for  reproducibility  are  the  same  or  not.  The  conflict  is  best  elucidated  by  the  paradox  that  it  generates, 
namely: the considered complementarity renders the equilibrium, viewed as the state of maximum entropy, to be the 
state  whose  behavior  would  be  predicted  with  the  lowest  possible  accuracy!?  Further,  the  lack  of  any  physical 
discrimination between the information and the noise highlights the paradox by posing the question whether the Sun 
will  rise  tomorrow  is  also  subject  to  prediction,  the  accuracy  of  which  depends  on  the  current  entropy  of  the  Solar 
system and its environment!? It is obvious that the core of these paradoxes lies in the parity between the information 
and  the  entropy  established  on  the  grounds  of  the  oversimplified  relation  between  order  and  disorder  expressed 
through the dependence of both the information and the entropy on the probability for realization of a given state.  In 
order  to  avoid  the  problem,  we  assert  that  the  information  must  be  defined  so  that  to  account  for  the  functional 
organization  of  the  “order”.  Since  the  functional  organization  of  a  given  state  is  mapped  onto  the  properties  of  the 
discrete band in the power spectrum, we proposed the latter to be the target measure of information. Note that any 
discrete band reveals the long-term correlations established in the system, i.e. they correspond to certain deterministic 
processes or causal relations. On the other hand, imposed on every stochastic process, the boundeness viewed as 
the  only  general  constraint  for  providing  the  stability,  makes  the  shape  of  the  power  spectrum  in  each  realization 
insensitive  to  the  particularities  of  its  statistics  [2,  chapter  1].    In  turn,  the  obtained  insensitivity  provides  constant 
accuracy of the separation between the information (a discrete band) and the noise (a continuous band of universal 
shape). The major advantage of maintaining constant accuracy lies in meeting the most general requirement for the 
reproducibility of the information: it is worth noting that while the deterministic processes are reproducible by definition, 
the  noise  realizations  are  always  different.  For  that  reason  the  issue  about  the  accuracy  of  the  separation  of  the 
information from the noise appears as an indistinguishable part of the problem about the reproducibility in general. 
 
 
 
 

References 

1.  M. K. Koleva, http://arXiv.org/cond-mat/0212357 
2.  M. K. Koleva, http://arXiv.org/physics/0512078 
3.  M. K. Koleva, http://arXiv.org/physics/0609096 
4.  C. E. Shannon and W. Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Information, University of Ill. Press, Urbana (1949) 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

