Cultural route to the emergence of linguistic categories 

Andrea Puglisi (1), Andrea Baronchelli (1,2) & Vittorio Loreto (1) 

(1)“La Sapienza” University, Physics Department, P.le A. Moro 2, 00185 Rome ITALY 

(2) Departament de Física i Enginyeria Nuclear, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 

Campus Nord, Mòdul B4, 08034 Barcelona, Spain 

Andrea.Puglisi@roma.infn.it, Andrea.Baronchelli@roma1.infn.it, Vittorio.Loreto@roma1.infn.it  

 

Abstract 

Categories provide a coarse grained description of the world. A fundamental question is 
whether  categories  simply  mirror  an  underlying  structure  of  nature,  or  instead  come 
from  the  complex  interactions  of  human  beings  among  themselves  and  with  the 
environment.  Here  we  address  this  question  by  modelling  a  population  of  individuals 
who  co-evolve  their  own  system  of  symbols  and  meanings  by  playing  elementary 
language games. The central result is the emergence of a hierarchical category structure 
made  of  two  distinct  levels:  a  basic  layer,  responsible  for  fine  discrimination  of  the 
environment, and a shared linguistic layer that groups together perceptions to guarantee 
communicative success. Remarkably, the number of linguistic categories turns out to be 
finite and small, as observed in natural languages. 
 

Categories are fundamental to recognize, differentiate and understand the environment. 

According to Aristotle, categories are entities characterized by a set of properties which 

are shared by their members [1]. A recent wave in cognitive science, on the other hand, 

has  operated  a  shift  in  viewpoint  from  the  object  of  categorization  to  the  categorizing 

subjects [2,3]: categories are culture-dependent conventions shared by a given group. In 

this  perspective,  a  crucial  question  is  how  they  come  to  be  accepted  at  a  global  level 

without  any  central  coordination  [4,5,6-8].  The  answer  has  to  be  found  in 

communication, that is the ground on which culture exerts its pressure. An established 

breakthrough in language evolution [4,9-11] is the appearance of linguistic categories, 

i.e. a shared repertoire of form-meaning associations in a given environment [2,3,5,12-

15]. Different individuals may in principle perceive, and even conceptualize, the world 

in  very  different  ways,  but  they  need  to  align  their  linguistic  ontologies  in  order  to 

understand each other.  

 

In  the  past  there  have  been  many  computational  and  mathematical  studies 

addressing the learning procedures for form-meaning associations [16-17].    From the 

point of view of methodology, the evolutionary scheme, based on the maximization of 

some  fitness  functions,  has  been  extensively  applied  [18,19].  Recent  years,  however, 

have  shown  that  also  the  orthogonal  approach  of  self-organisation  can  be  fruitfully 

exploited in multi-agent models for the emergence of language [6-8]. In this context, a 

community  of  language  users  is  viewed  as  a  complex  dynamical  system  which  has  to 

develop  a  shared  communication  system  [20,21].  In  this  debate,  a  still  open  problem 

concerns  the  emergence  of  a  small  number  of  forms  out  of  a  diverging  number  of 

meanings.  For  example  the  few  “basic  colour  terms”,  present  in  natural  languages, 

coarse-grain an almost infinite number of perceivable different colours [22-24]. 

Following this recent line of research, our work shows that an assembly of individuals 

with  basic  communication  rules  and  without  any  external  supervision,  may  evolve  an 

initially  empty  set  of  categories,  achieving  a  non-trivial  communication  system 

characterized  by  a  few  linguistic  categories.  To  probe  the  hypothesis  that  cultural 

exchange is sufficient to this extent, individuals in our model are never replaced (as in 

evolutionary  schemes  [18,19]),  the  only  evolution  occurring  in  their  internal  form-

meaning association tables, i.e. their “mind”. The individuals play elementary language 

games  [25,26]  whose  rules,  hard-wired  in  individuals,  constitute  the  only  knowledge 

initially shared by the population. They are also capable of perceiving analogical stimuli 

and communicating with each others [6,7].  

 

Our  model  involves  a  population  of  N   individuals  (or  players),  committed  in 

the  categorization  of  a  single  analogical  perceptual  channel,  each  stimulus  being 

represented  as  a  real-valued  number  ranging  in  the  interval 

]0,1[

.  Here  we  identify 

categorization  as  a  partition  of  the  interval 

[0,1   in  discrete  sub-intervals,  from  now 

]

onwards  denoted  as  perceptual  categories  [27].    Each  individual  has  a  dynamical 

inventory  of  form-meaning  associations  linking  perceptual  categories  (meanings)  to 

words (forms), representing their linguistic counterpart. Perceptual categories and words 

associated  to  them  co-evolve  dynamically  through  a  sequence  of  elementary 

communication  interactions,  simply  referred  as  games.  All  players  are  initialised  with 

only  the  trivial  perceptual  category 

[0,1 ,  with  no  name  associated  to  it.  At  each  time 

]

step a pair of individuals (one playing as speaker and the other as hearer) is selected and 

presented  with  a  new  ``scene'',  i.e.  a  set  of 

2≥M

  objects  (stimuli),  denoted  as 

]0,1[∈io

 with 

i ∈

1,[ M

]

. The speaker discriminates the scene and names one object and 

the hearer tries to guess the named object. A correct guess makes the game successful. 

Based  on  game's  outcomes  both  individuals  update  their  category  boundaries  and  the 

inventory of the associated words. A detailed description of the game is given in Fig. 1. 

The  perceptive  resolution  power  of  the  individuals  limits  their  ability  to  distinguish 

objects/stimuli that are too close to each other in the perceptual space: in order to take 

this into account, we define a threshold  mind

, inversely proportional to their resolution 

power.  In  a  given  scene  the  M stimuli  are  chosen  to  be  at  a  distance  larger  than  this 

threshold,  i.e.

o| −
i

d|>o

j

min

  for  every  pair 

(i,

j)

.  Nevertheless,  objects  presented  in 

different  games  may  be  closer  than 

.  The  way  stimuli  are  randomly  chosen 

mind

characterizes  the  kind  of  simulated  environment:  simulations  will  be  presented  both 

with  a  homogeneous  environment  (uniform  distribution  in 

]0,1[

)  and  more  natural 

environments (e.g., without loss of generality [27], the distributions of the hue sampled 

from pictures portraying natural landscapes).  

A resume of the main results of our experiments is given in Fig. 2. The evolution of the 

population presents two main stages: 1) a phase where players do not understand each 

other, followed by 2) a phase where communication has reached full success thanks to 

the  emergence  of  a  common  language,  still  with  evolving  perceptual  categories.  The 

first phase is marked by the growth and decline of synonymy, see Fig. 2a. Synonymy, in 

 

) 2/b+a

Fig.1: Rules of the game. A pair of examples representing a failure (game 1) and a success 
(game 2), respectively. In a game, two players are randomly selected from the population. Two 
objects  are  presented  to  both  players.  The  speaker  selects  the  topic.  In  game  1  the  speaker 
has  to  discriminate  the  chosen  topic  (“a”  in  this  case)  by  creating  a  new  boundary  in  her 
rightmost  perceptual  category  at  the  position  (
.  The  two  new  categories  inherit  the 
words-inventory  of  the  parent  perceptual  category  (here  the  words  “green”  and  “olive”)  along 
with a different brand new word each (“brown” and “blue”). Then the speaker browses the list of 
words associated to the perceptual category containing the topic. There are two possibilities: if a 
previous  successful  communication  has  occurred  with  this  category,  the  last  winning  word  is 
chosen;  otherwise  the  last  created  word  is  selected.    In  the  present  example  the  speaker 
chooses the word “brown”, and transmits it to the hearer. The outcome of the game is a failure 
since the hearer does not have the word “brown” in her inventory. The speaker unveils the topic, 
in  a  non-linguistic  way  (e.g.  pointing  at  it),  and  the  hearer  adds  the  new  word  to  the  word 
inventory of the corresponding category. In game 2 the speaker chooses the topic “a”,  finds the 
topic already discriminated and verbalizes it using the word “green” (which, for example, may be 
the  winning  word  in  the  last  successful  communication  concerning  that  category).  The  hearer 
knows this word and therefore points correctly to the topic. This is a successful game: both the 
speaker and the hearer eliminate all competing words for the perceptual category containing the 
topic,  leaving  “green”  only.  In  general  when  ambiguities  are  present  (e.g.  the  hearer  finds  the 
verbalized word associated to more than one category containing an object), these are solved 
making an unbiased random choice.  

 

the context of the ``naming game'' (an individual object to be named), has been already 

studied [8], and a similar evolution was observed and explained. All individuals, when 

necessary, create new words with zero probability of repetition: this leads to an initial 

growth of the vocabulary associated to each perceptual category. New words are spread 

through  the  population  in  later  games  and,  whenever  a  word  is  understood  by  both 

players,  other  competing  words  for  the  same  category  are  forgotten.  This  eventually 

leads  to  only  one  word  per  category.  During  the  growth  of  the  dictionary  the  success 

rate, see Fig. 2b, is very small. The subsequent reduction of the dictionary corresponds 

to  a  growing  success  rate  which  reaches  its  maximum  value  after  synonymy  has 

disappeared.  In  all  our  numerical  experiments  the  final  success  rate  overcomes    80% 

and  in  most  of  them  goes  above  90%,  weakly  increasing  with  the  final  number  of 

perceptual categories. Success is reached in a number of games per player of the order 

of 

210⋅5

, logarithmically depending on  N , and it remains constant hereafter. 

The set of perceptual categories of each individual follows a somewhat different 

evolution  (see  dashed  lines  in  Fig.  2c).  The  first  step  of  each  game  is,  in  fact,  the 

discrimination stage where the speaker (possibly followed by the hearer) may refine her 

category inventory in order to distinguish the topic from the other objects. The growth 

of  the  number  of  perceptual  categories 

  of  each  individual  is  limited  by  the 

percn

resolution  power:  in  a  game  two  objects  cannot  appear  at  a  distance  smaller  than 

mind

and  therefore 

n

/2
d<

min

perc

.  The  minimal  distance  also  imposes  a  minimum 

number  of  categories 

mind/1

that  an  individual  must  create  before  her  discrimination 

process may stop. The average number of perceptual categories per individual, having 

passed 

mind/1

,  grows  sub-logarithmically  and  for  many  practical  purposes  it  can  be 

considered constant. 

 

The  success  rate  is  expected  to  depend  on  the  alignment  of  the  category 

inventory among different individuals. The degree of alignment of category boundaries  

is measured by an overlap function  O  (defined in the Appendix) which returns a value 

proportional  to  the  degree  of  alignment  of  the  two  category  inventories,  reaching  its 

maximum unitary value when they exactly coincide. Its study, see dashed curves of  

100=N

Fig.2:  Results  of  the  simulations  with
: 
a)  Synonymy,  i.e.  average  number  of  words  per  category;  b)  Success  rate 
measured as the fraction of successful games  in a sliding time windows  1000  
games  long;    c)  Average  number  of  perceptual  (dashed  lines)  and  linguistic 
(solid  lines)  categories  per  individual;  d)  Averaged  overlap,  i.e.  alignment 
among  players,  for  perceptual  (dashed  curves)  and  linguistic  (solid  curves) 
categories. 

and  different  values  of  mind

 

Fig.  2d,  shows  that  alignment  grows  with  time  and  saturates  to  a  value  which  is, 

typically, in between 60%-70%, i.e. quite smaller than the communicative success. This 

observation  immediately  poses  a  question:  given  such  a  strong  misalignment  among 

individuals, why is communication so effective?   

 

 

 

 

 

 
Fig.3:  Saturation  in  the  number  of  linguistic  categories:  a)  A  “word 
contagion” phenomenon occurs whenever the topic falls in a gap between two 
misaligned  categories  of  two  playing  individuals.  In  the  shown  examples  two 
individuals play two successive games. In game 1 the speaker (S) says “blue” 
and the hearer (H), unable to understand, adds “blue” as a possible word for her 
leftmost  category;  successively  (game  2)  the  speaker  repeats  “blue”  and  the 
hearer learns this word as the definitive name for that perceptual category; both 
left and right perceptual categories of the hearer are now identified by the same 
name “blue” and they can be considered (for the purpose of communication) as 
a single linguistic category; b) Final number of linguistic categories as a function 
.  As  the  time  increases  the  number  of 
of 
linguistic  categories  saturates.  At  large  times,  for  small 
mind

  at  different  times,  with

  ,  the  number  of 

100=N

mind

linguistic  categories  becomes  independent  of 
  itself.    Concerning  size 
dependence,  only  a  weak  (logarithmic)  dependence  on  N,  not  shown,  is 
observed. 

mind

The answer has to be found in the analysis of polysemy, i.e. the existence of perceptual 

categories identified by the same unique word. Misalignment, in fact, induces a ``word 

contagion''  phenomenon.  With  a  small  but  non  zero  probability,  two  individuals  with 

similar, but not exactly equal, category boundaries, may play a game with a topic falling 

in  a  misalignment  gap,  as  represented  in  Fig.  3a.  In  this  way  a  word  is  copied  to  an 

adjacent perceptual category and, through a second occurrence of a similar event, may 

become the unique name of that category.  Interfering events may occur in between: it is 

always possible, in fact, that a game is played with a topic object falling in the bulk of 

the  category,  where  both  players  agree  on  its  old  name,  therefore  cancelling  the 

contagion. With respect to this cancelling probability, some gaps are too small and act 

as  almost  perfectly  aligned  boundaries,  drastically  reducing  the  probability  of  any 

further  contagion.  Thus,  polysemy  needs  a  two-step  process  to  emerge,  and  a  global 

self-organised  agreement  to  become  stable.  On  the  other  hand,  polysemy  guarantees 

communicative success: perceptual categories that are not perfectly aligned tend to have 

the same name, forming true linguistic categories, much better aligned among different 

individuals.  The  topmost  curve  of  Fig.  2d,  displays  the  overlap  function  measured 

considering  only  boundaries  between  categories  with  different  names:  it  is  shown  to 

reach a much higher value, even larger than 90%.  

The  appearance  of  linguistic  categories  is  the  evidence  of  a  coordination  of  the 

population  on  a  higher  hierarchical  level:  a  superior  linguistic  structure  on  top  of  the 

individual-dependent, finer, discrimination layer. The linguistic level emerges as totally 

self-organised  and  is  the  product  of  the  (cultural)  negotiation  process  among  the 

individuals.  The average number of linguistic categories per individual, 

lingn

, Fig. 2c 

(solid  curves),  grows  together  with 

during  the  first  stage  (where  communicative 

catn

success  is  still  lacking),  then  decreases  and  stabilises  to  a  much  lower  value.  Some 

configurations of both category layers, at a time such that the success rate has overcome 

95%, are presented in Fig. 4, using different sets of external stimuli.  

The analysis, resumed in Fig.3b, of the dependence of 

lingn

 on  mind

 for different 

times,  makes  our  findings  robust  and,  to  our  knowledge,  unprecedented.  As  the 

resolution  power  is  increased,  i.e.  as 

is  diminished,  the  asymptotic  number  of 

mind

linguistic  categories  becomes  less  and  less  dependent  upon 

mind

  itself.  Most 

importantly, even if any state with 

1>nling

  is not stable, we have the clear evidence of 

a  saturation  with  time,  in  close  resemblance  with  metastability  in  glassy  systems 

[28,29].  This  observation  allows  to  give  a  solution  to  the  long-standing  problem  of 

explaining  the  finite  (and  small)  number  of  linguistic  categories 

lingn

.  In  previous 

pioneering  approaches  [6,7]  the  number  of  linguistic  categories 

lingn

  was  trivially 

constrained  (with  a  small  range  of  variability)  by 

,  with  a  relation  of  the  kind 

mind

n
ling

/1∝

d

min

,  implying  a  divergence  of 

  with  the  resolution  power.  In  our  model 

lingn

we have a clear indication of a finite 

 even in the continuum limit, i.e. 

lingn

0→mind

, 

corresponding to an infinite resolution power.  

 

0.01

,  after 

100=N

in  a  population  of

Fig.4:  Categories  and  the  pressure  of  environment.  Inventories  of  10 
individuals  randomly  picked  up 
players,  with 
710   games.  For  each  player  the  configuration  of  perceptual 
=d min
(small  vertical  lines)  and  linguistic  (long  vertical  lines)  category  boundaries  is 
superimposed  to  a  coloured  histogram  indicating  the  relative  frequency  of 
stimuli.  The  labels  indicate  the  unique  word  associated  to  all  perceptual 
categories  forming  each  linguistic  category.  Three  cases  are  presented:  one 
with  uniformly  distributed  stimuli  (a)  and  two  with  stimuli  randomly  extracted 
from the hue distribution of natural pictures (b and c). One can appreciate the 
perfect  agreement  of  category  names,  as  well  as  the  good  alignment  of 
linguistic  category  boundaries.  Moreover,  linguistic  categories  tend  to  be  more 
refined  in  regions  where  stimuli  are  more  frequent:  an  example  of  how  the 
environment may influence the categorization process.  

 
With the help of an extensive and systematic series of simulations we have shown that a 

simple  negotiation  scheme,  based  on  memory  and  feedback,  is  sufficient  to  guarantee 

the emergence of a self-organised communication system which is able to discriminate 

objects in the world, requiring only a small set of words. Individuals alone are endowed 

with the ability of forming perceptual categories, while cultural interaction among them 

is  responsible  for  the  emergence  and  alignment  of  linguistic  categories.  Our  model 

reproduces a typical feature of natural languages: despite a very high resolution power, 

the  number  of  linguistic  categories  is  very  small.  For  instance,  in  many  human 

languages,  the  number  of  “basic  colour  terms”  used  to  categorize  colours  usually 

amounts to about ten [22-24], while the light spectrum resolution power of our eyes is 

evidently much higher. Note that in our simulations we observe a reduction, with time, 

of  the  number  of  linguistic  categories  toward  the  final  plateau.  The  experimental 

evidence  [30],  collected  in  empirical  studies  on  colour  categorization,  of  a    growth  of 

the  number  of  categories  from  simpler  to  more  complex  societies  could  be,  in  our 

opinion, an effect of the increased number  N of players involved in the communicative 

process. Finally we believe that these results could be important both from the point of 

view of language evolution theories, possibly leading to a quantitative comparison with 

real  data  (e.g.  different  populations  sizes  and  ages),  and  from  the  point  view  of 

applications  (e.g.  emergence  of  new  communication  systems  in  biological,  social  and 

technological contexts  [31,32]). 

 Appendix 

O  function: 

The degree of alignment of category boundaries is measured by the following ``overlap'' 

=O

∑
2
{
}
j<i

o
ij
−

N(N

1

)

 with 

o
ij

=

(1

−

i
lc
i

2

)

2

∑

j

c
i
lc
i

(1

−

2

)

+

(1

−

lc

2

)

j

, 

∑

c
i

∑

c
i

where  cl lc  is the width of category  c ,  ic

iic  is one of the categories of the  i -th player, and 

ijc  is the generic category of the category ``intersection'' set obtained considering all the 

boundaries of both players  i and  j . The function 

ijo  returns a value proportional to the 

degree  of  alignment  of  the  two  category  inventories,  reaching  its  maximum  unitary 

value when they exactly coincide. 

[1] J. Barnes, (Editor), The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford 

Translation, Bollingen Series, Vol. LXXI, No. 2 (Princeton University Press, 1995). 

[2] G. Lakoff, Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things (University of Chicago Press, 

1987). 

Books, 1987) 

2005). 

[3] H. Gardner,  The Mind's New Science: A History of the Cognitive Revolution (Basic 

[4] M. Christiansen, S. Kirby, (eds.) Language Evolution (Oxford University Press, 

[5] L. Steels, In The Evolution of Language, Selected papers from 2nd International 

Conference on the Evolution of Language (London, 1998). 

[6] L. Steels, T. Belpaeme, Behavioral and Brain Science 24, 469 (2005). 

[7] T. Belpaeme, J. Bleys, Adaptive Behavior 13, 293 (2005). 

[8] A. Baronchelli, M Felici, E. Caglioti, V. Loreto, L. Steels, J. Stat. Mech. P06014 

(2006). 

[9] J. R. Hurford, M. Studdert-Kennedy, C. Knight, (eds.) Approaches to the Evolution 

of Language: Social and Cognitive Bases (Cambridge University Press, 1998). 

[10] M. A. Nowak, N. L. Komarova , P. Niyogi, Nature 417, 611 (2002). 

[11] J. Maynard-Smith, E. Szathmary, The Major Transitions in Evolution  (Oxford 

University Press, New York, 1997). 

[12] J. R. Taylor, Linguistic Categorization: Prototypes in Linguistic Theory (Oxford 

University Press, 1995). 

(Elsevier, New York, 2005). 

[13] H. Coehn, C. Lefebvre,  (eds.), Handbook of Categorization in Cognitive Science, 

[14] G. Garrod, A. Anderson, Cognition 27, 181 (1987). 

[15] W. Labov, in C.-J. Bailey and R. Shuy (eds.), New Ways of Analyzing Variation in 

English (Georgetown U. Press, Washington, DC, 1973).  

[16] J. Hurford, Lingua 77, 187 (1989). 

[17] M. Oliphant, in T. Briscoe ed., Linguistic evolution through language acquisition, 

(Cambridge University Press, 2002). 

[18] M. A. Nowak, D. C. Krakauer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 13189 (1999).  

[19] M. A. Nowak, J. B. Plotkin, D. C. Krakauer, Jour. Theor. Bio. 200, 147 (1999). 

[20] L. Steels, in M. Schoenauer (Ed.), Proceedings of PPSN VI (Springer-Verlag, 

Berlin, 2000). 

[21] N. L. Komarova, Frontiers of engineering: reports on leading-edge engineering 

from the 2005 symposium, The National Academy Press, pp. 89-98 (2006). 

[22] B. Berlin, P. Kay, Basic color terms: their universality and evolution (University of 

California Press, Berkeley, 1969). 

[23] D. T. Lindsey, A. M. Brown, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 16608 (2006). 

[24] B. A. C. Saunders, J. van Brakel, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20, 167 (1997). 

[25] L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations (Blackwell Publisher, Malden USA, 

1953). 

[26] L. Steels, in C. O. Langton, K. Shimohara, (eds.) 
 Proceedings of Artificial Life V  (MIT press, Cambridge MA, 1996).  

[27]  This approach can also be extended to categories with prototypes and fuzzy 

boundaries, for instance adding a weight structure upon it. Typical proposals in 

literature, such as prototypes with a weight function equal to the inverse of the distance 

from the prototype [7], are exactly equivalent to our ``rigid boundaries'' categories. 

Moreover, all the results of our experiment can be easily generalized to multi-

dimensional perceptual channels, provided an appropriate definition of category 

domains is given. It should be kept in mind that the goal of our work is to investigate 

why the continuum of perceivable meanings in the world is organized, in language, in a 

finite and small number of subsets with different names, with a no immediate 

(objective) cause for a given partition with respect to other infinite possibilities. Apart 

from the evident example of the partition of the continuous light spectrum in a small 

number of “basic color terms”, this phenomenon is widespread in language: one can 

ask, for example, what objective differences allow to distinguish a cup from a glass; one 

can present a multi-dimensional continuum of objects able to “contain a liquid” 

(including also objects given as a prize), but a natural discontinuity between cups and 

glasses does not appear; our model, even reducing the phenomenon to the case of a 1-

dimensional continuum, unveils a mechanism which can be easily extended to any kind 

of space, once it has been provided with a topology. The mechanism we propose for the 

discrete partition in linguistic subsets (categories) does not depend on the exact nature 

of this topology, which is of course a fundamental, yet different, matter of investigation.  

[28] M. Mezard, G. Parisi, M. A. Virasoro, Spin glass theory and beyond (World 

Scientific, New Jersey, 1987).  

[29] P. G. Debenedetti, F. H. Stillinger, Nature 410, 259 (2001). 

[30]  P. Kay, L. Maffi, American Anthropologist 101, 743 (1999). 

[31]  L. Steels, IEEE Intelligent Systems 21, 32 (2006).  

[32] C. Cattuto, V. Loreto, L. Pietronero, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., in press (2007). 

Acknowledgements: The authors wish to thank C. Cattuto,  G. Andrighetto, A. Baldassarri, E. Polizzi di 

Sorrentino, L. Steels, T. Belpaeme, J.  De Beule and B. De Vylder for many interesting discussions and 

suggestions. This research has been partly supported by the EU under RD contract IST-1940 (ECAgents).  

Competing Interests statement: The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests. 

