1 

Passive Exposure to Mobile Phones: 

Enhancement of Intensity by Reflection 
Tsuyoshi HONDOU(cid:1), Takenori UEDA1, Yasuhiro SAKATA2, Nobuto TANIGAWA2, 
Tetsu SUZUKI3, Taizo KOBAYASHI2 and Kensuke IKEDA2 
Department of Physics, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578 
1Japan Offspring Fund, 2-5-2 Kojimachi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0083 
2Department of Physics, Ritsumeikan University, Kusatsu 525-8577 
3Department of Information and Communication Engineering, 
Sendai National College of Technology, Sendai 989-3128 

   In  a  recent  Letter  [J.  Phys.  Soc.  Jpn.  71,  432  (2002)],  we  reported  a  preliminary  calculation  and 
concluded  that  public  exposure  to  mobile  phones  can  be  enhanced  by  microwave  reflection  in  public 
spaces. In this paper, we confirm the significance of microwave reflection reported in our previous Letter 
by experimental and numerical studies. Furthermore, we show that “hot spots” often emerge in reflective 
areas, where the local exposure level is much higher than average. Such places include elevators, and we 
discuss other possible environments including trains,  buses, cars, and airplanes.  Our results indicate the 
risk of “passive exposure” to microwaves.  

KEYWORDS: passive exposure, boundary condition problem, biological effect, microwave, Maxwell’s equations, 
mobile phone 

(cid:1)1 Introduction 

Significant  public  concerns  have  arisen  over 
exposure  to  microwaves.  These  concerns  relate  to 
interference with electro-medical devices and the effect 
on  human  health.  Exposure  to  microwaves  has  been 
shown  to  disturb  the  regular  activity  of  our  biological 
cells,  even  at  exposure  levels  much  lower  than  those 
known  to  induce  thermal  stress.  It  is  naively  assumed 
that in public areas the exposure level decreases rapidly 
with distance from the  radiation source  (e.g., a  mobile 
phone)1-10). This assumption has been widely applied to 
several risk assessments11-13).  

From the viewpoint of mathematical physics, the 
laws  of  electromagnetic  waves  are  described  by 
Maxwell’s  equations,  a  set  of  partial  differential 
equations.  It  is  well  known  in  mathematics  that  a 
partial  differential  equation  cannot  be  solved  without 
specifying its boundary condition. In the application we 
present  here,  microwaves  are  reflected  by  metallic 
walls  at  an  efficiency  of  more  than  99%.  Hence,  we 
recently  pointed  out  in  preliminary  calculations14)  the 
                                                 

importance  of  considering  all  boundary  condition  in 
passive exposure to microwaves, since many reflective 
boundaries  are  found  in  our  daily  life,  for  example,  in 
elevators  and  trains.  However,  specialists  in  this  area 
have still not acknowledged the central issue raised. 

in  which  a  specialist  conceded 

A  typical  objection  to  concerns  about  reflected 
microwaves  was  presented  in  the  magazine  New 
that 
Scientist, 
microwaves  would  bounce  around 
inside  of 
carriages  and  boost  field  levels.  However,  he  claimed, 
“the increase should be  minimal, because power drops 
off a short distance away from each phone”15). Another 
expert also stated, “RF emissions are not “trapped” in a 
train  car.  They  disperse,  are  absorbed  and  dissipate  in 
intensity.”16) 

the 

It  seems  that  specialists  with  this  viewpoint  are 
not  familiar  with  the  basics  of  partial  differential 
their  public  exposure 
that 
in 
equations,  and 
assessments11-13) 
they  are  assuming  a  boundary 
condition under  which there is no reflection.  Thus,  we 
“quantitatively”  studied  the  effect  of  the  boundary 

(cid:1) E-mail address: hondou@cmpt.phys.tohoku.ac.jp 
  Web address: http://www.cmpt.phys.tohoku.ac.jp/~hondou/ 

 

 

1 

condition to identify whether it is necessary to account 
for the effect of microwave reflection in evaluating the 
potential health hazard of microwave exposure in daily 
situations.  The  aim  of  this  paper  is  to  determine 
whether Case 1 or Case 2 is correct: 

Case 1) The effect of reflection is negligibly small. The 
effect of reflection may not be hazardous. 

Case 2) The effect of reflection is NOT negligible. We 
have  to  seriously  consider  the  effect  of  reflection, 
leading to "passive exposure" in public areas. 

than 

  In  this  paper,  we  report  experimental  and 
numerical  results  demonstrating  that  Case  2  holds. 
Because  of  microwave  reflection,  the  exposure  level 
can  be  orders  of  magnitude  higher 
that 
conventionally  assumed  by  specialists.  In  (cid:1)2,  we 
describe  the  experimental  setup  and  the  results  of 
microwave distributions in a container and an elevator. 
In  (cid:1)   3,  we  describe  numerical  simulations  that 
the  experimental  results.  In  (cid:1) 4,  we 
confirm 
summarize our results and discuss the significance of 
the interdisciplinary research from diverse viewpoints 
of the problem. 

 (cid:1)2 Experiments 

 

2.1 Experimental methods in container 

For  our  experiment,  we  used  a  20-foot  metallic 
reefer  (refrigerator)  container.  The  inner  wall  surfaces 
of the container  were made of stainless steel while the 
ceiling and floor were aluminum. All the metal surfaces 
reflect  microwaves  at  an  efficiency  of  greater  than 
99.99%. The internal dimensions of the container were 
5.5 m (length) (cid:1) 2.3 m (width) (cid:1) 2.2 m (height), which 
are represented as a three-dimensional (3D) coordinate 
system as shown in Fig. 1 (X: [0, 5.5], Y: [0, 2.3], Z: [0, 
2.2]).  

 

 

Ｙ

Ｘ

probe

 
Figure 1 Installation of radiation source (FM transmitter) and 
probe.  

Ｚ

0

 

door

2 

2 

As  a  microwave  source,  we  installed  a  1.2  GHz 
frequency  modulated  (FM)  radio  transmitter  (TH-59, 
Kenwood, Tokyo) in the container at X=0.69, Y=0.66, 
Z=1.12.  The  frequency  of  the  transmitter  was  within 
the  frequency  range  of  mobile  phones.  In 
the 
experiments, the transmitted power  was about 0.15  W. 
The peak radiation power of a mobile phone may reach 
around  2  W  depending  on  the  model  and  conditions. 
Because  the  radiation  power  of  actual  mobile  phones 
fluctuates  with  time  depending  on  their  operating 
condition,  we  used  an  amateur  radio  transmitter  to  fix 
radiation  power.  The  transmitter  was  supported  by  a 
cardboard  box,  whose  absorption  of  microwaves  was 
known to be negligible.  A rod  antenna included in the 
transmitter set from the manufacturer was used.  

The intensity distribution of the microwaves was 
measured  by  a  hand-held  isotropic  electric-field  probe 
put  in  front  of  an  observer.  The  existence  of  an 
observer  perturbs  the  microwave  distribution,  which 
generally  decreases  the  intensity  by  absorption,  but 
may increase the local intensity by reflection17). A pilot 
study  between 
two  cases  (with  and  without  an 
observer) showed that the effect of an observer on the 
overall  microwave  distribution  is  negligible  compared 
with the order of enhancement of intensity by reflection. 
An electric field probe (Type 18.0) and electromagnetic 
radiation  meter  (EMR-21)  from  Narda  Safety  Test 
Solutions  (Pfullingen,  Germany)  were  used  for  all 
experiments. The equipment was calibrated at Narda on 
May  7,  2003  (probe)  and  May  9,  2003  (meter).  A 
calibration factor of 0.92 (at 1.2 GHz and 1.4 GHz) was 
used in the experiments.  

 

2.2 Experimental result in container 

A typical result of the power density (equivalent 
Poynting’s  vector18))  distribution  is  shown  in  Fig.  2. 
We  also  plot  the  intensity  distribution  as  typically 
assumed by specialists of radio engineering,  where the 
intensity is approximated as an inverse square law. The 
experimental values of intensity are consistently higher 
than  the  predicted  values.  Intensity  does  not  even 
decrease with distance from the source. The difference 
in intensity between the container situation and the free 
boundary condition increases with distance. The higher 
intensities  measured  under  a  reflective  boundary 
condition  are  simply  a  consequence  of  the  law  of 
energy conservation. 

We 

furthermore  confirm 

the  existence  of 
microwave  “hot  spots”,  in  which  the  microwaves  are 
“localized”. The intensity measured at one hot spot 4.6 
m from the transmitter is the same as that at 0.1 m from 
the  transmitter  in  the  case  without  reflection  (free 
boundary condition). Namely, the intensity at the hot  

3 

metallic  elevator  surfaces  (steel  in  most  cases)  is 
negligibly  small.    However,  we  performed  further 
experiments to indicate the universality of our result. In 
experiments  at  Tohoku  University,  Japan,  we  installed 
the same FM transmitter in an elevator with a capacity 
of 17 people (1.5 m (cid:1) 1.8 m (cid:1) 2.3 m). With 2 people in 
the elevator, we observed a hot spot of 1.1 (W/m2) at a 
distance 2.6 m from the transmitter even when the door 
was  open.  This  intensity  is  realized  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  transmitter,  i.e.,  at  0.1  m,  in  the  free 
boundary condition. 

(cid:1)3 Numerical Simulations 

To  confirm  our  experimental  findings  of  the 
greater-than-predicted  intensity  due  to  reflection,  as 
well  as  the  hot  spots,  we  performed  two  numerical 
simulations  using  High-Frequency  Structure  Simulator 
(HFSS) version 9 from Ansoft Corporation (Pittsburgh, 
U.S.A.)  and  Finite-Difference  Time-Domain  (FDTD) 
methods,  which  are  the  most  standard  and  reliable 
high-frequency 
analysis 
methods 
electromagnetic fields (for detail, see Appendix).  

the 

for 

of 

 

 

 
Figure  3  Intensity  distribution  in  the  elevator  model, 
obtained using HFSS, in which  the data was obtained along 
the  line  between  (0.50,  0.50,  0.11)  and  (1.48,  -0.80,  1.07). 
The dimensions are the same as those used in the experiment, 
except  for  the  reduced  height  of  1.3  m  from  2.3  m  due  to 
limited CPU memory, i.e., (1.5 m (cid:1) 1.8 m (cid:1) 1.3 m). The door 
of  the  elevator  is  kept  fully  open,  and  the  width  of  the 
aperture  is  0.9  m.  The  intensity  of  the  hot  spot  at  1.8  m  is 
increased by approximately 1000 times by reflection. 

Figure 3 shows a typical result of the intensity 
distribution in an elevator model, obtained using HFSS, 
in which the door of the  elevator  was fully open, as in 
the experiment. A snapshot of the spatial distribution of 
the intensity19) is shown in Fig. 4, in which the element 
of the antenna is shown by a black bar and the intensity 
is  indicated  by  a  color  scale.  The  intensity  does  not 

line  graph 

 
Figure 2 Distribution of microwave intensity in container, for 
which the data were obtained along the X-axis: X: [0.75(m), 
5.25(m)]  with  fixed  Y  and  Z  coordinates:  Y=1.60  (m)  and 
Z=1.00  (m).  The  sequential 
titled  “With 
reflection”  shows  the  measured  intensity  when  following  a 
straight path along the X-direction in the container. We plot 
the  power  density  of  the  wave  zone  only,  in  which  the 
distance from  the radiation source is sufficiently far relative 
to  the  microwave  wavelength.  The  “Without  reflection” 
curve  shows  the  expected  intensity  in  the  case  without 
reflection  determined  by  an  inverse  square  law  from  the 
measured intensity at 0.30 (m) in the free boundary condition. 
A  hot  spot  caused  by  the  localization  of  electromagnetic 
waves occurs at X=5.30, Y=0.07, Z=1.00. 
 

spot  is  increased  by  approximately  2000  times  by 
reflection.  The  spatial  fluctuation  of  the  intensity  is 
attributable to the wave nature of electromagnetism, in 
which  the  phases  of  electromagnetic  waves  coming 
from an infinite number of paths in a 3D space interfere 
with  each  other.  The  interference  leads  to  an  intensity 
distribution  that  is  highly  sensitive  to  an  individual’s 
position.  We  performed  experiments 
in  different 
situations:  1)  without  people  in  the  container,  2)  with 
the door open without people, and 3) with people in the 
container. Indeed, the average intensity depends on the 
condition. However, the following characteristics of the 
intensity  do  not  change:  1)  a  higher-than-predicted 
intensity  due  to  reflection,  2)  spatial  fluctuation  of  the 
intensity, and 3) the existence of hot spots. 

 

2.3 Experiment in elevator 

The  results  shown  in  the  container  is  closely 
connected to our everyday life. Elevators comprised of 
metal  are  a  typical  and  concrete  example,  in  which 
almost all the boundary reflects electromagnetic waves. 
We  consider  the  container  an  effective  model  of  an 
actual  elevator,  because  the  difference  in  reflection 
rates  between  our  container  surface  and  those  of 

 

 

3 

monotonically  decrease  from  the  transmitter,  which  is 
in clear contrast to the case without reflection20) (Fig. 5), 
in  which  all  the  parameters  are  the  same  as  those 
shown  in  Fig.  4  with  the  exception  of  the  boundary 
condition.  The  intensity  at  the  hot  spot  (X,  Y,  Z)  = 
(1.46, -0.78, 1.05) around 1.8 m from the transmitter in 
the  reflective  boundary  condition  is  approximately 
1000 times higher than that at the same position in the 
free boundary condition21). The result of the simulation 
is  thus  consistent  with  our  experiments,  although  the 
values differ owing to the different conditions imposed 
by computational limits.  

4 

in 

the 

The 

experiment 

container  was 
numerically  simulated  by  a  two-dimensional  (2D) 
FDTD22)    (Fig.  6),  which  is  also  consistent  with  the 
experiments and numerical results using HFSS. The 2D 
simulation  does  not  correspond  directly  to  a  real 
experiment  in  3D  space  because  of  the  difference  in 
dimensionality.  However,  the  result  of  the  experiment 
is  also  reproduced:  a  greater  than  predicted  intensity 
due to reflection, as  well as the existence of hot spots. 
For  example,  we  observe  a  hot  spot  at  (X,  Y)  =  (432, 
72)  cm.  In  comparison  with  the  control  simulation 
using  the  free  boundary  condition,  we  find  that  the 
power  density  at 
increased  by 
the  hot  spot 
approximately a thousand times by reflection.  

is 

Figure  4  Snapshot  of  spatial  distribution  of  intensity  in 
elevator  model,  obtained  using  HFSS.  Parameters  are  the 
same  as  those  shown  in  Fig.  3.  The  door  of  the  elevator, 
whose  area  is specified by X=1.5, Y:[-0.45, 0.45]  and  Z:[0, 
1.3], is kept fully open. For details, see Appendix and ref. 19. 

 

Figure  5  Snapshot  of  spatial  distribution  of  intensity  in  the 
case without reflection. Parameters are the same as those for 
the  elevator  model,  except  for  the  boundary  condition.  For 
details, see Appendix and ref. 20. 

 

 

 

 
Figure  6  Snapshot  of  spatial  distribution  of  intensity  in  2D 
container  model  simulated  by  FDTD  method.  We  set  a 
radiation  source  and  a  human  model  as  (X,Y)=(70,66)  and 
(76,120), respectively. For details, see Appendix and ref. 22. 

(cid:1)4 Summary and Discussion 

These experimental and numerical results clearly 
reject  Case  1  and  support  Case  2,  that  is,  microwave 
reflections  must  be  considered  in  risk  assessments  of 
electromagnetic exposure in daily life. We have already 
noted  that  in  elevators,  the  passive  exposure  level  is 
much  higher  than  previously  thought.  Other  places  in 
which  passive  exposure  is  likely  to  be  enhanced 
taxis,  and  airplanes.  With 
include  buses, 
enhanced exposure levels caused by reflection, we may 
be  passively  exposed  beyond  the  levels  reported  for 
electro-medical  interference  and  health  risks.  For 
that  mobile  phone 
example,  one  report  showed 
radiation interfered with heart pacemakers from 30 cm 
away13), even without reflection. The present result also 
confirms  evidence  that  some  hearing  aids  often  suffer 
from  heavy  noise  caused  by  microwave  radiation  in 
public transport.  

trains, 

 

In relation to biological and health aspects, there 
are several non-thermal effects of microwaves as found 
in a review by  Hyland1,2).  For  example, Salford et  al.3) 
reported  that  the  blood-brain  barrier  in  rats  opens  in 
response  to  a  mobile  phone  brought  to  within  1.8  m, 
even  without  reflection.  Such  non-thermal  biological 

4 

and 

allergies7) 

effects  include  DNA  strand  breaks4,5),  gene  expression 
changes5,6), 
electromagnetic 
hypersensitivity8).  If  these  consequently  turn  out  to  be 
serious  for  our  health,  we  may  be  subject  to  adverse 
health  effects  even  without  owning  a  mobile  phone. 
Recent  epidemiological  studies  indicate  an  increased 
tumor  risk  after  a  latency  period  on  the  order  of  ten 
years9,10).  Hands-free  phone  kits  may  be  useful  for  the 
users 
themselves,  but  may  still  enhance  passive 
exposure  to  others  who  have  no  control  over  the 
exposure.  

In  the  present  study,  we  restricted  experiments 
and  numerical  simulations  to  one  transmitter  for 
simplicity.  In  public  situations,  several  mobile  phones 
can be in operation simultaneously,  which may further 
increase  the  passive  exposure  level.  Because  the peak 
exposure level is crucial in considering electro-medical 
interference,  interference  to  airplanes,  and  biological 
effects on human beings,  we  also need to  consider the 
possible  peak  exposure  level,  or  hot  spots,  for  the 
worst-case  estimation.  Thus,  risk  assessments  based 
only on average exposure23-25) are inappropriate26).  

One  can  avoid  exposure  to  microwaves  by  not 
using  mobile  phones.  However,  people  cannot  avoid 
passive  exposure  from  others,  which  is  a  parallel 
situation  to  passive  smoking.  Exposed  people  include 
children,  babies  and,  in  particular,  fetuses,  who  are 
likely to be the most sensitive to environmental stresses. 
Discussion  and  further  research  of  passive  exposure 
risks under various conditions are seriously encouraged.  

Acknowledgements  
(cid:1) The  authors  thank  Yusaku  Kimura  for  assistance  in 
the  container  experiments  at  Kawasaki  port,  Masaki 
Sano for making us aware of several theoretical aspects 
of  these  experiments,  and  Evan  Blackie  for  critical 
reading  of  the  manuscript.  The  authors  thank  the 
Yukawa  Institute  for  Theoretical  Physics  at  Kyoto 
University.  Discussions  during  the  YITP  workshops 
YITP-W-03-01, 04-01 and 05-03 on "Biological effects 
of electromagnetic field" were useful in completing this 
work.  This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  a  Japanese 
Grant-in-Aid  for  Science  Research  Fund  from  the 
Ministry  of  Education,  Culture,  Sports,  Science  and 
Technology (Grant No. 17654082).  

 

Appendix: Numerical Method 

1) Numerical Simulation using HFSS 

The  elevator  simulation  was  performed  using 
HFSS  version  9  from  Ansoft  Corporation  (Pittsburgh, 
U.S.A.).  HFSS  utilizes  a  3D  finite  element  method 
(FEM)  to  solve  Maxwell’s  equations.  HFSS  solves 
Maxwell’s  equations  for  the  stationary  state.  In  this 
simulation,  we  selected  a  “Low-order  solution”  in 
HFSS to calculate the largest system volume possible. 
 

5 

5 

to  reduce 

Because  of 

limited  CPU  capacity,  a  3D 
simulation  of  the  actual  container  was  not  practical. 
Instead, 
the  demand  on  memory,  we 
performed  a  numerical  simulation  for  an  elevator 
model with the height reduced from 2.3 m to 1.3 m (i.e., 
depth,  width  and  height  of  1.5  m,  1.8  m  and  1.3  m, 
respectively).  The  door  of  the  elevator  was  kept  fully 
open in all simulations.  

As  a  radiation  source,  we  installed  a  1/2-
wavelength  dipole  antenna.  The  radiation  frequency 
was 0.9 GHz. This difference in frequency between the 
experiment  (1.2  GHz)  and  the  simulation  was  also 
necessary due to  memory limitations. The input power 
was  1  W.  All  the  surfaces  were  set  as  stainless  steel 
except the door aperture of the elevator, which was set 
to be fully open. The boundary condition of the opened 
door was set to “radiation” for the HFSS simulation. 

In the movies, X:[0, 1.5], Y:[-0.9, 0.9] and Z:[0, 
1.3]  coordinates  correspond  to  the  depth,  width  and 
height, respectively. The area specified by X=1.5, Y:[-
0.45,  0.45]  and  Z:[0,  1.3]  is  the  open  door  (the  door 
frame is indicated by the thick lines in  Figs. 4 and 5), 
through which microwaves dissipate out of the elevator. 
The antenna is set at (X, Y, Z) = (0.50, 0.50, 0.11).  

We  also  have  the  “project  files”  for  the  HFSS 
simulations.  Any  user  of  HFSS  (version  9  and  later) 
can  verify  the  present  result  using  the  project  files  (in 
refs. 27 and 28). 
 

2) Numerical simulation by 2D-FDTD 

FDTD  is  a  widely  used  method  for  solving 
Maxwell’s  equations  in  the  time  domain  based  on  the 
calculus  of  finite  differences.  FDTD  solves 
the 
equations  not  only  for  stationary  states  but  also  for 
transient  processes;  however,  we  only  discuss  the 
stationary  state  here.  We  performed  2D-FDTD 
simulation because this method enables us to simulate a 
large  area  such  as  a  container.  We  used  the  same 
frequency as that used in the experiment (1.2 GHz).  

In  Fig.  6,  the  red  circle  represents  a  radiation 
source.  The  white  circle  represents  an  observer  model 
of radius 10 cm that interacts with the radiation, having 
the  same  dielectric  constant  and  conductivity  as  those 
of human skin29).  
 

References 

1. G. Hyland: Lancet 356 (2002)1833. 

2. G. Hyland: The physiological and environmental effects of 
non-ionising electromagnetic radiation. STOA Project 
number 2000/07/03, 
http://www.europarl.eu.int/stoa/publi/default_en.htm, 
(European Parliament, Luxembourg, 2001). 

3. L. Salford, B. Persson, L. Malmgren, and A. Brun: Mobile 
Communication and the Blood-Brain Barrier, (Lecture 
organized by ECOLO, le CEFE, European Parliament, 29 
June, 2000). 

4. H. Pearson: Mobile-phone radiation damages lab DNA, 

doi:10.1038/news041220-6  (news@nature.com, London, 
2004). 

5. REFLEX project (funded by the EU under the programme 
"Quality of Life and Management of Living Resources", 
Project coordinator, Prof. F. Adlkofer): Risk Evaluation of 
Potential Environmental Hazards from Low Energy 
Electromagnetic Field Exposure Using Sensitive in vitro 
Methods (VERUM foundation, Munchen, 2004). 

6. D. Pomerai, C. Daniells, H. David, J. Allan, I. Duce, M. 
Mutwakil, M. Thomas, P. Sewell, J. Tattersall, D. Jones 
and P. Candido: Nature 405 (2002) 417.  

7. H. Kimata: Allergy 60 (2005) 838. 

8. The Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific 

Research TNO, Effects of Global Communication system 
radio-frequency fields on Well Being Cognitive Functions 
of human subjects with and without subjective complaints, 
TNO-report No. FEL-03-C148 (2003).  

9. L. Hardell, M. Carlberg, and K. H. Mild: 
Neuroepidemiology 25 (2005) 120. 

10. J. Schüz, E. Böhler, G. Berg, B. Schlehofer, I. Hettinger, 
K. Schlaefer, J. Wahrendorf, K. Kunna-Grass, and M. 
Blettner: American Journal of Epidemiology 163 (2006) 
512. 

11. Electromagnetic Compatibility Conference Japan: 

Guidelines on the Use of Radiocommunication Equipment 
such as Cellular Telephones—Safeguards for Electronic 
Medical Equipment (Association of Radio Industries and 
Businesses, Tokyo, 1997) [in Japanese]. 

12. FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration): FDA report 

on “Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) Testing of 
Medical Devices” (1996), available at 
http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/ost/index.html. 

13. AAMI/American National Standard: Active implantable 
medical devices EMC test protocols for implantable 
cardiac pacemakers and implantable cardioverter 
defibrillators, AMMI PC69 (1999). 

14. T. Hondou: J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 71 (2002) 432. 

15. I. Sample (reporter): New Scientist 174 (issue 2341) 

(2002) 23. 

Japanese). 

16. C. K. Chou: New Scientist 174 (issue 2348) (2002) 52. 

17. Y. Sakata: Bussei Kenkyu (Kyoto) 83 (2) (2004) 189 (in 

18. The equivalent Poynting vector, P, is defined by  P =

| E 2 |
cμ0
where  E,  c and  μ0  are the electric field, velocity of light 
and magnetic permeability in a vacuum, respectively. 

, 

19. The movie file corresponding to Fig. 4 is available at our 

website 
(http://www.cmpt.phys.tohoku.ac.jp/~hondou/ref/movie1

 

6 

6 

A.mov). This movie shows the results of the simulation of 
the intensity distribution in an elevator model produced 
using HFSS software, where the intensity is indicated by a 
color scale. The door of the elevator is kept fully open in 
the simulation. The enhancement of intensity by reflection 
is evident. Note that the temporal period of oscillation of 
the intensity in the movies corresponds to one-half the 
period of radiation, or 1/(2(cid:1) 0.9(cid:1)109 ) s (QuickTime; 
1.1MB). 

20. The movie file corresponding to Fig. 5 is available at our 
website(http://www.cmpt.phys.tohoku.ac.jp/~hondou/ref/
movie2.mov). This movie shows the control study 
(simulation) for the case without reflection (free boundary 
condition), in which all the parameters are the same as 
those in refs. 19 and 21 with the exception of the 
boundary condition. The intensity monotonically 
decreases from the antenna, which clearly contrasts with 
the case under reflection (QuickTime; 660KB). 

21. Emergence of hot spots is clearly observed by a 3D 

visualization of the intensity distribution in an elevator 
model. The movie file is available at our web site 
(http://www.cmpt.phys.tohoku.ac.jp/~hondou/ref/movie1
B.mov). The 3D movie shows the localized and 
unpredictable distribution of hot spots more clearly than 
Fig. 4  (QuickTime; 3.3MB). 

22. The movie file corresponding to Fig. 6 is available at our 

website 
(http://www.cmpt.phys.tohoku.ac.jp/~hondou/ref/movie3.
mov). This movie shows the results of the simulation of 
the container model produced using a 2D-FDTD method. 
The red and white circles represent the radiation source 
and human model, respectively. The period of intensity 
oscillation at a fixed position corresponds to one-half the 
period of radiation, or 1/(2(cid:1)1.2(cid:1)109 ) s. The enhancement 
of intensity as well as hot spots can be observed as with 
the elevator model (QuickTime; 3MB). 

23. A. Toropainen: Bioelectromagnetics 24 (2003) 63. 

24. A. Kramer, J. Frohlich, and N. Kuster: J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 

71 (2002) 3100. 

25. ELF Electromagnetic Fields Committee: 

Electromagnetic Fields: Annual Update 2003 (Health 
Council of the Netherlands, The Hague, 2004). 

26. T. Hondou: J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 71 (2002) 3101.  

27. http://www.cmpt.phys.tohoku.ac.jp/~hondou/ref/1.hfss. 

We have provided the project file for the HFSS 
simulation shown in Figs. 3 and 4. Any user of HFSS 
(version 9 and later) can verify the present result using the 
project file (MSWord; 184KB). 

28. http://www.cmpt.phys.tohoku.ac.jp/~hondou/ref/2.hfss. 

We have provided the project file for the HFSS 
simulation shown in Fig. 5. Any user of HFSS (version 9 
and later) can verify the present result using the project 
file (MSWord; 140KB). 

29. Tissue Dielectric Properties are obtained by the resources 

at Federal Communications Commission, 
http://www.fcc.gov/fcc-bin/dielec.sh, where we use the 
values of “Skin (Dry)” at a frequency of 1.2 GHz.  

