2W/nm Peak-power All-Fiber Supercontinuum Source 
and its Application to the Characterization of 
Periodically Poled Nonlinear Crystals 
 
B. A. Cumberland, J. C. Travers, R. E. Kennedy, S. V. Popov and J. R. Taylor 
 
Femtosecond Optics Group, Physics Department, Imperial College London, 
SW7 2BW, United Kingdom 

 
Abstract 
 
We demonstrate a uniform high spectral  brightness and peak power density 
all-fiber  supercontinuum  source.  The  source  consists  of  a  nanosecond 
Ytterbium fiber laser and an optimal length PCF producing a continuum with 
a  peak  power  density  of  2  W/nm  and  less  than  5  dB  of  spectral  variation 
between 590 to 1500 nm. The Watt level per nm peak power density enables 
the  use  of  such  sources  for  the  characterization  of  nonlinear  materials. 
Application of the source is demonstrated with the characterization of several 
periodically poled crystals. 
 
Introduction 
 
Photonic  crystal  fibers  (PCF)  with  high  nonlinearities  and  customizable 
dispersion    profiles  [1,  2]  have  been  widely  used  for  supercontinuum 
generation.  Considerable  interest  has  been  driven  by  a  diverse  range  of 
potential  applications  including    frequency  metrology  [3],  optical  coherence 
tomography  [4]  and  biomedical  imaging  [5].  Many  applications,  particularly 
those  involving  nonlinear  optical  processes,  require  high  spectral  power 
densities  and  single-transverse  mode  outputs.  The  highest  average  spectral 
power densities of greater than 10 mW/nm have been demonstrated with CW 
pumping of PCFs with fiber lasers. Enhanced power densities can be obtained 
with high peak power pumping of PCFs or tapered PCFs [6, 7] over a spectral 
range  as  broad  as  0.3  to  1.8  µm  using  picosecond  or  femtosecond  sources. 
However,  the  peak  power  density  of  such  sources  may  vary  considerably 
across  the  continuum  spectrum  not  only  due  to  the  average  spectral  power 
variation  (femtosecond  and  picosecond  pumping)  but  also  due  to  dispersion 
related  variation  of  the  pulse  duration  across  the  spectrum.  The  resulting, 
often  over  10-fold,  peak  power  density  changes  limit  the  useful  spectral 
range  of  such  sources  in  applications  where  evaluation  of    linear  [8]  and 
especially nonlinear optical responses are involved.  
 
The effect of dispersion on pulse durations is greatly reduced with the use of 
nanosecond  pulse  durations.  Pumping  a  PCF  near  the  zero  dispersion 
wavelength with its length adjustment can lead to uniformly high peak power 
density distribution across the whole continuum spectral range. Comparing to 
micro-chip  or  solid-state  laser  pumping  [9]  of  PCFs  that  generally  result  in 
over  10dB  spectral  fluctuations  and  mW/nm  scale  peak  power  outputs,  the 

use  of  all-fiber  format  pumping  with  low-loss  splicing  to  the  optimized  PCF 
significantly enhances environmental stability of the source and can allow for 
considerably  higher,  Watts  level,  average  pump  power  budgets  and 
Watts/nm output spectral densities.  
 
Here  we  demonstrate  an  all-fiber  nanosecond  supercontinuum  source  that 
produces a peak power density of 2W/nm (0.18 mW/nm average) from 590 
nm  to  1500  nm.  The  source  consists  of  a  kW-peak  power  single-mode 
nanosecond Ytterbium pump laser spliced to a PCF whose length is optimized 
to  provide  the  required  spectral  and  peak  power  density  coverage  in  the 
region  of  interest  for  the  desired  application.  We  apply  the  high  power 
broadband  source  to  the  characterization  of  the  quasi-phase-matching 
wavelength  of  periodically  poled  crystals.  The  use  of  such  a  broadband 
source  offers  significant  advantages  over  a  tunable  laser,  as  it  allows  a 
simple method of single shot characterization over a broad spectral range at 
Watt-level  peak  powers.  Apart  from  environmental  and  spectral  power 
density  stability,  the  full  fiber  integrated  format  of  the  resulting  source  can 
make it a robust, low maintenance, low cost diagnostic device. 
 
Continuum Generation 
 
The  supercontinuum  PCF  was  pumped  by  a  nanosecond  pulsed  Ytterbium 
fiber  laser  (IPG  Photonics)  in  the  anomalous  dispersion  regime.  At  a  pulse 
repetition rate of 5 kHz the pump laser produced 6.7 kW of peak power with 
a single transverse mode output (M2 < 1.1) in 18 ns pulses at 1062 nm. The 
PCF  had  a  zero  dispersion  wavelength  of  1.04  μm,  core  diameter  of  4.9 μm 
and a nonlinear coefficient of ~13 (W km)-1. The PCF was directly spliced to 
the Ytterbium fiber laser enabling a high coupling efficiency of the pump light 
and  suppression  of  higher  order  transverse  mode  excitation.  A  low  loss  in-
line isolator was employed to protect the laser from possible back reflections 
from the splice. The typical splice loss, without using any intermediate mode-
matching  fibers,  was  1.5  dB  and  was  obtained  by  developing  an  optimized 
splicing procedure with a filament fusion splicer. 
 
In order to evaluate the continuum flatness a cut back of the PCF from 62 m 
to  2.8  m  was  performed.  The  nanosecond-pumped  continuum  formation  is 
driven  by  a  combination  of  nonlinear  processes  in  the  PCF.  Pump  spectral 
broadening, initiated by modulation instability (MI), is enhanced at the longer 
wavelengths  due  to  the  strong  Raman  gain  at  the  first  Stokes  wavelength. 
The MI induced solitons develop into a continuum via Raman self-scattering. 
For such long pump pulse durations the soliton fission length is estimated to 
be 10s of kilometers. In this case where the PCF lengths are of the order of 
meters it is not expected that  the widely  observed  high order soliton fission 
and dispersive waves will be generated other than in the vicinity of the pump 
MI  breakup.  In  contrast  to  the  femtosecond  regime,  short  wavelength 
generation  is  unlikely  to  be  due  to  dispersive  waves  and  the  corresponding 
cross-phase  modulation  effects.  In  this  case  we  believe  that  four-wave 
mixing  is  the  dominant  effect  generating  the  short  wavelength  side  [9-14]. 

The  contribution  of  particular  nonlinear  effects  to  the  supercontinuum 
generation can be traced from the cutback results shown in Figure 1. For the 
3m  length  of  fiber  the  continuum  generation  is  strongly  driven  by  Raman 
effects while for the lengths of PCF over 10m, wavelengths shorter than the 
pump are also generated. The spectral power density in the infrared falls as 
the  PCF  length  is  increased  due  to  the  soliton  self-frequency-shift  driving 
power  transfer  to  longer  wavelengths  where  the  loss  of  the  fiber  is  higher. 
For the longest PCF lengths employed, around 60 m, the fiber losses lead to 
peak  power  density  reductions  across  the  whole  spectral  range.  The  dip  at 
1.38 µm corresponds to the water peak loss. 
 
Depending  upon  the  required  application,  spectral  power  densities  can  be 
controlled by tailoring the PCF length, dispersion profile [11] and the coupled 
pump  powers.  As  an  example  we  characterized  a  number  of  periodically 
poled  crystal  samples,  with  second  harmonic  quasi-phase-matching  (QPM) 
wavelengths ranging from 700 to 1550 nm. The PCF length corresponding to 
the highest most uniform brightness in this spectral range was used. The 17 
m  long  PCF  produced  a  continuum  with  less  than  5  dB  peak-to-peak  power 
variation from 590 to 1550 nm and a peak power density of 2.0 W/nm within 
this range. 
 
Non-linear Crystal Characterization 
 
The  setup  is  shown  in  Figure  2.  Periodically  poled  KTiOPO4  (PPKTP),  LiNbO3 
(PPLN)  and  LiTaO3  (PPLT)  with  poling  periods  from  2.4  to  24.3  µm  (50:50 
duty  factors  for  the  first  order  SHG)  were  assessed  and  an  edge  spectral 
filter was used to facilitate easy identification of the second harmonic signal. 
Although  the  pump  source  was  unpolarized,  due  to  the  high  peak  power 
density, no polarizing elements were needed before the crystals. The crystal 
samples  were  10  mm  long  which  corresponded  to  QPM  bandwidths  for 
second  harmonic  generation  (SHG)  of  0.05  to  2.40  nm  (FWHM).    A  75mm 
focusing lens was used producing a 100 µm spot diameter in the crystal. 
 
Typical  spectral  traces  of  the  second  harmonic  signals  from  the  tested 
crystals are shown in Figure 3 for: (a) congruent PPLT, Λ = 2.46 μm, λpump 
= 770 nm; (b) congruent MgO doped PPLN, Λ = 10.23 μm,  λpump = 1178 
nm;  (c)  PPKTP,  Λ  =  24.28  μm,  λpump  =  1550  nm;  taken  at  room 
temperature  (21°C).  The  traces  were  taken  on  an  Anritsu  MS9030A  / 
MS9701B optical spectrum analyzer (OSA).  
 
The  second  harmonics  were  readily  identifiable  for  all  the  crystal  samples 
(766,  1170  and  1534  nm  respectively).  In  the  case  of  the  PPKTP  (Fig.3c) 
additional  signal  was  present  at  515  nm  that  we  attribute  to  third  harmonic 
generation of 1545 nm. In such an arrangement, the spectral position of the 
signals  versus  crystal  temperature  data  can  allow  calculation  of  Sellmeier 
equation  coefficients.  In  reverse,  once  the  poling  period  is  known,  the 
corresponding Sellmeier coefficients can be deduced for each of the particular 
ferroelectrics by accounting for the crystal temperature, QPM wavelength and 

thermal expansion coefficient. A temperature sweep of the crystal pumped by 
the  high  brightness  continuum  source  enables  verification  of  the  linear 
thermal  expansion  coefficient,  as  demonstrated  for  the  MgO  cPPLN  crystal 
(Fig.4). 
 
More  detailed  information  on  the  poling  period,  duty  factor,  poled  domains 
uniformity  and  Sellmeier  coefficients  could  be  obtained  by  using  shorter 
crystal samples with wider QPM bandwidths. Under these conditions the QPM 
profile deviation can be more easily monitored.  
 
Conclusion 
 
In this paper we demonstrated a compact, robust, efficient, diffraction limited 
output,  all-fiber  supercontinuum  source  capable  of  producing  a  peak  power 
density of 2W/nm (0.18 mW/nm average) in the spectral range from 590 nm 
to 1500 nm. This optimized PCF length source yielded peak-to-peak spectral 
power  variation  of  less  than  5  dB  which  makes  it  suitable  for  non-linear 
materials characterization in the whole continuum range. The single-spectral 
shot characterization of nonlinear optical SHG crystals was demonstrated by 
the use of several samples of periodically poled ferroelectrics. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research 
Council  (EPSRC)  under  Grant  EP/514408.  B.  A.  Cumberland,  J.  C.  Travers 
and R. E. Kennedy are funded by EPSRC studentships. J. R. Taylor is a Royal 
Society Wolfson Research Merit Award holder. 
 

to 

lifetime 

fluorescence 

imaging  and 

in  air-silica  microstructure  optical 

J.  K.  Ranka,  R.  S.  Windeler,  and  A.  J.  Stentz,  "Visible  continuum 
fibers  with  anomalous 

References 
 
[1] 
J.  C.  Knight,  T.  A.  Birks,  P.  S.  Russell,  and  D.  M.  Atkin,  "All-silica 
single-mode optical fiber with photonic crystal cladding," Opt. Lett. 21 (1996) 
1547-1549. 
[2] 
generation 
dispersion at 800 nm," Opt. Lett. 25 (2000)  25-27. 
[3]  D. J. Jones, S. A. Diddams, J. K. Ranka, A. Stentz, R. S. Windeler, J. L. 
Hall,  and  S.  T.  Cundiff,  "Carrier-envelope  phase  control  of  femtosecond 
mode-locked  lasers  and  direct  optical  frequency  synthesis,"  Science  288 
(2000) 635-639. 
 [4]  P. L. Hsiung, Y. Chen, T. H. Ko, J. G. Fujimoto, C. J. S. de Matos, S. V. 
Popov,  J.  R.  Taylor,  and  V.  P.  Gapontsev,  "Optical  coherence  tomography 
using  a  continuous-wave,  high-power,  Raman  continuum  light  source,"  Opt. 
Exp. 12 (2004) 5287-5295. 
[5]  C. Dunsby, P. M. P. Lanigan, J. McGinty, D. S. Elson, J. Requejo-Isidro, 
I. Munro, N. Galletly, F. McCann, B. Treanor, B. Onfelt, D. M. Davis, M. A. A. 
Neil,  and  P.  M.  W.  French,  "An  electronically  tunable  ultrafast  laser  source 
imaging 
fluorescence 
applied 
microscopy," J. Phys. D (App. Phys.) 37 (2004) 3296-303. 
 [6]  A. Kudlinski, A. K. George, J. C. Knight, J. C. Travers, A. B. Rulkov, S. 
V. Popov, and J. R. Taylor, "Zero-dispersion wavelength decreasing photonic 
crystal fibers for ultraviolet-extended supercontinuum generation," Opt. Exp. 
14 (2006) 5715. 
[7] 
dispersion-micromanaged holey fibers," Opt. Lett. 30 (2005) 1566-8. 
[8] 
P.  Rakich,  H.  Sotobayashi,  J.  Gopinath,  S.  Johnson,  J.  Sickler,  C. 
Wong,  J.  Joannopoulous,  and  E.  Ippen,  "Nano-scale  photonic  crystal 
microcavity 
characterization  with  an  all-fiber  based  1.2-2.0  µm 
supercontinuum," Opt. Exp. 13 (2005) 821-825. 
J. M. Dudley, L. Provino, N. Grossard, H. Maillotte, R. S. Windeler, B. J. 
[9] 
Eggleton,  and  S.  Coen, 
in  air-silica 
microstructured fibers with nanosecond and femtosecond pulse pumping," J. 
Opt. Soc. Am. B-Opt. Phys. 19 (2002) 765-771. 
 [10]  A.  Demircan  and  U.  Bandelow,  "Supercontinuum  generation  by  the 
modulation instability," Opt. Comm. 244 (2005) 181-185. 
[11]  J.  M.  Dudley,  G.  Genty,  and  S.  Coen,  "Supercontinuum  generation  in 
photonic crystal fiber," Rev. Modern Physics 78 (2006) 1043-1361. 
 [12]  W. J. Wadsworth, N. Joly, J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, F. Biancalana, and 
P.  S.  J.  Russell,  "Supercontinuum  and  four-wave  mixing  with  Q-switched 
pulses in endlessly single-mode photonic crystal fibres," Opt. Exp. 12 (2004) 
299-309. 
[13]  J.  C.  Travers,  S.  V.  Popov,  and  J.  R.  Taylor,  "Extended  blue 
supercontinuum  generation  in  cascaded  holey  fibers,"  Opt.  Lett.  30  (2005) 
3132-3134. 
[14]  G.  Genty,  T.  Ritari,  and  H.  Ludvigsen,  "Supercontinuum  generation  in 
large mode-area microstructured fibers," Opt. Exp. 13 (2005) 8625-8633. 

L.  Fei,  "Generation  of  broadband  femtosecond  visible  pulses  in 

"Supercontinuum  generation 

Figures 
 
 

 
Fig. 1. Supercontinua evolution during a PCF cut-back experiment: (A) 3 m, 
(B)  10  m,  (C)  17  m,  (D)  27  m,  (E)  62  m.  The  curves  are  normalized  to 
output power that does not take into account spectral power outside the OSA 
coverage. 
 

 

 
Fig. 2. Experimental setup for nonlinear crystals characterization. 
 

 

 
Fig. 3. Spectra of QPM harmonics signals generated in (A) cPPLT, SHG of 766 
nm; (B) MgO cPPLN, SHG of 1170 nm (C) PPKTP, SHG of 1534 nm and THG 
of 1545 nm.  

 

 
Fig. 4. Dependence of the QPM SHG output spectra of the MgO cPPLN crystal 
(SHG  of  1170nm)  on  the  crystal  temperature  variation  20  to  100  oC.  Inset; 
QPM wavelength vs temperature. 
 

 

