Shkrob, Chemerisov, Wishart 

 

 

 

 

 

 

version 3  

EPR Study of Radicals in Irradiated Ionic Liquids and Implications for 
the Radiation Stability of Ionic Liquid-Based Extraction Systems 

Ilya A. Shkrob,  * 1  Sergey D. Chemerisov, 
Chemistry Division , Argonne National Laboratory,9700 S. Cass Ave, Argonne, IL 60439 

 
James F. Wishart, * 2 
Chemistry Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973-5000 

Received: March *, 2007. 

 

 

The submitted manuscript has been created by UChicago Argonne, LLC, Operator of Argonne National Laboratory (“Argonne”). Argonne, a 
U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science laboratory, is operated under Contract No. DE-AC-02-06CH11357. The U.S. Government 
retains for itself, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide license in said article to reproduce, prepare 
derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.   
 
Abstract  

The radiation- and photo- chemistry of room temperature ionic liquids (ILs) composed of 

ammonium, phosphonium, pyrrolidinium, and imidazolium cations and bis(triflyl)amide, 

dicyanamide,  and  bis(oxalato)borate  anions,  have  been  studied  using  low-temperature 

Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR). Several classes of radicals have been identified 

and related to reactions of the primary radiolytically generated electrons and holes. Large 

yields  of  terminal  and  penultimate  C-centered  radicals  are  observed  in  the  aliphatic 

chains  of  the  phosphonium,  ammonium  and  pyrrolidinium  cations,  but  not  for 

imidazolium cation. This pattern can be accounted for by efficient deprotonation of a hole 

trapped on the cation (the radical dication) that competes with rapid charge transfer to a 

nearby anion.  The latter leads to the formation of stable N- or O-centered radicals. The 

electrons either react with the protic impurity (for nonaromatic cations) yielding H atoms 

or the aromatic moiety (for imidazolium cations). Excitation of bis(triflyl)amide anion is 

shown  to  yield  trifluoromethyl  radical;  the  yield  of  this  radical  in  radiolysis,  though,  is 

low  (<  10%  of  the  alkyl  radical  yield).  In  terms  of  their  radiation  chemistry,  neat  ILs 

appear  to  be  intermediate  between  organic  liquids  and  ionic  solids.  Addition  of  10-40 

wt%  of  trialkylphoshate  (a  common  extraction  agent  for  nuclear  cycle  separations)  has 

relatively little effect on the fragmentation of the ILs. Radiation induced dealkylation of 

the phosphate is prominent, but the yield of the alkyl radical fragments derived from the 

phosphates  is  <  4%  of  the  yield  of  the  radical  fragments  drived  from  the  solvent.  We 

discuss  the  implication  of  these  results  for  the  radiation  stability  of  nuclear  cycle 

extraction systems based upon the IL diluents. 

 

___________________________________________________________________________________ 
1)  Work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  Office  of  Science,  Division  of  Chemical 
Science,  US-DOE  under  contracts  Nos.  DE-AC-02-06CH11357  and  DE-AC02-
98CH10886.  
Authors 
shkrob@anl.gov, (2) wishart@bnl.gov 

to  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed;  electronic  mail:  (1) 

2 

 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

In  this  study,  we  address  the  fundamental  aspects  of  radiation  chemistry  and 

mechanisms  for  radiation  induced  degradation  of  room  temperature  ionic  liquids  (ILs).  

The latter are salts with unusually low melting points due to poor packing of bulky, oddly 
shaped ions. 1 

Currently, these unusual liquids are being assessed as next generation diluents for 
extractions in nuclear cycle separations. 2-7 The practical advantages of the ILs are due to 

their  low  volatility,  high  ionicity,  versatile  physical  properties,  and  the  possibility  of 

integrating functional groups into the solvent. However, to be useful for the separations, 

these new IL and extraction systems must be chemically stable in high radiation fields of 

the decaying radionuclides, at least in comparison to presently-used separations systems. 

Not  only  should  the  solvent  be  resistant  to  highly  oxidizing  conditions  (as  the  aqueous 
phase is 1-2 mol/dm3 nitric acid), it should withstand a radiation dose that is equivalent to 
1-40  Mrad  (1  rad  =  10-2  Gy)  per  cycle.  8,9  The  current  UREX  and  UREX+  extraction 

processes are based on normal alkanes (dodecane) as a diluent and alkylphosphates (such 

as  tributylphosphate)  as  uranyl  extractant.  These  systems  exhibit  relatively  little 
radiolytic  degradation  of  the  solvent,  but  substantial  damage  to  the  extractant.  4-8 
Dissociative electron attachment (DEA)  10,11 or energy transfer  12 to the alkyl phosphate 

lead to dealkylation of the phosphate esters and the formation of dialkylphosporic acids 
that have high affinities for radioactive lanthanides, such as Nd3+; 9 the extraction of these 

cations  causes  radioactive  contamination  of  the  organic  phase  and  requires  costly 
recycling  of  the  extractant.  8,9  From  the  standpoint  of  radiation  stability,  a  prospective 

extraction system should fulfill several criteria.  Not only should the absolute amount of 

radiation damage to the solvent (via polymerization, volatilization, and loss of fragments 

to the aqueous phase) be low; an equally important requirement is that the yield of a few 

radiolytic  products  capable  of  binding  the  metal  ions  should  be  negligible.  Ideally,  the 

solvent should take the brunt of radiation damage without compromising its performance 

as diluent while fully protecting the extractant. Alkane-based extraction systems are not 

optimum in this sense, as radiation generates species (electrons, holes, and excited states) 

that  are  very  reactive  towards  the  phosphate  extractants,  and  this  results  in  rapid 

3 

deterioration  of  the  extractant.  8-12  By  contrast,  halocarbon  solvents  provide  excellent 

protection  of  the  extractant,  serving  as  scavengers  of  the  radiolytically  generated 
electrons  and  efficient  quenchers  of  the  excited  states,  13  but  are  unacceptable  for 
environmental (toxicity) and technological (corrosion from Cl- released into the raffinate) 

reasons.  

A  switch  to  ILs  could  thus  provide  an  opportunity  both  for  improving  the 

separations  efficiency  and  for  readdressing  the  issue  of  radiation  stability  by  finding  a 

solvent  system  that  actively  protects  the  extractant.  This  is  possible  because  ion 

constituents of ILs are better electron and hole traps and quenchers of the excited states 

than  the  alkylphosphate  extractant.  However,  a  greater  degree  of  protection  of  the 

extractant  means  greater  damage  to  the  solvent.  The  latter  is  perhaps  unavoidable  for 

complex organic solvents. Optimization of the extraction systems involves balancing the 

costs  of  the  diluent  and  the  extractant,  the  separations  efficiency  and  the  radiation 

resistance. Rational approach to this optimizations requires detailed understanding of the 

mechanisms  for  radiation  damage  in  several  classes  of  ILs.  As  immiscibility  of  the  ILs 
with  acidic  solutions  and  the  suppression  of  cation  exchange  14  are  important  for  the 

extraction, the ILs of interest typically consist of large, highly hydrophobic cations (such 

as  quaternized  ammonium  and  phosphonium  cations  with  aliphatic  chains  with  4-14 

carbons)  and anions that are not hydrolysable and do not chelate metal cations (such as 
-). The chemical structures for 

-, DCA- and, to a lesser degree, PF6

-, CF3SO3

- and BF4

NTf2

some of these ions are shown in Figure 1. 

The radiation stability of several classes of ILs has already been addressed using 
pulse radiolysis 15-27 and product analysis. 28,29 The bulk of these studies has been on ILs 
composed  of  1-methyl-3-alkyl-imidazolium  cations  (Cnmim+,  where  n  is  the  carbon 
-),  although  salts  based 
number  of  the  aliphatic  chain)  and  bis(triflyl)imide  anions  (NTf2
- 15,16,29 anions and quaternary ammonium (R4N+), pyrrolidinium, 
on Cl-, NO3
- 
25-27  and  pyridinum  20  cations  were  also  studied.  Product  analyses  28  suggest  that  PF6
-  radical  and  F-  (as  known  from  EPR  studies)  30 
- might undergo scission of the C-S and the S-N bonds. Products of  cross 
whereas NTf2
recombination of these radicals and C-centered radicals derived from Cnmim+, by loss of 

anion  undergoes  DEA  yielding  •PF5

-, 28 and PF6

hydrogen in 2-position in the ring have been observed. Other products were speculated to 

4 

be formed by recombination of this –H radical with an alkyl radical in the side chain or 

N-centered  radicals  generated  via  the  loss  of  the  aliphatic  chain.  The  formation  of  free 
•CF3 radicals has also been proposed by Neta et al.  18,20 who observed radical oxidation 
reactions consistent with the presence of CF3O2• radicals in O2-saturated IL solutions; 20 

these authors also observed a 405 nm band in pyrene solutions that was attributed to the 
adduct of •CF3 to pyrene. 18 

Pulse radiolysis studies indicate that in ILs composed of aromatic cations (such as 

imidazolium  and  pyridinium)  the  electrons  rapidly  attach  to  the  ring  to  form  the 
corresponding neutral radicals 15,16,20 

 that strongly absorb at 300-400 nm. By contrast, in 

tetraalkylammonium  salts,  the  excess  electron  is  trapped  as  a  metastable  F-center  (the 
“solvated  electron”)  exhibiting  a  broad  absorption  band  in  the  near  infrared,  23-27,31,32 

suggesting that the electron is solvated by the alkyl chains of the cations. By analogy to 

the F-centers in ionic crystals, one can visualize these solvated electrons as occupying s-

orbitals in anion vacancies, although  functional  groups present on the  ILs may  result in 
specific  solvation  interactions.  24  In  a  few  hundred  nanoseconds,  these  electrons  react 

with adventitious protic/acidic impurities typically present in the  IL and yield mobile H 

atoms,  which  can  be  observed  indirectly  using  transient  absorption  spectroscopy  via 

reactions  with  aromatic  solutes  to  form  H-adducts  that  have  characteristic  visible 
absorption spectra. 21,23 (In extremely pure and dry aliphatic cation ionic liquids, we have 

observed  the  solvated  electron  to  decay  on  a  slower  timescale  with  complex  kinetics 

suggestive of geminate recombination, however, such conditions are not obtained within 
separations processing environments that are the focus of our present interest.)  

Apart from these direct observations, Neta and co-workers 16-22 postulated several 

primary processes that they were not able to observe directly. Specifically, they suggested 
that  both  anions  (A-)  and  cations  (C+)  might  trap  holes  (electron  deficiencies)  yielding 
neutral radicals (A•) and radical dications (C•2+), respectively. The former radicals (such 
- anions were 

as sulfonamidyl N-centered radical, (•NTf2) and electronically excited NTf2

thought  to  fragment,  yielding  the  •CF3  radicals.  The  radical  dications  may  deprotonate 
and yield C-centered (alkyl) radicals. 20 These mechanisms may, in principle, account for 

the  fragmentation  patterns  deduced  from  the  product  analyses.  The  main  problem  with 

5 

the  latter  is  that  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  between  primary  and  secondary  radical 

chemistry. 

These  suggested  pathways  were  based  on  the  conceptual  picture  of  IL  as  an 

organic  solvent.  Another  reference  system  would  be  an  ionic  crystal  composed  of  
derivatized ammonium cations and inorganic anions. In ammonium perchlorate (R=H) 33 
+ 
and tetramethyl ammonium (R=Me) chloride,  34 the main product of radiolysis is •NR3

radical cation that is generated via homolysis of N-H or N-C bonds in the excited state of 
-  species  in  which  there  is  a  3-

the  cation.  In  halide  crystals,  the  hole  is  trapped  as  •X2
electron,  two-center  s

*  bond  between  the  halide  atom  and  the  lattice  anion.  One  can 
- and 
envision that this chemicolligation also occurs for the •A radicals derived from NTf2
DCA-.  Only  experiment  can  decide  what  the  radiation  chemistry  of  the  ILs  might 

resemble more: that of the ionic crystals or that of organic liquids. 

To  elucidate  the  reaction  pathways,  we  took  a  different  approach  from  these 

previous  studies.  The  radicals  were  generated  in  low-temperature  frozen  vitreous  ILs 

using 3 MeV  electrons  and 248 nm photons, and the metastable radicals  were observed 

using  continuous  wave  X  band  (cw)  Electron  Paramagnetic  Resonance  (EPR).  The 

radicals became mobile and decayed at 180-200 K. Due to high rigidity of the IL glasses, 

the rotations of functional groups are frequently inhibited up to this temperature, resulting 

in  broad,  anisotropic  lines  and  relatively  low  spectral  resolution.  Despite  these 

complications,  we  were  able  to  identify  several  families  of  fragment  radicals  and 

establish  the  main  pathways  leading  to  these  radicals.  Our  study  supports  some  of  the 

previously  suggested  mechanisms  and  provides  new  mechanistic  insight  into  the 

radiolytic  degradation  of  the  ILs.  This  insight  was  subsequently  used  to  assess  the 

radiation  stability  of  trialkylphosphates  in  these  ILs.  Although  the  dealkylation  of  the 

extractant  was  observed,  presumably  via  DEA,  the  relative  yield  of  the  alkyl  radicals 

derived  from  the  solute  was  1-4%  of  the  yield  of  the  radicals  derived  from  the  solvent, 

even  in  the  ILs  containing  40  wt%  of  the  extractant.  These  observations  indicate 

remarkable  radiation  stability  of  the  alkylphosphate  extractants  in  this  new  class  of 

diluents. 

 

6 

s
2. EXPERIMENTAL 

Materials:  Ionic liquids/solids were composed of the following cations: N,N,N-trihexyl-
N-tetradecylphosphonium  (Hx3TdP+),  methyl-tri-n-butylammonium  (MB3N+),  trimethyl-
ammonium  (Me3NH+),  triethylammonium  (Et3NH+)  and  tetrabutylammonium  (Bu4N+), 
+),  and  N-methyl-N-decylimidazolium  (C10mim+). 
-  was  kindly 

N-butyl-N-methyl  pyrrolidinium  (P14
Some  of  these  ions  are  shown  in  Figure  1.  The  sample  of  MB3N+  NTf2

provided  by  Dr.  P.  Neta  of  NIST  and  prepared  as  described  in  ref.  22.  The  sample  of 
-  was 
-  was  provided  by  M.  Dietz  and  P.  G.  Rickert  of  ANL.  P14
C10mim+  NTf2
- was prepared by mixing aqueous solutions 
prepared as described in ref. 36. Et3NH+ NTf2
-  (Aldrich)  which 
containing  equal  amounts  of  triethylammonium  chloride  and  Li+  NTf2

+  NTf2

resulted in phase separation to produce the crude IL. The IL phase was washed repeatedly 

with small quantities of deionized water to remove LiCl until the rinsate tested negative 
+  DCA-  was  purchased  from  EMD  Chemicals  in 
+ and Hx3TdP+ 

“high purity” grade and used as received. Bis(oxalato)borates (BOB) of P14

for  chloride  ion  using  a  silver  test.  P14

were purchased from EMD Chemicals in “for synthesis”  grade and dried for 2 hours in 
vacuum at 50 oC before use. Hx3TdP+ NTf2
- was prepared from the aqueous metathesis of 
-.  Briefly,  5.29  g  (10.2  mmol)  Hx3TdP+  Cl-  was 
Hx3TdP+  Cl-  (Cytec)  and  Li+  NTf2
-  (10.5  mmol) 
suspended  above  50  mL  of  water  with  stirring,  while  3.02  g  Li+  NTf2
dissolved in 1.1 mL water was added. Cloudy white beads of Hx3TdP+ NTf2
- (density = 
1.06  g/cm3,  yield  ~80%)  began  to  condense  and  drop  to  the  bottom  of  the  flask.  The 

mixture was stirred overnight, the aqueous phase was decanted, and the ionic liquid was 

washed  four  times  with  10  mL  water  to  remove  residual  LiCl  until  the  rinsate  tested 

negative  for  chloride  ion  using  a  silver  test,  after  which  it  was  dried  on  a  rotary 
-  was 
- , except 

evaporator,  followed  by  drying  in  a  vacuum  oven.  Tetrabutylammonium  NTf2
prepared in a similar fashion from aqueous solutions of Bu4N+ Cl- and Li+ NTf2

that the product was a solid that was recovered by filtration, washed with water and dried 

in the vacuum oven. 

Irradiation  and  EPR  spectroscopy:  Liquid  samples  were  placed  in  4  mm  diameter 

Suprasil tubes, degassed in several freeze-thaw cycles, sealed in vacuum, and frozen by 

rapid immersion into liquid nitrogen. With the exception of triethylammonium salt, room 
-  (which  is 
temperature  ILs  formed  high-quality,  transparent  glasses;  the  Et3NH+  NTf2

7 

liquid  at  room  temperature)  crystallized  on  cooling.  In  some  experiments,  the  ILs  were 

doped by d10-anthracene that served both as a charge scavenger and a photosensitizer (the 

peak of the absorption of the anthracene is at 350 nm, whereas the ILs are transparent to 
the excitation light). 35  

The samples were irradiated at 77 K using either (i) 55 ns fwhm pulses of 3 MeV 

electrons from a Van de Graaff accelerator at Argonne (the typical dose was about 0.15 
Mrad; the repetition rate was 20-30 Hz, the average current was ca. 0.6 m A), (ii) 248 nm 

light from a Lambda Physik LPX 120i KrF excimer laser (15 ns fwhm, 20 mJ per pulse, 4 

Hz; 5-30 min), and (iii) the cw light from a 60 W Xe arc lamp that was filtered through a 

water and a 300-420 nm glass bandpass filter. Following the irradiation, the samples were 

transferred into the resonator of a 9.44 GHz Bruker ESP300E spectrometer equipped with 

an  Oxford  Instruments  CF935  cryostat.  The  modulation  frequency  was  100  KHz.  First-

derivative  EPR  spectra  were  taken  at  several  temperatures,  microwave  power  levels 

(typically,  0.2  and  20  mW),  and  modulation  fields  (typically  1  or  10  G).  The  spectra 

given below were normalized in order to facilitate the comparison between the samples. 

Electron  beam  irradiation  of  suprasil  yields  H  atoms  that  are  trapped  in  the  SiO2:OH 

glass; these H atoms reveal themselves as a 500 G doublet of narrow lines superimposed 

on the EPR spectra from the sample. UV laser irradiation of the sample tubes under the 

conditions of our experiment did not result in such H atom signals. Another EPR signal 

that originated from the sample tube was Eg ’ defect (a Si dangling bond) whose narrow 

line is seen at the center of the EPR spectra. 

Calculations of the geometry and magnetic parameters of the radicals were carried 
out using density functional theory (DFT) with B3LYP functional 37 and 6-31+G** basis 
set from Gaussian ’98; 38 this method is most commonly used for such calculations. 39,40 

In the following a denotes the isotropic hyperfine coupling constant (hfcc) and b denotes 

the largest (absolute) principal value of B, which is the anisotropic part of the hfc tensor 

(these hfcc tensors are mostly axial and we chose the axis z to be associated with the long 

axis). These hyperfine constants and magnetic fields are given in units of Gauss (1 G = 
10-4 T). The simulations of EPR spectra were carried out using the calculated hfc tensors 

assuming  isotropic  g-tensor  (which  is  a  gross  simplification  for  some  of  the  species 

involved, such as trifluoromethyl) using the standard first-order perturbation theory; the 

8 

orientation averaging was carried out using the Monte Carlo code. The spectra were then 
convoluted  with  a  Gaussian  (of  width  BD

  to  simulate  the  effects  of  inhomogeneous 

broadening). To save space, some of the experimental and simulated spectra are placed in 

the  Supplement  (these  figures  have  the  designator  "S"  (e.g.,  Figure  1S).  The  optimized 

geometries of the radicals and calculated hfcc tensors are also placed there. 

 

 

3. 

RESULTS 

3.1.  Bis(triflyl)amide salts. 

The  EPR  spectra  of  radiolyzed  and  photolyzed  frozen  ILs  are  rather  complex, 

suggesting multiplicity of reaction paths leading to fragmentation reactions. The types of 

radicals generated are the same for photolysis and radiolysis, but the yields are different. 

This  allows  one  to  use  the  combination  of  the  two  excitation  methods  in  order  to 

recognize the groups of EPR signals from these different radicals. 

Irradiation  of  the  samples  with  248  nm  light  (where  the  cations  have  strong 

absorption  bands)  results  in  efficient  photoionization.  During  the  low-temperature 

photolysis,  vitreous  samples  yield  bright  luminescence  in  the  blue,  and  green 

phosphorescence with a lifetime of a few seconds is also seen. These samples also exhibit 

very bright thermoluminescence and radiothermoluminescence, suggesting the formation 
of S1 and T1 states of C+ by recombination of trapped charges. The likely mechanism for 
the photoionization is biphotonic excitation of C+ (by our relatively long laser pulses) that 

is mediated by their S1 and T1 states and also by secondary photolysis of their long-lived 

T1  states.  The  efficiency  of  photoionization  by  cw  light  from  a  Xe  arc  lamp  was  quite 

low, suggesting that the former mechanism prevails. Thus, 248 nm photolysis provides a 

convenient way of generating radical products via the low-energy ionization channel. By 

contrast,  electron  beam  radiolysis  yields  the  products  that  are  generated  by  direct 

excitation  of  the  ion  constituents  to  highly  energetic,  autoionizing  excited  states  from 

which fragmentation is more facile. 

The  strongest  EPR  signals  in  both  photo-  and  radiolyzed  samples  are  from  C-

centered alkyl radicals (Figure 2a). The spectra of these radicals are poorly resolved due 

to hindered chain rotations and these signals are superimposed on a narrow singlet with 

peak-to-peak  (

)  separation  of  ca.  15  G.  The  latter  feature  is  observed  in  all  IL 

ppBD

9 

samples  considered  in  this  section  and  it  can  be  seen  unobstructed  by  warming  the 

samples  above  180  K,  when  the  alkyl  radicals  disappear  from  the  EPR  spectra  (Figure 
- anion, as it is present in the ILs consisting 
2b). This radical must be derived from NTf2
of  this  anion,  but  it  is  not  observed  in  the  ILs  consisting  of  DCA-  and  BOB-  anions 

(section 3.2). This radical cannot be a C-centered radical or an F-center, and the yield of 

this  radical  does  not  correlate  with  the  yield  of  •CF3  radical  (which  excludes  the 
•SO2NTf- or •NTf- radicals). 

In the EPR spectra of photolyzed C10mim+ and Et3NH+ salts one can also discern 

a weaker 67 G doublet superimposed onto this singlet (Figure 2a), which is the same for 

both of these salts (despite the marked difference in the cation structure). These lines are 

indicated by open circles in the upper two traces in Figure 2a. For the other two salts in 

Figure  2,  this  doublet  cannot  be  seen  as  it  is  superimposed  on  a  much  stronger  signal 

from the alkyl radicals (see below). Very similar EPR spectra were observed in electron-
-  (shown  in  Figures  1S  and  2S)  and  Me3NH+  NTf2
irradiated  polycrystalline  Li+  NTf2

- 

(shown  in  Figure  3S).  Figure  3  shows  the  comparison  between  these  two  spectra 
observed at 50 K.  For Li+ NTf2
-, the central line of this radical is better resolved at 130-

165 K (Figure 1S), showing the sidebands (indicated by dashed arrows in Figure 3) with 

the separation of 12 G. This spectrum is superimposed on a weaker and broader signal (a 

doublet of septets) from an unidentified radical with hf couplings of ca. 17 G in the six 
fluorine  atoms  (possibly,  from  a  radical  pair  involving  lithium-7).    For  Me3NH+  NTf2

- 

(Figure  3S),  the  three-line  spectrum  is  superimposed  on  a  weaker  pattern  from  •CF3 

radical  (see  below).  The  invariance  of  this  spectrum  with  the  cation  structure  and  the 

change observed by the replacement of the anion indicates that the radical is derived from 

the NTf2

- anion. 

The  combination  of  a  singlet  (with  poorly  resolved  sidebands)  and  a  doublet 

(indicated by solid arrows in Figure 3) would be expected for the •NTf2 radical shown at 

the top of Figure 3: the doublet corresponds to the extreme transitions for magnetic field 

aligned with the N 2p orbital of this sulfonamidyl radical (Figure 1S). The central singlet 
is  relatively  narrow  as  the  coupling  to  19F  (spin-1/2  nucleus)  in  the  two  trifluoromethyl 
groups is weak. Our DFT calculations suggest that for the six fluorides the |a(19F)|<1.4 G; 
the  estimates  for  14N  (spin-1)  nucleus  are  a=+12  G  and  b=+24  G,  which  results  in  the 

10 

lines  corresponding  to  the  extreme  transition  that  are  separated  by  ca.  62  G  (vs. 
-). The simulated spectrum is shown in 
experimental 67 G in the ILs and 82 G in Li+ NTf2

Figure 2S; the exact profile of the sidebands around the central resonance depends on the 
averaging of hfcc tensors for 19F in the trifluoromethyl groups .  The typical estimates of 

isotropic hfcc for sulfonamidyl (-N•-SO2-) radicals are 13-13.4 G (see ref. 41, v. II/17c, 

section 5.7); the anisotropic hfcc’s has not been  reported) for the  closest  analogs of the 
2-
•NTf2  radical,  •N(SO2F)2  42  and  •N(SO3)2
,  43  a(14N)=8.3  G  and  13.3  G,  respectively 
(and, for the latter radical, b(14N)=24.6 G). We thus identify these features with the •NTf2 
radical hypothesized by Skrzypzak and Neta. 18  At higher temperature, the narrowing of 

the  central  line  and  slow  rotation  of  the  trifluoromethyl  groups  (resulting  in  the 

broadening of the outer lines) conspire to produce the singlet shown in Figure 2b (the 200 

K  trace  therein  and  trace  (ii)  in  Figure  1S).  Below  100  K,  the  rotation  is  completely 

arrested  and  weak  extreme  transitions  are  seen,  but  the  lines  are  inhomogeneously 

broadened  (Figure  2a  and  trace  (iii)  in  Figure  1S).  Figure  3S(a)  illustrates  this  matrix 

effect on the EPR spectrum of the •NTf2 radical, by comparing EPR spectra obtained in 
(i)  radiolyzed  polycrystalline  sample  and    (ii)  photolyzed  quenched  melt  of    Me3NH+ 

NTf2

-
.  While the former sample exhibits the EPR spectrum (also shown in Figure 3) in 

which  the  67  G  doublet  is  well  resolved,  in  the  latter  sample  this  doublet  is  poorly 

resolved (just like the doublets shown in Figure 2a). 

The observation of the sulfonamidyl radical in photoionization of C+ suggests that 
the  species  is  a  hole  trapped  by  A-.  Our  results  suggest  that  this  N-centered  radical  is 

stable  towards  fragmentation  of  the  C-S  bond;  we  observed  large  yield  of  this  radical 

even in the samples were the yield of •CF3 radical was very low (see below).  

Another  radical  that  is  observed  in  all  of  the  ILs  consisting  of  NTf2

-,  both  in 

photolysis and radiolysis, is •CF3 radical (Figure 4). The yield of this radical in radiolysis, 

as  estimated  by  integration  of  the  EPR  spectra  is  only  5-10%  of  the  yield  of  the  alkyl 

radicals  (the  lowest  trace  in  Figure  5  and  simulations  shown  in  Figure  4S  convey  the 

relative magnitude of these two groups of resonance signals). The yield of •CF3 radical in 

laser  photolysis  is  10-20  times  lower  than  in  radiolysis  (vs.  the  yield  of  the  alkyl 

radicals),  which  suggests  that  this  radical  originates  through  electronic  excitation  of  the 
-  anion.  Addition  of  10  wt%  of  electron  scavengers,  such  as  CH3I  and  EtBr, 

NTf2

11 

considerably  decreases  the  yield  of  this  •CF3  radical  (>  5  times).  Scavenging  of  the 
-  by  these  dopants  preclude  the 

electrons  and  quenching  of  the  excited  states  of  NTf2

fragmentation of the dissociative excited states of the anion. The EPR spectrum of •CF3 

radical (which is superimposed on the much stronger signals from the N- and  C-centered 

radicals)  can  be  seen  in  all  EPR  spectra  shown  in  Figure  4a.  The  EPR  pattern  is  rather 
complex due to the strong anisotropy of the g-tensor and the three hfc A-tensors for  19F 
nuclei  in  the  trifluoromethyl.  42-47  Ref.  45  contains  detailed  theoretical  analysis  of  such 

EPR spectra, including the second order effects. As our intent was to identify the radicals 

rather than account for the intricacies of their EPR spectra, we have not attempted such 

analysis.  

eff
The  two  extreme  transitions  (AA')  separated  by  3A||

» 692  G  in  Figure  3b  (for 

radiolyzed  Et3NH+  NTf2
-)  correspond  to  the  alignment  of  the  magnetic  field  B  with  the 
axis  of  symmetry  for  this  C3v  symmetrical  radical.  45  The  two  groups  of  doublets  (BB' 
and CC') are typically observed in the EPR spectra of trifluoromethyl above 10-20 K. 45,46 

These  doublets  can  be  fully  resolved  at  130  K,  due  to  the  better  averaging  of  the 
anisotropies.  As  a(19F)=144  G  weakly  depends  on  the  matrix,  44-47  we  obtain 

eff = b 3cos2 a - 1
b||

(

) 2 » 87  G,  where  a

  is  the  angle  between  the  F  2p  orbital  and  the 

symmetry axis. For a typical angle of 18o, 44,45 b≈101.5 G (vs. 119 G for •CF3 in solid Kr 

at 4 K). Such complicated EPR spectra from noninverting, nonrotating •CF3 radicals have 

been  observed  only  in  cryogenic  crystals,  at  4-20  K.  In  frozen  ILs  such  features,  with 

very  little  or  no  dynamic  averaging,  can  be  observed  at  temperatures  as  high  as  170  K. 

This  suggests  extreme  rigidity  of  the  IL  glasses.  The  same  is  suggested  by  incomplete 

averaging of the anisotropies in the N- and C-centered radicals.  

As  stated  above,  though  we  observed  strong  EPR  signals  from  H  atoms  in 

radiolyzed samples (accounting for < 0.5% of the total radical yield), these signals might 

originate  from  the  sample  tubes.  As  the  weaker,  saturable  EPR  signals  from  these  H 

atoms at 77 K are also observed in laser photolysis, and such signals do not occur in ILs 

doped  by  the  electron  scavengers  such  as  anthracene,  nor  in  imidazolium  salts,  we 

believe  that  some  of  these  trapped  H  atoms  were  indeed  formed  in  the  radiolyzed 

samples.  Stabilization  of  the  H  atom  in  an  organic  glass  at  77-120  K  is  unprecedented: 

typically,  the  H  atoms  promptly  decay  (as  these  light  atoms  can  readily  tunnel)  by  H 

12 

abstraction and/or addition to double bonds. The unexpected stability (albeit at low yield) 
-  anions,  i.e., 

of  the  H  atom  suggests  that  the  trapping  site  is  formed  by  the  (inert)  NTf2

this trapping site is a cation vacancy. As the likely mechanism for the production of these 

trapped H atoms is a reaction of the excess electron (solvated or dry) with some residual 
-);  such 
protic  centers  (such  as  impurity  R3NH+  cations  23,24  that  are  H-bonded  to  NTf2

trapping seems likely, as the H atom is produced next to the anion in a location where a 
cation  existed  before  dissociative  electron  attachment.  The  reaction  with  residual  H3O+ 

seems  unlikely,  as  no  trapped  D  atoms  were  observed  in  the  ILs  that  were  shaken  with 
D2O,  suggesting  that  the  e--trapping  center  cannot  be  H/D  exchanged  in  this  fashion. 

Note  that  only  when  the  parent  anion  is  situated  next  to  the  cation  vacancy  can  the 

trapped  H  atom  be  metastable;  otherwise  it  would  rapidly  react  with  hydrocarbon 

moieties. The stability of a subset of the H atoms is therefore indicative of the formation 

of the  cation vacancies;  in this respect the  ILs resemble ionic solids. To  stabilize the H 

atoms, this trapping mechanism requires rigidity of the matrix. As we have seen, this is 

indeed the case in the frozen IL glasses.  

Apart from the  H atoms, we did not observe other radicals that can be traced to 

the electron trapping centers in the ammonium and pyrrolidinium salts. In particular, no 
trapped  electron  species  (the  F-centers)  23-27,32,33  or  •CF2SO2NSO2CF3  radicals  were 
observed.  Short-lived  F-centers  were  observed  23,24,26  in  room-temperature  ILs;  either 

these  centers  are  short-lived  even  at  low  temperature  (decaying  by  reaction  with  the 

protons) or their (microwave saturable) signals  are masked by other radicals. The •CF2- 

formed.  The loss of F with the formation of CF3CO2

radical (the product of DEA involving the triflyl group of the anion) does not appear to be 
- was observed in gamma radiolysis 
-, 47 and such reactions are fairly typical for other fluorinated compounds 
-)2).  44  In  radiolysis  of  crystalline  CF3CONH2  46  and 

(such  as  CF2(CONH2)2,  (CF2CO2

+ CF3CO2

of NH4

NH4

+ CF3CO2

- 47 at 77 K, the yields of the •CF3 and -F radicals were comparable.  

The  two  weak  lines  shown  by  arrows  in  Figure  4b  might  be,  in  principle,  be 
-
  radicals,  44  although 

attributable  to  the  extreme  spin  transitions  arising  from  such  •CF2

the scaling of these signals with the features of •CF3 (as a function of dose, exposure, and 

temperature) argues that these are associated with the latter radical (some weak additional 

13 

lines may appear due to the anisotropy of the g-tensor). Perhaps the DEA is suppressed 

due to the availability of deeper electron traps in the solid. 

One  of  the  possible  decay  routes  for  the  excess  electron  is  DEA  to  quaternized 

the loss of a hydrogen atom (with the formation  of stable •NR3

ammonium cations with the formation of the amine and dealkylation. The dealkylation or 
+ radical cations) is also 
+ cations that is known to occur 
possible via direct excitation and fragmentation of •NR4
in  the  ionic  crystals.  33,34  Our  results  argue  against  the  occurrence  of  this  reaction  in 
+ radical cation would exhibit large Hb  splittings in their aliphatic 
+ in tetramethylamine chloride; 34 the resulting pattern from 

chains (ca. 26.7 G for •NMe3

irradiated ILs. The •NR3

the six magnetically equivalent protons is not seen in the EPR spectra. The only system 

examined in which such a radical cation was generated by radiolysis was polycrystalline 
-,  where  the  octet  of  lines  separated  by  28.9  G  was  seen  even  at  300  K 
Me3NH+  NTf2

(Figure  3S(b)).  As  this  pattern  is  not  observed  below  120  K  and  it  appears  at  the  same 

temperature  at  which  the  •NTf2  radical  disappears  (around  150  K),  it  is  likely  that  this 

species is produced by H atom abstraction from the parent trimethylammonium cation by 

the  •NTf2  radical  rather  than  the  homolysis  of  the  N-H  bond  in  the  excited  state  of  the 
parent cation. No such species was observed in frozen liquid Et3NH+ NTf2
- and in  molten 
-  (quenched  in  liquid  nitrogen).  Apparently,  this  secondary  reaction 
Me3NH+  NTf2

occurred only in crystals. 

The dealkylation via DEA involving the parent cations, C+,  can only result in the 
formation of terminal alkyl radicals, such as ethyl radical for Et3NH+. By contrast, proton 

transfer  reactions  involving  the  hole  trapped  at  the  cation  site  would  produce 
Et2NH+•CHCH3  and  Et2NH+CH2CH2•  radicals.  As  the  absolute  isotropic  hfcc’s  for  Ha  

and  Hb   protons  in  the  alkyl  radicals  are  close,  the  EPR  spectra  from  the  ethyl  radicals 

(five  protons)  would  yield  qualitatively  different  pattern  than  these  radicals  (four 

protons). This can be demonstrated by direct simulation of EPR spectra using the hfcc’s 

reported in the literature (Figure 6S) and by generation of the ethyl radical in the matrix 

via photolysis of the samples containing EtBr (see the upper trace in Figure 5) The EPR 
-  crystals  at  77  K  looks  rather  complex 
spectrum  observed  from  irradiated  Et3NH+  NTf2

due to poor rotational averaging, but warming the sample to 180 K removes most of the 

extra features by permitting the rotational dynamics (Figure 5), and the EPR spectrum of 

14 

the  alkyl  radical  can  be  clearly  seen.  This  spectrum  is  undoubtedly  from  a  four-proton 

alkyl  radical  rather  than  the  ethyl,  so  the  dealkylation  is  excluded  by  our  EPR  results. 

This reaction is probably too slow to compete with other channels of electron decay, such 

as the reaction with protic impurity. Our data, however, do not exclude the possibility of 
generation of H atoms via DEA to Et3NH+. 

While the DEA to tetraalkylammonium does not seem to occur, the formation of a 

neutral radical by electron attachment to imidazolium is fully expected to occur, as these 

radicals  have  been  observed  in  pulse  radiolysis  of  imidazolium  salts,  identified  by  their 
320 nm absorption band.  15,16 In the C10mim• radical (Figures 7S(a) and 8S(a)) the spin 

density is divided between N(1) and N(3) nitrogens and C(2) carbon in the imidazolium 

ring. Our DFT calculation indicates that the proton coupling for the C(2)-H should be ca 
17.4  G,  and  proton  couplings  for  protons  in  b   position  to  N  2p  orbitals  should  also  be 
considerable (6.7 G), whereas 14N couplings are relatively small (about 3.5 G). The EPR 

spectrum, given large broadening, would appear as a singlet with a peak-to peak splitting 

of  ca.  44  G  (Figure  8S,  trace  (i)  in  panel  (b)).  The  EPR  spectra  observed  in  radiolyzed 
C10mim+ NTf2
- do exhibit an unresolved, broad singlet (Figure 6a) that can be interpreted 

this  way  (with 

  of  ca.  40  G).  Lack  of  spectral  resolution  and  the  superimposed 

ppBD

signals from other radicals (including •CF3) prevented us from positive identification of 

this radical. We may, however, conclude that electron trapping by imidazolium cations is 

not inconsistent with our magnetic resonance results. 

We turn now to alkyl radicals that are the prevalent feature in the EPR spectra of 

radiolyzed  (and  even  to  a  greater  degree)  photolyzed  ILs.  As  stated  above,  for  the 

triethylammonium salt, the alkyl radical cannot be the ethyl radical. Previous EPR studies 
irradiated  crystalline  alkylamine  chlorides,  48  indicated  that  only  terminal 
of 
Et2NH+CH2CH2•  radicals  (with  a(Ha )=28  G  and  a(Hb )=18-20  G)  were  formed  in 
Et3NH+Cl-.  This  result  was  in  line  with  the  fragmentation  patterns  for  other  mono-  and 
diethylammonium chlorides  48 indicating that that only terminal radicals were formed in 
radiolysis.  Our  DFT  calculations  suggest  that  isotropic  hf  constant  on  14N  for  the 

interior radical (Et2NH+CH•CH3) is ca. –2.6 G and the splitting on Hb (NH) is ca. 0.8 G, 

so in both of the alkyl radicals, the terminal and the interior, the EPR spectrum is due to 
hfcc’s to a  and b  protons in the aliphatic chain. Given that the isotropic hfcc’s are very 

15 

g
-
g
-
close, it is impossible to distinguish the two types of radicals in this case. However, for 
MB3N+, such a distinction can be made because –CH2CH2CH2• (radical (i) in Figure 7) 
 radicals (radical (ii) in Figure 7) (that have comparable isotropic hfcc’s 
and –CH2CH•CH3
for  a   and  b   protons)  have  different  numbers  of  strongly  coupled  protons  (four  for  the 

terminal,  six  for  the  penultimate,  and  five  for  the  interior).  Comparison  with  the 

simulated  EPR  spectra  and  the  spectrum  observed  for  n-propyl  radical  in  solid 
butyronitrile  (this  radical  may  be  generated  via  DEA  to  the  nitrile)  49  in  Figure  2a 
conclusively  indicate  that  the  alkyl  radicals  derived  from  MB3N+  are  terminal.  Exactly 
-  glass  and  polycrystalline 
the  same  radicals  are  observed  in  radiolysis  of  MB3N+  NTf2
-  (Figure  9S)  suggesting  that  the  methyl  group  does  not  fragment.  For 
BuN+  NTf2
-,  both  types  of  radicals  (the  penultimate  and  the  terminal)  are 

photolyzed  P14

+  NTf2

present  (as  indicated  by  the  outer  pair  of  lines  indicated  by  filled  circles  in  Figure  2a), 
- glass, the lines from the 

suggesting less selective fragmentation. In radiolyzed P14

+ NTf2

interior/penultimate  radicals  are  more  easily  observed  (Figure  6b).  Radiolysis  (as 
opposed to photolysis) of MB3N+ NTf2
- also yields these outer lines, though the relative 

+
amplitude of these signals is 2-3 times lower than in the P14

 (Figure 10S).  Apparently, 

there  is  less  bias  towards  the  generation  of  terminal  alkyl  radicals  in  radiolysis  as 

compared to photolysis. 

3.2. 

Other classes of ILs. 

composed of hydrophobic ions.  

In this section, we briefly examine EPR spectra obtained for other classes of ILs 

Figure  11S(a)  shows  the  comparison  of  EPR  spectra  obtained  for  radiolyzed 
+  DCA-  glass  (Figure  1).  The  EPR  spectrum 

(powder)  Na+  DCA-  and  photolyzed  P14

observed in sodium dicyanamide is consistent with that expected for an inhomogeneously 

broadened lines of the •N(CN)2 radical simulated in Figure 11S(b) using hfcc’s estimated 

from  our  DFT  calculations.  In  this  C2v  symmetrical  radical,  the  unpaired  electron  is 
shared by three p -orbitals in the nitrogen atoms residing in a b1 SOMO, so that the atomic 

spin  density  is  split  4:5:4  between  the  three  nitrogen  atoms.  The  B3LYP/6-31+G** 
calculation  gave  the  estimates  of    a=4.7  G  (b=9.  2G)  for  the  central  14N  nucleus  and 
+ DCA- glass (Figure 

a=11.4 G (b=15 G) for the two cyanide nitrogens. In photolyzed P14

10S(a)),  this  spectrum  is  superimposed  onto  the  spectrum  of  the  alkyl  radicals  derived 

16 

from the P14

+ cation as it is observed in photolyzed P14

+ NTf2

-. It is seen that the type of 

the alkyl radicals is the same in both of the  ILs. Thus, the behavior of the dicyanamide 

and bis(triflyl)amide anions appears to be similar: both of these anions serve as efficient 

hole traps. 

In  Figure  12S,  EPR  spectra  of  photolyzed  and  radiolyzed  P14

+  BOB-  glass  are 

shown. These spectra are dominated by a narrow, asymmetrical singlet from an oxygen-
centered radical derived  from the BOB- anion. This resonance line might be composite, 

as the photolysis produces a narrower and more symmetrical line than the radiolysis. In 

the wings of this line, the spectral lines of the alkyl radicals derived from the cation are 

observed; the relative yields of these alkyl and O-centered radicals is 1:2.3.  

In  crystalline  potassium  and  ammonium  oxalates,  50  the  oxalate  anion  traps  the 

holes, forming •O2C-CO2

- radical. The hole scavenging by BOB- 

 anion, in analogy to this 

hole  trapping  reaction  and  the  formation  of  boron  oxygen  hole  centers  involving 
- centers in borate 51 and borosilicate 52 glasses would be via 

tetrahedrally coordinated BO4

the  dissociation  of  the  B-O  bond  with  the  formation  of  the  trigonal  BO3  unit  in  the 

(OCO)2BOCO2• radical.  The electron  attachment  would be dissociative, resulting in the 

partial or complete elimination of the oxalate anion and the formation of a boron dangling 

bond (B E') center (also known as boron electron center, BEC, for trigonal coordination), 
(OCO)2B• or (OCO)2B-•O(CO)CO2
-, – in analogy to radiolysis of vitreous boron trioxide 
and alkali borate glasses.  51 The EPR spectra of radiolyzed samples of BOB- glasses do 

reveal  a  weak  doublet  of  broad  resonance  lines  separated  by  238  G  (not  shown),  that 
would be consistent with the inner M(11B)=±1/2 lines of this 11B E' or BEC center. 51 The 
DFT  calculation  for  the  tentative  (OCO)2B•  radical  gives  an  estimate  of  a(11B)  =290  G 
and b(11B)=21 G. 

The scavenging reaction of the solvated electron by BOB- was observed in room 
+  BOB-  by  pulse  radiolysis  transient  absorption 
temperature  P14
spectroscopy  at  the  BNL  LEAF  Facility.  A  rate  constant  of    3.1  x  108  M-1  s-1  was 
+ NTf2

obtained, close to the diffusion limit in P14

-  containing  P14

+  NTf2

-. 53 

The  EPR  spectra  observed  for  irradiated  Hx3TdP+  NTf2

-  and  Hx3TdP+  BOB- 

glasses are similar to those observed for ILs composed of the ammonium cations with the 

same anions (Figure 13S), except that in the bis(triflyl)amide salt, almost no •CF3 radicals 

17 

are formed. In the bis(oxalate)borate salt, the ratio between the yield of the alkyl radicals 

derived from the cation and the O-centered radicals derived from the anion is 1:1.6 (in 3 

MeV electron radiolysis) and 1:1.1 (in 248 nm laser photolysis), respectively. It appears 

that the ILs consisting of large, hydrophobic phosphonium and ammonium cations have 

rather similar radiation chemistry. 

 

3.3.  Radiation stability of trialkylphosphates in the ILs. 

As  observed  in  the  Introduction,  radiation  stability  of  the  alkylphosphate  extractant 

(of  which  30  wt%  is  typically  added  to  the  solvent  during  the  actinide  separations) 

matters for nuclear cycle separations as much (if not more) than the radiation stability of 

the  diluent.  The  specific  concern  is  the  dealkylation  of  the  phosphate  esters  ((R'O)3PO) 

that  results  in  the  formation  of  dialkyl  phosphoric  acid  ((R'O)2P(O)OH)  capable  of 
nonspecific  interactions  with  methal  ions.  8-12  While  the  acid  residue  ((R'O)2P(O)O-) 

generated in the course of DEA cannot be observed using EPR, the complementary alkyl 

radical  (R'•),  can  be  observed  directly,  provided  that  the  resonance  lines  of  this  radical 

can  be  distinguished  against  the  strong  background  of  the  radicals  derived  from  the 

solvent (section 3.1). For these reasons, the use tributyl phosphate (that is commonly used 

as  the  extraction  agent)  is  inconvenient,  as  the  resulting  butyl  radicals  cannot  be 

distinguished from the radicals generated by deprotonation of (aliphatic) cations. Instead, 

we  studied  the  dealkylation  of  trimethyl-  and  triethyl-phosphates,  as  the  corresponding 

methyl  and  ethyl  radicals  (Figure  5S)  have  characteristic  spectral  lines  that  can  be 

observed  even  in  the  presence  of  other  alkyl  radicals  and  these  radicals  can  be  readily 

generated  in  the  IL  glasses  via  DEA  to  alkyl  halides,  so  their  EPR  spectra  in  rigid  IL 

glasses  can  be  obtained  and  used  for  calibration  of  the  relative  concentrations.  These 

methyl and ethyl radicals were stable at 77 K, so their yield provided a good quantitative 

measure of the radiation stability of the solute with respect to the dealkylation. 

Figure 8 exhibits EPR spectrum from radiolyzed C10mim+ NTf2

- glass containing 35 

wt% trimethylphosphate (TMP).  Since there is almost no alkyl radicals generated in the 

neat imidazolium salts (section 3.1), the four resonance lines of the methyl radical were 

readily observed against the broad, featureless spectrum of C10mim• radical. Comparison 

of these EPR spectra with the known EPR spectrum of methyl radical in this IL (shown in 

18 

the  same  plot,  lower  trace)  indicates  that  the  yield  of  •CH3  was  ca.  2%  of  the  C10mim• 

radical. Addition of TMP (similar to other electron scavengers) also decreased the  yield 

of •CF3 radicals by a factor of 3.5.  The yield of the methyl radicals in laser photolysis is 

considerably  greater  (the  lower  trace  in  Figure  8),  due  to the  direct  photoexcitation  and 
photodissociation of the TMP by 248 nm light. Similar results were obtained for C10mim+ 
+  BOB-  glasses  containing  10  wt%  and  35  wt%  and  20  wt%  of 

-  and  P14

NTf2

triethylphosphate  (TEP),  respectively.  The  distinctive  resonance  lines  from  the  ethyl 

radical  are  clearly  seen  in  the  photolyzed  samples  (Figure  14S),  but  barely  seen  in  the 

radiolyzed ones; the  yield of the ethyl radical is less than 2-3% of the total  yield of the 
-  containing  14  wt%  or  40  wt%  TMP,  the  lines  from  the 

matrix  radicals.  For  P14

+  NTf2

methyl radical stand out against the broader resonance lines of the alkyl radicals derived 
+ cation. The relative yield of these radicals is ca. 1% for 14 wt% TMP and 

from the P14

4% for 40 wt% TMP (in the latter solution, the yield of •CF3 radical was 2 times lower 

than in neat IL). Importantly, the relative yield of the methyl radicals decreases with the 

increasing dose (the yield of dealkylation was observed to decrease with the dose in the 
alkane  solvents,  too).  8  This  decrease  can  be  used  to  contrast  the  EPR  lines  from  the 

methyl  radical  against  the  underlying  lines  from  the  IL  matrix,  as  shown  in  Figure 

15S(b). The largest relative yield of the methyl radicals (with regards to the alkyl radical 
+ 
derived from the IL solvent) of ca. 8% was observed in radiolysis of 20 wt% TMP in P14
BOB-; however, even in this sample the methyl radical accounted for only 3% of the total 

radical yield (Figure 16S).  

We  conclude  that  although  radiation-induced  dealkylation  of  the  phosphate  esters 

does occur in these IL glasses, the relative yield of this fragmentation does not exceed 1-

4%  of  that  of  the  solvent,  even  when  the  concentration  of  the  extractant  is  20-40  wt%. 

Whereas the radiation stability of neat ILs is inferior to simple organic diluents, such as 

paraffins,  these  IL  solvents  can  actively  protect  the  extractant  against  the  radiation 

damage. The DEA to the extractant and its subsequent dealkylation do occur, but it is a 

relatively minor reaction, even at the higher end of the concentration range. 

  

4. 

DISCUSSION 

19 

Recapitulating  the  previous  section,  three  classes  of  radicals  were  observed  in 
- anions. The radicals other than trifluoromethyl can be 

radiolyzed ILs consisting of NTf2

accounted for by assuming the following reaction scheme: 

 
h+ •+C + ﬁ C •2+  

+

h

+•

A

A

•

 

C •2+ + A-

ﬁ C(- H )• + H d + Ad -

 

+
+•

C 2

A

+

C

+

A

•

 

e t )(

+•

C

+

•

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(for aliphatic)   

(for aromatic)   

(for aromatic)   

(for aliphatic)   

(for aliphatic)   

- •+ BH d + LAd -
  e(t )

ﬁ H • + B + A-  

     

(for aliphatic)   

H

+•

+

V

tH

•

 

e

+•

V

te

•

 

+•

e t
)(

(

OR
'

)

PO

3

+•
'

R

(

OOPOR
2

)

(

)

'

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

(2) 

(3a) 

(3b) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

The  holes  are  initially  trapped  by  either  cation  (reaction  (1))  or  anion  (reaction  (2)) 

moieties.  The  anion  is  a  deeper  trap  for  the  holes  and  a  good  proton  acceptor,  so  the 
radical dication (C•2+) either rapidly deprotonates (reaction (3a)) or accepts the electron 

from the anion (reaction (3b)). For aliphatic cations, the deprotonation route is prevalent; 

for aromatic cations, the charge transfer route is prevalent. The most abundant radicals in 

ILs  that  consist  of  aliphatic  cations  are  alkyl  radicals  that  are  generated  via  the 

deprotonation  of  the  radical  dications.  The  aromatic  cations  also  serve  as  electron-

trapping centers; for aliphatic cations, the DEA reaction does not occur. For imidazolium 

cations, the alkyl radical yield is greatly reduced and the EPR spectra are dominated by 
the C10mim• (ring) p -radical generated in reaction (4). Similar reactions have been shown 
to  occur  for  other  aromatic  cations,  such  as  pyridinum  cations.  20  In  ILs  consisting  of 
aliphatic cations, the electrons are trapped by anion vacancies (V-), reaction (7). Both the  
free and the trapped electrons 23-27 react with hydrogen-bonded protic impurities (BH…A, 
d +...d -O=S(O)  centers)  or  amides  (reaction  (5))  to 

d +...d -O=S(O)  or  HOH

such  as  R3NH

generate  mobile  H  atoms.  A  small  fraction  of  these  H  atoms  are  trapped  at  the  cation 
vacancy  sites  (V+),  reaction  (6);  the  rest  decay  via  abstraction  and  addition  reactions 

20 

ﬁ
-
ﬁ
-
ﬁ
-
ﬁ
ﬁ
-
-
-
-
-
ﬁ
ﬁ
involving  the  IL.  The  NTf2

-  anion  competes  with  the  cations  as  a  hole  trapping  site 

(reaction  (2)),  yielding  relatively  stable  sulfonamidyl  radical;  analogous  reactions  occur 
- anion, either direct or via 
for DCA- and BOB- anions. Electronic excitation of the NTf2

charge  recombination,  results  in  its  fragmentation  with  the  formation  of  •CF3  radicals. 

The yield of these radicals is relatively low as compared to the yield of radicals generated 

in  reactions  (1)  to  (7).  The  reaction  of  the  solvated  electron  with  protonated  anion 

(HNTf2)  is  not  considered  explicitly  here  because  ionic  liquids  in  contact  with 

reprocessing systems will contain enough water to make reaction (5) dominant. In ref. 21 
it  was  shown  that  the  reaction  of  e-  with  HNTf2  does  not  result  in  the  production  of  H 

atoms  –  the  presence  of  water  is  required.  Reduction  of  HNTf2  may  result  instead  in 

DEA, and will be the subject of further studies. 

The EPR spectra suggest that pulse radiolysis and photoionization of quaternized 

ammonium  salts  results  in  the  formation  of,  predominantly,  terminal  and  penultimate 

alkyl  radicals  derived  from  the  longest  chains.  The  example  of  triethylammonium 

indicates that these radicals are attached to the cation (rather than formed via dealkylation 

in an excited state or DEA).  

These  results  are  broadly  consistent  with  a  scenario  in  which  such  radicals  are 

generated  via  reaction  (3a).  In  crystals  of  alkylammonium  salts,  the  cations  typically 

assume  Cs  symmetrical  "letter  T"  configuration  with  fully  extended,  aliphatic  chains 

pointing  in  the  direction  of  the  counter  anions  (e.g.,  refs.  54  and  55).  When  the  hole  is 

trapped by the cation, the excess positive charge localizes in such a way as to minimize 

Coulomb  repulsion.  This  behavior  has  the  earlier  precedent  in  matrix-stabilized  radical 
cations  of  n-alkanes,  56-60  where  the  maximum  spin  density  is  observed  in  the  terminal, 
in-plane hydrogens. Although the singly occupying molecular s -orbital (SOMO) spreads 

over the entire aliphatic chain, the hfcc’s on the inner protons are negligible. Depending 

on the packing of the alkane molecules in a paraffin crystal, it is either these terminal or 
penultimate  hydrogens  56-60  that  are  lost  in  proton  transfer  (leading  to  even-odd 

alternation  in  the  yield  of  the  corresponding  radicals  as  a  function  of  carbon  number, 
which correlates with the alternation of  crystal symmetry).  59,60 EPR studies of multiple 

conformers  of  linear  and  branched  alkane  radical  cations  stabilized  in  Freon  and  SF6 

matrices  indicate  that  proton  transfer  preferentially  occurs  at  the  H  site  of  maximum 

21 

unpaired  electron  density.  56  For  quaternized  alkylammonium  cations,  both  of  these 

factors  (molecular  packing  and  spin  localization)  favor  deprotonation  of  -CH2CH3 

hydrogens: the spin density in the terminal and penultimate hydrogens is the largest and 

these sites are the closest to the proton-accepting anions.  

To  put  this  reasoning  on  a  firmer  footing,  we  investigated  the  SOMO  for  the 

radical dications using DFT methods (Figure 9 shows the isodensity maps of the SOMO 
for the optimized geometry, Cs symmetrical species). For Et3NH•2+ (Figure 9a) most of 

the atomic spin density and the excess positive charge are in the terminal methyl groups 
(2:1  to  the  interior  hydrogen  atoms).  For  methyltripropylammonium•2+  and  P14•2+ 

(Figures  9b  and  9c),  the  maximum  spin  density  and  the  excess  positive  charge  are 
distributed 2:3 between the terminal and the penultimate sites. By contrast, for C4mim•2+ 
shown in Figure 9d (that served as a model cation for C10mim•2+), the two alkyl sites (that 

equally divide the spin density on the protons) contain only 20% of the total spin density, 
whereas 80% of the spin density resides in the p -orbitals in C(2), C(4), and C(5) atoms of 
the  imidazolium  ring.  This  suggests  that  C4mim•2+  is  more  homologous  to  aromatic 
radical cations than the alkane radical cations. (the pulse radiolysis study of Behar et al. 16 

is in agreement with this conclusion: a species attributed to the radical dication generated 
-  was  observed  in  an  aqueous  solution). 

by  oxidation  of  the  imidazolium  cation  by  SO4•

Thus,  this  radical  dication  should  be  more  stable  towards  the  proton  transfer  from  the 

alkyl  chains  and  thus  decay  via  reaction  (3b).  This  would  account  for  the  reduced 

production of alkyl radicals in the imidazolium based ILs. The charge transfer should also 
- crystals: 61-63 the 
be facilitated by fortuitous ion packing observed in imidazolium - NTf2
planar imidazolium ring is typically situated next to the -N-  62 or -SO2-  63 groups of the 

NTf2

- anion.  

While several substitution products at the C(2) site of the imidazolium ring were 
observed  by  Berthon  et  al.  31  (including  CF3  and  alkyl  substitutions)  and  interpreted  by 

these authors as evidence for cation fragmentation, these products can also be generated 

by addition of these radicals to the imidazolium ring and subsequent deprotonation. We 

observed  no  evidence  for  dealkylation  of  the  imidazolium  cation  postulated  by  these 
workers. 29 The caveat is that according to our DFT calculations, the C-centered radicals 

(e.g.,  Figures  4S(b,c))  formed  by  the  loss  of  hydrogen  in  the  imidazolium  ring  would 

22 

have relatively small hfcc’s (see the Appendix) and exhibit EPR spectra represented by a 

narrow singlet with the peak-to-peak splitting of ca. 20 G (Figure 5S). This singlet might 

be  obscured  by  EPR  lines  of  other  radicals,  like  the  tentative  EPR  signal  from  the 
C10mim• radical discussed in section 3.1. While such a possibility cannot be excluded, it 

presently  appears  that  imidazolium  cations  are  more  stable  towards  fragmentation  via 

reaction (3a) than other cations studied here. 

 

5. 

CONCLUSION 

Our  EPR  studies  begin  to  provide  a  coherent,  albeit  incomplete,  picture  of  the 

initial  stages  of  radiation  damage  in  several  practically  important  classes  of  room 

temperature  ILs.  The  process  that  yields  most  fragments  is  trapping  of  the  hole  by 

alkylammonium  (phosphonium)  cations  which  results  in  their  rapid  deprotonation  from 

the terminal (and to a lesser degree) penultimate sites of their longest extended aliphatic 

chains.    Our  examination  of  the  trapped-hole  dication  species  qualitatively  accounts  for 

the  fragmentation  patterns  observed.  The  formation  of  interior  radicals  is  precluded 

because the spin density in the alkyl chains is maximal for the terminal and penultimate 

sites  of  the  longest  extended  chain,  from  which  the  deprotonation  occurs.  That 

specifically  these  sites  become  predominant  is  the  likely  consequence  of  packing  of  IL 

glasses,  as  these  sites  are  the  closest  to  the  proton-accepting  anions.  The  H-abstraction 

reactions of H atoms (or other mobile radicals) with the alkyl chains would be expected 

to produce a pattern that reflects the relative abundance of the three proton donating sites, 

with  the  interior  and  penultimate  radicals  providing  the  largest  contribution.  The  clear 

preference in the generation of terminal radicals is thus indicative of the deprotonation of 

a  short-lived  radical  dication  of  the  ammonium/phosphonium  as  the  predominant 

mechanism for alkyl radical formation. 

The deprotonation is less important for imidazolium cations (and, perhaps, other 

aromatic cations, such as pyridinium) as the spin density mainly resides on the aromatic 

ring and charge transfer to a nearby anion can take place instead. This does not mean that 

the  imidazolium  cations  are  protected.  Quite  to  the  contrary,  the  aromatic  cations  serve 
instead  as  electron  trapping  centers  that  generate  p -radicals  which  initiate  yet  another 

degradation  path.  Hole  trapping  by  the  cations  competes  with  the  hole  trapping  by  the 

23 

anions that are deeper traps (and thus would prevail in the absence of deprotonation); the 
- and DCA) or an O-centered radical 
resulting species is an N-centered radical (for NTf2
(for BOB-) that is rather stable. The electrons are trapped either by the aromatic cations 

or,  in  the  ILs  consisting  of  the  aliphatic  chain  cations,  at  the  adventitious  protic  sites 

(having  first  been  localized  as  F-centers  in  anion  vacancies,  as  indicated  by  pulse 
radiolysis  studies).  16-20  The  latter  convert  to  H  atoms,  some  of  which  are  trapped  in 

cation vacancies at low temperature. Recombination of direct excitation at the anion site 
-  anion  with  the  release  of  •CF3  radicals.  The  BOB- 

causes  fragmentation  of  the  NTf2

anion  appears  to  be  capable  of  electron  scavenging  via  DEA  with  the  formation  of  a 

boron dangling bond radical.  

In  the  context  of  the  greater  problem  that  we  address  (how  to  increase  the 

radiation  stability  of  extraction  systems  based  upon  an  IL  diluent),  the  sketch  of  the 

radiation  chemistry  drawn  above  is  discouraging  in  some  respects  and  encouraging  in 

other respects. First, it is seen that the radiation damage to the cation is unavoidable, as 

the  deprotonation  is  not  precluded  even  by  reaction  (3a)  that  involves  anions  which 

constitute half of the liquid: if the cation does not fragment via reaction (3b), it is reduced 

in reaction (4); in both of these cases, reactive radicals are formed and oligomerization is 

possible.  Second,  the  excitation  of  both  ions  occurs  and  can  result  in  prompt 

fragmentation  of  these  ions.  Such  reactions  also  cannot  be  precluded.  Third,  mobile, 

reactive radicals such as •CF3 and H atoms are formed; these radicals immediately attack 

the IL solvent. All these reaction mechanisms contribute to deterioration of neat ILs. Our 

scenario suggests that this damage may not be fully prevented or mitigated by addition of 

charge  scavengers  and  excited  state  quenchers,  as  such  processes  as  deprotonation  are 

very fast and already compete with very rapid charge transfer. It should be noted however 

that  complete  prevention  or  mitigation  is  a  goal  unlikely  to  be  achieved  in  any  system; 

the real question is whether ionic liquids afford a higher level of radiolytic stability (and 

separations performance) than TBP/hydrocarbon extraction systems. The studies reported 

here  are  effective  at  quantifying  relative  yields  of  early  radical  radiolysis  products,  but 

not  as  effective,  on  their  own,  at  establishing  the  absolute  rate  of  radiolytic  damage 

accumulation in ILs as compared to other systems.  

24 

On  a  more  positive  note,  the  damage  to  the  solvent  does  not  necessarily  lead  to 

inferior  performance  of  the  extraction  system  if  the  solvent  (i)  actively  protects  the 

extractant from the damage, diverting the damage towards itself, and (ii)  does not  yield 

products  that  interfere  with  the  metal  ion  extraction.  Our  results  suggest  that  this  may 

indeed be the case: rapid, irreversible trapping of the electrons and holes by the solvent 

means that the extractant is protected. While various radicals are produced, none of these 

might be expected to react with the alkylphosphate extractant causing dealkylation of the 

latter.  Direct  measurements  suggest  that  in  10-40  wt%  solutions  of  alkyl  phosphates  in 

these  ILs,  the  yield  of  the  radicals  generated  via  dealkylation  of  the  solute  does  not 

exceed  a  few  per  cent  of  the  total  yield  of  the  (matrix)  radicals,  implying  that  the  IL 

solvent takes the brunt of the radiation damage, protecting the solute. This behavior of the 

IL solvents is fully consistent with our observations: 

The  DEA  involving  the  alkylphosphates  (reaction  (8))  is  impeded  by  electron 

trapping, whereas excitation transfer is impeded by the presence of the cations that have 

lower excitation energies, serving as quenchers of the excess energy. This quenching may 

actually  protect  the  extractant  even  from  the  direct  excitation.  Thus,  the  ILs  suggest  a 

different paradigm for radiation protection: the complex solvent that actively protects the 

functional  solute  (the  extractant)  in  a  sacrificial  way.  The  current  alkane-phosphate 

extraction systems involve a highly resistant, structurally simple solvent (the alkane) that 

efficiently  channels  all  radiation  damage  to  the  functional  solute  (the  alkyl  phosphate). 

Ionic liquids are the medium in which this pattern is reversed.  

 

6.  AKNOWLEDGMENTS.  

The  work  at  Argonne  and  Brookhaven  is  supported  by  the  Office  of  Science, 

Division  of  Chemical  Sciences,  US-DOE  under  contracts  Nos.  DE-AC-02-06CH11357 

and DE-AC02-98CH10886, respectively.  We thank J. Miller, M. Dietz, R. Chiarizia, and 

L. Soderholm for many useful discussions and freely given insights, and M. Dietz, P. G. 

Rickert,  A.  M.  Funston,  T.  Szreder,  M.  Thomas,  A.  Castaño,  K.  Odynocki,  and  R. 

Ramkirath for preparing or providing some of the ionic liquids used in this study. JFW 

thanks  the  BNL  Office  of  Educational  Programs  and  the  BNL  Diversity  Office  for 

support of the undergraduate and graduate assistants listed above. 

25 

Supporting  Information  Available:  (1)  A  PDF  file  containing  Figures  1S  to  16S  with 

captions and (2) the Appendix. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at 

 

http://pubs.acs.org. 

26 

  
References. 

1. 

2. 

 

 

3. 

6. 

7. 

Earle, M. J.; Seddon, K. S. Pure Appl. Chem. 2000, 72, 1391. 

Cocalia, V. A.; Gutowski, K. E.; Rogers, R. D. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2006, 250, 755 

Dietz, M. L. Sep. Sci. Technol. 2006, 41, 2047. 

Stepinski D. C.;  Young B.A.;  Jensen M.P.;  Rickert P.G.;  Dzielawa J.A.;  Dilger 

A.A.;  Rausch D.J.;  Dietz M.L. in Separations for the Nuclear Fuel Cycle in the 
21st  Century,    Lumetta  G.;  Nash  K.L.;  Clark  S.B.;  Friese  J.I.  Eds.,  American 

Chemical  Society,  2006;    233;  Jensen,  M.  P.;  Neuefeind,  J.;  Beitz,  J.  V.; 

Skanthakumar, S.; Soderholm, L J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 15466. 

4. 

Luo,  H.;  Dai  S.;  Bonnesen,  P.  V.;  Haverlock,  T.  J.;  Moyer,  B.  A.;  and  A.  C. 

Buchanan III Solvent Extr. Ion Exch. 2006, 24, 19. 

5. 

S.  I.  Nikitenko,  S.  I.;  Cannes,  C.;  Le  Naour,  C;  Moisy,  P.;  Trubert,  D.  Inorg. 

Chem. 2005, 44, 9497. 

Chaumont, A.; Wipff, G. Inorg. Chem. 2004; 43, 5891. 

Visser, A. E.; Jensen, M. P.; Laszak, I.; Nash, K. L.; Choppin, G. R.; Rogers, R. 

D. Inorg. Chem. 2003, 42, 2197. 

8. 

Davis, W., Jr. in "Science and Technology of Tributyl Phosphate. Vol. 1" Schulz, 

W. W.; Navratil, J. D.; Talbot, A. E., Eds. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1984; pp. 221 

9. 

Egorov,  G.  F.  Radiation  Chemistry  of  Extraction  Systems,  Moscow,  Energizdat, 

1986. 

10. 

Kerr,  C.  M.  L.;  Webster,  K.;  Williams,  F.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  1972,  76,  2848  and 

1975, 79, 2650;  Haase, K. D.; Schulte-Frohlinde, D.; Kourim, P.; Vacek, K. Int. 

J.  Radiat.  Chem.  1973,  5,  351;  Zaitsev,  V.  D;  Karasev,  A.  L.;  Khaikin,  G.  I.; 

Egorov, G. F. High Energy Chem. 1988, 22, 418 

11. 

Zaitsev,  V.  D.;  Khaikin,  G.  I.  High  Energy  Chem.  1989,  23,  99;  Radiat.  Phys. 

Chem. 1994, 28, 269; V. D. Zaitsev, Protasova, E. L.; Khaikin, G. I. High Energy 

Chem. 1990, 24, 414; High Energy Chem. 1993, 27, 30 

12. 

Lan, W. J.; Ying, F. Y.; Qing, W. W. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1984, 23, 601;  Huai-

Yu, S.; Zhi-Zhong, W.; Yao-Huan, C.; Yong-Hai, H.; Qi-Zhong, W.; Jin-Tai, C.; 

Ren-Zhong,  L.  Radiat.  Phys.  Chem.  1989,  33,  585;  Shuyao,  Y.;  Yu,  Shan; 

27 

Tianzhen,  T.  Radiat.  Phys.  Chem.  1989,  33,  599;  Jiamin,  W.;  Rongyao,  Y.; 

Xianming,  P.  Radiat.  Phys.  Chem.  1989,  33,  603;  Nan,  Z.;  Ji-Lan,  W.  Radiat. 

Phys.  Chem.  1991,  38,  383;  Radiat.  Phys.  Chem.  1992,  39,  287;  Haofang,  J.; 

Xianming,  P.;  Jilan,  W.;  Fengmei,  L.;  Andong,  L.;  Hongchun,  G.  Radiat.  Phys. 

Chem. 1995, 47, 815; Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1999, 54, 245; Du, Y.; Wu, J.; Li, F.; 

Liu, A. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1999, 54, 455. 

13. 

Egorov,  G.  F.;  Afanas'ev,  O.  P.;  Zilberman,  B.  Ya.;  Makarychev-Mikhailov,  M. 

N. Radiochemistry 2002, 44, 151. 

14. 

Dietz  M.  L.;  Dzielawa,  J.  A.  Chem.  Commun.  2001,  2124;  Dietz,  M.  L.; 

Dzielawa,    J.  A.;  Laszak,  I.  Young,  B.  A.;  Jensen,  M.  P.  Green  Chem.  2003,  5, 

682; Dietz M. L.; Stepinski, D. C. Green Chem. 2005, 7, 747. 

15.  Marcinek, A.; Zielonka, J.; Gebicki, J. J. Phys. Chem. A 2001, 105, 9305. 

Behar, D.; Gonzales, C.; Neta, P. J. Phys. Chem. A 2001, 105, 7607. 

Grodkowski, J.; Neta, P. J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 11130. 

Grodkowski, J.; Neta, P. J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 5468. 

Grodkowski, J.; Neta, P. J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 9030. 

Behar, D.; Neta, P.; Schultheisz, C.  J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 3139. 

Grodkowski, J.; Neta, P.; Wishart, J. F.  J. Phys. Chem. A 2003, 107, 9794. 

Skrzypzak, A.; Neta, P. J. Phys. Chem. A 2003, 107, 7800. 

23.  Wishart, J. F.; Neta, P. J. Phys. Chem. B 2003, 107, 7261. 

24.  Wishart, J. F.; Lall-Ramnarine, S. I.; Raju, R.; Scumpia, A.; Bellevue, S.; Ragbir, 

R.; Engel, R.  Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2005, 72, 99. 

25.  Wishart,  J.  F.  in  “Ionic  Liquids  as  Green  Solvents:  Progress  and  Prospects” 

Rogers, R. D. and Seddon, K. R., Eds.; ACS Symp. Ser. 856, Ch. 31, pp. 381-396, 

ACS, Washington, DC, 2003.  

26. 

A. M. Funston and J. F. Wishart in Ionic Liquids IIIA: Fundamentals, Progress, 

Challenges  and  Opportunities;  Rogers,  R.  D.  and  Seddon,  K.  R.,  Eds.;  ACS 

Symp. Ser. 901, Ch. 8, pp. 102-116, ACS, Washington, DC, 2005. 

27.   Wishart, J. F.;  Funston, A. M.; Szreder T. in “Molten Salts XIV” Mantz, R. A. et 

al., Eds.; The Electrochemical Society, Pennington, NJ, 2006, pp. 802.  

28. 

Allen, D. et al. Green. Chem. 2002, 4, 152 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

28 

29. 

Berton,  L.;  Nikitenko,  S.  I.;  Bisel,  I.;  Berthon,  C.;  Faucon,  M.;  Saucerotte,  B.; 

Zorz, N.; Moisy, Ph. J. Chem. Soc. Dalton Trans. 2006, 2526. 

30.  Mishra, S. P.; Symons, M. C. S. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Comm. 1974, 279. 

31. 

Katoh, R.; Yoshida, Y.; Katsumura, Y.; Takahashi, K. J. Phys. Chem. B, ASAP, 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

DOI: 10.1021/jp067107e.  

Chandrasekhar, N.; Unterreiner, A.-N. Z. Phys. Chem. 2006, 220, 1235. 

Janecka, J.; Fujimoto, M. J. Magn. Reson. 1971, 4, 47 

Tench, A. J. J. Chem. Phys. 1963, 38, 593. 

Paul, A; Mandal, K.; Samanta, A. J. Phys. Chem. B 2005, 109, 9148. 

Funston, A. M.; Fadeeva, T. A.; Wishart, J. F.; Castner, Jr., E. W. J. Phys. Chem 

B 2007, 111, in press, DOI: 10.1021/jp0682980.  

37. 

Becke, A. D. Phys. Rev. A 1988, 38, 3098; Lee, C., Yang, W.; Parr, R. G. Phys. 

38. 

Frisch,  M.  J.  et  al,  Gaussian  98,  revision  A.1,  Gaussian,  Inc.,  Pittsburgh, 

Rev. B 1988, 37, 785. 

Pennsylvania, 1998. 

39. 

Lund,  A.;  Lindgren,  M.;  Lunell,  S.;  Maruani,  J.  in  Molecules  in  Physics, 

Chemistry, and Biology, ed. J. Maruani, vol. 3, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1989; Feller, 

D; Davidson, E.R.  in: Theoretical Models of Chemical Bonding; ed. Z.B. Maksic, 

Springer,  Berlin,  199;    Part  3;  Malkin,  V.  G.,  Malkina,  O.  L.;  Salahub,  D.  R.; 

Eriksson,  L.    in  Theoretical  and  Computational  Chemistry,  eds.  Politzer,  P.; 

Seminario, J.M., vol. 2, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1995; Chipman, D. M. in Quantum 

Mechanical  Electronic  Structure  Calculations  with  Chemical  Accuracy,  ed.  S.R. 

Langhoff (Ed.), Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1995; Ban,  F.; Gauld, J.W.; Wetmore, S.D.; 

Boyd,  R.J.  in  EPR  of  Free  Radicals  in  Solids:  Trends  in  Methods  and 

Applications; eds. Lund, A.; Shiotani, M. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2003. 

40. 

Eriksson, L. A., Malkin, V.G.; Malkina, O.L.; Salahub, D.R. Int. J. Quant. Chem. 

1994, 52, 879, J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 100, 5066; Barone, V. J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 

101,  6834;  Nguyen,  M.  T.;  Creve,  S.;  Eriksson,  L.A.;  Vanquickenborne,  L.G. 

Mol. Phys. 1997, 91, 537; Feller, D. J. J. Chem. Phys. 1990, 93, 579; Chen, B.-Z.; 

Huang, M.-B. Chem. Phys.  Lett. 1999, 308, 256; Engels, B.; Peyerimhoff, S. D.  

Molec. Phys. 1989, 67, 583. 

29 

41. 

Landolt-Bornstein,  New  Series,  "Magnetic  Properties  of  Free  Radicals",  Ed. 

Fischer, H. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1987. 

42. 

DesMarteau, D. D.; LeBlond, R. D.; Hossain, S. F.; Nothe, D. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 

1981, 103, 7734. 

Symons, M. C. S. Adv. Chem. Ser. 1962, 36, 76 

43. 

44. 

46. 

47. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

Iwasaki, M. Fluorine Chem. Rev. 1971, 5, 1; Toriyama, K.; Iwasaki, M. J. Phys. 

Chem. 1969, 73, 2919. 

45.  Maruani, J.; McDowell, C. A.; Nakajima, H.; Raghunathan, P. Molec. Phys. 1968, 

14, 349; Maruani, J. Molec. Phys. 1970, 18, 165.  

Rogers, M. T.; Kispert, L. D. J. Chem. Phys. 1967, 46, 3193. 

Srygley, F. D.; Gordy, W. J. Chem. Phys. 1967, 46, 2245 (one of the radicals was 

reassigned to trifluromethyl in subsequent studies). 

48. 

Kotov, A. G., Pukhal'skaya, G. V.; Pshezhetski, S. Ya. High Energy Chem. 1970, 

4, 93; High Energy Chem. 1967, 1, 536. 

49. 

Shkrob, I. A.; Sauer, M. C., Jr. J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 9120; Adrian, F. J.; 

Cochran,  E.  L.;  Bowers,  V.  A.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1973,  59,  3946;  Auscough; 

Thomson, C. Trans. Farad. Soc. 1962, 49. 

Krishnamurthy, M. V. Molec. Phys. 1972, 24, 1353. 

Shkrob, I. A.; Tadjikov, B. M.; Trifunac, A. D.  J. Non-Cryst. Solids 2000, 262, 6. 

Shkrob, I. A.;  Tarasov, V. F.  J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113, 10723. 

53.  Wishart, J. F.; Castaño, A., manuscript in preparation.  

54. 

Forsyth, C. M.; MacFarlane, D. R.; Golding, J. J.; Huang, J.; Sun, J.; Forsyth, M.  

55. 

Ronig,  B.;  Bick,  T.;  Pantenburg,  I.;  Wesemann  L.  Eur.  J  .Inorg.  Chem.,  2004, 

Chem. Mater. 2004, 14, 2103. 

689. 

56. 

Iwasaki,  M.;  Toriyama,  K.;  Nunome,  K.  Radiat.  Phys.  Chem.  1983,  21,  147;  J. 

Phys.  Chem.  1986,  90,  6836;  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1982,  77,  5891;  J.  Chem.  Phys. 

1983, 79, 2499; Chem. Phys. Lett. 1984, 105, 414 

57. 

58. 

Demeyer, A.; Ceulemans, J. J. Phys. Chem. A 1997, 101, 3537 

Shkrob, I. A.; Tifunac, A. D. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1995, 46, 83 

30 

59. 

Iwasaki,  M.;  Toriyama,  K.;  Fukaya,  M.;  Muto,  H.;  Nunome,  K.  J.  Phys.  Chem. 

1985, 89, 5278; Muto, H.; Nunome, K.; Fukaya, M. J. Phys. Chem. 1990, 94, 418 

Tilquin, B.; Baudson, T. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1991, 37, 23. 

Davidson,  M.  G.;  Raithby,  P.  R.;  Johnson,  A.  L  .;  Bolton,  P.  D.  Eur.  J.  Inorg. 

Chem. 2003, 3445 

Jodry, J. J.; Mikami, K. Tetrahedron Lett. 2004, 45, 4429 

Golding,  J.  J.;  MacFarlane,  D.  R.;  Spiccia,  L.;  Forsyth,    M.;  Skelton,  B.  W.; 

White, A. H. Chem. Comm. 1998, 1593 

60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

 

31 

Figure captions. 

Figure 1. 

Figure 2. 

Chemical structures of the ions composing the ILs studied. 

(a)  First  derivative  EPR  spectra  (9.445  GHz,  modulation  1  G,  0.2  mW)  from  C+  NTf2

-

solids  irradiated  by  248  nm  laser  light  at  77K.  The  spectra  were  obtained  at  70  K.  The 

cations  are  indicated  next  to  the  traces.  The  spectra  are  normalized  to  facilitate  the 

comparison.  In  the  lower  trace,  the  spectrum  from  CH3CH2CH2•  radical  observed  in 

irradiated  d10-pyrene  in  n-butyronitrile  at  30  K  is  shown  by  a  dotted  line  (from  Figure 
 is 

24S of ref. 49). In the upper two traces, the 67 G doublet of resonance lines from •NTf2

indicated  by  open  circles  (compare  with  simulations  in  Figure  2S).    The  lines  from 
+  are  indicated  by  filled  circles  (see 

penultimate  alkyl  radicals  in  the  butyl  chain  of  P14
Figure 5S for simulations). (b) Evolution of the EPR spectrum from MB3N+ NTf2

-
 shown 

in panel (a) upon warming of the sample to 200 K. 

Figure 3. 

EPR  spectra  from  polycrystalline  Li+  NTf2

-  and  Me3NH+  NTf2

-  irradiated  by  3  MeV 

electrons  at  77  K  (the  spectra  are  obtained  at  50  K;  1  G  modulation,  0.2  mW).    Solid 

arrows indicate the extreme transitions from •NTf2 radical (see also Figures 1S and 2S). 
Dashed  arrows  indicate  the  sidebands  from  19F  transitions.  In  both  of  these  spectra, 

weaker resonance lines from other radicals (see the text) superimpose onto the spectrum 

of the sulfonamidyl radical. 

Figure 4. 

Formation  of  trifluoromethyl  in  low-temperature  (77  K)  radiolysis  (40  s  exposure)  and 
photolysis (5 min exposure) of C+ NTf2

-
 solids (see section 2 for more detail). The EPR 

spectra were obtained using 10 G modulation and 20 mW microwave power.  The traces 

were  normalized  by  the  maximum  signal  at  the  center  of  the  spectrum.  The  resonance 

32 

signals  from  alkyl  radicals  and  the  H  atoms  are  removed.  (a)  In  the  lower  trace,  the 

dashed signal indicates the spectrum and the solid line shows the same spectrum scaled 

by a factor of 10. The six groups of lines (AA',  BB', and CC', panel (b)) from •CF3 are 
- anion. The solid lines are 

clearly seen. The same lines appear for all ILs including NTf2

for electron radiolysis (the scaling factors are 10, 20, 10, and 10, from top to bottom) and 

the  dotted  lines  are  for  photolysis  (the  scaling  factors  are  40,  80,  and  40,  from  top  to 

bottom).  Compare  with  the  simulations  shown  in  Figure  2S  for  relative  intensities.  (b) 
The lines from •CF3 radical in polycrystalline Et3NH+ NTf2

 at 70 K (solid line) and 130 

- 

K (dashed line) irradiated using 3 MeV electrons to the dose of 0.15 Mrad. The signal at 

the center is removed. The signals inside the circles are (saturated, overmodulated) EPR 

signals  from H atoms. The lines indicated by  arrows have not been  classified. The AA' 

doublet  corresponds  to  the  extreme  transitions  occurring  when  the  field  is  aligned  with 

Evolution of the EPR spectrum from Et3NH+ NTf2

-
 shown in Figure 4b upon warming of 

the  sample.  The  arrows  indicate  the  BB'  and  CC'  lines  from  trifluoromethyl.  At  180  K, 

many  interfering  signals  disappear  and  rotation  becomes  unhindered,  so  the  resonance 

lines of the alkyl radicals (superimposed onto the singlet) are clearly seen (indicated by 

the symmetry axis.  

Figure 5. 

open circles). 

Figure 6. 

EPR  spectra  observed  in  radiolyzed  (a)  imidazolium  and  (b)  pyrrolidinium  salts.  The 

dashed lines are for 1 G modulation and 0.2 mW, the solid lines are for 10 G modulation 

and  20  mW;  the  temperature  is  70  K.  The  lines  from  trifluoromethyl  are  indicated  by 

arrows.  The  question  marks  indicate  unidentified  doublet  of  lines  from  Figure  3b.    The 

integration of the signals suggests that the yield of •CF3 radicals is 5-10% of the yield of 

the alkyl and C10mim• radicals. 

33 

Comparison  between  EPR  spectra  obtained  in  low-temperature  photolysis  (dashed  line) 
-  at  70  K.  The  arrows  indicate  the 
and  radiolysis  (solid  line)  of  glassy  MB3N+  NTf2

resonance lines from trifluoromethyl radical. In the radiolyzed solid, there are additional 

lines (indicated by open circles) from penultimate (ii) C-centered radicals that are missing 

in the photolyzed solid, where only terminal radicals (i) are observed. 

Figure 7. 

Figure 8. 

Generation of methyl radicals in low-temperature 3 MeV  electron radiolysis (solid line, 

the  upper  panel)  and  248  nm  laser  photolysis  (solid  line,  the  lower  panel)  of  low-
temperature  C10mim+  NTf2
+  glass  containing  35  wt%  trimethylphosphate  (TMP).  These 

EPR spectra were observed at 50 K; the irradiation was carried out at 77 K. The positions 

of  the  four  resonance  lines  from  the  methyl  radical  are  indicated  by  the  arrows.  The 

relative yield of these radicals is ca. 2% of the yield of the C10mim• radical.  In the lower 

panel, the dashed line indicates the spectrum of the methyl radical generated by DEA to 

iodomethane in the same IL glass. 

Figure 9. 

Isodensity surfaces of spin density for Cs symmetrical radical dications of (a) Et3NH, (b) 

methyltripropylammonium (a model for MB3N), (c) P14, and (c) C4mim. The geometries 

of these species were optimized using B3LYP/6-31+G** method. The isodensity surfaces 

are for (a) 0.02, (b) 0.01, (c) 0.05, and (d) 0.15 (in atomic units). See the Appendix in the 

Supplement for atomic charge and spin densities. 

34 

N

N

DCA-

N

N

2

MB3N+

3
N

4

1
N

5

Cnmim+

O

N

O

F3C

S

O

CF3

S

O

-

NTf2

OO
B

O
O
BOB-

O

O

O

O

N

+
P14

P

Hx3TdP+

77 K
248 nm

MB3N+ 
248 nm

n-Pr•

(a)

Et3NH+

C10mim+

P14+

MB3N+

(b)

200 K

150 K

77 K

field, G

3250

3300

3350

3400

3450

•NTf2

radiolysis, 77 K  

Li+

Me3NH+

polycrystalline
samples

50 K

field, G

3320

3360

3400

 radiolysis
 photolysis 

(a)

C10mim+  

MB3N+  

P14+  

(b)

130 K

A

70 K

Et3NH+  

70 K

x10

field, G

3000

3200

3400

3600

Et3NH+  
radiolysis

C'

B

C

B'

A'

field offset, G

-400

-200

0

200

400

Et3NH+
radiolysis

Et•

180 K

130 K

70 K

3200

3300

3400

3500

field, G

H• 

?

(b) P14+ 

H• 

Alk• 

radiolysis, 70 K 

?

x10

?

•CF3

(a) C10mim+ 

N

N R

x10

field, G

3000

3200

3400

3600

MB3N+  70K

R3N+

R3N+

(i)

(ii)

 radiolysis
 photolysis 

3200

3300

3400

3500

field, G

C10mim+ NTf2-
with 35 wt% TMP  

radiolysis, 77 K

•CH3

photolysis, 77 K

field, G

3350

3400

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)

(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:4)

(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:4)

Shkrob et al. 
 

 Page 1  

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL   

 

 

 

 

Supporting Information. 

Figure Captions (Supplement)  

Figure 1S. 

EPR spectra observed in polycrystalline lithium-7 bis(triflyl)amide (Li+ NTf2
-) irradiated 
by 3 MeV electrons at 77 K and observed at 50, 130, and 165 K, as indicated in the plot. 
The solid lines are EPR spectra obtained using 1 G modulation and 0.2 mW microwave 
power; the dashed lines are the same spectra obtained using 10 G modulation and 20 mW 
microwave power. The side lines (also shown in Figure 3) at the center resonance from 
the •NTf2 radical become better resolved at the higher temperature, as the trifluoromethyl 
groups begin to rotate more freely; above 120 K, one can also see a complex pattern of 
weaker lines from another radical (or a radical pair) with a broad spectrum. 

Simulation of powder EPR spectrum from the C2v symmetrical •NTf2 radical (b1 SOMO) 
using hfcc parameters estimated using the B3LYP/6-31+G** method. Trace (i) shows the 
histogram of EPR transitions, and traces (ii) and (iii) show simulated first derivative EPR 
spectra obtained by convoluting this histogram with Gaussian functions having the width 
of  1  G  and  10  G,  respectively.  The  outer  doublet  corresponds  to  the  alignment  of  the 
magnetic  field  along  the  N  2p  orbital  of  the  radical  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  SNS 
plane of the molecule.  

Figure 2S. 

Figure 3S. 

EPR  spectra  from  low-temperature  polycrystalline  and  amorphous  trimethylamine 
-. (a) The comparison between the EPR spectra obtained 
bis(triflyl) amide, Me3NH+ NTf2
in  the  samples  following  (the  top  trace)  248  nm  laser  photolysis  of  a  melt  (that  was 
rapidly  quenched  by  immersion  into  liquid  nitrogen)  and  (b)  polycrystalline  solid 
irradiated by 3 MeV electrons (at 77 K). These EPR spectra were observed at 50 K (1 G 
modulation  and  0.2  mW  microwave  power).  In  the  lower  trace,  the  lines  from  the 
trifluoromethyl  radical  are  scaled  by  a  factor  of  10.    The  narrow  resonance  lines 
corresponding to the extreme transitions in the •NTf2 radical (Figure 2S) are clearly seen 
in the polycrystalline (powder) samples, but these lines are poorly resolved in the vitreous 
sample.  (b)  Evolution  of  the  EPR  spectrum  from  3  MeV  electron  irradiated  Me3NH+ 
- upon warming the sample from 50 K to 150 K to 300 K (the upper EPR spectrum 
NTf2
was obtained at 200 K after warming the sample to 300 K for 5 min). The arrows indicate 
the lines from the •CF3 radical, the filled circles indicate the lines from the •NTf2 radical. 
+  radical  cations  which  are 
The  open  circles  indicate  the  lines  from  •NMe3
observed above 120 K. 

+  or  •NHMe2

 

 

 

Shkrob et al. 
 

Figure 4S. 

 Page 2  

Simulation  of  the  first  derivative  EPR  spectra  form  the  terminal  and  penultimate  alkyl 
radicals and the •CF3 radical. These simulated spectra were normalized by the integral of 
the EPR signal, i.e. their relative amplitudes correspond to a 1:1:1 mixture of these three 
radicals  (the  same  inhomogeneous  broadening  of  10  G  was  assumed  for  all  resonance 
lines). The powder spectrum of trifluoromethyl was simulated using the hfcc parameters 
obtained  from  DFT  calculation  in  the  Appendix.  The  spectra  of  alkyl  radicals  were 
simulated assuming complete averaging of their anisotropic tensors; the hf constants were 
taken from reference 41. For terminal radical, we let a(2Ha )=22 G, a(2Hb )=29.1 G, and 
a(2Hg )=0.7 G, for penultimate radical, we let a(Ha )=21.9 G, a(3Hb )=24.6 G, a(2Hb )=27.2 
G, and a(3Hg )=3.9 G. The AA’, BB’, and CC’ doublets in the spectrum of trifluoromethyl 
are indicated. Isotropic g-tensors were assumed for all of these radicals. 

Figure 5S. 

+  NTf2

- (red dashed line) and P14

-  (solid  black  line)  containing  10  wt%  EtBr  and  (b)  P14

(a) Ethyl, (b) methyl, and (c) methyl-d3 radicals generated in frozen ILs. All of these EPR 
spectra were observed at 50 K for field modulation of 1 G, and the microwave power of 
0.2 mW. These radicals were generated via DEA to the halocarbon dopants. Normalized 
EPR spectra from 3 MeV electron irradiated (a) C10mim+ NTf2
+ 
-  (thin  blue  line) 
NTf2
containing 10 wt% CH3I are shown. The four resonance lines (1:4:4:1) from the methyl 
radical (marked by the arrows) are superimposed onto the spectrum of alkyl radicals that 
+.  The  latter  signals  can  be  removed  by subtracting the scaled EPR 
are  derived  from  P14
spectrum obtained in irradiated neat IL to produce the EPR spectrum shown by the bold 
(black)  line  which  is  mainly  from  the  methyl  radical.  To  demonstrate  that  the  EPR 
spectrum from the doped sample shown in (b) is composite (as there is a possibility that 
the methyl radical abstracts hydrogen from the cation), in (c) we show the seven line EPR 
spectrum from the •CD3 radical obtained by 248 nm laser photolysis 49 of 14 wt% CD3CN 
-. The resonance lines from the trideuteromethyl radical (with a peak-to-peak 
in P14
separation  of  3.3  G  vs.  the  literature  value  of  3.4  G)  are superimposed on the spectrum 
from  (mostly)  •NTf2.  The  stability  of  the  methyl  radical  in  the  IL  matrices  is  thus 
demonstrated. 

+ NTf2

(a) Simulation of EPR spectra from the radicals derived from the aliphatic chains of the 
amines/alkylammonium  using  the  hfcc’s  reported  in  the  literature  (ref.  41,  vol.  II/9b, 
section  3  and  ref.  49).  Only  isotropic  hfcc’s  were  taken  into  account.  In  panel  (b),  we 
compare the spectra from Et2NH+CH•CH3 and Et2NH+CH2CH2• radicals calculated using 
the  hfcc’s  obtained  in  our  DFT  calculations  (see  the Appendix). The parameters for the 
terminal radical are indicated in the plot.  

Figure 6S. 

Figure 7S. 

Isodensity SOMO maps for (a) C4mim• radical and (b,c) two -H radicals obtained via the 
loss of imidazolium protons. See Figure 7S for their simulated EPR spectra. 

 

 

 

 Page 3  

Shkrob et al. 
 

Figure 8S. 

Figure 9S. 

Figure 10S. 

Figure 11S.  

(a)  Simulated  powder  EPR  spectra  for  imidazolium  radicals.  The  lower  trace  is  for 
C4mim• radical; the upper three traces are for -H radicals, as indicated in the figure (see 
also Figure 7S). The spectra were simulated assuming 1 G broadening. In panel (b), the 
same  spectra  are  shown  assuming  10  G  broadening.  Trace  (i)  is  for  the  imidazolium 
radical; traces (ii) are -H radicals.  

EPR  spectrum  of  polycrystalline  Bu4N+  NTf2
-  irradiated  by  3  MeV  electrons  at  77  K 
(observed at 50 K, for the field modulation of 1 G and the microwave power of 0.2 mW). 
The  sharp  "spikes"  are  resonance  lines  from  H  atoms  in  the  sample  tube.  The  arrows 
indicate the lines from •CF3. The dashed (blue) line is the EPR spectrum from MeBu3N+ 
-
NTf2
  glass.  Despite the difference in the sample morphology and the substitution at the 
nitrogen, the spectra of the resulting alkyl radicals are very similar. 

The comparison of EPR spectra from radiolyzed MB3N+ NTf2
-
 glasses (70 
K; the field modulation and the microwave power are indicated in the plot). The arrows 
indicate  the  resonance  lines  from  trifluoromethyl.  The  filled  circles  indicate  the  outer 
lines from the penultimate C-centered radicals in the n-butyl groups of these cations.   

- and P14

+ NTf2

(a)  A  comparison  between  the  EPR  spectra  obtained  from  3  MeV  electron  irradiated 
polycrystalline  sodium  dicyanamide  (DCA)  and  248  nm  laser  irradiated  IL  glass 
+  DCA-.  In  the  upper  trace,  spin  transitions  assigned  to  the  •N(NC)2 
composed  of  P14
radical  are  indicated  by  the  arrows.  In  the  lower  trace,  EPR  spectrum  observed  in  laser 
+  DCA-  (blue  line)  are  shown  for 
irradiated  P14
comparison.  These  EPR  spectra  were  obtained  at  50  K  (field  modulation  of  1  G  and 
microwave power of 0.2 mW). (b) Simulated EPR spectra of •N(NC)2 (the bold line is for 
10  G  width,  the  thin  line  is  for  1  G  width) obtained using the hfc tensors calculated by 
B3LYP/6-31+G** method (see the Appendix). The b1 SOMO of the radical is shown in 
the inset. 

-  (dashed  line)  and  radiolyzed  P14

+  NTf2

Figure 12S. 

(a)  EPR  spectra  observed  in  radiolyzed  (solid  black  line)  and  laser  photolyzed  (dashed 
+  BOB-  glass  at  77  K  (these  EPR  spectra  were  obtained  at  50  K, 
blue  line)  frozen  P14
modulation 1 G, and 0.2 mW). The spectrum is dominated by oxygen-centered radicals; 
observe the difference between the two traces, indicating the composite character of the 
EPR spectrum. Panel (b) shows the same EPR spectrum scaled by a factor of 25, so that 
the resonance lines from the alkyl radical are seen in more detail. The yellow line that is 
superimposed  on  these  spectra  is  a  scaled  EPR  spectrum  obtained  from  laser-irradiated 
+ 
P14

-  glass  at  77  K.  It  is  seen  that  the  same  alkyl  radicals  derived  from  the  P14

+  NTf2

 

 

 

 Page 4  

cation  moiety  are  generated  in  all  three  of  these  samples.  Integration  of  the  EPR  lines 
indicates that the yield ratio of the alkyl to the O-centered radical(s) is ca. 1:2.3. 

EPR  spectra  observed  in  irradiated  frozen  IL  glasses  consisting  of  Hx3TdP+  cation, 
trihexyltetradecylphosphonium  (50  K,  1  G,  0.2  mW).  (a)  The  alkyl  radical  generated  in 
-  glass. 
radiolyzed  (solid  black  line)  and  photolyzed  (dashed  blue  line)  Hx3TdP+  NTf2
Observe the near absence of EPR signals from the •CF3. (b) Solid lines: EPR spectra from 
radiolyzed and photolyzed Hx3TdP+ BOB- glass (the dashed lines are scaled EPR spectra 
from alkyl radicals shown in panel (a), respectively). The relative yields of the alkyl and 
O-centered radicals, as estimated by integration of the EPR spectra, are 1:1.6 (radiolysis) 
and 1:1.1 (photolysis), respectively.  

Shkrob et al. 
 

Figure 13S. 

Figure 14S. 

Dealkylation of triethyl phosphate (TEP) in irradiated IL glasses at 77 K (the EPR spectra 
are observed at 50 K). The dashed red lines in both panels show the EPR spectrum of the 
ethyl  radical  (generated  by  3  MeV  electron  irradiation  of  EtBr  in  C10mim+  NTf2
-  glass, 
Figure 5S(a)). (a) Laser photolysis (248 nm) and 3 MeV electron radiolysis of C10mim+ 
-  glass  containing  10  wt%  (blue  lines)  and  35  wt%  (black  lines)  TEP.  While  the 
NTf2
resonance  lines  from  the  ethyl  (indicated  by  the  arrows)  can  be  readily  observed  in  the 
photolyzed  samples  (due  to  the  direct  photoexcitation  of  the  triethyl  phosphate),  almost 
no such features are observed in the radiolyzed samples; the relative yield of this radical 
is  <  2%  of  the  yield  of  the  C10mim•  radical. (b) Radiolysis (solid black lines) and laser 
+  BOB+  containing  20  wt%  TEP.  The  microwave 
photolysis  (dashed  blue  lines)  of  P14
power  is  indicated  in  the  plot  (the  modulation  is  1  G).  The  open  circles  indicate  the 
features  from  the  ethyl  radical  derived  from  TEP.  The  relative  yield  of  this  radical  is 
< 5% of the total yield of all radicals observed. 

Figure 15S. 

+ NTf2

- glass containing 
(a)  Upper  traces:  EPR  spectra  of 3 MeV electron irradiated P14
trimethylphosphate  (TMP).  The  solid  (black)  line  is  from  a  sample  containing  40  wt% 
TMP, the dashed (blue) line is from a sample containing 14 wt% TMP; the yellow line is 
the spectrum for neat IL. The four resonance lines from the methyl radical derived from 
TMP  stand  out  against  the  stronger  background  signal  from  the  (mostly)  alkyl  radicals 
+  cation.  The  bottom  two  traces  are  EPR  spectra  obtained  in 
derived  from  the  P14
photolyzed glass containing 40 wt% TMP  (solid line) and radiolyzed glass containing 10 
wt%  CH3I  (dashed  line).  These  two  spectra  are  very  similar,  as  both  of  the  spectra  are 
dominated by the methyl radical that is generated via DEA to the dopant. In panel (b) the 
- glass containing 40 wt% TMP irradiated to the radiolytic 
upper trace is from P14
doses of 0.15 Mrad (solid black line) and 1.25 Mrad (dashed blue line); these EPR spectra 
were normalized so that the outer lines from the alkyl radicals had the same amplitudes. 
As  the  relative  yield  of  the  methyl  radical  among  the  radical  products  of  radiolysis 
decreases  with  the  increasing  dose,  the  subtraction  of  the  two  spectra  yields  the  EPR 
spectrum  from  the  (predominantly)  methyl  radical  (trace  (ii)).    The  arrows  in  the  lower 
trace  indicate  the four resonance lines from the •CH3.  Integration of these EPR spectra 

+ NTf2

 

 

 

Shkrob et al. 
 

 Page 5  

indicates  that  the  yield  of  the  methyl  radical  relative to the alkyl radical (for 0.15 Mrad 
dose)  for  3  MeV  electron  radiolysis at 77 K is ca. 1% for 14 wt% TMP and 4% for 40 
wt% TMP. Though the dealkylation of TMP occurs in radiolysis, most of the damage is 
directed  towards  the  IL  matrix.  The  EPR  spectra  were  obtained  at  50  K,  for  field 
modulation of 1 G, and the microwave power of 0.2 mW. 

Figure 16S. 

+  BOB-  glass  containing  20  wt% 
EPR  spectrum  of  electron  beam  irradiated  P14
trimethylphosphate (TMP). The spectra were obtained at 50 K, for field modulation of 1 
G, and the microwave power of 0.2 mW. In panel (a), the spectrum (solid black line, trace 
(i)) is shown over the spectrum observed from irradiated neat IL glass (dashed blue line, 
trace (iii) in both of the panels). The four resonance lines from the methyl radical derived 
from TMP are indicated by the arrows. In panel (b) the wings of these spectra (scaled by a 
factor of 10) are shown separately, with EPR spectra from the alkyl radical derived from 
- glass (trace (iv) from Figure 
deprotonated P14
5S,  trace  (c))  superimposed.  Subtraction  of  this  underlying  EPR  signal  from  the  alkyl 
radical yields the outer two lines of the methyl radical. Integration of these lines indicates 
that  the  relative  yields  of  the  alkyl,  the  O-centered,  and  the  methyl  radical  in  the 
radiolyzed  sample  are  1:1.6:0.08.  Though  the  dealkylation  of  TMP  occurs  in  radiolysis, 
most of the damage is directed towards the IL matrix, with the methyl radicals accounting 
for only 3% of the radical products. These EPR spectra were obtained at 50 K, for field 
modulation of 1 G, and the microwave power of 0.2 mW. 

+ cation and the methyl radical in P14

+ NTf2

 

 

 

