An Easily Constructed, Tuning Free, Ultra-broadband 

Probe for NMR 

D. Murphree, S.B. Cahn, D. Rahmlow, D. DeMille 

Yale University Department of Physics, New Haven, CT 06520 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Dennis Murphree 
SPL Room 25 
217 Prospect St. 
New Haven, CT 06520-8120 
 
Email: dennis.murphree@yale.edu 
Phone: 203-436-4437 
Fax: 203-432-9710 

 

 

 

An Easily Constructed, Tuning Free, Ultra-broadband 

Probe for NMR 

 

 

D. Murphree, S.B. Cahn, D. Rahmlow, D. DeMille 
Yale University Department of Physics, New Haven, CT 06520 

We have developed an easy to construct, non-resonant wideband NMR probe.  The probe is of the 

 
 
 
saddle coil geometry and is based on a transmission line design, thus requires no tuning or matching 
elements.  We use the probe with a spectrometer whose duplexer circuitry employs a simple RF switch 
instead of the more common λ/4 lines, so the entire probe and spectrometer perform in an essentially 
frequency-independent manner.  Despite being designed with electro- and magnetostatic formulas, the 
probe performs well at frequencies up to 150 MHz and beyond.  We expect that with additional design 
effort, the probe could be modified for use at significantly higher frequencies.  Because our construction 
method relies on commercial circuit fabrication techniques, identical probes can be easily and accurately 
produced. 
 
Keywords: NMR probe; broadband; transmission line; saddle coil; quadrupolar 
 
 

1  Introduction 
 

Most nuclear magnetic resonance measurements use resonant tuned probes for generation 

and detection of radiofrequency (RF) magnetic fields.  However, a variety of applications 

require probes capable of wideband operation.   Here we present the design for such a 

probe, measure its performance, and describe our experiences of constructing probes of 

this type.   

The design of our probes has been driven by a specific experiment underway in our group, 

with the goal to study electroweak interactions inside molecules.  This experiment 

requires the ability to shim and monitor a magnetic field in the range 0.1-0.6 T, to a 

homogeneity of 0.1ppm, with rapid adjustments to large changes in the field strength.  In 

 

 

 

order to do so, we will use an array of thirty-two spatially distributed NMR probes to 

provide a precise real-time map of the magnetic field.  Because we will not have physical 

access to the probes in order to tune them as we change the field, we need a probe which 

is non-resonant and automatically impedance matched for a broad range of frequencies.  

Although we are using the probe for this one particular application (as a precision NMR 

teslameter), the basic design appears to lend itself to other potential applications.  We 

discuss several possibilities near the end of this article.

2  Discussion 

2.1  Principles 
 

Our probe is a saddle coil based on a transmission line design.  A saddle coil is similar to 

a Helmholtz coil, but with the conductors constrained to lie on the surface of a cylinder 

[1]. Unlike conventionally tuned probes, which rely on matching networks to impedance 

match the probe to the spectrometer, a properly terminated transmission line probe 

presents a constant impedance to the spectrometer, independent of RF frequency.  

Furthermore, as it contains no resonant circuit, a transmission line probe is inherently 

equally sensitive to all NMR signals within its bandwidth, and requires no tuning to move 

between frequencies of interest.  Note that a transmission line probe is distinct from the 

situation in which a transmission line forms one part of a probe in order to move the 

tuning and matching elements farther from the coil. 

The basics of transmission lines can be found in standard RF engineering texts, e.g. Pozar 

[2].  A key feature to recall in the context of this work is that the characteristic impedance 

2

2

 

 

 

of a transmission line is determined purely by its geometry and by the materials involved 

in its construction.  When terminated with a load which matches its characteristic 

impedance, no reflections will appear on the line.  In a loss-free transmission line with 

uniformly distributed inductance and capacitance, the impedance is independent of 

frequency and is given by: 

Z

0

=

L / l
C / l

, 

 

(1) 

where L/l is the inductance per unit length and C/l is the capacitance per unit length.  The 

basic premise behind a transmission line NMR probe then is to match the distributed 

inductance, which appears due to the probe coils, with an appropriate distributed 

capacitance, in order to give the desired characteristic impedance.  The line can then be 

terminated with a resistor of the same value.  The desired characteristic impedance is 

determined by the spectrometer, and in most cases is 50Ω. 

2.2  Previous Work 
 

The use of transmission line-like probes in NMR was originally discussed by Lowe, 

Engelsberg, and Whitson [3,4] in the mid 70’s, then recently revisited by Kubo and 

Ichikawa [5].  A significant difference between these authors’ work and our own is that 

their probes are modeled as delay lines consisting of a finite number of cascaded LC 

circuit sections.  This is natural for their designs, because their probes are constructed 

with a small number of discrete capacitors and wire inductors arranged in segments, 

forming a classic delay line.  These probes are thus described by a characteristic 

impedance 

3

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

Z

=

Z

0 1

−

, 

 

 

(2) 

2
ω
2
ω
c

1
CL
u

u

where ωc is a cutoff frequency above which no signal will propagate.  The cutoff 

frequency is determined by 

=ω
c

,  where Lu and Cu are the inductance and 

capacitance per circuit section.   

In a transmission line  the inductance and capacitance are distributed continuously along 

the length of the line rather than appearing in discrete cascaded sections.  There are then 

essentially an infinite number of these sections, each of infinitesimal length, with the 

important consequence that there is (in principle) no cutoff frequency.  Since our probes 

have a continuously distributed capacitance and inductance, they are best treated as 

transmission lines rather than delay lines.  It is interesting to note that Kubo and Ichikawa 

[5] found that after including the mutual inductances between adjacent circuit segments, 

the impedance of discrete delay line probes could also be well described by the 

transmission line formula. 

As mentioned by Kubo and Ichikawa [5], very few transmission line probes have been 

put into practical use, most likely due to the difficulty encountered until now in their 

construction.  We have only found two examples of transmission line coils: that of Stokes 

[6], who used a solenoidal coil to measure the T1 of 19F in difluorotetrachloroethane over 

a range of 18-80MHz, and a low field ESR gaussmeter developed by Gebhardt and 

4

4

 

 

 

Dormann [7].  Both were solenoidal in design and required somewhat involved 

construction and calibration techniques.  Our design constitutes a straightforward method 

of constructing transmission line probes.  An important benefit of our method is that we 

can produce large quantities of practically identical probes with ease.  Furthermore, our 

design is the first which uses a saddle coil, thus making it particularly appropriate for 

superconducting solenoidal magnets.   

3  Design 

3.1  Method 
 

The basic idea behind our probe is to make a saddle coil pattern out of traces on a flexible 

circuit board.  We model the probe inductance, which is dominated by the saddle coil 

loops, as being uniformly distributed along the length of the coil trace.  Then, for a given 

coil size and number of loops, we control the capacitance per unit length by adjusting the 

trace width.  The construction method is similar to that of planar surface microcoils [8], 

but because our circuit board is flexible, we can wrap it around a sample tube to create a 

saddle coil.   

Calculating the characteristic impedance of our transmission line probe consists of two 

parts, the capacitance and the inductance.  Because the size of our coils is small 

compared to the wavelength of interest, we calculate the electrical characteristics of our 

probe for DC fields.  To design probes for use at higher frequencies, of course, these 

assumptions will break down and more sophisticated modeling will need to be employed.  

5

5

 

 

 

 

 

We chose trace widths large compared to the thickness of the flex substrate, so that the 

capacitance could be modeled as that of a simple parallel plate capacitor, with 

C

=

e A
ε
d

 

 

(3) 

Here A is the surface area of the entire probe trace, d is the thickness of the dielectric, and 

εe is its effective dielectric constant.  The effective dielectric constant [9] combines the 

effects of the dielectrics above and below the transmission line.  It is dependent on the 

trace width and thickness.  To calculate the inductance of our coils, we use the results of 

Mohan et al. [10] for determining the inductance of surface-patterned spiral inductors.   

To verify our calculations, we directly measure the total capacitance and inductance of 

our probes.  To measure C, we remove the terminating resistor from the probe (so that the 

probe looks like an open circuit at DC) and read off the capacitance at the lowest 

frequency available (1 MHz) from a network analyzer.  Using this method, our 

capacitance predictions match our measurements within 10-20% (see Table 1).  To 

measure the inductance, we replace the resistor with a short circuit.  These measurements, 

also made at 1MHz, match the predicted values within 20-40% (see Table 1).  

3.2  Potential Pitfalls 
 

We have considered two possible types of deviations from ideal behavior in our probes: 

impedance mismatches and non-uniform distribution of inductance and capacitance.  

Impedance mismatches can occur at the “launch lines” which connect the coaxial 

6

6

 

 

 

connector to the coil, as well as at the interface between the coils and the stripline which 

connects one coil to the other.  Reflections at the coax to coil connection reduce the total 

power delivered to the coil, as well as signal received from it.  Reflections at the coil to 

stripline interface can unbalance the currents in the two sides of the saddle coil, and 

hence introduce inhomogeneity in the RF field produced and detected by the probe [5].  

Furthermore, reflections can also cause the current amplitude to vary along the length of 

the probe, which can introduce additional spatial variation to the field. 

 

The second form of deviation from the ideal that our probes may experience is the non-

uniform distribution of capacitance and inductance.  In this case the theoretically infinite 

segmentation of the transmission line becomes effectively finite, and our probe will 

behave in a manner similar to the delay line probe discussed above, albeit with a 

potentially high number of circuit sections.  This has two effects.  The first is the 

appearance of a cutoff frequency, as described in Eq. [2].  The second is the appearance 

of a decay frequency, above which a signal will still propagate but will not effectively 

couple to the spins.  This is due to phase delays between adjacent circuit segments [5].  

The magnetic fields produced by the phase-delayed currents can interfere destructively, 

thus reducing the total RF field.  The decay frequency is probe volume dependent; for 

cylindrical coils it scales as one over the radius cubed [5].  Since our probes have 

relatively large radii, if their inductance and capacitance are not uniformly distributed it is 

possible that this could be a limiting factor for higher frequencies. 

7

7

 

 

 

 

4  Construction 
 

The flex material we have used is the Pyralux LF brand by DuPont, which consists of 1 

oz. copper (thickness = 34.2 µm) deposited on both sides of a Kapton polyimide 

dielectric substrate.  For this copper thickness the dielectric is available in thicknesses 

ranging from 76 to 127 µm.  The thinner varieties are susceptible to permanent damage 

by creasing (similar to tin foil), and care must be taken when handling them.  A dielectric 

coverlay can be deposited over the final design in order to lend mechanical rigidity and 

electrical insulation.   

We have constructed three different types of probe.  The first (probe #1) was machined 

on a CNC mill, making use of a vacuum chuck to restrain the flexible circuit material 

during cuts.  This probe has two loops, and is rolled to form a saddle coil one inch in 

diameter.  It is fabricated on Pyralux LF 9151R substrate (dielectric thickness of 0.007”, ε 

= 3.7).  Difficulties in machining make this an unreliable method for producing multiple 

identical probes.  However, this prototype probe showed excellent impedance 

characteristics and gave us confidence in our basic modeling. 

A more convenient and reliable way of producing these probes is to have them fabricated 

by commercial flex circuit manufacturing houses.  We have used two different 

manufacturers to produce three different types of probe.  The first (probe #2) is a one 

inch diameter, three loop probe on Pyralux LF 7010R, with trace widths of 0.042”.  It has 

a 0.002” thick dielectric (Kapton + adhesive) with a dielectric constant ε = 3.7.  The 

second (probe #3) is a one inch diameter two loop probe on a non-specified 1oz. copper 

8

8

 

 

 

 

laminate, with trace widths of 0.074” and a dielectric with a thickness of 0.007” and ε = 

3.5.  Our most recent probe design (probe #4) is a 15mm diameter two loop probe printed 

on Pyralux LF 9151R, with trace widths of 0.062” and a dielectric thickness of 0.007”, ε 

= 3.7.  The coverlay for probes 2-4 is LF 1510, with thickness 0.0015”.  Connections to 

and from the probe are made via a U.FL standard miniature (0.81mm diam.) coaxial 

cable produced by Hirose.  The transmission line is terminated on the flex circuit, with a 

1/4 Watt 50 ohm non-magnetic chip resistor from SRT Technologies (model CHR-1206).  

The straight lines of conductor between the coaxial launch and the coils are standard 50Ω 

microstrip transmission lines.  A photograph and mechanical drawing of probe #4 can be 

found in Figs. 1 and 2.  Once manufactured, the probe is secured via plastic cable ties 

around a tube appropriate for the sample of choice. 

Because of the limited thicknesses of dielectric available, the capacitance per unit length 

of the microstrip can be designed only over a fairly restricted range.  This limitation can 

cause difficulties when attempting to specify the value of C/l needed to match the large 

L/l of the coil loops as necessary to make a Z0 = 50Ω line.  We found that trying to meet 

this capacitance requirement effectively limited us to no more than three loops.   

5  Results  
 

A natural measure for an initial evaluation of the electrical properties of our probes is the 

reflection coefficient Γ, defined as the ratio of the reflected voltage to the incident voltage: 

 

 

 

 

=Γ

. 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

V

V

ref

inc

9

9

 

 

 

 

This quantity is easily measured with modern network analyzers and is simple to interpret.  

In particular, this coefficient determines the fraction of power delivered to the load: 

 

= PP
0

1(

Γ−

2

)

. 

 

 

 

(4) 

Here P0 is the incident power and P is the power delivered to the load.  In our situation 

the load is either the probe or the receiver amplifier, depending on whether the 

spectrometer is transmitting or receiving.   

The transmitted power as a function of frequency for probe #4 can be seen in Fig. 3.  The 

measurements were taken with a Hewlett-Packard 8712C Network Analyzer.  As seen in 

Fig. 3, the probe is extremely well matched to a 50Ω load over the frequency range of 5 

to 26 MHz (0.1 to 0.6 T) required for our experiment; essentially all of the applied power 

is transmitted to the load.  At higher frequencies, however, the probe begins to reflect 

larger fractions of the power.  At 150MHz nearly 90% of the applied power is transmitted, 

but at 300MHz almost half of it is reflected. 

Having a large transmission coefficient does not ensure that power is delivered in the 

form of an RF magnetic field, however.  Field strength can be affected either by the 

decay frequency effects discussed above, or by current being shunted through the 

capacitance of the probe instead of flowing through the coils as desired.  Hence, a more 

stringent test of our probes requires measuring the RF field produced by the probe as a 

function of both frequency and position.  To do this, we made a small pickup coil of one 

~1.2mm radius loop terminated with a 50Ω resistor.  In separate measurements, we 

verified that this pickup coil has a useful bandwidth of DC-300MHz.  To measure the RF 

10

10

 

 

 

 

field at various positions in the probe, we mounted the pickup coil on a translation stage 

near the center of a probe.  The probe was driven by a function generator, and the voltage 

induced in the pickup coil was amplified and monitored with an oscilloscope.  The RF 

field from the probe was investigated at frequencies up to 300 MHz using this setup.    At 

low frequencies, the behavior of the probes agreed well with our expectations based on 

modeling with DC currents.  At higher frequencies, substantial changes appeared both in 

the spatial distribution of the RF field, and in its magnitude.  Figs. 4 and 5 show this 

behavior.     

Fig. 4 shows the measured RF field strength, as a function of position along the axis 

which connects the saddle coil centers, for various frequencies.  At low frequencies, we 

expect a field minimum halfway between the coils, as observed.  As the frequency is 

increased, the field minimum shifts away from the center, and towards the second coil in 

the probe (the coil furthest from the launch connector, and closest to the terminating 

resistor).  At 300MHz, the field minimum shifted more than a millimeter from the center.  

Similar data showed that, in contrast, the RF field distribution along the central axis of 

the saddle coil cylinder (perpendicular to the line between coil centers) was relatively 

insensitive to the frequency.  This indicates that the reason for the change in transverse 

field distribution is simply that the field produced by the first coil is stronger than that of 

the second.  We suspect that this may be due to reflections at the transitions from the 

coils themselves to the thin microstrip trace connecting the coils.   

11

11

 

 

 

Results for the absolute RF field strength as a function of frequency appear in Fig. 5.  To 

account for the varying spatial distribution of the field, this measurement was performed 

while tracking the field minimum along the axis connecting the coils.  The measured 

values take into account the measured amplifier gain vs. frequency, and include 

corrections for the measured pickup coil behavior as a function of frequency.  We 

compare the measured values with predictions based on the calculated low-frequency 

behavior.  The predictions include corrections for the measured reflection coefficient of 

the probe and the measured transmission properties of the U.FL cable.  The measured and 

predicted values agree to within 25% for all frequencies up to 150MHz, but begin to 

diverge substantially at higher frequencies.  Considering that the probe was designed 

using electro- and magnetostatic formulae, the frequency range of good performance is 

surprisingly broad.  Several possible reasons for deviation from the predicted behavior 

were mentioned earlier; however, determination of the source of the degradation in 

performance at high frequencies will require further investigation. 

In order to further characterize the RF field homogeneity of our probe, we used the 4T 

magnet at the Yale Magnetic Resonance Research Center to make a gradient echo image 

of probe #4’s RF field at 170 MHz.  As seen in Fig. 6, the probe field is unbalanced, with 

greater sensitivity near one coil and less near the other.  The overall behavior is consistent 

with our pickup-coil measurements.  Both techniques indicate that at frequencies above 

about 100 MHz, the expected region of RF field homogeneity near the center of the 

saddle coils shifts to one side and becomes narrower.  We note in passing that using the 

12

12

 

 

 

probe with a commercial Bruker console required no extra consideration beyond a cable 

adaptor. 

We have tested the NMR performance of our probes in an Oxford 85/310HR horizontal 

superconducting magnet run at a proton frequency near 22MHz.  The field was shimmed 

to approximately 0.1ppm inside a 5cm long, 15mm diameter cylinder along the bore.  

The spectrometer is home built and will be described elsewhere, but the important 

characteristic in terms of its RF performance is that we have replaced the traditional λ/4 

line and crossed diode based protection circuit with a simple electromechanical reed relay 

(Coto 2341).  At the center of the magnet and using a long, cylindrical water sample 

doped with 68.5mM CuSO4, we can measure the proton frequency with a typical standard 

deviation in the center frequency of around 0.4Hz for data from a single free induction 

decay.  Under these conditions the linewidths for probe #4 are around 12.5Hz, while the 

linewidths for probe #3 are around 25Hz.  After switching to pure water we see 

linewidths of around 6Hz for probe #4.  We believe the residual line widths are a result of 

the inhomogeneous B0 field; this is consistent with the fact that the measured linewidth 

for probe #4 is smaller than that of probe #3, due to the smaller volume sampled by probe 

#4.     

6  Possible Improvements 
 

We anticipate that this probe might be useful in a wider range of circumstances than in 

our experiment, so here we discuss some possible improvements in the design.  Clearly, 

operation up to higher frequencies would be desirable for many applications.  A first step 

13

13

 

 

in this direction would be simply to make the probes smaller.  Making the characteristic 

length of the probe smaller may reduce the effects of reflections.  Evidence for this can 

be seen in Fig. 7: The useful frequency range (defined loosely as frequencies below the 

first peak in the voltage reflection coefficient) for the 15mm diameter probe #4 is 

significantly broader than that of the 25.4mm diameter probe #3.  Furthermore, if the 

capacitance and inductance are unevenly distributed along the probe, thus causing it to 

behave more like a delay line rather than a transmission line, then one would expect the 

phase delays between sections to decrease thus raising the decay frequency.  Finally, 

additional improvements in coil design may be possible by more accurately predicting the 

probe’s behavior at higher frequencies (e.g. by using commercial RF electromagnetic 

simulation packages).   

7  Potential Applications 
 

The utility of a transmission line probe goes well beyond that of our particular 

application (a high-precision, broadband NMR teslameter for a physics experiment).  

Other potential uses include: 

•  The ability to simultaneously acquire the spectra of several nuclei without 

the need for multiply tuned probes. 

•  Use in solid-state NMR, where the spectral frequency ranges are often too 

large for conventional tuned probes [5]. 

•  NMR of nuclei with large quadrupolar couplings, where frequency sweeps 

are typically employed [5].   

14

14

 

 

• 

 Study of samples whose magnetic properties are dependent on the 

external field strength, since with a non-resonant probe one can change the 

strength of the static field continuously [5].   

•  Use in cryogenic studies to avoid tuning difficulties due to resonant circuit 

components at different temperatures [11]. 

•  Use in short time scale experiments, since non-resonant probes should 

have better transient recovery times [2]. 

•  Reduction in Johnson noise by locating the terminating resistor in a low 

temperature bath [5]. 

•  Use in nuclear quadrupole resonance detection schemes, e.g. for 

explosives and narcotics, where the signals intrinsically cover a broad 

range of frequencies [12] and fast transient recovery time can increase the 

signal to noise for fast decaying-signals [3, 12]. 

8  Conclusion 
 

We have designed and constructed an easy to manufacture, tuning free, broadband NMR 

probe.  The probe is based on a transmission line design which ensures a good impedance 

match to a standard spectrometer across over 200 MHz of bandwidth.  Construction of 

our probe is easily performed by printing the coil design onto a flexible circuit board, and 

design of new probe geometries should be straightforward. 

15

15

 

 

 

 

 

9  Acknowledgements 
 

We thank R. Schoelkopf, R. Vijayaraghavan, and B. Turek for many useful 

discussions.  We also thank K. M. Koch and R. A. De Graaf for making the RF field map 

of probe #4. 

10 References 
 
[1] D. Hoult and R. Richards, J. Magn. Res. 24 (1976), p. 71. 
 
[2] David M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering, 3rd Ed., John Wiley & Sons, 2004 
 
[3] I.J. Lowe, M. Engelsberg, A fast recovery pulsed nuclear magnetic resonance sample 

probe using a delay line, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 45 (1974) 631–639. 

 
[4] I.J. Lowe, D.W. Whitson, Homogeneous rf field delay line probe for pulsed nuclear 

magnetic resonance, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 48 (1977) 268–274. 

 
[5] Atsushi Kubo and Shinji Ichikawa, Ultra-broadband NMR probe: numerical and 

experimental study of transmission line NMR probe, Journal of Magnetic Resonance, 
Volume 162, Issue 2, June 2003, Pages 284-299 

 
[6] H.T. Stokes, T.A. Case, D.C. Ailion, NMR observations of molecular motions and 

Zeeman-quadrupole cross relaxation in 1,2-difluorotetrachloroethane, J. Chem. Phys. 
70 (1979) 3563–3571. 

 
[7] H Gebhardt and E Dormann, ESR gaussmeter for low-field applications, J. Phys. E: 

Sci. Instrum. 22 (1989) 321-32 

 
[8] Sertac Eroglu, Barjor Gimi, Brian Roman, Gary Friedman, Richard L. Magin, NMR 
spiral surface microcoils: Design, fabrication, and imaging, Concepts in Magnetic 
Resonance Part B: Magnetic Resonance Engineering, Volume 17B, Number 1, Pages 
1-10  

 
[9] Fred Gardiol, Microstrip Circuits, Wiley Series in microwave and optical engineering, 

John Wiley and Sons, 1994 

16

16

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

[10]  S.S. Mohan, M. Hershenson, S.P. Boyd and T.H. Lee, Simple Accurate 

Expressions for Planar Spiral Inductances, IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Oct. 
1999, pp. 1419-24. 

 
[11]  M.S. Conradi, Low-temperature NMR techniques, Concepts Magn. Reson. 5 

(1993) 243–262. 

 
[12]  Allen M. Garroway et al., Remote Sensing by Nuclear Quadrupole Resonance, 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, Vol. 39, No. 6, June 2001 

17

17

 
Table 1:  Electrical and mechanical parameters for three probe designs.  Experimental 
values were measured at 1MHz, predicted values are at DC.  The diameter refers to the 
total probe diameter, or the distance between the centers of the coils when the probe is 
wrapped around a sample tube.   
 

 

Diam. 

# loops 

Cmeas

Lmeas

Probe #2 
Probe #3 
Probe #4 

0.5" 
0.5" 
15mm 

3 
2 
2 

375pF 
138pF 
69pF 

769nH 
343nH 
230nH 

 
 

C
C

meas

 

pred

0.86 
1.02 
1.10 

L
L

meas

 

pred

0.76 
0.95 
1.43 

Z =0

L
C

meas

meas

 

45.3 
49.8 
57.7 

Mechanical drawing of front side of probe #4.  The circuit is wrapped 

Photograph of probe #4.  The U.FL RF connector is located outside the 

Figure 1: 
picture, at the end of the microstrip “launch line” extending down past the bottom of the 
picture.   
 
Figure 2: 
around a sample tube to form a volume coil that is 15mm in diameter and 15mm long.  
Trace widths are 0.062”.  A ground conductor is patterned on the back underneath the 
traces.  Connections between the front and back are made via 0.007” diameter circular 
plated through holes.  The T shaped lines are where the terminating resistor sits.  The 
coaxial connector is on a tail several inches away, outside the drawing.  The long “tail” 
was incorporated into the design when we found that the U.FL connectors contain a 
nickel flash of sufficient volume to affect our NMR measurements when located too near 
the probe.   
 
Figure 3: 

Measurement of  the unreflected fraction of power, 

2Γ−

, vs. 

1(

)

frequency, for probe #4.  

Γ ≡

V

reflected

incident

/

V

. 

RF field strength versus position along the axis connecting the centers of 

Measured and predicted RF field strength vs. frequency for probe #4, at an 

 
Figure 4: 
the coils.  Measured results are shown at several different frequencies, as well as the 
calculated field profile at DC.  The zero of the x-axis is defined as the fitted position of 
the field minimum at low frequency.  To highlight the changes in the spatial distribution 
of the field, results from all frequencies are normalized to the same value at x=0.  A shift 
in the position of the field minimum, as well an increase in the spatial curvature of the 
field, is evident at high frequencies.  
 
Figure 5: 
input power of +16dBm (40mW).  As discussed in the text, the field strength for each 
frequency is measured at the position corresponding to the local minimum near the center 
of the saddle coils. The absolute accuracy of these measurements is at the 10-20% level. 
The predicted field strength is based on magnetostatic calculations, with corrections for 
the measured voltage reflection from the probe. 
 
Figure 6: 
nutation angle map made from a 3.0mm axial slice taken near the longitudinal center of 
the probe.  TR = 3s; TE = 3ms; 2 Averages; Spectral Width = 50 kHz; FOV = 1.6 x 1.6 
cm, 50 x 50 pixels.   
 
Figure 7: 
smaller size of probe #4 pushes the peak in reflected power to a higher frequency.   

Voltage reflection coefficient vs. frequency for probes #3 and #4.  The 

Gradient echo image of the RF field produced by probe #4.  This is a 

