Ab initio phenomenological simulation of the growth of large tumor cell 

populations 

Roberto Chignola1,2, Alessio Del Fabbro2,3, Chiara Dalla Pellegrina1, Edoardo Milotti2,4 

1Dipartimento Scientifico e Tecnologico, Università di Verona, Strada le Grazie 15 – 

CV1, I-37134 Verona,  Italy 

2Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Trieste, Via Valerio 2, I-34127 

3Facoltà di Scienze Motorie, Università di Verona, Via Casorati 43, I-37100 Verona, 

Trieste, Italy 

Italy 

4Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Trieste, Via Valerio 2, I-34127 Trieste, Italy 

Running head: Ab initio simulation of cell proliferation 
 
 
Correspondence to:  Roberto Chignola 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Dipartimento Scientifico e Tecnologico 
Università di Verona 
Strada Le Grazie 15 – CV1 
I-37134 Verona, Italy 
Tel. +39 045 8027953 
Fax +39 045 8027952 
e.mail roberto.chignola@univr.it 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

Abstract 

In a previous paper we have introduced a phenomenological model of cell metabolism 

and of the cell cycle to simulate the behavior of large tumor cell populations (Chignola 

R  and  Milotti  E  2005  Phys.  Biol.  2  8-22).  Here  we  describe  a  refined  and  extended 

version of the model that includes some of the complex interactions between cells and 

their  surrounding  environment.  The  present  version  takes  into  consideration  several 

additional energy-consuming biochemical pathways such as protein and DNA synthesis, 

the tuning of extracellular pH  and of the cell membrane potential.  The control of the 

cell  cycle  -  that  was  previously  modeled  by  means  of  ad  hoc  thresholds  -  has  been 

directly addressed here by considering checkpoints from proteins that act as targets for 

phosphorylation  on  multiple  sites.  As  simulated  cells  grow,  they  can  now  modify  the 

chemical composition of the surrounding environment which in turn acts as a feedback 

mechanism to tune cell metabolism and hence cell proliferation: in this way we obtain 

growth curves that match quite well those observed in vitro with human leukemia cell 

lines.  The  model  is  strongly  constrained  and  returns  results  that  can  be  directly 

compared  with  actual  experiments,  because  it  uses  parameter  values  in  narrow  ranges 

estimated from experimental data, and in perspective we hope to utilize it to develop in 

silico studies of the growth of very large tumor cell populations (106 cells or more) and 

to  support  experimental  research.  In  particular,  the  program  is  used  here  to  make 

predictions on the behaviour of cells grown in a glucose-poor medium: these predictions 

are confirmed by experimental observation. 

 

2 

1. Introduction 

Individual  tumors  are  complex  biological  systems  and,  in  spite  of  great  therapeutic 

advances, many tumors still escape treatment and lead to death. Part of the complexity 

of  the  problem  is  a  sheer  consequence  of  tumor  size:  clinicians  deal  with  the 

macroscopic  properties  of  tumors,  i.e.  masses  that  may  eventually  weigh  a  few 

kilograms – and thus with a number of cells that ranges between 106 and 1013 – and that 

may grow for months or years – with a corresponding number of cell cycles somewhere 

in the range between 100 and 10000. Microscopically, the malignant transformation of 

single  cells  is  a  multistep  process  that  involves  the  modification  of  several  molecular 

circuits  which,  in  turn,  modify  the  cells’  behavior  and  the  relationships  between  cells 

and  the  environment  [1].  In  addition,  epigenetic  and  environmental  factors  – that 

include cell-cell interactions – also conspire with the bare genetic information to make 

tumor growth a highly variable process with very strong feedbacks [1].  

The  highly  nonlinear  character  of  the  cells’  internal  molecular  machinery,  combined 

with  the  cell-cell  and  environmental  interactions,  with  the  large  number  of  cells  in  a 

tumor, and with the extended tumor lifespan, make predictions based on the behavior of 

a  single  molecular  circuit  quite  haphazard.  We  are  thus  in  a  frustrating  situation,  in 

which  the  huge  body  of  detailed  knowledge  that  has  been  collected  in  basic  research 

areas,  such  as  molecular  biology,  often  seems  to  be  of  little  or  no  consequence  in  the 

clinical management of the disease. 

The  availability  of  powerful  computers  has  already  helped  bridge  the  gap  between 

observations  and  predictions  in  many  complex  problems,  and  a  few  attempts  have 

already been made to attack the problem of tumor growth with numerical models (see 

e.g.  Refs.  [2-4]  and  references  cited  therein).  Recently  we  have  proposed  a  numerical 

 

3 

simulator of tumor growth [5, 6]: the simulator should eventually reproduce the growth 

of  solid  tumors  in  the  prevascular  phase  and  allow  an  in  silico  investigation  of  the 

biophysical laws that govern tumor growth dynamics and the response of cell clusters to 

anti-tumor  treatments.  The  program  simulates  both  tumor  cells  and  the  complex  and 

changing environment where molecules, such as nutrients and drugs, diffuse and where 

cells  interact  mechanically  with  one  another.  The  simulator  deals  with  very  different 

spatiotemporal scales and eventually with a large number of cells; using the prototype 

software we have been able to achieve a linearization of time and memory requirements 

using  techniques  and  methods  borrowed  from  molecular  dynamics  and  computational 

geometry  [5].  An  essential  part  of  the  simulation  software  includes  the  code  for 

metabolism  and  cell  cycle,  and  in  a  previous  paper  we  have  shown  and  discussed  the 

basic aspects of the underlying biophysical model [6]. Here we refine and extend that 

code and show that it can be used to simulate the proliferation of tumor cells that grow 

in a closed environment with good quantitative agreement with experimental data. We 

also  use  the  model  to  predict  the  behavior  of  cells  that  grow  in  non-standard 

environments and compare these predictions with actual experimental data. 

The  next  section  briefly  describes  the  materials  and  methods  used  in  the  experiments 

that have been carried out to fix some of the necessary parameters and in the numerical 

simulations.  Section  3  contains  a  detailed  description  of  the  simplified  metabolic 

network included in the simulator, and section 4 explains the implementation of the cell 

proliferation  dynamics.  The  results  of  the  simulations  and  comparisons  with 

experimental data are given in section 5, while section 6 contains our conclusions and 

our outlook on future developments. 

 

 

4 

2. Materials and methods 

2.1 Cell lines and proliferation assays 

 

 

Molt3 (human T cell leukemia) and Raji (human B cell leukemia) were obtained from 

the  ATCC  and  maintained  in  RPMI-1640  medium  supplemented  with  10%  foetal 

bovine  serum.  Cells  were  cultured  at  37  °C  in  a  5%  CO2  humidified  atmosphere  and 

passaged  weekly.  For  proliferation  assays,  15x104  cells  from  exponentially-growing 

cultures were seeded into T25 culture flasks in 7 ml of the following media: complete 

RPMI-1640 + 10% FBS or glucose-deprived RPMI-1640+10% FBS. Fifty 1 μl samples 

were  drawn  from  culture  flasks  at  the  time  point  indicated  in  the  figures  to  carry  out 

measurements of cell survival. Alive and dead cells were identified using the vital dye 

Trypan-blue  and  were  counted  at  the  microscope  using  a  Neubauer  chamber.  Four 

measurements for each well were carried out and the values were then averaged. Each 

data  point  in  the  growth  curves  is  the  mean  ±  standard  deviation  (SD)  of  three 

independent replicates. The amount of ATP in growing cell populations was measured 

using  the  luciferine/luciferase  method  (Promega  kit)  following  the  manufacturer's 

procedures. Measurements expressed in luminescence arbitrary units were converted to 

concentration  units  by  means  of  a  calibration  curve  obtained  with  known  amounts  of 

ATP.  Luminescence  was  measured  using  a  microplate  luminometer  reader  (Bio-Tek 

instruments).  Each  data  point  in  the  figures  is  the  mean  ±  SD    of  eight  independent 

replicates. 

Cell  cycle  analysis  was  carried  out  by  flow  cytometry.  Cells  were  washed  with  PBS, 

and  cell  pellets  produced  from  1.5x105  cells  where  resuspended  under  mild  vortexing 

with  1  ml  of  cold  Tris/HCl-EDTA  buffer  (0.1  M  Tris-hydroxymethyl-aminoethane,  1 

5 

mM EDTA, pH 7.4). Cells were centrifuged at 4 °C and supernatants discarded. Pellets 

were labelled with 1 ml of a cold ethidium bromide solution (25 μM ethidium bromide, 

0.3  mM  Na-citrate,  1  mM  NaCl,  0.1%  v/v  Triton  X-100,  25  μg/ml  RNAaseA)  under 

mild  vortexing,  and  cells  incubated  overnight  at  4  °C  .  The  nuclei  were  analyzed  by 

flow  cytometry  on  an  EPICS-X  (Coulter,  Hialeah,  FL)  flow  cytometer  using  a 

preparation from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (blood drawn from healthy 

donors) as the standard. 

2.2 Simulations 

The simulation program has been written in ANSI/ISO-C++ and has been run on Apple 

computers (both PowerPC- and Intel-based). The program has been compiled with the 

GCC 4 compiler in a Mac OS X environment. The differential equations that make up 

the model have been integrated with a fixed time step (cid:1)t = 1 s; this choice is dictated by 

the conflicting needs of reducing the total computation time as much as possible and by 

the  computational  request  -  needed  for  algoritmic  stability  -  that  (cid:1)t  << (cid:1)k  for  all  the 

Michaelis-Menten  (MM)  reactions,  where  (cid:1)k  is  the  reaction  time  constant  for  low 

concentrations  for  the  kth  MM  reaction.  The  model  is  partly  stochastic,  and 

pseudorandom numbers have been generated by the linear congruent generator RAN2, 

taken from the Numerical Recipes library [7]. 

 

 

 

6 

3. A minimal model of the biochemical network of tumor cells 

The biochemical network implemented in the simulation program is shown in Fig.1: it 

is  a  really  minimal  network  in  comparison  to  the  complexity  of  the  actual  metabolic 

system of tumor cells. The rationale behind the choice of the reactions in this minimal 

set has been discussed extensively in our previous paper [6], and we summarize again 

here  the  main  arguments:  1.  many  parameters  of  the  metabolic  network  are  actually 

unknown;  2.  even  if  we  had  a  detailed  knowledge  of  the  actual  metabolic  network,  a 

numerical model of a single cell’s metabolic network would be computationally heavy, 

and  the  simulation  of  large  cellular  ensembles  would  be  extremely  impractical  [5];  3. 

many metabolic pathways are redundant and, in addition, it is now clear that the whole 

system has a hierarchical topology and that its dynamical behavior is dominated by the 

network’s hubs [8]. We have thus decided to keep only those metabolic pathways that 

in  our  opinion  do  determine  the  cell’s  behavior:  obviously  this  choice  is  somewhat 

arbitrary but it is eventually validated by the comparison with the experimental data. 

The  core  of  the  metabolic  network  in  Fig.1  contains  the  uptake  and  conversion  of 

glucose  and  of  other  molecules  into  energy  (in  the  form  of  ATP),  storage  molecules 

(e.g.  glycogen)  and  waste  products  (e.g.  lactate) and  hence  this  part  of  the  model  is  a 

global  representation  of  glycolisis,  oxidative  phosphorylation  through  the  TCA  cycle 

and  gluconeogenesis.  Certain  pathways  are  controlled  by  sensors,  and  we  have 

considered  both  ATP  and  oxygen  sensors.  These  sensors  depend  on  the  biophysical 

state of the virtual cell and tune its behaviour when ATP and/or oxygen become limiting 

factors  because  of  harsh  environmental  conditions.  All  these  aspects  and  their 

mathematical modeling have been described and discussed in our previous paper [6]. In 

 

 

7 

the following subsections we concentrate on the new pathways that we have included to 

model  growth  in  a  closed  environment.  The  values  of  model  parameters  for  these 

pathways are listed in table 1. Since the environment is now closed it follows that we 

have to consider a conservation equation for the whole system's volume and a detailed 

description of the transport kinetics of  some chemical species (like nutrient and waste 

products) inside and outside cells. But this, in turn, implies that the fate of the certain 

chemical species in cells must also be described  and hence biosynthetic pathways that 

were  previously  neglected  [6]  must  now  be  taken  into  consideration.  We  include  also 

protein  and  DNA  synthesis  and  since  these  paths  consume  energy  the  global  energy 

balance of the cell must also be extensively revised as well. 

3.1 Closed environment 

The  first  significant  biophysical  difference  with  respect  to  our  previous  model  is  the 

definition of the closed environment where cells grow. In the previous version, in fact, 

cells were assumed to grow in an open volume  where nutrients were always available 

and  waste  products  immediately  removed  [6].  Now  the  environment  is  closed  –  as  it 

happens  to  be  in  most  experimental  settings  and  in  real  tumors  embedded  in  animal 

tissues  –  and  environmental  concentrations  of  nutrients,  waste  products,  and  other 

molecules become importantant variables. Because of the negligible compressibility of 

water solutions the environmental volume is effectively constrained by the equation : 

Voltot

= Volenv

+

(cid:1) = constant  

Volk

 

N

k =1

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

where  Volenv  is  the  volume  of  the  extracellular  environment  and  Volk  is  the  volume  of 

the k-th cell.  

 

 

8 

 

 

3.2  The  pool  of  “other  nutrients”  in  compartment  A:  glutamine  as  an  essential 

component 

In our previous work [6], we introduced compartment A (see Fig.1) to include nutrients 

other  than  glucose  that  can  nonetheless  be  catabolized  through  the  oxidative 

phosphorylation  pathways  or 

converted 

into 

storage  molecules 

through 

gluconeogenesis,  and  indeed  it  is  known  that  tumor  cell  metabolism  does  not  rely  on 

glucose  only.  Since  numerous  but  different  molecules  –  each  one  involving  different 

enzymatic  mechanisms  –  can  partecipate  in  cell  metabolism,  energy  production  and 

storage (in the form of glycogen, through the gluconeogenesis pathway that is described 

here  phenomenologically  by  means  of  rate  p11  –  see  Fig.1),  we  initially  considered 

compartment A as a generic pool of “other nutrients” (e.g. lactate, glutamine and other 

aminoacids).    However,  in  the  present  version  of  the  model  we  also  want  to  include 

biosynthetic pathways such as protein and DNA synthesis that are intimately linked to 

cell cycle kinetics (see the next paragraphs),  and thus we need a better definition of the 

nutrients  in  the  A  compartment.  We  have  decided  to  narrow  the  scope  of  the  A 

compartment and focus on glutamine alone for the following reasons:  

1. it is well known that glutamine is essential (together with glucose) to sustain tumor 

cell growth in vitro [9,10], and is required by real tumor cells in vivo [9,10], and it has 

also  been  shown  that  glutamine  utilization  for  ATP  production  through  the  oxidative 

phosphorylation in tumor cells may actually overcome that of glucose [11];  

2. it has been reported that most, if not all, tumor cells express the glycolytic isoenzyme 

pyruvate kinase type M2 (M2-PK) and that this enzyme is not expressed by normal cells 

[12]. The enzyme occurs in a highly active tetrameric form and in a dimeric form with 

9 

low  affinity  for  phosphoenolpyruvate.  The  switch  between  the  two  forms  regulates 

glycolytic  phosphometabolite  pools  and  the  interaction  between  glycolysis  and 

glutaminolysis,  the  latter  resulting  in  pyruvate  and  lactate  production  from  glutamine 

[12].  Thus,  these  pathways  do  depend  on  glutamine  (although  the  correlation depends 

on a series of enzymatic reactions) and this justifies the phenomenological description 

represented by rates p22 and p11, respectively (see Fig.1);  

3.  Finally,  glutamine  is  an  essential  building  block  both  of  proteins  and  of  DNA  (see 

below) [13,14]. 

3.3 Transport of nutrients and of waste products across the cell membrane 

Except for oxygen which diffuses freely across the cell membrane, transport of glucose, 

glutamine and lactate is mediated by saturable transporters whose activity is well known 

to  follow  a  Michaelis-Menten  type  kinetics.  Thus,  if  Xin  and  Xout  represent  the 

concentrations  of  a  given  molecule  in  the  cell  and  in  the  environment,  then  transport 

across cell membrane is modelled by the equations: 

dXin
dt

= (cid:1)

dXout
dt

= vin(cid:2)out (cid:1) vout (cid:2)in  

vout (cid:1)in

= vmax Xout
+ Xout
K m

 

vin(cid:1)out

= vmax Xin
+ Xin
K m

 

vmax

= vm (cid:1) Surf  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2a) 

(2b) 

(2c) 

(2d) 

10 

 

 

 

 

where  vm  and  Km  are  the  Michaelis-Menten  constants  for  the  molecular  transport  and 

Surf  is  the  cell  surface  area.  The  transport  of  glucose  depends  on  the  oxygen 

concentration as well, and this dependence, along with the value of model parameters 

for glucose transport, has already been described [6]. 

3.4 Intracellular and extracellular pH. Dependence of various transport and metabolic 

rates on environmental acidity.  

The  intracellular  and  the  extracellular  pH  are  assumed  to  vary  primarily  because  of 

lactate  production.  Lactic  acid  is  produced  by  cells  during  the  conversion  of  glucose 

through  the  anaerobic  glycoslysis.  During  this  conversion  ATP  is  also  produced,  and 

from the stechiometry of ATP and lactic acid production we know that 2 moles of both 

species  are  produced  per  mole  of  glucose.  Thus,  the  production  rates  of  both  species 

(see ATP_nOX in Fig.1) also match and have been parametrized by means of the rates 

g1 and r1 (see Fig.1) that describe the conversion of glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) and of 

glycogen storage molecules (STORE) through glycolysis (see [6] for further details). 

Within the range of acidity that is physiologic for living cells, lactic acid is completely 

dissociated  into  lactate-  and  H+  ions  and  these  are  co-transported  through  the  cell 

membrane by means of MCT transporters. The MCT transporters do not require energy 

and transport proceeds bidirectionally along the lactate and proton gradients [15]. In a 

cell, protons partecipate to a complex series of chemical equilibria that regulate several 

important  processes  such  as  the  cell  osmotic  pressure,  the  potential  of  the  cell 

membrane  and  of  the  membranes  of  intracellular  organelles  (e.g.    mitochondria),  the 

transport of various ions across the cell membrane and the production of energy under 

the form of ATP. The regulation of the intracellular pH involves the action of  energy-

 

 

11 

driven proton pumps (H+ ATPase), proton channels and ion transporters that drive H+ or 

equivalent H+ and HCO3

- ions into and out of the cell and that are all expressed at the 

cell  membrane  [16].  The  latter  include  an  Na+/H+  antiport,  Na+-dependent  HCO3- 

transporters, an Na+-independent Cl-/HCO3- exchanger, an Cl-/OH- exchanger and other 

transporters  such  as  the  lactate-proton  cotransporter  [16].  In  addition,  a  number  of 

chemical reactions among which the set of reactions describing the buffering effect of 

the  carbonate/bicarbonate  system  takes  place  both  in  the  cellular  cytosol  and  in  the 

environment.  Taken  as  a  whole  this  system  is  rather  complex  (see  e.g  [17,18])  and 

includes fast chemical reactions, faster than the time interval of 1 s that we have taken 

as  a  compromise  between  algoritmic  stability,  computation  time  and  computational 

load.  

However  some  simplifications  are  possible:  firstly,  the  experimental  evidence  shows 

that  the  buffering  capacity  of  cytosol  in  tumor  cells  is  much  higher  than  that  of  the 

surrounding environment. Although the intracellular buffering capacity has been shown 

to vary slightly during the cell cycle, the intracellular pH does not vary much during the 

cell’s  life  and  this  is  due  to  the  number  of  proton  and  ion  pumps  and  of  buffering 

systems that a tumor cell expresses and exploits for this purpose [19]. In addition, using 

a  parametrization  of  the  observed  buffering  capacity  of  cytosol  [20],  we  carried  out 

numerical  simulations  that  demostrate  that  intracellular  pH  in  simulated  cells  falls 

below  physiologic  limits  only  under  severe  starvation,  that  would  anyway  lead  to  cell 

death,  e.g.  because  of  insufficient  ATP  or  glycogen  storage  levels.  Thus,  as  a  first 

approximation, we have assumed intracellular pH to be constant and we have fixed it at 

7.2,  which  is  the  observed  value  in  tumor  cells  [16,19,20].  Another  simplifying 

consideration  is  that  the  buffering  capacity  of  the  environment  can  be  measured  quite 

 

12 

easily,  and  for  standard  culture  media  the  pH  has  been  shown  experimentally  to  be 

directly  proportional  to  environmental  lactic  acid  concentration  [21].  In  the  simulator 

we  take  the  following  phenomenological  model  for  the  acidity  of  the  extracellular 

environment: 

pH out

= pH st (cid:1)

AcLout
Volout (cid:3)(cid:2)out

 

(cid:2)out

= (cid:1)

dH out
dpH out

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3a) 

(3b) 

where  pHst  is  the  standard  pH  of  a  clean  medium,  AcLout  is  the  mass  of  lactate  in  the 

extracellular  environment,  Volout  is  the  volume  of  the  environment  (and  thus 

AcLout Volout   is  the  lactate  concentration  in the  environment) and (cid:1)out  is  the  buffering 

capacity of the environment estimated from experiments [21]. 

The Michaelis-Menten parameter vmax for the transport of glucose, lactate and of other 

molecules  (see  below)  is  known  to  depend  on  pH  [22-25].  To  the  best  of  our 

knowledge,  however,  this  dependence  has  not  been  studied  in  detail  and  no  firm 

biophysical  conclusions  are  available.  Once  again  we  resort  to  a  phenomenological 

description that nonetheless takes into account the results of experimental observations. 

This  description  assumes  that  the  vmax  of  the  various  transporters  is  weighed  by  a 

function which is roughly a sigmoid curve as a function of pH. In practice we take the 

piecewise linear approximation for the weight function:  

 

 

 

 

13 

w pH(

) =

w1

pH (cid:2) pH1

pH1 (cid:1) pH (cid:1) pH 2

 

 

 

(4) 

)

(cid:3)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:4)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:5)

w1
+ w2 (cid:2) w1

(

pH 2 (cid:2) pH1
w2

pH < pH1

pH > pH 2

 

 

where  w1, w2, pH1, pH 2 are  the  parameters  that  we  specify  to  approximate  the  few 

available data.  

In  particular,  for  the  transport  of  glucose  and  of  glutamine  we  take  w1

= 0 ,  w2

= 1, 

pH1

= 6.3,  pH 2

= pH st

= 7.54   (see  [22,25]),  while  for  lactate  transport,  we  take 

w1

= 3,  w2

= 1,  pH1

= 6.0 ,  pH 2

= 8.0  [23,24].  

It should be noted that since the intracellular pH is kept at a fixed value, then the flow 

of glucose, glutamine and lactate is unbalanced if the environmental pH differs from the 

standard  value,  and  in  the  closed  environment  described  by  the  simulator  this  does 

indeed happen because of lactate production and secretion by cells. As the environment 

is  gradually  more  and  more  acidic,  the  uptake  of  nutrients  is  also  reduced  and  can 

eventually switch off completely, thereby leading to a depletion of the energy reserves 

and ultimately to cell death. This mechanism, which is entirely mediated by the weight 

function described above, represents an important feedback regulatory circuit between 

cells  and  their  environment,  and  can  be  tested  experimentally  because  it  defines  the 

carrying capacity of the environment where cells grow (see the results section). 

We take a fixed intracellular pH, however the increase of the concentration of H+ ions in 

the cells cannot be neglected. The increase is originated by two main processes: as the 

cell  population  grows  the  lactic  acid  secretion  also  rises  and  the  environmental  pH 

lowers  below  the  standard  intracellular  level:  in  this  case  a  cell  can  import  lactic  acid 

through  the  MCT  transporters.  Secondly,  the  continuous  intracellular  production  of 

14 

lactic acid may eventually overcome the maximal rate of secretion of MCT transporters. 

We have already remarked that  H+ ions partecipate in a number of cellular processes in 

tumor  cells,  that  collectively  allow  cells  to  maintain  an  almost  fixed  pH [16]  and  that 

these  processes  can  be  subdivided  into  two  categories  on  the  basis  of  their  energy 

requirements.  Since  the  energy  consuming  pathways  are  important  in  our  model,  we 

must take into account the consumption of ATP used to eliminate intracellular H+ when 

the  MCT  transporters  alone  cannot  sustain  the  whole  load.  It  should  be  noted that  we 

are not interested in the fate of the H+ ions, because of the phenomenological modeling 

of  the intracellular and extracellular pH, and we only need to focus our attention on the 

energy balance of H+ transport. 

To model the energy consumption due to H+ transport, we recall that in the model H+ 

ions  originate  from  the  complete  dissociation  of  lactic  acid,  and  that  lactic  acid  is 

synthesized by cells through glycolysis and this path is described by rates g1 and r1 (see 

Fig.1; see also [6] for details). In addition lactic acid is transported out and in the cells 

by  means  of  the  MCT  transporters  with  a  transport  kinetics  that  follows  the  set  of 

equations (2a-d). H+ can finally move across cell membranes by passive diffusion. The 

mass variation of H+ ions in the cell therefore writes: 

dH +
dt

= (2g1

+ 2r1

+ vout (cid:2)in, AL (cid:1) vin(cid:2)out , AL ) (cid:3)

+

H

MW
MWAL

+ D

H

(
+ (cid:3) H +
(cid:4)(cid:5)

(cid:6)(cid:7)out

(cid:1) H +
(cid:4)(cid:5)

(cid:6)(cid:7)in

)  

(5) 

where the factor 2 takes into accounts the stechiometric result that 2 moles of lactic acid 

are produced per mole of glucose, vpAL and vmAL are the rates of lactic acid transport in 

and  out  of  the  cells  through  MCT  transporters,  MWH

+  and  MWAL  are  the  molecular 

15 

 

 

 

weights of H+ and lactic acid, respectively, DH

+ is the effective diffusion constant (i.e. 

the diffusion coefficient multiplied by the thickness of the cell membrane) of H+ in the 

cell  membrane  and  [H+]out,  in  are  the  extracellular  and  intracellular  H+  concentrations, 

respectively. Equation (4) is then used to calculate the energy consumption required to 

move the charged ions in the electric field associated to the Nernst membrane potential 

when this field opposes H+ secretion (see below). 

3.5 Protein and DNA synthesis 

Protein  synthesis  and  DNA  synthesis  are  two  important  new  blocks  in  the  present 

simulation program, however the very high complexity of the actual cellular processes 

means 

that  once  again  we  have 

to  resort 

to  some  form  of  approximate 

phenomenological description. In the case of protein synthesis we compute the number 

of  glutamine  and  ATP  molecules  required  to  build  an  “average  protein”.  We  take 

human  serum  albumin  as  a  representative  of  the  “average  protein”;  albumin  contains 

585 aminoacids and its molecular weight is (cid:1) 66.4 KDa [26]. Glutamine is incorporated 

in the protein as it is or after it has been changed into another aminoacid by enzymatic 

modification of its sidechain. Experimentally, it has been shown that in the proteins of 

HeLa  tumor  cells  the  aminoacids  Ala,  Asp,  Glu,  Gly,  Pro,  Ser  derive  from  the 

glutamine carbon sidechain, although to a different extent [13]. For example, as much 

as  68%  of  Asp  but  only  3.2%  of  Ser  derive  directly  from  glutamine [13].  From  these 

quantitative  data  and  from  the  sequence  of  human  albumin,  we  estimate  that,  on 

average, 5% of albumin aminocids are glutamine or are derived from glutamine. Thus, 

to synthesize one molecule of an  average protein of 585 aminoacids the cell needs on 

average 29.25 glutamine molecules as building blocks.   

 

 

16 

An  average  protein  of  585  aminacids  contains  584  peptide  bonds  that  require  the 

hydrolysis of 2 molecules of ATP and 2 of GTP per bond for formation [27], and hence 

1168  ATP  molecules  are  utilized  on  the  whole  to  synthesise  one  molecule  of  the 

average protein (note that in the present model the GTP molecular pathways are not yet 

taken into account).  

Protein synthesis requires both glutamine and ATP as building blocks, and since either 

of them can vary in time and become a limiting factor, the rate of protein synthesis must 

depend on the building block which, at any given time, is less abundant (at the moment 

we  neglect  recovery  of  aminoacids  due  to  protein  degradation).  From  these 

considerations we find the equations that model protein synthesis: 

dPs
dt

dPs
dt

(cid:2)
(cid:5)
(cid:5)
(cid:3)
(cid:5)
(cid:5)
(cid:4)

= p33
29.25
vp
1168

=

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

MWPs
MWA
MWPs
MWATP

p33

= p3 (cid:1) d   

 

 

vP

= ATP _ TOT (cid:1) ATPp

 

K m P

+ ATPp

         if   

N ATP
1168

> N A
29.52

        elsewhere 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(6a) 

(6b) 

(6c) 

 

 

 

 

where  PS  is  the  protein  mass,  NATP  and  NA  are  the  numbers  of  available  ATP  and 

glutamine molecules, respectively, MWPs, MWATP, MWA are the molecular weights of the 

“average  protein”,  ATP  and  glutamine,  respectively,  vP  is  the  rate  of  ATP  pool 

consumption  for  protein  synthesis  (this  is  assumed  to  follow  a  Michaelis-Menten 

kinetics because of the activity of the enzymes that utilize ATP for protein synthesis), 

ATP_TOT is the total ATP production (see [6] for details), KmP is the Michaelis-Menten 

 

 

 

17 

constant  for  ATP  consumption,  p3  is  the  rate  of  glutamine  molecules  channeled  to 

protein synthesis and d is a homeostatic control function that assumes real values in the 

interval [0,1] and that modulates the rate p33 as a function of the size of the glutamine 

compartment  A  (see  [6]  for  details).  Initial  guesses  for  p33  and  vp  were  obtained  by 

considering that the protein content of one cell is approximately 10-20 % of the cell's 

mass [27], that a cell has a relative density (cid:1) 1 and that at the end of one cell cycle the 

protein mass must be approximately twice as much as in a newborn cell.  

We have modeled DNA synthesis much like protein synthesis. However, in this case we 

note that the atoms N3 and N9 of purines and N3 and C2 of pyrimidines derive from the 

sidechain  of  glutamine  after  some  biochemical  processing  [14,  27].  Thus,  on  average 

the  stechiometric  relationship  between  glutamine  and  the  bases  of  the  DNA  is  one 

molecule  of  glutamine  for  each  base.  We  also  note  that  the  number  of  bases  in  the 

human  genome  is  6x109,  and  that  the  incorporation  of  nucleotides  into  the  DNA 

sequence  is  sustained  energetically  by  the  hydrolysis  of  the  high-energy  phosphoryl 

groups  present  in  the  nucleotides  themselves.  The  formation  of  the  phosphodiester 

bonds  ((cid:2)G=5.3  Kcal/mol)  –  that  join  one  base  to  the  other    –  requires  energy  that  is 

provided  by  ATP,  then  if  we  assume  that  during  the  duplication  of  the  genome 

approximately 6x109 phosphodiester bonds are formed and that the hydrolysis of ATP 

releases  (cid:1)  11.94  Kcal/mol  [27],  we  can  estimate  that  DNA  duplication  requires  (cid:1) 

2.67x109  ATP  molecules.  Thus  both  glutamine  and  ATP  are  required  for  DNA 

synthesis,  and  both  may  vary  during  the  cell’s  life  and  limit  the  DNA  synthesis  rate, 

which we model as follows: 

 

 

18 

dDNA
dt
dDNA
dt

(cid:2)
(cid:5)
(cid:5)
(cid:3)
(cid:5)
(cid:5)
(cid:4)

= p33

Nav
MWA

6 (cid:1)109 (cid:1)
vDNA
2.67 (cid:1)109 (cid:1)

=

Nav
MWATP

         if   

N ATP
2.67 (cid:1)109

> N A
6 (cid:1)109

 

 

        elsewhere 

vDNA

= (cid:1)DNA 1 + DNA_MAX_SPREAD·(cid:2)

(

) ATP _ TOT (cid:3) ATPp

K m DNA

+ ATPp

 

 

 

 

 

(7a) 

(7b) 

where  vDNA  is  the  rate  of  ATPp  consumption for DNA  synthesis,  Nav  is  the  Avogadro 

constant,  (cid:1)DNA  is  the  fraction  of  the  total  ATP  production  rate  ATP_TOT  that  is 

channeled  to  DNA  synthesis  in  the  S  phase  of  the  cell  cycle,  KmDNA  is  the  Michaelis-

Menten  constant  of  the  enzymatic  process  of  ATP  utilization  for  DNA  synthesis, 

DNA_MAX_SPREAD is a constant, and (cid:2) is a random variable drawn from a uniform 

distribution  on  the  interval  (-1,1).  The  term  DNA_MAX_SPREAD*(cid:2)  is  small  cell-

dependent random spread which is determined at cell birth and it has been introduced to 

parametrize  the  fluctuations  assumed  to  occur  in  certain  mechanical  aspects  of  DNA 

synthesis  that  involve  processes  such  as  the  unidirectional  translocation  of  the  motor 

proteins helicases to unwind and separate the two DNA strands [27]. Finally, it should 

be noted that we consider only one rate term for glutamine utilization for both protein 

and  DNA  synthesis.  In  this  way  the  glutamine  pool  (compartment  A  in  Fig.1)  is 

subdivided  into  three  pools  that  sustain  the  STORE  compartment  (p11),  energy 

production  (p22)  and  biosynthesis  (p33)  and  where  p11  and  p22  are  dynamically 

interconnected through the ATP sensor (see also [6] for details).    

 

 

 

 

 

19 

3.6 The energy balance: summary of the energy producing and consuming processes 

The  model  of  cell  metabolism  takes  into  account  diverse  energy  producing  and 

consuming pathways. Energy, stored under the form of ATP, is produced by anaerobic 

glycolysis (rate ATP_nOX in Fig.1) and oxidative phosphorylation of glucose taken up 

from  the  environment  (rate  ATP_OX  in  Fig.1).  In  addition,  if  ATP_OX  falls  below  a 

standard  ATP  production  rate  (e.g.,  under  starvation  conditions),  a  cell  senses  this 

difference  and  channels  glycogen  and  glutamine  catabolites 

toward  oxidative 

phosphorylation  to  produce  ATP  (rates  ATP2  and  ATP3,  respectively,  in  Fig.1). 

However, the production of glycogen molecules through gluconeogenesis has a cost that 

has previously been modeled by the rate ConsATP [6]. These paths have been discussed 

in  detail  earlier  [6]  and  led  us  to  define  an  overall  production  rate  ATP_TOT  and  an 

overall balance between energy producing and consuming pathways, as in the following 

equations: 

ATP _ TOT = ATP _ nOX + ATP _ OX + ATP2 + ATP3 (cid:1) ConsATP   

dATPp
dt

= ATP _ TOT (cid:1) rc  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8a) 

(8b) 

where ATPp is the ATP pool and rc is a phenomenological ATP consumption rate. One 

of the main differences between the previous model and the present one is that now we 

define some of the energy consuming paths that were previously modelled by means of 

the  single  phenomenological  rate  rc.  In  this  context,  we  have  already  described  above 

the  use  of  ATP  for  protein  and  DNA  synthesis.  In  addition  we  also  consider  a 

phenomenological  rate  of  ATP  consumption  for  mitochondria  maintenance  (i.e., 

maintenance  of 

the  mitochondria  membrane  potential  which 

is  essential  for 

20 

 

 

 

mitochondria  to  work  properly  [28],  see  vMit  in  Fig.1)  which  is  proportional  to  the 

number M of mitochondria in the cell. Finally, we include in the model the consumption 

of  ATP  used  to  pump  H+  ions  outside  the  cell  when  the  environmental  pH  becomes 

lower  than  the  intracellular  pH.  The  latter  has  been  calculated  as  follows:  we  assume 

that,  under  normal  environmental  conditions,  the  cell  has  a  membrane  potential      

Vrif = -21  mV  (derived  from  calculations  using  the  Nernst  equation  and  assuming  that 

the standard extracellular pH is 7.54 and the intracellular pH is 7.2, see below and [16]). 

When  the  concentration  of  environmental  H+  increases  –  because  of  lactic  acid 

production  and  secretion  –  the  membrane  potential  changes  according  to  the  Nernst 

equation: 

VNernst

= R (cid:1) T
z (cid:1) F

(cid:1) ln

[H + ]out
[H + ]in

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(9) 

where R is the the gas constant, T is the temperature (°K), z is the proton charge and F 

the Faraday constant. Under standard condition, the environmental pH is set to 7.54 and 

the intracellular pH to 7.2, so that VNerst=Vrif= -21 mV. As long as the environmental pH 

is greater than the intracellular pH, H+ ions diffuse passively through the cell membrane. 

However, with a higher extracellulary acidity, H+ ions cannot longer diffuse  and must 

be  actively  pumped  outside  the  cell:  the  energy  required  to  pump  H+  ions  outside  the 

cells  can  be  calculated  from  the  Gibbs  energy  of  ATP  hydrolysis  ((cid:1)GATP  =  3.1x104 

J/mole) and the energy required to move a charged particle across the electric potential 

difference (cid:1)V=Vrif-VNernst. The rate of ATP consumption is:  

 

 

 

 

21 

vATP _ H

= H _ Peff (cid:2)

dH +
dt

(cid:2)

F (cid:2) (cid:1)V
(cid:1)GATP

(cid:2) MWATP (cid:2) 103 mole
(cid:3)
(cid:4)(cid:7)
kg

(cid:5)
(cid:6)(cid:8)  

 

 

 

(10) 

where  H_Peff  is  a  constant  that  parametrizes  the  efficiency  of  the  H+  pumps,  the  rate 

dH +
dt

 has been defined in equation (4), MWATP is the molecular weight of ATP and the 

multiplicative  factor  103 mole
kg

  is  the  conversion  factor  that  is  needed  to  express  the 

result in SI units (i.e., one mole of H+ weighs 0.001 kg), so that vATP_H, the rate of ATP 

consumption  for  proton  secretion  against  the  electric  potential,  is  expressed  in  kg/s  as 

all the other rates. 

Overall, the balance between energy production and consumption writes: 

dATPp
dt

= ATP _ TOT (cid:1) (vP

+ vDNA

+ vMit (cid:2) M + vATP _ H ) 

 

 

 

(11) 

 

 

 

 

22 

4. Cell proliferation dynamics 

 

 

In  this  section  we  describe  how  the  model  of  cell  metabolism  is  integrated  with  the 

biochemical  network  that  drives  the  cell  cycle  and  cell  growth,  and  in  particular  we 

describe how we link the metabolic network to growth and division, i.e. the mechanism 

of  molecular  threshold  implemented  in  the  simulator.  Next,  we  discuss  the  sources  of 

randomness  in  the  dynamics  of  cell  division  that  are  important  in  the  simulator,  and 

finally we list criteria for cell death. 

The proliferation dynamics presented here differs in many ways from the dynamics in 

the  previous  version  described  in  [6]  and  hence  some  preliminary  comments  are  in 

order.  First  of  all,  the  control  of  cell  progression  along  the  cell  cycle  was  previously 

modeled  by  means  of  phenomenological  thresholds.  The  cell  cycle  is  conventionally 

represented by a  series of phases characterized by specific molecular events and there 

are four major phases that cells traverse from birth until duplication: the initial growth 

factor-dependent  phase  G1,  the  S  phase  where  DNA  duplication  takes  place,  the  G2 

phase during which a cell prepares its genetic material for proper sorting into the two 

daughter  cells  and  the  M  phase  were  duplication  (mitosis)  occurs.  Passage  from  one 

phase to the other is a unidirectional and highly coordinated process which is regulated 

in particular by a class of proteins called cyclins: the different members of the class are 

expressed  at  specific  points  along  the  cell  cycle  and  activate  kinases,  the  cyclin-

dependent  kinases  (CDKs)  [29].  Active  CDKs,  in  turn,  phosphorylate  specific  protein 

substrates  often  on  multiple  sites,  and  these  phosphorylation  events  are  tuned  by  a 

network of proteins, inhibitors and enzymes that phosphorylate or dephosphorylate the 

proteins  involved,  among  which  the  CDKs  themselves  [29].  The  result  is  a  complex 

23 

enzymatic network with feedback regulatory circuits that regulates the progression of a 

cell from one phase to the next at specific points called cell-cycle checkpoints [29]. This 

network  has  a  fundamental  relevance  for  both  normal  and  tumor  cell  growth,  and 

various models of its inner workings have been proposed [30]. 

The control of the progression along the cell cycle ultimately consists in the activation 

of  kinases  which  phosphorylate  substrates  using  ATP  as  the  donor  of  high  energy 

phosphoryl groups [29], therefore ATP depletion can be expected to block cell growth, 

and indeed the existence of two energetic thresholds at the G1/S and G2/M transitions 

has been demonstrated for tumor cells [31,32]. In our previous model we included only 

a rough description of these thresholds [6]. However, in a recent study of the dynamic 

properties of the multisite modification of proteins we have shown how this mechanism 

may apply to proteins that are central to the cell cycle checkpoint mechanism, and how 

it  can  set  a  biochemical  threshold  [33,  34].  The  threshold  obtained  from  multisite 

modification is robust and depends on the concentrations of all the molecules involved 

in the reaction, i.e., the checkpoints depend non only on the ATP concentration, but also 

on the concentrations of enzyme and substrate, and may better account for the observed 

variabilities of the cell cycle [33, 34]. 

A second major difference is the link between  energy production and cell growth: the 

increase of cell volume was previously assumed to be proportional to the net uptake of 

glucose  and  to  the  overall  rate  of  energy  consumption  [6].  The  idea  was  that  glucose 

uptake and storage provide a source of carbon atoms and that at the same time the cell 

mass  increase  can  only  proceed  with  a  corresponding  energy  expense.  Thus  we 

considered a net balance of glucose uptake and storage given by a linear combination of 

the rates v1p, v1m, g1 and g2 [6], while energy consumption was modeled by means of the 

 

24 

phenomenological  rate  rc  discussed  above.  The  rate  rc  described  the  global  ATP 

consumption in processes such us protein and DNA synthesis, tuning and maintenance 

of the membrane potential and so forth, which, however, were not explicitly included in 

our  previous  model  [6].  Unfortunately  this  description  has  a  logical  fault:  ATP 

consumption  depends  on  the  amount  of  available  ATP  that  in  turn  depends  on  cell 

metabolism where molecules such as glucose itself are converted into energy, and thus 

glucose  uptake  and  ATP  consumption,  and  hence  energy  consumption,  are  directly 

correlated, while they need not be. In addition, the hypothesis that cell volume increases 

as  a  function  of  energy  consumption  is  biologically  untenable  since  this  does  not 

consider possible dissipative pathways that are not related to cell growth, such as active 

secretion  of  newly  synthesized  proteins.    Since  we  make  explicit  several  energy 

consumption paths we must revise the link between cell metabolism and cell growth.  

4.1 Linking the metabolic network to the cell cycle 

In this subsection we summarize the conditions that each cell must satisfy to step from 

one phase to the next in the simulator, and we start with the most complex mechanism, 

which is responsible for the G1/S phase transition. The G1/S checkpoint is perhaps the 

best  known  and  the  most  important  one,  because  as  soon  as  cells  pass  the  checkpoint 

they become committed to progress along the remaining part of the cell cycle [35, 36]. 

The molecular details have been reviewed in several papers (see e.g. [35-40]).  

Central 

to 

the  underlying  molecular  network 

is 

the  Rb/E2F  complex.  The 

retinoblastoma protein Rb (pRb) has 16 putative phosphorylation sites and may exist in 

various 

forms  depending  on 

the 

level  of  phosphorylation 

[37-40]. 

In 

its 

hyperphosphorylated  form,  when  at  least  10  sites  are  phosphorylated  [37-40],  the 

 

 

25 

Rb/E2F complex is fully dissociated, but partial dissociation may occur for intermediate 

phosphorylation  levels  of  the  Rb  protein.  E2F  is  a  transcription  factor  that  once 

dissociated  from  the  pRb  starts  the  transcription  of  genes  involved  in  a  series  of 

important  pathways  that  ultimately  bring  about  DNA  synthesis  [35-40].  This 

checkpoint, therefore, marks the end of the G1 phase and the beginning of the S phase. 

The phosphorylation of the Rb protein takes place thanks to the coordinated action of at 

least  two  different  cyclin-dependent  kinases  (CDKs)  that,  in  turn,  are  activated  by 

cyclin  D  and  cyclin  E.  These  cyclins  are  expressed  at  appropriate  phases  of  the  cell 

cycle – in particular the expression of cyclin E is controlled by E2F after it is released 

by  pRb  upon  partial  phosphorylation  –  and  form  complexes  with  the  specific  CDK’s.  

The  CDKs’  concentration  in  the  cell  is  rather  constant  throughout  the  cell  cycle,  thus 

the timing of the CDKs’ action is determined by the expression of the cyclins [29]. The 

enzymatic  activity  of  the  CDKs  is  also  tuned  by  phosphatases  and  inhibitors  that 

collectively form a complex biochemical network with feedback regulatory circuits [29, 

30].  The  network  has  already  been  modeled,  and  it  has  been  shown  that  important 

dynamical behaviors emerge: thresholds, hypersensitive response and hysteresis [41]. In 

other words, the network reacts as an on-off irreversible switch [41]. 

Here we apply once again the approach that we followed in the case of cell metabolism: 

just  as  the  metabolic  network,  the  checkpoint  control  network  has  a  hierarchical 

structure, and we assume its dynamics to be dominated by the system's hubs. Given its 

demostrated importance [35-40], we have selected the multiple phosphorylation process 

of the Rb protein as the central hub of the checkpoint control network. We have isolated 

this  process  from  the  network  (Fig.2)  and  studied  the  general  dynamical  properties  of 

the  modifications  of  proteins  on  multiple  sites  (multisite  protein  modification,  MPM) 

 

26 

[33,  34].  The  results  have  been  published  recently  and  here  we  summarize  the  main 

conclusions:  

1. MPM naturally produces a threshold in the system’s response;  

2. the threshold is robust to noise perturbation, and this is important when dealing with 

low protein concentrations, that is to say when fluctuations are not negligible;  

3. if the protein that carries multiple modification sites controls a downstream 

Michaelis-Menten reaction (Fig.2), then MPM delays the downstream reaction and the 

delay may be several orders of magnitude larger than the characteristic times of enzyme 

kinetics. Thus MPM drives the information transfer from the fast kinetics of enzymes 

action to the slow kinetics of cellular response;  

4. MPM dynamics does not depend on the attachment/detachment mechanism of the 

chemical groups (i.e. phosphoryl groups) that modify the protein with multiple 

modification sites and these may be represented by enzymatic processes or simplified as 

bimolecular interactions. It follows that MPM is equivalent to the classical allosteric 

effect [33, 34] and that, to model its dynamics, one can neglect the specific processes of 

protein modification.  

The dynamical properties of MPM are rather attractive because they allow great 

simplification of the model of the G1/S checkpoint. In particular from property 3. we 

can represent the duration of the G1 phase in terms of an enzymatic reaction controlled 

by a protein with multiple modification sites and this is reminiscent of the way E2F 

drives the transcription of genes once released by the Rb control protein. Moreover 

properties 1. and 2. assure that the dynamical response behaves like a robust on-off 

switch, and property 4. justifies an approximate description. 

 

27 

The basic model for the control of the G1/S transition in our virtual cells is shown in 

Fig.2 and is based on the following assumptions: 

1. the amount of ATP required to phosphorylate the Rb protein is negligible with 

respect to the overall amount of available ATP in the cell that is described in our model 

by the variable ATPp; 

2. CycD and CycE instantaneously form complexes with specific CDKs whose 

concentration is constant during the cell cycle. As soon as the complex is formed the 

phosphorylation of the Rb protein starts; 

3. the phosphorylation/dephosphorylation events of the individual available sites on the 

Rb protein follow a stochastic dynamics and are fast with respect to the observation 

time (i.e. with respect to CycD and CycE expression rates). 

With these assumption we can describe the process of pRb phosphorylation by means of 

a probabilistic chain of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation events (transition chain) that 

occurs as a consequence of classical bimolecular reactions between cyclins and pRb 

[33, 34]. In particular, using assumption 3. we can neglect the dynamics of the transition 

chain  and even the chain itself and concentrate instead on the equilibrium probabilities. 

The analysis in [33, 34] shows that if the E2F is released when at least  nth

= 10  sites on 

pRb are phosphorylated, then we find the number of free E2F molecules: 

PRb

= N Rb (cid:3)

p =

1
2N[Rb]
 

N

(cid:1)
n = nth

N

n

1 (cid:2) p)N (cid:2) n  

(cid:6)
(cid:7)(cid:9) (cid:3) pn (cid:3) (

(cid:4)
(cid:5)(cid:8)
{
(
(cid:2) N[Rb] + [Cyc] + K Rb

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

) (cid:1) N[Rb] (cid:1) [Cyc]

(

)2 + 2K Rb (N[Rb] + [Cyc]) + K Rb

2

(12a) 

}

(12b) 

28 

 

 

 

 

where  PRb  is  the  number  of  activated  pRb  molecules  with  at  least  nth  phosphorylated 

sites out of a total of N sites,  NRb is the total number of pRb molecules, KRb is the ratio 

between backward and forward rate constant of phosphorylation supposed to occur in a 

bimolecular reaction between the cyclin/CDKs complexes (CycD and CycE) and pRb, 

[Cyc] = [CycD] + [CycE]   is  the  total  cyclin  concentration,  and  where  the  square 

brackets denote concentrations. 

A recent, more detailed analysis of the process dynamics has confirmed that it is safe to 

use the quasi steady-state assumption [34]. 

The  number  of  activated  pRb  molecules  depends  on  the  concentrations  of  pRb,  CycD 

and CycE. Using data in the current literature we assumed a phenomenological model 

for  the  kinetics  of  the  three  proteins  as  a  function  of  the  cell  cycle  phase  [29,  35-40], 

and the results are shown in Fig.3. In this scheme, the Rb protein has been hypothesized 

to  be  synthesized  in  the  G2  phase  and  then  to  be  partitioned  randomly  at  mitosis 

between the two daughter cells (see the next paragraph for a further discussion on this 

point).  As  far  as  we  know,  experimental  evidence  on  the  precise  timing  of  the  pRb 

expression is not  available. Existing data indicate that the protein maintains an almost 

constant  concentration  in  the  cell  but  varies  both  its  phosphorylation  state  and 

intracellular localization [29, 35-40]. Since cell division would result in a dilution of the 

pRb  concentration  the  protein  must  be  synthesized  de  novo  sometime  during  the  cell 

cycle  of  the  mother  cell.  For  the model  described  by  the  set  of  equations  (12a-b)  it  is 

only important that pRb molecules are available for a new phosphorylation cycle in the 

daughter cells at the beginning of their life, hence the precise timing of pRb expression 

is irrelevant. On the other hand, CycD is synthesized at the beginning of the cell's life in 

the  G1  phase  and  is  destroyed  immediately  after  the  cell  has  overcome  the  G1m/G1p 

 

29 

transition  (see  also  Fig.2);  CycE  is  synthesized  in  the  G1p  phase  and  is  destroyed  as 

soon as a cell enters the following S phase. The synthesis rate of these proteins is also 

assumed  to  be  proportional  to  the  overall  protein  synthesis  rate  defined  by  the  set  of 

equations (5). Thus, in general if Xp is the mass of either pRb, CycD or CycE: 

dXp
dt

= (cid:1)Xp (cid:2)

dPs
dt

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(13) 

The mechanism implemented in the simulator, whereby pRb releases E2F as soon as nth 

sites are phosphorylated and subsequently E2F catalyzes the conversion of a substrate S 

into  a  product  R,  models  the  whole  set  of  enzymatic  reactions  that  occur  upon  the 

release of the E2F in the dynamics of the G1m/G1p/S transitions. The pRb/E complex is 

assumed to follow a 1:1 stechiometry, thus the concentration of the enzyme E equals the 

concentration of active pRb molecules. This dynamics is described by the equations: 

[E] = PRb (cid:1)[Rb]  

 

d[S]
dt

= (cid:1)

kMM (cid:2)[E] (cid:2)[S]
+ [S]
K MM

 

 

 

G1m (cid:1) G1p     if    [S] < Sth,1   

G1p (cid:1) S          if    [S] < Sth,2   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(14a) 

(14b) 

(14c) 

(14d) 

Where [S]0 denotes the initial substrate concentration in the simulator, and Sth,1 and Sth,2 

are two critical S concentrations. The initial substrate concentration [S]0 is assumed to 

be the same for all cells. We remark here that the subdivision of the G1 phase into two 

subphases G1m and G1p has already been considered in our previous model [6] and is 

30 

 

 

 

 

 

also  a  known  experimental  fact  [42].  Here,  however,  this  subdivision  has  a  precise 

molecular meaning as it defines the transition to CycD destruction and CycE synthesis, 

and  moreover  both  cyclin/CDKs  complexes  act  on  the  same  pRb  substrate  and  this 

reflects realistically the present knowledge on the G1/S checkpoint [35-40]. 

At present, the molecular machinery of the G2/M checkpoint is more obscure than that 

of the G1/S checkpoint, and in that case we assume a much rougher threshold model, 

i.e., threshold crossing happens as soon as the concentration of the proper cyclin/CDK 

complex reaches a critical concentration. For this purpose, we consider a generic cyclin 

X that is synthesized at the beginning of the G2 phase and is destroyed after mitosis.  

The  M  phase  duration  has  small  individual  fluctuations  associated  to  the  mechanical 

aspects  of  chromosome  condensation  and  sorting  that  take  place  during  the  M  phase. 

Thus:  

)  
M _ T = M _ TM 1 + PHASE_SPREAD·(cid:1)

(

 

 

 

 

 

(15) 

where M_TM is the mean duration of the M phase, PHASE_SPREAD is a constant, and 

(cid:1) is a random variable drawn from a uniform distribution in the interval (-1,1). In the 

simulator, the fluctuation of the M phase is determined at cell birth. 

The  S  phase  is  regulated  differently:  its  duration  is  not  determined  by  a  checkpoint 

mechanism, but rather by DNA synthesis as described by the set of equations (6). The S 

phase ends when DNA completes the duplication process. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

31 

4.2 Cell proliferation dynamics and stochastic aspects 

As a cell proceeds along the cell cycle its volume increases and all the cell material is 

roughly doubled in mass, so that after mitosis each daughter cell looks like the mother 

cell at birth.  This also applies to mitochondria, and an approximately linear correlation 

between  cell  volume  and  the  number  of  mitochondria  has  been  demonstrated 

experimentally [43]. Mitochondria possess their own DNA that includes the genes for 

some,  but  not  all,  mitochondrial  proteins.  The  other  mitochondrial  proteins  are  coded 

into  the  cell’s  DNA  and  imported  from  the  cell  cytosol  after  their  expression. 

Mitochondria  proliferate  by  fission,  a  process  that  is  reminiscent  of  bacterial 

proliferation,  and  their  number  also  varies  because  of  mitochondrial  fusion  and  death 

[44, 45]. The proliferation of mitochondria is highly coordinated with cell growth and 

the molecular signals at the basis of the cell/mitochondria synchronization are presently 

under  investigation  [44,  45].  The  regulation  of  cell  volume  is  not  well  understood  at 

present, however in the simulator we decided to link the cell’s volume to the number of 

mitochondria, i.e., we assume that each cell increases its size to adapt its volume to the 

number of mitochondria in the cytosol (and this part of the model has been completely 

revised with respect to the previous version [6]). 

Mitochondria  contain  the  molecular  circuits  where  the  oxydative  phosphorylation  of 

glucose  takes  place  and  produce  ATP.  On  the  other  hand,  the  proliferation  of 

mitochondria requires energy and hence it depends on the overall energy balance of the 

cell.  This  establishes  an  interesting  interplay:  a  cell  takes  up  nutrients  from  the 

environment  for  energy  production  which  is  the  primary  task  of  mitochondria; 

mitochondria utilize part of the energy for their maintenance and proliferation; finally, 

mitochondria give back energy to the cell to accomplish its various tasks. 

 

32 

These arguments lead to the following equations:  

 

 

 

 

 

dM
dt

= C1(cid:1)

dATPp
dt

 

dVol
dt

= C2 (cid:1)

dM
dt

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(16a) 

(16b) 

where M is the number of mitochondria, Vol is the cell volume and C1 and C2 are two 

positive  constants.  It  should  be  noted  that  unlike  the  previous  version,  the  simulation 

program  has  no  upper  bound  for  cell  volume  and  number  of  mitochondria,  so  that,  at 

least  in  principle,  they  can  now  increase  without  limit.  This  means  that  volume  and 

number  of  mitochondria  are  controlled  by  the  metabolic  network  and  by  the  growth 

dynamics, and the eventual stability hints at the correctness of the whole model.  

At mitosis mitochondria are partitioned between the two daughter cells: the partitioning 

follows a binomial distribution, and the reasons for this have already been discussed [6]. 

The volume of the daughter cells is then calculated in accordance with equation (15b): 

Vol = Volmin

+ C2 (cid:1) M 0  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(17) 

where  Volmin  is  the  volume  of  the  nucleus  [6]  and  M0  is  the  number  of  mitochondria 

inherited from the mother cell.   

The unequal sharing of cytosol in the daughter cells shows up as an additional source of 

randomness in the partitioning of pRb. The synthesis of pRb has been hypothesized here 

to  occur 

in 

the  nucleus  during 

the  G2  phase  of 

the  mother  cell.  In 

its 

hypophosphorylated form the protein is not released in the cytosol but is retained in the 

33 

nucleus, bound to the nuclear matrix up to the early G1 phase [46], and thus the amount 

of pRb that the daugther cells receive depends on the distribution of the pRb molecules 

in  the  nucleus  and  on  the  dynamics  of  the  nuclear  division.  In  the  simulator  we 

implement this mechanism assuming that the nuclear matrix, and hence the associated 

pRb or any other such protein, is split according to a binomial distribution.  

All the other molecules in the cytosol are partitioned proportionally to cell volume, and 

thus  their  concentration does  not  change  at  mitosis,  and  the randomness of their mass 

splitting depends on the fluctuation of the number of mitochondria. 

4.3 Criteria for cell death 

In the present version the model assumes the following criteria for cell death: 

1. the ATP pool falls below a given threshold value ATPmin. This may occur because of 

environmental nutrient deprivation; 

2. the length of the S phase exceeds a given time span S_T. The length of the S phase in 

the  simulator  depends  on  the  availability  of  ATP  and  glutamine,  and  thus  on  nutrient 

uptake and utilization. Experiments show that a long-lasting blockade of DNA synthesis 

is  not  compatible  with  cell  life  and  the  molecular  mechanisms  leading  to  cell  death 

involve the biochemical networks that form the so-called intra S checkpoints [47-50]; 

3. the length of the G2 phase exceeds a given time span G2_T. This may occur in our 

model because of the G2/M checkpoint when [CycX] does not overcome the threshold 

CycXth.  Since  [CycX]  is  a  function  of  protein  synthesis  and  cell  volume,  this  process 

depends  on  nutrient  availability  and  utilization  as  well.  And  indeed,  experimental 

observations  show  that  a  long-lasting  blockade  of  G2  phase  progression  leads  to  cell 

death [47-50]. 

 

 

34 

5. Simulations vs. experimental results 

5.1 Growth kinetics 

In  its  present  configuration,  the  program  simulates  the  growth  of  proliferating  cells 

dispersed in a closed environment. This is equivalent to the growth of tumor blood cells 

in a tissue-culture plate and hence the results of simulations can be directly compared to 

observations.  This  comparison  is  all  the  more  direct  because  the  simulator  uses 

parameter values estimated from actual experimental data.  

On the whole, the model presented in [6] and extended here is quite complex because it 

considers many biochemical  and cellular paths, and a true fit of the model parameters 

cannot be carried out, given the high number of parameters and the scarcity of some key 

experimental data. Thus the model is not optimized – although the parameter estimates 

all lie within reasonable biophysical extremes.  

And yet, even in the absence of a true optimization, the model seems to be quite robust 

and  is  able  to  reproduce  the  observed  patterns,  e.g.,  Fig.4  and  Fig.5  show  some 

simulation  outputs  and  experimental  data  on  the  growth  of  two  human  leukemia  cell 

lines.  The  simulation  covers  the  same  timespan  as  the  observations  and  there  is  good 

agreement between the simulated and the observed population dynamics, and the total 

computed  ATP  mass  also  fits  quite  well  the  experimental  data.  The  only  noticeable 

difference between simulations and experimental data is the fast decrease of the number 

of alive cells after the peak, and this probably means that the definition of cell death still 

lacks  some  relevant  detail.  However,  cellular  properties  calculated  for  simulated  cells 

using  the  parameters  listed  in  Tab.1  and  in  Tab.1  in  [6]  -  to  which  we  refer  as  the 

“standard” parameters and that give the “standard” growth curve in Fig.1 - match fairly 

35 

 

 

well  those  observed  for  real  cells  (Tab.2).  Among  them  we  find  the  cell  size  and  the 

number of mitochondria per cell that, as mentioned earlier, have been modelled without 

built-in  upper  and  lower  bounds.  On  this  basis,  we  conclude  that  the  model  is  stable, 

and we discuss this topic further in the next section.  

5.2 Cells grow and modify the surrounding environment 

Growth  curves  such  as  those  shown  in  Fig.4  and  Fig.5  can  be  subdivided  into  two 

phases: an initial exponential growth phase followed by a decline in the cell number due 

to  cell  death.  Both  phases  are  well  known  to  be related  to  the  interplay  between  cells 

and their surrounding environment (see Ref. [51] and references cited therein). Initially, 

nutrients and space are abundant and we observe an exponential growth phase, however 

as  cells  grow  they  produce  toxic  waste  products  that  accumulate  in  the  environment 

ultimately leading to cell death in spite of nutrient availability. In ecological terms the 

size  of  the  environment  is  related  to  the  so-called  carrying  capacity  [51,  52].  The 

interplay between cells and the environment has been studied both experimentally and 

theoretically  by  Tracqui  et  al.  [52]  using  tumor  cells  that  grow  attached  at  the  plastic 

surface  of  culture  plates.  The  environmental  accumulation  of  waste  products,  mainly 

lactic acid, has been monitored by these authors by means of pH measurements, and it 

has  been  shown  that  a  peak  in  the  growth  curves  corresponds  to  a  rapid  change  in 

environmental  pH  towards  acidic  values  which  are  no  longer  compatible  with  cell 

survival [52].  

The data shown by Tracqui et al. can be simulated by the simulation program when we 

assume that cells die because of the decrease of environmental pH, and that this process 

does not depend on whether cells grow attached at the plastic surface of culture wells or 

 

 

36 

in suspension. Fig.6 compares the result of a simulation with experimental data reported 

in  [53]  and redrawn  here.  To  compare  experiments  with  simulated  data,  time  in  Fig.6 

has been rescaled in units of doubling time both for real and simulated cells. Doubling 

time is obtained by fitting the exponential growth phase with the equation: 

N(t) = N(0) (cid:1) ekp(cid:1) t  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(18) 

where N(0) is the initial cell number and kp is the growth rate. Then doubling time (cid:1) is 

calculated as follows: 

(cid:1) = ln2
kp

 

 

 

 

 

 

(19) 

Fig.6 shows that our model is in good agreement with experimental data as far as cell 

behaviour and environmental changes are concerned. 

5.3 Simulations carried out under abnormal growth conditions: predictive capabilities 

of the model 

The  model  parameters  listed  in  Tab.1  have  been  tuned  with  a  lengthy  procedure  to 

simulate  the  growth  of  proliferating  cells  in  an  environment  with  standard  nutrient 

concentration. Experimental growth media are supplemented with foetal bovine serum 

that provides hormones and various growth factors and contain a number of molecules 

that  are  required  for  cell  growth  such  as  vitamins,  proteins,  aminoacids,  lipids  and  so 

forth.  However,  it  is  well  known  that  tumor  cells  can  grow  even  in  poorer  media, 

37 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

though they are sensitive to the deprivation of some key molecules that include glucose, 

glutamine and oxygen. 

To  further  test  our  model  we  have  simulated  the  growth  of  proliferating  cells  in  an 

environment characterized by low glucose concentrations using the standard parameters 

listed  in  Tab.1.  We  developed  the  model  without  ever  considereding  such  limiting 

growth  conditions  and  hence  these  simulations  are  truly  predictive.  Fig.7  shows  some 

results  of  these  simulations.  When  the  environmental  glucose  concentration  is  kept  at 

the  standard  value  of  0.9  kg/m3,  ATP  production  (per  cell)  remains  roughly  constant 

during  growth.  However,  when  the  environmental  glucose  concentration  is  decreased, 

the  model  predicts  a  higher  ATP  production.  Simulated  cell  in  the  model  transiently 

produce more ATP in low glucose media because of the ATP sensor that has been fully 

described in our previous paper. The ATP sensor was introduced to tune the rates r3, p22 

and  p11  shown  in  Fig.1  and  was  meant  to  model phenomenologically  both  the  Pasteur 

and  the  Crabtree  effects  [6].  At  low  glucose  concentrations,  the  ATP  production  rate 

falls  below  the  standard  assumed  value  (ATP_St,  [6])  and  turns  on  the  ATP  sensor. 

Additional STORE molecules and glutamine molecules are then catabolized resulting in 

a transient overshoot of ATP production (and oxygen consumption) [6].  

As far as we know, this behaviour has never been explored experimentally and therefore 

we  carried  out  experiments  on  tumor  cell  growth  in  glucose-poor  media  (see  also  the 

Materials  and  Methods  section).  RPMI  glucose-free  medium  has  been  supplemented 

with  10%  FBS  that  contains  approximately  0.9  kg/m3  glucose.  Thus  the  glucose 

concentration  in  the  whole  medium  is  approximately  0.09  kg/m3.  Under  these 

experimental conditions tumor cells can grow and the ATP production can be measured. 

Experimental  data  show  that  in  standard  medium  the  ATP  per  cell  remains  almost 

 

38 

constant  throughout  the  growth  process  whereas  in  low  glucose  medium  the  ATP 

production is significantly higher, in good agreement with the model predictions. 

Next,  we  studied  the  effects  of  fast  modulations  of  the  environmental  glucose 

concentrations  on  cell  growth  (Fig.8).  Both  simulations  and  experiments  show 

populations that alternate periods of cell proliferation and death which are out-of-phase 

with  glucose  fluctuations,  although  the  first  peak  in  population  size  is  higher  for 

simulated cells. At the end of the first period of glucose deprivation, the model predicts 

an accumulation of cells in the S phase: this prediction is confirmed by the experimental 

observations. 

The simulations shown in both Fig.7 and Fig.8 agree with the experiments, although the 

quantitative agreement is not perfect. We have carried out a rather extensive exploration 

of the parameter space and we believe that the origin is not due to some bad parameter 

but rather to the missing definition of some biochemical path that finely tunes the cells’ 

behavior. Nevertheless, our model captures the major features of the cells’ behavior in 

these unusual conditions. 

 

 

 

 

 

39 

6. Conclusions and outlook 

When dealing with real complex systems, such as animal cells, with a large number of 

parts  and  a  lot  of  redundancy,  it  is  difficult  to  decide  which  parts  of  the  system  are 

really  necessary  and  must  be  kept  when  developing  a  viable  computational  model. 

Several approaches can be followed - and indeed have been followed over the years - to 

model the growth of proliferating cells, and all have advantages and disadvantages. At 

one  extreme  are  the  analytical  models  that  use  coupled  differential  equations,  and  the 

major  drawback  of  these  approaches  is  that  the  discrete  events,  that  mark  a  cell’s  life 

(such as the duplication of the genome and cell division), cannot be described because 

they  lack  the  required  analytical  continuity.  At  the  other  extreme  we  find  the  models 

that  try  to  approach  numerically  every  single  known  molecular  pathway,  and  still 

cannot  describe  all  the  cell’s  details  because  of  the  huge  amount  of  computational 

resources required for this task [53, 54]. Our approach lies somewhere in between these 

extremes, and we have already shown that it can be used to model quantitatively some 

key aspects of cell metabolism and of cell cycle kinetics [6]. The approach is based on 

the fact that biochemical networks in the cell possess a hierarchical structure [8], and if 

a  network  has  a  hierarchical  topology  then  the  system  dynamics  is  known  to  be 

dominated  by  the  network’s  hubs  [8].  Thus  by  modelling  the  hubs  of  the  cell’s 

biochemical networks one should – at least in principle – be able to capture most of the 

information of the cell dynamics. However, there are no general rules to identify these 

hubs and for a cell – with thousands of interconnected biochemical paths – the only way 

is to proceed heuristically.  

 

 

40 

A comparison between our previous model [6] and the model described here shows how 

model  refinements  lead  to  a  better  description  especially  when  abnormal  conditions 

require the turning on of seldom used molecular pathways. Indeed our previous model 

compared very favourably with many existing data in three related areas of cell biology: 

metabolism, growth and proliferation. However, that model was unable to account for 

deviations  from  standard  growth  conditions,  because  of  the  incomplete  or  missing 

description  of  certain  important  paths.  The  refined  model  presented  here  tries  to 

overcome several previous limitations, and includes important new details:  

1. the definition of a closed extracellular environment;  

2. the description of biosynthetic pathways such as protein and DNA synthesis;  

3. the description of a minimal biochemical network for the control of the cell cycle;  

4. the description of additional energy-consuming paths;  

5.  the  inclusion  of  stochastic  aspects  that  are  required  to  explain  the  observed 

fluctuations in tumor cell proliferation.  

We believe that the introduction of a network that controls the cell cycle (point 3 above) 

is a major improvement in the model. Indeed, it is well-known that the control of cell 

cycle is rather complex as it is formed by a large number of proteins that act as enzymes 

and/or substrate with complex interactions that lead to a markedly nonlinear behaviour 

[29,  30,  35-41].  These  aspects  have  been  already  been  studied  in  detail  both 

experimentally  and  theoretically  and  it  has  been  shown  that  the  network’s  dynamics 

includes emergent properties such as limit cycle oscillations and chaos [29, 30, 35-41]. 

However, these results have been obtained mostly in cell-free systems using protein cell 

extracts  and  it  is  not  clear  whether  cells  share  the  same  dynamics.  In  particular,  the 

chemical oscillations of some proteins of the cyclin network – although evident in the 

 

41 

test tube – cannot be directly connected to cell cycle kinetics where proteins are shared 

by  the  daughter  cells  and  where  cyclins  are  destroyed  and  regenerated  after  gene 

expression: processes such as protein degradation and expression are sure to influence 

the dynamics of the network.  

The  mechanism  that  we  have  included  in  the  simulation  program,  i.e.,  the  multisite 

protein modification, and in particular multisite phosphorylation of the Rb protein, has 

been shown to account for at least three important, observed, dynamic behaviors:  

1. generation of a biochemical threshold, required to allow a cell to proceed from one 

cell cycle phase to the other;  

2.  generation  of  a  time  delay  in  the  downstream  reactions  that  span  several  order  of 

magnitude, that is required to transfer biochemical information from the fast enzymatic 

kinetics to the slow cell response;  

3. stability of the dynamics even in presence environmental fluctuations.  

The  last  remark  means  that  Rb  multisite  phosphorylation  opposes  fluctuations,  and 

tends to synchronize cells. Thus, the desynchronyzation of cell cycle kinetics, that is an 

experimental  evidence  [55]  and  that  has  been  addressed  in  the  previous  model  [6],  is 

greatly reduced and must be restored with the introduction of some additional source of 

randomness.  Our  description  of  such  processes  is  still  at  the  phenomenological  level, 

and  yet  we  obtain  realistic  population  growth  curves  (see  Fig.  4  and  Fig.5  as  an 

example). 

We  have  already  remarked  that  the  simulation  program  uses  parameters  that  are 

estimated  from  actual  data  and  that  for  this  reason  the  results  of  simulations  can  be 

directly compared with observations. Here we add that during the simulation campaign 

that we have carried out to fine tune some parameter values, we have realized that most 

 

42 

parameters  are  correlated  and  cannot  assume  arbitrary  values.  For  example,  if  cells 

grow  quickly  because  they  express  great  amounts  of  cyclins  or  because  they  take  up 

large  amounts  of  nutrients,  then  they  produce  more  waste  products  that  lead  to  a  fast 

increase of the toxicity of the environment. Thus the actual dimension of the parameter 

space  is  smaller  than  the  total  number  of  parameters,  and  parameter  tuning  is  less 

complex than it appears to be at first sight.  

Here we have shown that the model can reproduce quantitatively several aspect of the 

growth  of  large  tumor  populations  of  tumor  blood  cells  and  can  be  used  to  make 

testable predictions. We also wish to stress that the simulation program has already been 

able to simulate populations of more than a million cells: using a non-optimized version 

of  the  program  we  were  able  to  simulate  the  growth  of  a  cluster  of  cells  that  started 

from a single cell and exceeded 1.25 million cells after five days of processing using an 

Apple  PowerMac  G5.  We  believe  that  this  marks  an  important  milestone  in  the 

advancement  of  the  simulation  program  and  we  hope  that  our  model  will  eventually 

help the study of developmental features of tumor cell populations. 

Acknowledgement 

We wish to thank Professor Giancarlo Andrighetto for many useful discussions and for 

his enthusiastic support and encouragement. 

43 

 

 

 

 

References 

[1] Hanahan D and Weinberg R A 2000 The hallmarks of cancer Cell 100 57-70 

[2] Kansal A R, Torquato S, Harsh G R. Chiocca E A and Deisboeck T S 2000 

Simulated brain tumor growth dynamics using three-dimensional cellular automaton 

J. Theor. Biol. 203 367-382 

[3] Mansury Y and Deisboeck T S 2004 Simulating structure-function patterns of 

malignant brain tumors Physica A 331 219-232 

[4] Peter J and Semmler W 2004 Integrating kinetic models for simulating tumor 

growth in Monte Carlo simulation of ECT systems IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 51 2535-

[5] Chignola R and Milotti E 2004 Numerical simulation of tumor spheroid dynamics 

Physica A 338 261-266 

[6] Chignola R and Milotti E 2005 A phenomenological approach to the simulation of 

metabolism and proliferation dynamics of large tumor cell populations Phys. Biol. 2 

2539 

8-22 

[7] Press W H, Teukolsky S A, Vetterling W T and Flannery B P 1992 Numerical 

Recipes in C - The Art of Scientific Computing 2nd edn (New York: Cambridge 

University Press) 

[8] Barabasi AL and Oltvai Z N 2004 Network biology: understanding the cell’s 

functional organization Nat. Rev. Genet. 5 101-113 

[9] Souba WW 1993 Glutamine and cancer Ann. Surg. 218 715-728 

[10]  Medina M A 2001 Glutamine and cancer J. Nutr. 1312539S-2542S 

 

44 

[11]  Guppy M, Leedman P, Zu X L and Russell V 2002 Contribution by different 

fuels and metabolic pathways to the total ATP turnover of proliferating MCF-7 

breast cancer cells Biochem. J. 364 309-315 

[12]  Mazurek S, Zwerschke W, Jansen-Dürr P and Eigenbrodt E 2001 Effects of the 

human papilloma virus HPV-16 E7 oncoprotein on glycolysis and glutaminolysis: 

role of pyruvate kinase type M2 and the glycolytic-enzyme complex Biochem. J. 

356 247-256 

[13]  Levintow L, Eagle H and Piez K A 1955 The role of glutamine in protein 

biosynthesis in tissue culture J. Biol. Chem. 215 441-460 

[14]  Salzman N P, Eagle H and Sebring E D 1958 The utilization of glutamine, 

glutamic acid, and ammonia for the biosynthesis of nucleic acid bases in 

mammalian cell cultures J. Biol. Chem. 230 1001-1012 

[15]  Halestrap A P and Price N T 1999 The proton-linked monocarboxylate 

transporter (MCT) family: structure, function and regulation Biochem. J. 343 281-

299 

[16]  Pucéat M 1999 pHi regulatory ion transporters: an update on structure, 

regulation and cell function Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 55 1216-1229 

[17]  Ho C and Sturtevant J M 1963 The kinetics of the hydration of carbon dioxide at 

25° J. Biol. Chem. 238 3499-3501 

[18]  Burbea Z H, Gullans S R and Ben-Yaakov S 1987 Delta alkalinity: a simple 

method to measure cellular net acid-base fluxes Am. J. Physiol. Cell. Physiol. 253 

C525-C534 

 

45 

[19]  Karumanchi S A, Jiang L, Knebelmann B, Stuart-Tilley A K, Alper S L and 

Sukhatme V P 2001 VHL tumor suppressor regulates Cl-/HCOR- exchange and 

Na+/H+ exchange activities in renal carcinoma cells Physiol Genomics 5 119-128 

[20]  Quintart J, Leroy-Houyet M A, Trouet A and Baudhuin P 1979 Endocytosis and 

chloroquine accumulation during the cell cycle of hepatoma cells in culture J. Cell. 

Biol. 82 644-653 

[21]  Newell K, Franchi A, Pouyssegur J and Tannock I 1993 Studies with glycolysis-

deficient cells suggest that production of lactic acid is not the only cause of tumor 

acidity Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90 1127-1131 

[22]  Kaminskas E 1978 The pH-dependence of sugar transport and of glycolysis in 

cultured Ehrlich ascites- tumor cells Biochem. J. 172 453-459 

[23]  Tildon J T, McKenna M C, Stevenson J and Couto R 1993 Transport of L-

lactate by cultured rat brain astrocytes Neurochem. Res. 18 177-184 

[24]  McKenna M C, Tildon J T, Stevenson J H, Hopkins I B, Huang X and Couto R 

1998 Lactate transport by cortical synaptosomes from adult rat brain: 

characterization of kinetics and inhibitor specificity Dev. Neurosci. 20 300-309 

[25]  Bröer A, Albers A, Setiawan I, Edwards R H, Chaudhry FA, Lang F, Wagner C 

A and Bröer S 2002 Regulation of the glutamine transporter SN1 by extracellular 

pH and intracellular sodium ions J. Physiol. 539.1 3-14 

[26]  Meloun B, Moravek L and Kostka V 1975 Complete amino acid sequence of 

human serum albumin FEBS Lett. 58 134-137 

[27]  Nelson D L and Cox M M 2005 Lehninger principles of biochemistry 4nd edn 

(New York: Freeman) 

 

46 

[28]  Drachev L A, Jasaitis A A, Mikelsaar H, Nemecek I B, Semenov A Y, 

Semenova E G, Severina I I and Skulachev V P 1976 Reconstitution of biological 

molecular generators of electric current J. Biol. Chem. 251 7077-7082 

[29]  Vermeulen K, Van Bockstaele D K and Berneman Z N 2003 The cell cycle: a 

review of regulation, deregulation and therapeutic targets in cancer Cell Prolif 36 

131-149 

[30]  Tyson J J, Csikasz-Nagy A and Novak B 2002 The dynamics of cell cycle 

regulation BioEssays 24 1095-1109 

[31]  Sweet S and Singh G 1995 Accumulation of human promyelocytic leukemic 

(HL-60) cells at two energetic cell cycle checkpoints Cancer Res. 55 5164-5167 

[32]  Martin D S, Bertino J R and Koutcher J A 2000 ATP depletion+pyrimidine 

depletion markefly enhance cancer therapy: fresh insight for a new approach Cancer 

[33] 

 Chignola R, Dalla Pellegrina C, Del Fabbro A and Milotti E 2006 Thresholds, 

long delays and stability from generalized allosteric effect in protein networks 

[34]  Milotti E, Del Fabbro A, Dalla Pellegrina C and Chignola R 2007 Dynamics of 

allosteric action in multisite protein modification Physica A in press 

[35]  Weinberg R A 1995 The retinoblastoma protein and cell cycle control Cell 81 

[36]  Blagosklonny M V and Pardee A B 2002 The restriction point of the cell cycle 

Res. 60 6776-6783 

Physica A 371 463-472 

323-330 

Cell Cycle 1 102-110 

 

47 

[37] 

Ikeda M A, Jakoi L and Nevins J R 1996 A unique role for the Rb protein in 

controlling E2F accumulation during cell growth and differentiation Proc. Natl. 

Acad. Sci. USA 93 3215-3220 

[38]  Ezhevsky S A, Ho A, Becker-Hapak M, Davis P K and Dowdy S E 2001 

Differential regulation of retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein by G1 cyclin-

dependent kinase complexes in vivo Mol. Cell. Biol. 21 4773-4784 

[39]  DeGregori J 2004 The Rb network J. Cell Sci. 117 3411-3413 

[40]  Seville L L, Shah N, Westwell A D and Chan W C 2005 Modulation of 

pRb/E2F functions in the regulation of cell cycle and in cancer Curr. Cancer Drug 

Target. 5 159-170 

[41]  Tyson J J and Novak B 2001 Regulation of the eukaryotic cell cycle: molecular 

antagonism, hysteresis, and irreversible transitions J. Theor. Biol. 210 249-263 

[42]  Zetterberg  A and Larsson O 1985 Kinetic analysis of regulatory events in G1 

leading to proliferation or quiescence of 3T3 cells Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82 

5365-5369 

[43] 

James T W and Bohman R 1981 Proliferation of mitochondria during the cell 

cycle of the human cell line HL-60 J. Cell Biol. 89 256-260 

[44]  Garesse R and Vallejo C G 2001 Animal mitochondrial biogenesis and function: 

a regulatory cross-talk between two genomes Gene 263 1-16 

[45]  Frank S 2006 Dysregulation of mitochondrial fusion and fission: an emerging 

concept in neurodegeneration Acta Neuropat. 111 93-100  

[46]  Mancini M A, Shan B, Nickerson J A, Penman S and Lee W H 1994 The 

retinoblastoma gene product is a cell cycle-dependent, nuclear matrix-associated 

protein Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91 418-422 

 

48 

[47]  O'Connor P M and Fan S 1996 DNA damage checkpoints: implication for 

cancer threapy Prog. Cell Cycle Res. 2 165-173 

[48]  Morgan S E and Kastan M B 1997 p53 and ATM: cell cycle, cell death, and 

[49]  Meek D W 1998 Multisite phosphorylation and the integration of stress signals 

[50]  Taylor W R and Stark G R 2001 Regulation of the G2/M transition by p53 

cancer Adv. Cancer Res. 71 1-25 

at p53 Cell Signal 10 159-166 

Oncogene 20 1803-1815 

[51]  Chignola R, Dai Pra P, Morato L M and Siri P 2006 Proliferation and death in a 

binary environment: a stochastic model of cellular ecosystems Bull. Math. Biol. 68 

[52]  Tracqui P, Liu J W, Collin O, Clement-Lacroix J and Planus E 2005 Global 

analysis of endothelial cell line proliferation patterns based on nutrient-depletion 

models: implications for a standardization of cell proliferation assays Cell Prolif. 38 

[53]  Bishop T C, Skeel R D and Schulten k 1997 Difficulties with multiple time 

stepping and fast multipole algorithm in molecular dynamics J. Comput. Chem. 18 

[54]  Ayton G S D, Bardenhagen S, McMurty P, Sulsky D and Voth G A 2001 

Interfacing molecular dynamics with continuum dynamics in computer simulation: 

toward an application to biological membranes IBM J. Res. Dev. 45 417-426 

[55]  Chiorino G, Metz J A J, Tomasoni D and Ubezio P 2001 Desynchronization rate 

in cell populations: mathematical modelling and experimental data J. Theor. Biol. 

1661-1680 

119-135 

1785-1791 

208 185-199 

 

49 

[56]  Masafumi W, Wang H S and Okada A 2002 Characterization of L-glutamine 

transport by human neuroblastoma cell line A. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 282 C1246-

[57]  Spencer T L and Lehninger A L 1976 L-lactate transport in Erlich ascites-

tumour cells Biochem. J. 154 405-414 

[58] 

von Grumbckow L, Elsner P, Hellsten Y, Quistorff B and Juel C 1999 kinetics 

of lactate and pyruvate transport in cultured rat myotubes Biochim. Biophys. Acta 

C1253 

1417 267-275 

[59] 

al-Baldawi N F and Abercrombie 1992 Cytoplasmic hydrogen ion diffusion 

coefficient Biophys. J. 61 1470-1479 

[60]  Clare P M, Poorman R A, Kelley L C, Watenpaugh K D, Bannow C A and 

Leach K L 2001 The cyclin-dependent kinases cdk2 and cdk5 act by a random, 

anticooperative kinetic mechanism J. Biol. Chem. 276 48292-48295 

[61]  Freyer J P and Sutherland R M 1980 Selective dissociation and characterization 

of cells from different regions of multicell tumor spheroids Cancer Res. 40 3956-

3965 

[62]  Kunz-Schughart L A, Groebe K and Mueller-Klieser W 1996 Three-dimensional 

cell culture induces novel proliferative and metabolic alterations associated with 

oncogenic transformation Int. J. Cancer 66 578-586 

[63]  Robin E D and Wong R 1988 Mitochondrial DNA molecules and virtual number 

of mitochondria per cell in mammalian cells J. Cell. Physiol. 136 507-513 

 

 

 

50 

Figure captions 

Figure 1.  Schematic layout of the metabolic network that models cell metabolism and 

its  relationship  with  the  extracellular  environment.  Variables  within  circles  represent 

molecular species and are expressed in units of concentration or mass. Symbols are as 

follows:  Gex  =  external  glucose  concentration,  Gin  = 

intracellular  glucose 

concentration,  G6P  =  glucose-6-phosphate  concentration,  STORE  =  mass  of  glucose 

stored  in  the  form  of  glycogen,  Ac.Lat.ex  =  environmental  lactic  acid  concentration, 

Ac.Lat.in  =  intracellular  lactic  acid  concentration,  Aex  =  environmental  glutamine 

concentration,  Ain  =  intracellular  glutamine  concentration,  ATPp  =  pool  of  ATP 

molecules  concentration,  O2  =  oxygen  concentration,  H+  =  mass  of  intracellular 

protons,  Proteins  =  mass  of  intracellular  proteins,  DNA  =  relative  mass  of  DNA 

(normalized to 1 for the whole genome). Rates are represented by squares. The dashed 

and dotted circuits represent the ATP and Oxygen sensors, respectively, and have been 

described  previously 

[6].  The  dashed-and-dotted  circuit  named  “Cell  Cycle 

Checkpoints” represent the molecular circuit of cell cycle control that has been modeled 

on the basis of previous studies on the dynamics of the allosteric effect (see Refs. [33, 

34] and equations 11-14 for details). (cid:1)(cid:2) is the cell membrane electric potential that has 

been used to calculate the energy costs for intracellular proton dissipation (see equations 

8-9 for details). The calculation of the global energy cost also requires the rates v_Mit, 

v_P  and  v_DNA  that  model  ATP  consumption  for  mitochondria  maintenance,  protein 

synthesis and DNA synthesis, respectively.  

 

 

 

51 

Figure 2.  Scheme of the molecular interactions that have been considered in the model 

of  the  G1/S  transition  of  the  cell  cycle.  The  retinoblatoma  protein  (pRB)  has  been 

supposed to form a complex with an enzyme E and carries 16 putative phosphorylation 

sites. The pRB-E complex is synthesized in the G2 phase and it is partitioned at random 

between the daughter cells at mitosis. At the beginning of the G1m phase the cyclin D 

protein  (CycD)  is  expressed  and  it  phosphorylates  the  pRB-E  complex  upon  rapid 

association with specific cyclin-dependent-kinases [35-40]. Phosphoryl groups added to 

the  pRB-E  complex  are  represented  graphically  by  means  of  black  circles.  The 

phosphorylation  event  is  assumed  to  occur  following  the  reversible  bimolecular 

interaction between cyclin D and the pRb complex: a detailed study has shown that the 

precise mechanism of pRb phosphorylation is irrelevant with respect to the dynamics of 

the  system’s  response  [34].  Upon  partial  phosphorylation  of  the  pRb,  a  fraction  of  E 

molecules are released and catalyze a reaction whereby a substrate S is converted into a 

product P. When the concentration of S falls below the threshold Sth,1  (see equations 13) 

two  paths  are  activated  the  expression  of  the  cyclin  E  protein (CycE)  is  activated  and 

this marks the progression of the cell from the G1m phase to the following G1p. CycE  

participates to pRb phosphorylation upon istantaneous association with specific cyclin-

dependent-kinases  and  leads  to  the  hyperphosphorylation  of  the  pRb  with  full  E 

detachment. When the concentration of S falls below the threshold Sth,2 (see equations 

13)  the  cell  progresses  to  the  S  phase.  At  the  end  of  the  G1m  and  of  the  G1p  phases 

CycD and CycE, respectively, are destroyed by proteolytic degradation that is assumed 

to  occur  faster  than  the  considered reaction  kinetics.  The  enzymatic  reaction  catalized 

by  E  is  assumed  to  model  phenomenologically  the  reactions  controlled  by  the 

transcription  factor  E2F  that  associates  to  pRb  in  real  cells.  The  nature  of  pRb 

 

52 

phosphorylation  naturally  introduces  a  threshold  and  a  time  delay  in  the  reaction 

catalized  by  E  with  characteristic  times  comparable  with  the  cell  progression  through 

the various cell cycle phases (see also [33, 34] for a detailed biophysical description).  

Figure 3.  Simulation of cell cycle kinetics and its relationships with the expression of 

key molecular components of cell cycle control. A: kinetics of the cell cycle transitions 

from one phase to the other for a simulated cell. Cell cycle phases are as follows: 1 = 

G1m, 2= G1p, 3 = S, 4 = G2 and 5 = M. B-E: these graphs show the variation of cyclin 

X,  D  and  E  and  of  the  pRb  during  the  same  time  span  as  panel  A  (see  text).  Finally, 

panel F shows the fraction of hypersphosphrylated pRb that has been calculated using 

equations  (11).  Notice  that  in  the  present  model  the  oscillations  in  cyclin  expression 

(and  of  other  molecular  components  of  the  cyclin  network),  that  have  indeed  been 

observed  experimentally,  are  the  result  of  protein  expression  and  degradation  in 

successive cell cycles rather than the result of complex nonlinear interactions between 

molecules. As far as we know, no models of cyclin oscillations have taken into account 

the intermittent protein expression and degradation through successive cell cycles as the 

driving  force  of  their  oscillatory  behaviour.  More  realistically,  the  two  aspects  are 

probabily integrated in real cells. 

Figure 4.  Simulation of cell growth and death in a limited environment. In both panels, 

data are expressed as cell density vs. time. Upper panel: simulation outputs for different 

values of the parameters described in this paper. The curves marked as run120 show the 

simulation  outputs  obtained  with  the  parameter  values  listed  in  Tab.1  and  in  Tab.1  of 

Ref.  [6]  and  which  we  call  “standard”.  Lower  panel:  experimental  growth  curves 

 

 

 

53 

measured  for  the  two  human  leukemia  cell  lines  MOLT3  and  Raji  following  the 

procedures described in the Experimental section. 

Figure 5.  Amount of the ATP pool in simulated and real cells in growth assays. Upper 

panel: simulation outputs. Symbols are the same as in Fig.4 for proper comparison. The 

grey  dashes  represent  the  SD  calculated  around  mean  values  for  the  simulated 

populations. Lower panel: experimental results obtained with the human leukemia cell 

lines MOLT3 and Raji following the procedures described in the Experimental section. 

Figure  6.  While  cells  grow  they  modify  the  surrounding  environment.  This  picture 

shows  the  results  of  simulations  compared  to  actual  data  described  in  [52],  and  the 

relationships between cell concentration and environmental pH at different times during 

the growth assay. In both panels, the cell density has been normalized with respect to 

the  initial  cell  concentration  C(0).  Time  has  also  been  rescaled  in  units  of  cells’ 

doubling time to compare the data obtained with fast growing simulated cells and slow 

growing  real  tumor  cells  (see  the  text  for  details).  Upper  panel:  simulation  outputs. 

Lower panel: experimental results redrawn from [52]. 

Figure  7.  Predictive  potential  of  the  model:  ATP  production  by  cells  growing  in  low 

glucose  environments.  A:  amount  of  the  ATPp  calculated  for  cells  in  simulations 

carried  out  with  the  parameters’  values  listed  in  Tab.1  for  different  concentrations  of 

external  glucose.  The  symbol  +G  refers  to  the  standard  glucose  concentration  of  0.9 

kg/m3,  which  is  the  typical  glucose  concentration  in  complete  culture  media 

supplemented  with  FBS.  After  the  startup  phase  of  the  program,  that  allows  the 

 

 

 

 

54 

concentrations  of  all  the  considered  molecular  species  to  settle  at  equilibrium  values, 

the  environmental  glucose  concentration  has  been  reduced  to  10%  or  to  7.5%  of  the 

standard  value.  B:  experimental  resulta  obtained  with  MOLT3  cells  in  complete 

medium  (+G)  and  in  two  independent  experiments  where  cells  have  been  grown  in 

glucose-free  RPMI  medium  supplemented  with  10%  foetal  bovine  serum  (FBS). 

Glucose is present in FBS with an approximate concentration of 0.9 kg/m3, but this may 

vary  in  different  FBS  batches.  Thus  in  these  two  experiments  the  final  environmental 

glucose  concentration  is  approximately  0.09  kg/m3.  C  and  D:  cumulative  ATP  for 

simulated  cells  (panel  C)  and  real  cells  (panel  D)  (the  cumulative  value  has  been 

calculated from the curves in panels A and D with a simple integration:  ATP(t) (cid:3) dt

). 

(cid:1)

(cid:2)

0

Figure  8.  Predictive  potential  of  the  model:  growth  of  tumor  cells  in  environments 

subjected  to  cycles  of  glucose  deprivation.  A  and  B:  Time-dependent  variations  of 

glucose concentrations in the environment of simulated cells (A) and of real cells (B). 

The  concentration  of  environmental  glucose  for  real  cells  has  been  estimated  as 

described  in  the  caption  of  Fig.7.  C  and  D:  growth  curves  (cell  density  vs.  time)  for 

simulated  (panel  C)  and  real  (panel  D)  cells.  E:  cell  cycle  phase  distribution  for 

simulated cells during the first cycle of environmental glucose deprivation. Simulation 

outputs show an accumulation of cells in the S phase and a strong reduction of cells in 

the  G2/M  phases.  F:  raw  flow  cytometry  data  of  cell  cycle  distribution  of  real  cells 

during the first cycle of environmental glucose deprivation. Data have been collected as 

described  in  the  Experimental  section.  The  accumulation  of  the  cells  in  the  early  S 

phase  is  evident  (arrow)  as  well  as  the  reduction  of  the  cells  in  the  G2/M  phases, 

 

 

55 

although  both  data  sets  do  not  match  quantitatively  the  simulation  outputs.  However, 

the qualitative pattern is well predicted by the model. 

 

 

56 

Table 1. Model parameters for the standard simulation that are either modified or new 
with respect to those listed in reference [6]. 
 
Meaning 

References 

Value 

Units 

Symbol 

1x10-9 

kg s-1 m-

Maximum rate of glutamine transport 

[12] 

0.0238 

kg m-3 

Michaelis-Menten constant of 

[56] 

glutamine transport 

9.58x10-8  kg s-1 m-

Maximum rate of lactic acid transport 

[15, 57, 58] 

0.4053 

kg m-3 

Michaelis-Menten constant of lactic 

[15, 57, 58] 

-0.021 

V 

Cell membrane potential in standard 

This paper (see 

acid transport 

conditions 

the text for 

details) 

H_Peff 

0.1 

 

Phenomenological constant describing 

This paper (by 

the inverse of the efficiency of proton 

data fitting) 

pumps 

1.5x10-18  m3 s-1 

Effective proton diffusion constant 

[59] 

(assuming a plasma membrane 

thickness of 10 nm) 

0.19953 

kg m-3 

7x10-20 

kg s-1 

Buffering capacity of the environment 

[21] 

Rate of glutamine consumption for 

This paper (by 

protein and DNA synthesis 

data fitting) 

9x10-17 

kg 

Michaelis-Menten constant of ATP 

This paper (by 

utilization in protein synthesis 

data fitting) 

8x10-18 

kg 

Michaelis-Menten constant of ATP 

This paper (by 

utilization in DNA synthesis 

data fitting) 

0.008 

Fraction of the total ATP production 

This paper (by 

DNA_MAX 

_SPREAD 

0.1 

16 

10 

rate utilized for DNA synthesis 

data fitting) 

Maximum spread of the fluctuations in 

This paper (by 

the DNA synthesis duration 

data fitting) 

Maximum number of phosphorylation 

[38] 

sites on pRb 

Number of sites that must be 

[38] 

phosphorylated for pRb activation 

10-6 

M-1 

Equilibrium constant for 

 [60] a 

2 

2 

 

 

 

 

Vmax_A 

KmA 

Vmax_AL 

KmAL 

Vrif 

DH 

(cid:1)out 

p3 

KmP 

KmDNA 

(cid:2)DNA 

N 

l 

KRb 

 

57 

phosphorylation/dephosphorylation 

process on pRb 

1.5x10-2 

Fraction of proteins  which is pRb 

This paper (by 

Fraction of proteins  which is cyclin D 

This paper (by 

Fraction of proteins  which is cyclin E 

This paper (by 

Fraction of proteins  which is cyclin X 

This paper (by 

data fitting) 

data fitting) 

data fitting) 

data fitting) 

10-3 

M 

Substrate concentration for the 

[33, 34] 

downstream Michaelis-Menten 

reaction controlled by pRb 

s-1 

M 

Rate of S molecules consumption 

[33, 34] 

Michaelis-Menten constant of S 

[33, 34] 

molecules consumption 

Fraction of the S concentration that 

This paper (by 

defines the threshold for the G1m/G1p 

data fitting) 

7x10-3 

10-3 

8x10-3 

104 

10-3 

0.8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sth2 

0.05 

Fraction of the S concentration that 

This paper (by 

defines the threshold for the G1p/S 

data fitting) 

CycXth 

8x10-17 

kg 

Amount of cyclin X that defines the 

This paper (by 

transition 

transition 

threshold for the G2/M transition 

data fitting) 

3x1016 

kg-1 

Phenomenological constant for the 

This paper (by 

growth of mitochondria 

data fitting) 

2x10-18 

m3 

Phenomenological constant for the 

This paper (by 

increase of the cell volume 

data fitting) 

4x10-22 

kg s-1 

Rate of ATP consumption for 

This paper (by 

mitochondria maintenance 

data fitting) 

ATPmin 

1.5x10-15  kg 

Minimum ATP amount for cell 

This paper (by 

survival 

data fitting) 

Maximum duration of the S phase 

Maximum duration of the G2 phase 

Mean duration of the M phase 

[6] 

[6] 

[6] 

55000 

25200 

1800 

s 

s 

s 

 

PHASE_SPREAD  0.5 

Maximum spread for the fluctuations in 

This paper (by 

the M phase duration 

data fitting) 

a value measured for the equilibrium between ATP and cyclin-dependent kinases. 

58 

(cid:1)pRb 

(cid:1)CycD 

(cid:1)CycE 

(cid:1)CycX 

S 

kMM 

KMM 

Sth1 

C1 

C2 

vMit 

S_T 

G2_T 

M_TM 

 

 

 

Table 2. Estimated parameters for the simulated standard tumor cell population 
compared to experimental measurements. All values have been taken during 
exponential growth. 

 
Ref. 

 
19.8 

 
0.035 

 
22.8 b 
19.7 c 

 
 
 
 
 
 
[6] 
 

 
This work 
 

 
This work 
 

 
Simulated 

 
0.0304 b 
0.0352 c 

 
Experimental 

Max 
 
 
 
 
59.3 
40.5 
17.7 

Min 
 
 
 
 
48.4 
30.5 
7.3 
 
 
5.37 

Mean±SD 
 
 
 
 
54.4 ± 2.2 a 
27.5 ± 5.8 a 
16.4 ± 1.7 a 

Average 
 
 
 
 
52.5 
34.5 
12.9 
 
 
5.47 
 
 
 
5.02 

 
 
Parameter 
 
 
Growth rate a 
(hours-1) 
 
 
Doubling timea 
(hours) 
 
 
Cell cycle 
distribution 
(%) 
 
G1 
S 
G2/M 
 
 
 
ATP/Cell 
(10-15 g) 
 
 
Radius 
(μm) 
 
 
Volume 
(μm3) 
 
 
Mitochondria/Cell 
 
 
aThe growth rate for both simulated and experimental cell populations was calculated by 
exponential fitting of growth curves. The doubling time was then calculated as 
log2/(growth rate) 
bData measured for the MOLT3 human T lymphoblastoid cell line 
cData measured for the Raji human B lymphoblastoid cell line 
dRange of the number of mitochondria observed in different cell types 

 
5.76 ± 0.73 a 
4.32 ± 0.72 b 
 
 
(cid:1)7.5 

 
700-1500 

 
83-677 d 

 
This work 

 
266.9 

 
220.4 

 
190.6 

 
[61, 62] 

 
5.55 

 
4.82 

 
5.30 

 
471 

 
623 

 
530 

 
[61] 

 
[63] 

59 

 
 
Fig.1 

 

 

60 

 
Fig.2 
 

 

 

61 

Fig.3 

 

 

62 

Fig.4 

 

 

63 

Fig.5 

 

 

64 

Fig.6 

 

 

65 

Fig.7 

 

 

66 

Fig.8 

 

 

67 

