 The current progress of the ALICE Ring Imaging Cherenkov Detector 

A.  Braem1, G. De Cataldo1,2, M. Davenport1, A. Di Mauro1, A. Franco2, A. Gallas2, 

H. Hoedlmoser1, P.  Martinengo1, E. Nappi2, G. Paic3, F. Piuz1, V. Peskov1* 

1CERN, Geneva, Switzerland 

2INFN-sez.di Bari, Italy 

3Instituto de Ciencias Nucleares UNAM, Mexico 

 Abstract 
 
   Recently, the last two modules (out of seven) of the ALICE High Momentum Particle 
Identification detector (HMPID) were assembled and tested. The full detector, after a pre-
commissioning phase, has been installed in the experimental area, inside the ALICE 
solenoid, at the end of September 2006. In this paper we review the status of the 
ALICE/HMPID project and we present a summary of the series production of the CsI 
photo-cathodes. We describe the key features of the production procedure which ensures 
high quality photo-cathodes as well as the results of the quality assessment performed by 
means of a specially developed 2D scanner system able to produce a detailed map of the 
CsI photo-current over the entire photo-cathode surface. 
   Finally we present our recent R&D efforts toward the development of a novel 
generation of imaging Cherenkov detectors with the aim to identify, in heavy ions 
collisions, hadrons up to 30 GeV/c. 
 
Keywords: HMPID, GEM, CsI, photo-cathode, TIC, RICH, heavy-ion. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
   The ALICE Collaboration is building a dedicated heavy-ion detector to exploit the 
unique physics potential of nucleus-nucleus interactions at LHC energies [1]. The aim is 
to study the physics of strongly interacting matter at extreme energy densities, where the 
formation of a new phase of matter, the quark-gluon plasma, is expected. One of the 
important elements of this detector is the HMPID, which extends, in the central region, 
the particle identification capabilities of the ALICE PID system (TOF, ITS and TPC) up 
to 5 GeV/c. It consists of an array of seven identical RICH modules each segmented into 
six large area (40x60 cm2) CsI photo-cathodes (PCs), providing in total 11 m2 of photo-
sensitive area for the detection of Cherenkov light.  
   The progress in the development and construction of the first five modules were 
reported in recent articles [2-4]; in this paper we focus on the final stage: production and 
testing of the last two modules. 
   Finally we introduce our ideas concerning possible R&D activity oriented toward the 
development of a novel generation of Cherenkov detectors, able to perform, in heavy-ion 
collisions, hadrons identification up to 30 GeV/c. 
                                                 
* Corresponding author: Vladimir.Peskov@cern.ch 

 
 
2. Particular aspects of the manufacturing of the HMPID photo-cathodes 
 
   The CsI photo-cathodes are a key element of the ALICE HMPID detector and we made 
special efforts in order to assess their quality, before and after mounting on the MWPC, 
and to monitor their stability over time. Each substrate (see [5, 6] for details) before the 
CsI coating went through planarity measurements. The planarity threshold for acceptance 
was set to 125 µm. They were then cleaned in the surface treatment facility of TS-MME. 
The treatment consisted of an ultrasonic bath filled with NGL 17.4 ALU de-greasing 
fluid (50ºC), followed by rinsing with de-ionized water followed by immersion in an 
ultrasonic bath filled with de-ionized water (30ºC) and finally rinsed with de-natured 
ethyl alcohol and dried in an oven at 60ºC.They were then mounted on the wire chamber 
and the nominal high voltage was applied to check for any electrical or mechanical 
problems. The substrates were kept under HV at least during two days. After such a test, 
the substrates were qualified for the coating with CsI. 
   Before installation in the evaporation plant the substrate was kept one night in a clean 
room oven at 60o. Immediately prior to installation, the substrate was cleaned with 
reagent grade ethyl alcohol. In order to be able to assess the photo-cathode quality we 
upgraded the evaporation plant by adding a UV scanner system, described in detail in [4]. 
The scanner was able to measure the photo-current from any point of the photo-cathode 
surface and compare it with a reference photo-multiplier. After cross-checks with 
Cherenkov light emitted by charged particles in a test beam experiment, we have been 
able to define a photo-current acceptance level corresponding to a detected photon yield 
matching the physics requirements of the detector, i.e. a Cherenkov angle resolution of 3 
mrad. This cross-check was especially important because the photo-current is measured 
in vacuum while the photo-cathodes have to operate under gas (CH4). Moreover the 
deuterium lamp used as UV source has a photon energy spectrum quite different from the 
Cherenkov light to be detected.   
   The same set-up was also used to measure the photo-current some time after the photo-
cathodes production to check their stability and long-term behavior.     
   During the production of the first photo-cathodes we discovered what we name the 
“fatigue” effect: after the successful production of about 7-10 photo-cathodes (see [4] for 
more details) the subsequent ones were unsuccessful, delivering a photo-current below 
the acceptance level. We found empirically that in order to recover the photo-cathodes 
production a maintenance intervention was needed. The evaporation plant was carefully 
cleaned to remove the CsI  deposited on its inner walls followed by the pumping down of 
the set- up  at elevated temperatures (~70°C) until the vacuum nominal value of 10-7Torr 
was achieved. After this step it was possible to resume the production of photo-cathodes 
with the requested QE. 
 
2-1. The ”fatigue” effect, a possible explanation 
 
   To our best knowledge the fatigue effect has not been observed by other groups before; 
perhaps because they  dealt with the production of a small number of  photo-cathodes of 
small size (typically <10x10 cm2). 

   When the COMPASS experiment coated photo-cathodes of a similar size to ours and in 
the same coating facility, the scanner system was not yet operational. Therefore it was not 
possible to assess the photo-cathode quality just after the CsI deposition and effects 
observed later can be induced by the storage and manipulation of the photo-cathodes, for 
example during the assembly of the detector. It is also worth mentioning that our CsI area 
(11 m2) is twice as large as that of COMPASS one (5.5 m2). 
    In order to understand the fatigue effect we tried to correlate the photo-current with 
various parameters measured before and during the evaporation: vacuum level, chemical 
composition of the residual gas, temperature and evaporation rate [4] but we could not 
find any conclusive correlation. We think that the migration of residual water inside the 
evaporation plant [4] is the main factor influencing the quality of our photo-cathodes. 
Actually the effect of water on CsI is known and has been studied for a long time [7]. CsI 
is a highly hygroscopic component; it easily absorbs water which changes the structure of 
the surface layer (CsI molecules can even dissociate into Cs+ and I- ions [4, 8]) and can 
make it more difficult for the photo-electrons to pass through its layer into the gas.  
   During the production of the photo-cathodes (42 + 6 spares)  we observed that after ~5-
7 subsequent evaporations of CsI photo-cathodes  a rather thick and  visible layer of CsI 
was formed on the inner walls of the evaporation plant, hereafter called the parasitic 
layer. After each evaporation, the set up was cooled down to room temperature and then 
exposed to air (in order to extract the photo-cathode), therefore the parasitic layer 
adsorbed water from the ambient air. During the subsequent evaporation the accumulated 
water accumulated can migrate towards the photo-cathode changing its properties. 
In order to confirm this hypothesis, an upgrade of the evaporation plant is needed, aiming 
to improve the residual gas analysis sensitivity and to achieve a detailed map of the 
temperature inside the vessel. 
   In order to minimize the possible influence of the parasitic layer we decided to 
implement the following new procedure: for the measurement of the photo-current the 
photo-cathode has to be moved, inside the plant vessel and under vacuum, from the 
evaporation position (left on fig.1) to the measurement one (right on fig. 1).  During the 
measurement phase the right half of the vessel was kept at 60o C while the left half, with 
the parasitic layer, was cooled down to room temperature.  Then during the time between 
two evaporations: 

• 
• 

the door of the evaporation vessel was kept closed; 
the vessel itself was kept at 30o C, i.e. the heating was never switched off 
completely. 

   After the implementation of this procedure, the fatigue effect was no longer observed. 
Although the statistics are limited (19 photo-cathodes produced so far) and do not allow 
us to draw solid conclusions, we think it is worth reporting our experience while 
investigating more deeply this effect.  
    
2.2. Testing of the last two modules with cosmic particles 
 
  As reported in [2] we tested the first five modules with test beam at the CERN SPS 
accelerator.  Due the accelerators shutdown in 2006 it has not been possible to test the 
last two modules in the same way. To verify that all elements (MWPC, radiator vessels, 
photo-cathodes) operate properly after the final assembly, we performed tests with 

cosmic particles using a dedicated stand that allowed us to flip the module so as to have 
the radiator vessels facing the sky, a condition not foreseen during the design of the 
detector. As an example fig. 2 show a cosmic ray event. The data are currently under 
analysis but from a visual scan of the events we expect the last two modules will be as 
good as the first five, for which the full analysis is available, showing on average more 
than 20 photo-electrons/ring detected  at β = 1. 
 
 
3. New developments: towards very high momentum particles ID 
 
   Both, results from experiments at RHIC [9] and recent theoretical developments call for 
an extension of the PID capability above the present HMPID (5 GeV/c) limit. 
In the following section we present our ideas concerning a possible option for a detector 
able to make hadron identification up to 30 GeV/c in heavy-ion collisions. In particular 
we are investigating the possibility to develop a counter based on the Threshold Imaging 
Cherenkov (TIC) concept. Figures 3a and 3b show the TIC scheme, while in [10] the 
reader can find a detailed description of it. It is worth stressing that, in the study of 
heavy-ion collisions, the identification of protons plays a role as important as the 
identification of pions and kaons. In a RICH detector, below the Cherenkov threshold for 
protons and above the one for kaons, protons can be identified only by the absence of 
signal, i.e. using the detector as a threshold counter. However a threshold counter is not 
well adapted to the harsh heavy-ion environment, where it is common to deal with 
several hundreds charged particles per square meter. The TIC concept links the particle 
track to a fiducial region in which to look for the photon signal or its absence. As 
opposite to a classical threshold counter, the TIC can also provide some imaging 
information as the signal is now a “blob” in the photon detector plane. In parallel to the 
hardware effort, we are investigating how to exploit the blob characteristics, like 
dimensions or charge density inside it, in order to increase the signal significance. 
It may be interesting to note how, complementary considerations apply to the 
identification of electrons. In this case the β of the electron is known in advance, being 
equal to 1; it may therefore be of interest to replace a RICH, with its very sophisticated 
and expensive optics, with the more simple and robust TIC design. The TIC concept also 
allows for a more compact layout compared to a RICH in a focusing configuration, a non 
negligible advantage.    
   One option we are actively pursuing is the replacement of the MWPC based photon 
detector, as described in [10], with a windowless GEM combined with a CsI photo-
cathode. In this scheme the GEM are operated in the same gas used as the radiator 
medium [11]. However, the GEM is a rather fragile detector and for safe operation at the 
high gain required to detect single photoelectron with good efficiency, several GEM in 
cascade are needed (see Fig. 4a) [12]. Recently, we have developed a more robust version 
of the GEM, a thick GEM with resistive electrodes named RETGEM [13]. The sparks in 
this detector, if they appear at gains larger than 104, are mild (because their current is 
limited by the electrode resistivity) and they damage neither the detector nor the front-
end electronics. During the past months, in collaboration with the ICARUS group, we 
considerably improved the original design of RETGEM. The original graphite coating 
has been replaced by coating with CuO or CrO and each hole of the detector has now 

dielectric rims around it, allowing for reliable operation at higher gas gain, up to 105 with 
single step amplification [14].  
We also performed tests of this detector with a CsI coated cathode. We discovered that 
with one RETGEM coated with CsI it is possible to reach a gain of 105 and with two 
RETGEM, operated in cascade, a gain larger than 106, see Fig.4b. Note that the 
maximum achievable gain of two RETGEM operated in cascade only slightly depends on 
the gas mixture. It can therefore operate with unconventional (for a MWPC) gases, like 
pure Ar or Ne, although the very large cross section for electron backscattering will 
considerably reduce the photon yield in Cherenkov applications.  
This effect can be, at least partially, compensated by the suppression of the window 
between the radiator and the photon detector itself. The effect of scintillation light has 
also to be carefully investigated.   
In cooperation with the Reagent Research Center (Moscow) we finally made the first test 
of a  RETGEMs coated  with a SbC/CsI photo-cathode (some of our test are described in 
[15]). The prototype could operate at gains up to 105 and the QE, for λ=405 nm, was 
found to be 3.2%. Such a detector may open new avenues in applications; for example 
after further improvements it could be used for the detection of light from aerogel 
radiators. 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
   All seven modules of the ALICE HMPID, including the 42 photo-cathodes, have been 
successfully assembled and pre-commissioned. The entire detector has been installed in 
the experimental area, inside the ALICE solenoid, at the end of September 2006. While 
completing the services installation and the in-situ commissioning of the detector, aiming 
at being ready for the very first collisions at LHC, we  are investigating the possible 
options to extend our particle identification  capability up to 30 GeV/C. Preliminary tests 
indicate a RETGEM detector with CsI photo-cathodes, in a Threshold Imaging 
Cherenkov configuration, as a  promising candidate for this task, although more studies 
are needed in order to understand and optimize the  photosensitive detector. 
 
 
Figure captions: 
 
Fig. 1. A schematic drawing of the CERN evaporation plant (see [4] for more details).  
Fig. 2. Example of Cherenkov ring produced by cosmic ray. 
Fig 3a and 3b: schematic view of the TIC concept. 
Fig. 4a. Overall gains of triple GEM coated with CsI photocathodes measured in Ne and 
Ar at pressure of 1 atm. 
Fig. 4b. Gains of double RETGEM coated with CsI photocathodes measured in various 
gases at pressure of 1 atm. 
 
 
 
References: 
  

[1] ALICE Collaboration: F. Carminati et al., J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys., 30, 2004, 
1517 
and J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys., 32, 2006, 1295 
[2] A. Gallas, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys Res. A553, 2005, 345 
[3] H. Hoeldmoser et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys Res., A553, 2005, 140 
[4] H. Hoeldmoser et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys Res., A566, 2006, 338  
[5] D. Cozza et al.,  Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys Res., A502, 2003,101 
[6] F. Piuz et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys Res., A433,1999, 222  
[7] D.F. Anderson et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys Res., A343, 1994, 109 
[8] T. Francke te al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys Res., A515, 2003, 292 
[9] Some evaluations of RHIC results could be find in: 
Nucl. Phys A757, 2005,1, nucl-ex/041003, nucl-ex/0410020, nucl-ex/0410022, nucl-
ex/0501009 
[10] A. Braem et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys Res., A409, 1998, 426 
[11] Z. Fraenkel et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys Res., A546, 2005, 466 
[12] F. Sauli, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys Res., A553, 2005, 18 
[13] J.M. Bidault et al., Nuclear Physics B - Proceedings Supplements, 158, 2006, 199 
[14] A. Di Mauro et al., “A new GEM-like imaging detector with electrodes coated with 
resistive layers”, available at the IEEE Conf. record web page: http://www.nss-
mic.org/2006/conferencerecord/ 
[15] I. Rodionov et al., Preprint Physics/0511212, Nov. 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
                                           Fig. 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
                                                     Fig. 2 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

Fig. 3a 

Fig. 3b 

 

 

n

i

a
g

 
l

a
r
e
v
O

1.00E+04

1.00E+03

1.00E+02

1.00E+01

1.00E+00

1.00E+06

n
i
a
g
 
a
l
r
e
v
O

1.00E+04

1.00E+03

1.00E+02

Ne

Ar

0

500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000

Overal voltage

 
             
                                                    Fig. 4a 
 
 

1.00E+05

Ne

Ar+20%CH4

Ar

Ar+10%CH4

500

1500

2500

3500

4500

Overal voltage (V)

 
                                                     Fig. 4b 
 
 

 

 

