 

 

Imaging with the invisible light 
 

R. Bellazzinia, G. Spandrea*, A. Breza, M. Minutia, L. Baldinia, L. Latronicoa,  M.M. Massaib,   N. Omodeia, 
M. Pesce-Rollinsa, C Sgròa , M. Razzanoa, M. Pincheraa, J. Bregeona, M. Kussa,   A. Breamc 
aIstituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare di Pisa, Largo B. Pontecorvo, 3 I-56127 Pisa, Italy 
bUniversity of Pisa and INFN-Pisa, Largo B. Pontecorvo, 3 I-56127 Pisa, Italy 
cCERN, CH-1211 Gene`ve 23, Switzerland 

 
 
Abstract 

1. Introduction 

We describe a UV photo-detector with single photon(electron) counting and imaging capability. It is based 
on a CsI photocathode, a GEM charge multiplier and a self triggering CMOS analog pixel chip with 105k 
pixels at 50 µm pitch. The single photoelectron produced by the absorption of  a UV photon is drifted to and 
multiplied  inside  a  single  GEM  hole.  The  coordinates  of  the  GEM  avalanche  are  reconstructed  with  high 
accuracy  (4  µm  rms)  by  the  pixel  chip.  As  a  result  the  map  of  the  GEM  holes,  arranged  on  a  triangular 
pattern at 50µm pitch, is finely imaged. 

The  idea  of  position  sensitive  gas  detectors  with  CsI  photocathodes  was  introduced  and  developed  by 
Charpak’s group [1] at the end of the 80s when the first parallel-plate chamber with a CsI photocathode was 
successfully  tested.  Soon  afterward  solid  photocathodes  were  coupled  to  wire  chambers  [2]  and,  with  the 
introduction  of  new  detector  construction  technologies  as  photo-lithography  and  advanced  PCB,  to  new 
types of charge amplification structures such as MSGC[3,4,5], MGC[6], GEM[7,8,9]. 
Since  the  beginning,  these  types  of  detectors  found  great  interest  and  widespread  applications  in  several, 
different fields, from high energy physics, to nuclear physics, astrophysics, industry, plasma diagnostic and 
medical    imaging  and  for  this  reason,  in  the  last  two  decades,  a  large  of  “gaseous  photomultipliers”  have 
been  developed  and  successfully  tested.  In  the  development  of  photon  detectors  the  main  requests  are  for 
detection efficiency, particularly to single photon, localization accuracy and time stability. The use of GEMs 
in gaseous photodetectors with CsI photocathode, has allowed, due to the shadowing effect provided by the 
GEM  itself,  to  efficiently  reduce  the  avalanche-induced  photon  and  ion  feedback  which  spoils  the 
performance and limits the gain and the lifetime of the detector.  
In this work we describe a UV photodetector based on a single GEM charge multiplier coupled to a  custom 
CMOS  VLSI  pixel  array  which  is,  at  the  same  time,  the  charge  collecting  electrode  and  the  analog,  self 
triggering, read-out electronics. The fine pitch of both the read-out system and of the amplification structure 
(50  µm)  and  the  possibility  to  work  in  single  photon  detection  allows  to  reach  avalanche  reconstruction 
accuracy of 4 µm.  

2. The UV photon detector 

Two different photocathode configurations have been studied: the so-called semitransparent mode (fig.1, left 
panel), obtained by evaporating ~100 Ǻ CsI film onto the quartz window that closes the gas volume of the 
detector and the reflective mode (fig.1, right panel) in which the UV photon converter layer (thousands Ǻ)  is 
deposited onto the top side of the GEM. With this last method the photoelectrons extracted from the CsI are 
focused, by the electric field at the top GEM surface, into the nearest GEM hole and here multiplied. The 
                                                 
 

reflective  approach  allows  the  use  of  thick  photocathodes  which  are  easier  to  handle  and  have  higher 
quantum  efficiency  (10-20%  at  150  nm)  compared  to  the  semitransparent  ones  but,  on  the  other  hand,  a 
photo-detector operating in this configuration needs a special gold pre-coating on the GEM which introduces 
a lower geometrical efficiency (~50% in our case) and a lower gas gain. 

Fig. 1 - Schematic view  of the detector in the semitransparent 
(left panel) and reflective (right panel)configuration. 

 
 
With respect to the reflective mode of operation the detector with semitransparent photocathode is simpler to 
fabricate, has a higher gas gain and geometrical efficiency but the low thickness of the CsI coating prevents 
to obtain high Q.E. Fig. 2 shows a sketch  view of the detector assembly and  the UV-lamp adapter.  

Fig. 2 – The UV photo-detector with single electron sensitivity. 

The brass frame in fig.2 houses the quartz window and defines the 1 
mm drift region. The transfer gap between the GEM bottom and the 
charge collection pads of the VLSI ASIC has also 1 mm thickness. 
This  chip  is  the  third  generation  [10,11]  of  a  series  of  custom 
CMOS  ASICs  of  increasing  complexity,  larger  size,  reduced  pitch 
and  improved  functionality  (fig.3).  In  the  top  metal  layer  of  the 
chip,  105600  hexagonal  pixels  are  arranged  at  50  µm  pitch  in  an 
300×352 squared matrix of 15×15mm2 active area (corresponding to 
a pixel density of 470/mm2). A full electronics chain (pre-amplifier, 
shaping amplifier, sample and hold, multiplexer) is integrated under 
each  pixel  in  the  remaining  metal,  polysilicon  and  oxide  layers  of 
the 0.18 µm CMOS technology. The chip integrates more than 16.5 
million  transistors  and  it  is  subdivided  in  16  identical  clusters  of 
6600 pixels (22 rows of 300 pixels) or alternatively in 8 clusters of 
13200 pixels (44 rows of 300 pixels) each one with an independent 
differential analog output buffer. 

Fig. 3 – The three CMOS VLSI chips in comparison.  
The  last  version  with  105.600  pixels  is  shown 
bonded to its ceramic package (304 pins). 
 

A  new  feature  implemented  in  the  chip  is  a    customizable  internal  self-triggering  capability  with 
independently adjustable thresholds for each cluster. Groups of 4 contiguous pixels (mini-cluster) contribute 
to a local trigger with a dedicated amplifier whose shaping time (Tshaping~1.5 µs) is roughly a factor of two 
faster than the shaping time of the analog charge signal. In self-trigger operation the read-out time and the 
amount of data to be transferred result vastly reduced (at least by a factor 100) with respect to the standard 
sequential read-out mode of the full matrix (which is still available, anyway). This is due to the relatively 
small number of pixels (400-500) within the region of interest. The main characteristics of the VLSI chip are 
summarized in Table 1.  
To exploit the high granularity of the read-out plane, a non-standard gas amplification structure (GEM) with 
a pitch of 50 µm that matches the read-out pitch has been manufactured at CERN. Optimal spatial resolution 
and  imaging  capability  have  been  obtained.  The  technological  challenge  in  the  fabrication  of  this  type  of 
GEM has been the precise and uniform etching of the very narrow biconical multiplication holes, only 33 µm 
and 15 µm diameter respectively at the top and in the middle of the kapton layer.  With this gas multiplier, 
large effective gains at voltages at least 70V less than in standard 90 µm GEM have been reached. A gas 

gain of around 1000 has been obtained in 50% Ne – 50% DME at 450V across the GEM. This is likely due 
to  the  higher  field  lines  density  inside  the  very 
narrow amplification holes. A photo of the detector 
ready to be mounted on the control mother-board is 
shown in fig. 4.  

ASIC 

 

time 

3÷10 µs 

Table 1  
Main 
characteristics: 
Peaking 
(externally adjustable) 
Full scale linear range 
Pixel noise 
Read-out mode 

Trigger mode 

Read-out clock 
Self-trigger threshold 
Frame rate 

Parallel  analog  output 
buffer 
Access to pixel counter 

and 

self-

external, 

30000 electrons 
50 electrons ENC 
asynchronous 
synchronous 
Internal, 
trigger 
Up to 10 MHz 
2200 electrons (10% FS) 
Up 
to  1  KHz 
window self trigger) 
1, 8 or 16 

(event 

Fig. 4 -  Detector and VLSI chip ready to be assembled together. 
The GEM foil glued to the bottom of the gas-tight enclosure is well 
visible. 

direct 
(single  pixel)  or 
serial  (8-16  clusters,  full 
matrix, region of interest) 
92% 

Fill  fraction  (metal  to 
active area ratio) 
Total power dissipation   ~ 0.5 Watt 

A  custom  and  very  compact  DAQ  system  to 
generate  and  handle  command  signals  to/from  the 
chip  (implemented  on  Altera  FPGA  Cyclone 
EP1C240), to read and digitally convert the analog 
data (ADS5270TI Flash ADC) and to storage them, 
temporarily, on a static RAM, has been developed. 
By using the RISC processor NIOS  II, embedded on Altera FPGA, and the self-triggering functionality of 
the chip, it is possible, immediately after the event is read-out,  to acquire the pedestals of the pixels in the 
same chip-defined  event window (region of interest). The pedestals can be read one or more times (user-
defined).  The  average  of  the  pedestal  readings  is  used  to  transfer  pedestal  subtracted  data  to  the  off-line 
analysis system. This mode of operation has the great advantage of allowing the real time control of the data 
quality  and  to  cancel  any  effect  of  time  drift  of  the pedestal  values  or  other temperature  or  environmental 
effects. The disadvantages are a slight increase of the channel noise (at maximum a factor √2, for the case of 
1 pedestal reading only) and an increase of the event read-out time. For most of the applications we envisage, 
this will not be a real problem given the very large signal to noise ratio (well above 100) and the very fast 
operation in window mode. 

Nonetheless, the acquisition of a set of pedestal values for all the 105k channels at the beginning or 
at the end of a data taking run in standard mode is still possible. The instrument control and data acquisition 
is  done  through  a  VI  graphic  interface  developed  in  LAbVIEW.  The  VI  performs  a  bidirectional 
communication through a 100Mbps TCP connection between the DAQ and a portable PC running Windows 
XP. 
Fig.5 shows a snapshot of the Control Panel of the VI. 

 
 
Fig.  5  –  Snapshot  of  the  Control  Panel  of  the  acquisition  system.  
Together  with 
(chip 
configuration,  self-trigger  enable,  on  board  pedestal  subtraction,..) the 
canvas shows the display of one event as one-dimensional  pixel charge 
distribution (ADC counts vs. pixel number in the event window)  and 
the relative 2D  image displayed in real time. 

sets  of  user-selectable  commands 

the 

 

 

3.  Laboratory tests and single photon operation 

The detector has been tested in both configurations, 
semitransparent  and  reflective;  in  particular  the  capability  to  operate  in  single  photon  detection  has  been 
studied.  

Data were acquired in self-trigger configuration and the detector was illuminated with a UV lamp operating 
in DC mode. The gas filling  utilized is a mixture of 50%  Neon - 50% DME.  
The use of a  GEM with a much finer pitch than usual (pitch and thickness have now equal size) that matches 
the  50µm  read-out  pitch,  has  allowed  not  only  to  push    forward  the  2D  reconstruction  capability  of  the 
device  but  also to  obtain  high  gas  gain  with reduced voltages  across  the  GEM. Fig.6  shows the  measured 
effective gain as a function of the GEM voltage, with the typical exponential dependence, as derived from t 
the charge distributions of fig. 7.   
 

Fig. 6 - Effective gas gain vs. the voltage across the GEM obtained in 
the semitransparent photocathode configuration. The first point is out 
of the fit because of threshold effects at low gain. 
 

Fig.  7  -  Charge  distributions  for  different  voltages  across  the  GEM.  
The  average  effective  gain  obtained  with  a  Polya  fit  to  the 
distributions is reported.  

 
 
The gain values reported in fig. 6 have been obtained by fitting (fig. 8) the corresponding distribution with a 
Polya function of the type: 
 
 
where G0 is the average effective gas gain. 

N m
(
m

G
G

G
G

m  

















G
G

m 1
−

)

Γ

P

=

m  

e

 

 

0

0

0

Fig. 8 - Typical charge distribution obtained with 
∆VGEM ~540 V  in Ne50%-DME50%. 

Fig. 9 - The dependence of the count rate with respect to the voltage 
applied to the GEM allows to estimate the detection efficiency of the 
device. 

The  detection  efficiency  of  the  device  has  been  evaluated  by  measuring  the  trigger  rate  as  a  function  of  
∆VGEM (fig. 9). From an exponential fit to the curve an efficiency of  ~82% at 560V across the GEM has been 
obtained.  

The characteristics of the detector of very low noise high gain and read-out granularity, allows to operate in 
single photon detection and, under this condition, a very high intrinsic spatial resolution has been measured.  
With the UV light intensity kept sufficiently low, the 
device can detect one photon at a time, each producing 
a single electron.   
This  electron  drifts  into  a  single  GEM  hole  where  it 
knocks  out  further  electrons  from  atoms  in  an 
avalanche  effect    The  avalanche  started  from  the 
single electron is then extracted and collected onto the 
fine-pitch pixel CMOS analogue chip  which provides 
a direct reading of the GEM charge multipliers. If the 
resolution is  good  and  the noise  is low, the  centre  of 
gravity corresponds to the centre of the GEM hole.  
A  cumulative  map  of  several  hundreds  thousands  of 
such  events  produces    a  kind  of  self-portrait  of  the 
GEM amplification structure with individual dots only 
50 µm apart (fig. 10). 
A cut through the GEM holes of the 2D image, allows 
to  estimate  the  intrinsic  resolution  of  the  read-out 
system,  in  response  to  a  single  primary  electron,  of 
only 4 µm (fig. 11).  The picture shown in fig. 10 has 
been  obtained  with 
in 
semitransparent  configuration,  but  similar,  highly 
resolved,  images  have  been  obtained  in  reflective 
mode, as shown in fig. 12 where a set of small washers and nuts, the smallest one being an hexagonal nut 
with 1 mm internal diameter, has been imaged by illuminating the detector from above with the UV lamp. 
At least three facts demonstrate that the detector can operate in single photon detection: 

Fig.  10  -  Cumulative  map  of  hundreds  thousands  events  from  the  UV 
light conversion in the semitransparent CsI photocathode of the detector 
producing  a  kind  of  self-portrait  of  the  GEM  amplification  structure. 
The  white  spots  correspond  to  the  individual  GEM  holes  at  50  µm 

the  CsI  photocathode 

• 

• 

the  shape  of 

after  a  first  strong  attenuation  of  the  light  flux 
by  filtering,  no  significant change  of the  mean 
value  and  of 
the  charge 
distribution  has  been  observed  by  reducing 
further  the  trigger  rate;  at  this  point  a  final 
reduction of the flux of more than a factor five 
has  been  performed  by  adding  UV  filters  and 
by  moving  the  UV  lamp  far  away  from  the 
entrance window. 
even at higher rate, double events, recognizable 
in the one dimensional plot of the pixel charge 
(fig.  13), 
clearly 
distinguishable;  in  the  2D  reconstruction  they 
are  in  fact  treated  as  two  single  photons.  The 
2D  cumulative  histogram  of  fig.  14  shows  the 
first  50  triggers  registered  by  the  detector.  All 
the  50  reconstructed  photoelectron  clusters  are 

are  very 

rare 

and 

Fig. 12 - 2D reconstructed image of the first 50 triggers registered  
by illuminating the detector with the UV lamp. 

• 

well separated. 
the  spots  corresponding  to  the  GEM  holes,  in  the  baricenters  distribution  of  fig.  11  are  very  well 
resolved; only the detection of a single photon cluster can lead to such a resolving power. Detecting 
two  or  more  unresolved  photons  would  make  impossible  to  associate  the  baricenter  with  a  GEM 
hole. 

4. Conclusions 

A UV photo-detector based on a semitransparent or reflective CsI photocathode, followed by a Gas Electron 
Multiplier  foil  and  a  large  area,  custom,  analog  CMOS  VLSI  ASIC  has  been  reported.  The  detector  has 
shown excellent imaging capability and single electron sensitivity. The high granularity and low noise of the 

read-out electrode allows to reconstruct with a 4 µm resolution the centroid of the single electron avalanche. 
The position resolution of the device is, at the moment, limited by the 50 µm pitch of the GEM foil. 
The  main  problem  of  such  device  is  the  control  on  the  ion  back-flow  which  can  limit  the  lifetime  of  the 
detector, but various possible solutions exist and are now under development. 
The  performance  obtained  with  this  device  allow  to  state  that  the  class  of    Gas  Pixel  Detectors  is  now  a 
mature technology with a level of integration, compactness, operational simplicity and resolving power up to 
now typical of solid state detectors only.  It is also important to remark that this kind of device is very robust 
and after several months of intensive operation, no die or single pixel has been lost for electrostatic or GEM 
discharges, or for any other reason. 
 

References 

[1] G. Charpak , V. Peskov, D. Scigocki, J. Valbis , "New scintillators for photosensitive gaseous detectors" 
Proceedings  of  Symp.  on  Particle  Identification  at  High  Luminosity  Hadron  Colliders,  eds  T.  Gourlay 
and J. Morfin, Fermilab, Batavia, IL, (1989) 295. 

[2] V. Dangendorf, A. Breskin et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A289 (1990)322.  
[3] D.F. Anderson et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A346 (1994) 102.  
[4] A. Breskin, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A345 (1994) 205. 
[5] K. Zeitelhack et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A351 (1994) 585. 
[6] F. Angelini et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A371 (1996) 358. 
[7] C. Richter, et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 478 (2002) 528.  
[8] D. Mormann, et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 471 (2001) 333. 
[9] R. Chechnik et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A502 (2003) 195. 
[10]  R. Bellazzini et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A535, Issues 1-2, (2004) 477. 
[11]  R. Bellazzini et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A566, Issues 2, (2006) 552. 
 
 
 

 

 

