Vaas, R. (2006): Dark Energy and Life's Ultimate Future. 

In: Burdyuzha, Vladimir (Ed.): The Future of Life and the Future of our Civilization. 
Springer: Dordrecht 2006, pp. 231-247.  ISBN 978-1-4020-4967-5 
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 

 
DARK ENERGY AND LIFE’S ULTIMATE FUTURE 
 

Rüdiger Vaas  
 
Center  for  Philosophy  and  Foundations  of  Science,  University  of  Gießen,  Germany

Ruediger.Vaas@t-online.de 

_____________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________ 

 
 
Abstract:  The discovery of the present accelerated expansion of space changed everything regarding 
cosmology  and  life’s  ultimate  prospects.  Both  the  optimistic  scenarios  of  an  ever  (but 
decelerated)  expanding  universe  and  of  a  collapsing  universe  seem  to  be  no  longer 
available.  The  final  future  looks  deadly  dark.  However,  the  fate  of  the  universe  and 
intelligence  depends  crucially  on  the  nature  of  the  still  mysterious  dark  energy which 
drives the accelerated expansion. Depending on its  – perhaps time-dependent – equation 
of state, there is a confusing number of different models now, popularly called Big Rip, 
Big  Whimper,  Big  Decay,  Big  Crunch,  Big  Brunch,  Big  Splat,  etc.  This  paper briefly 
reviews  possibilities  and  problems.  It  also  argues  that  even  if  our  universe  is  finally 
doomed,  perhaps  that  doesn’t  matter  ultimately  because  there  might  be  some  kind  of 
eternal recurrence. 

Key words: Cosmology,  Universe,  Dark  Energy,  Cosmological  Constant,  Quintessence,  Phantom 

Energy, Inflation, Quantum Gravity, Far Future, Life, Intelligence  

1. 

COSMIC CONSTRAINTS  

The  future  is  not  what  it  used  to  be.  There  is  a  huge  challenge  and  change  going  on  in  our 
understanding  of  the  final  fate  of  life  and  intelligence  in  our  universe.1  Even  if  all  the  very  hard 
biological,  psychological,  sociological,  and  technological  problems  could  be  solved,  which  threaten 
life on Earth and perhaps also on other planets, and even if intelligent civilizations could succeed and 
colonize  the  galaxies,  escaping  the  deaths  of  their  parent  stars  and  manage  to  use  astronomical 
quantities of matter, energy, and information, the struggle is not won. If life and intelligence are to 
have  a  long-lasting  future  which  is  really  worth  to  be  called  that  way  –  and  this  ultimately  means 
quasi-eternal existence and evolution –, it has to face the cosmological constraints.  
We  do  not  know  very  much  about  these  constraints.  But  in  the  last  few  years  everything  that  we 
thought  we  could  know  –  and  even  would  know  soon  –,  got  different.  In  1970  Allan  Sandage 
published  a  paper  called  „Cosmology:  A  Search  for  Two  Numbers“.2  And  until  the  1990’s  it  was 
thought that those two numbers would, in fact, predict the ultimate future of our universe. Since 1998 
this has changed completely. Now we know those two numbers with a remarkable precision – but they 

 

–   2   – 

c,o) – L c2/3Ho

turned out to be almost irrelevant after all concerning the very far future. Suddenly, a third quantity 
came in, which, as it seems now, rules everything.  
The  first  of  the  two  numbers  which  Sandage  and  his  colleagues  had  been  trying  to  determine  for 
several decades is the Hubble constant H0. It describes the expansion rate of our present universe. Its 
value is around 70 kilometers per second and megaparsec (a megaparsec is 3,26 million light-years). 
Ho is not a true constant, but a time-dependent variable.  
The second number is called the  deceleration parameter q0. It describes how fast H0 changes in the 
future:  qo = 1/2 (r m,o/r
2, where r m,o is the present mean density of matter (dark matter 
included), r
2/8pG is the present critical density, which makes the universe flat (or Euclidean, 
c,o = 3Ho
thus there is no global curvature), and corresponds roughly to three hydrogen atoms per cubic meter, L
 
is the cosmological constant, c is the velocity of light, and G is Newton’s gravitational constant. 
For qo < 0 the expansion gets faster (so in this case qo should more adequately called the acceleration 
parameter),  for  qo  =  0  the  expansion  rate  is  constant  (what  holds  for  an  empty  universe  – 
mathematically  simple,  but  not  very  interesting  to  us),  for  qo  =  0,5  the  expansion  will  constantly 
decelerate  and  approach  (but  never  quite  reach)  zero,  and  for  qo  >  0,5  the  expansion  will  stop  and 
reverse someday. 
The  third  mysterious  quantity,  which  got  everything  mixed  up,  refers  to  what  is  now  called  dark 
energy.  
The aim of this paper is to review the new situation and its confusing many scenarios, problems, and 
implications  for  the  ultimate  future  of  life.  The  discussion  shall  be  restricted  to  the  boundary 
conditions of fundamental physics and cosmology, and it shall survey the different possibilities only 
briefly without the physical details. Here it is assumed, at least for the sake of the argument, that  no 
entirely new physical effects will change the whole picture (and even no variations of the fundamental 
constants of nature or that the topology of our universe is compact), nor that there are some kinds of 
nonphysical entities like Cartesian souls or transcendent Gods, which are beyond the reach of (current) 
science, but might alter the course of the universe in a non-predictable way. If we lived in a spiritual 
universe, or if idealism were true and matter was just a grand illusion, physical cosmology probably 
would be of no significance. 

1.1 

Dark energy 

Different  methodological  approaches  have  recently  led  to  a  consistent  and  coherent  picture  of  the 
universe we live in3 – a picture which is sometimes called the  concordance model, because it is the 
first  world-view  without  obvious  empirical  or  theoretical  contradictions  since  the  beginning  of 
relativistic cosmology in 1917. According to this model, our universe emerged from a very hot and 
dense state, the Big Bang, 13,7  –
 0,2 billion years ago, expanded ever since and cooled down to 3 
Kelvin yet. This is the temperature of the cosmic background radiation, which is left over from the 
primordial  fireball  and  was  released  some  380000  years  after  the  Big  Bang,  when  the  atoms  were 
formed. 
Many  independent  measurements of distant supernovae, the Hubble constant, the matter distribution 
and  density,  the  large-scale  structure  of  galaxies,  quasar  spectra,  gravitational  lensing  effects,  the 
Integrated Sachs Wolf effect, and the temperature fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background 
all point to a universe which has roughly the critical energy density Ototal =  r m,o/r
c,o +  L c2/3Ho
2 = 1 
and, therefore, is almost flat or Euclidean. The big surprise was that ordinary matter (about 4,4  –
 0,4 
percent)  and  the  still  mysterious  cold  dark  matter  (23  –
  4  percent,  probably  unknown  elementary 
particles without any electromagnetic interactions) together are adding up to only about a quarter of 
the total energy density. 73 –
 4 percent is made of what is now called dark energy. So if you imagine 
the universe as a cosmic cappuccino, the coffee stands for dark energy, the milk for dark matter, both 
of which we know almost nothing about; only the powdered chocolate would be what we are familiar 
with, namely ordinary matter made of protons , neutrons, electrons et cetera. This is the ironic success 
story of modern cosmology: Now we know what we don’t know, and this is more than 95 percent of 
what the universe is made of. 

 

–   3   – 

Dark energy has negative pressure, therefore it is repulsive, thus it acts like antigravity (so, a better 
designation would be dark pressure, because it is the negative pressure which is abnormal  – and not 
the energy density which remains positive). It is also what drives the accelerated expansion of space, 
which was discovered in 1998.4 Space does not expand any slower due to the gravitational interaction 
of matter within, as it was long thought, but does expand faster! Measurements of distant supernovae 
indicate that this accelerated expansion started about five billion years ago.  
But  what  about  the  future?  What  are  the  properties  of  dark  energy,  what  physical  effects  will  they 
have, and how will they affect the fate of life in the universe?  
Whether space expands eternally (and how fast) or not depends on what is called the equation of state 
of dark energy. It is p = r w, where p stands for the pressure of the spatially homogeneous dark energy 
(and also for other, less exotic stuff), and  r
 for its energy density. Thus, the parameter w is the ratio 
between the pressure and the energy density.  
Here are some numbers (not only for dark energy candidates): 
•  w = 1/3 represents electromagnetic radiation 
•  w =  0 represents non-relativistic matter 
•  w =  1 represents relativistic matter (for example within neutron stars) 
•  w =  –1 represents the cosmological constant  L
and wrongly withdrawn some years later 

, which was introduced by Albert Einstein in 1917 

•  –1/3 > w >  –1 represents a scalar-field called kosmon or quintessence (here the value of w can 

 

change with time, for instance might decrease to almost –1 when the universe grows older) 

•  w = –2/3 represents topological defects (which would be primordial relics of the early universe, but 

probably do not exist in significant quantities within our horizon) 

•  w < –1 represents what is called phantom energy 
It  is  not  clear  yet,  whether  the  equation  of  state  (and  perhaps  its  time-derivative)  describes  the 
possibilities exhaustively and sufficiently, but at the moment these are the main alternatives. Thus, w 
can tell us something important about the nature of dark energy. And, assuming we are on the right 
track, dark energy determines the ultimate fate of the universe. So what are the options? 
Before surveying them, a cautious comment seems to be appropriate.  

1.2 

Is dark energy real? 

 + 3 p ‡

 0. – This is violated by dark energy. 

Accelerated expansion is only possible if at least one of the following assumptions is violated: 
(1) The strong energy condition: the density and isotropic part of the pressure seen by all observers on 
timelike trajectories satisfy r
(2) General Relativity as a large-scale description of our universe. – This is violated by modified theories 
of  gravity,  for  example  modified  Friedmann  equations,  string  theories  with  large  extradimensions  or 
relativistic  versions  of  MOND  (modified  Newtonian  dynamics).5  By  the  way:  Some  theories  of  dark 
energy,  some  quintessence  models  for  instance,  violate  not  only  (1)  but,  strictly  speaking,  also  (2), 
implying modified Friedmann equations or new interactions. 
isotropic  Friedmann-Robertson-Walker 
(3)  The  assumed  matter-dominated,  homogeneous  and 
cosmological  model  of  the  universe  (even  beyond  our  observational  horizon).  –  This  is  violated  if  our 
whole  observable  universe  is  an  underdense  „bubble“  within  a  denser  environment.6  This  large-scale 
inhomogeneity might be the result of very long wavelength, super-horizon perturbations generated by a 
period  of  cosmic  inflation  in  the  early  universe.  The  observed  acceleration  would  be  a  „backreaction“ 
from  these  perturbations  without  the  assumption  of  new  physics,  that  is  the  violation  of  (1)  or  (2). 
However, whether a violation of (3) alone is really sufficient to cause an accelerated expansion is still 
very controversial.7 Another possibility for a violation of (3), or at least a wrong application of it, is this: 
Our Milky Way might be located at the center of an underdense „void“ (with a radius of a few dozens or 
hundred  light-years)  in  the  large-scale  distribution  of  galaxy  clusters.  This  is  improbable,  but  it  would 
distort the measurement of Ho nearby versus far away and could mimic an accelerated expansion.8 
At present there is no convincing reason to drop dark energy, but one has to be aware of the alternatives. 
Only observations will tell which of the assumptions above is violated. 

 

2. 

–   4   – 

THE FUTURE OF LIFE AND THE UNIVERSE 

2.1 

The past future: chill or crunch 

 = 0): 

Before  dark  energy  was  discovered,  there  were  only  two  possibilities  in  relativistic   cosmology, 
depending on Sandage’s famous two numbers (and L
(1)  An  infinite  (either  globally  Euclidean  or  hyperbolic)  universe  is  spatiotemporally  open  and  will 
expand  forever,  but  with  an  increasingly  slower  rate  due  to  the  decelerating  effect  of  matter and 
energy. This scenario is called the  Big Whimper (and sometimes the Big Chill), because everything 
finally fades away. 
(2) A finite (but unlimited, that is spherically curved) universe is spatiotemporally closed and will start 
to contract after some time due to the gravitational interactions of its matter content, finally collapsing 
to a high density state called the  Big Crunch. Even if the Big Crunch were to turn into a new Big 
Bang, nothing could survive this transition.  
By the way, there is a scenario where in some sense the direction of time is switching at the maximum 
size  of  the  finite  universe  when  the  expansion  turns  into  contraction.  While  some  have  argued  that 
even the psychological and thermodynamic arrow of time would run backwards (from the perspective 
of the expanding stage), and observers would still believe to live in an expanding phase, in a quantum 
cosmological framework everything with classical properties is destroyed in the maximum stage due 
to quantum interference, and the Big Bang and Big Crunch are ultimately the same, amusingly called 
the Big Brunch.9 So in this scenario life has to cease even earlier than in the Big Crunch model, that is 
half way at the latest, so to speak. 
Both  scenarios  challenge  the  far  future  of  life  tremendously,  but  there  are  at  least  some  chances  for 
long-term survival  – provided, of course, that life can adapt itself to the changing conditions. It must 
learn  to  use  the  decreasing  amount  of  energy  and,  perhaps,  must  even  rebuild  its  own  physical 
architecture (for example if protons were unstable and would decay). But if life is ultimately based on 
information-processing devices (that is on structure and organization, not substance), it might act like a 
software  running  on  different  kinds  of  hardware.  And  for  this,  many  speculative  options  are 
conceivable. As John Desmond Bernal wrote already in 1929: „Finally, consciousness itself may end or 
vanish in a humanity that has become completely etheralized, losing the close-knit organism, becoming 
masses of atoms in space communicating by radiation, and ultimately perhaps resolving itself entirely 
into light. That may be an end or a beginning, but from here it is out of sight.“ 
Frank  Tipler10  has  argued  that  an  advanced  civilization  can,  in  principle,  colonize  a closed universe 
entirely and should be able to manipulate its collapse to gain enough energy to live forever  – forever 
with  respect  to  subjective  time  (based  on  General  Relativity’s  time  dilatation)  which  is  not  to  be 
confused with the finite objective time span such a contracting universe has. 
Freeman Dyson11 argued that in an open, eternally expanding universe with a decelerating expansion 
rate, life could also go on forever. „The pulse of life will beat more slowly as the temperature falls but 
will never stop“.12  Given  longer  and  longer  phases  of  hibernation,  life-bearing devices could perform 
infinitely many calculations with a finite amount of energy. For a society of the size and complexity of 
our present civilization, for instance, 6 . 1030 Joule would suffice – the amount of energy radiated away 
by our sun within just eight hours. It is controversial however, whether such a kind of existence is really 
eternal. First, because deleting old information to acquire new information costs energy, so perhaps only 
a finite number of thoughts could be instantiated. Second, it is unclear whether life is ultimately digital 
or analogous, that is, based on continuous processes. Only in the latter case a finite amount of energy is 
really sufficient and alarm clocks for hibernation wake up calls would not necessarily break. Lawrence 
Krauss and Glenn D. Starkman criticized Dyson’s assumptions and believe that even in a decelerated 
eternal expansion of the universe life is ultimately doomed.13 John Barrow and Sigbjørn Hervik argued, 
however, that arbitrarily weak anisotropies of the universe suffice to harness the temperature gradients 
created  by  gravitational  tidal  energy,  and  this  should  be  enough  to  drive  an  information-processing 
machine arbitrarily long.14 

 

–   5   – 

Now with dark energy, the situation is not only more complicated, but also more desperate for the far 
future of life. But this depends crucially on the nature of dark energy which is not known yet.15 Thus, 
many different alternatives have to be considered.  

2.2 

Resurrection and the accelerated future  

) »

The Big Whimper scenario is the most conservative or simple one. It is implied by the existence of a 
positive cosmological constant L
 in the framework of relativistic cosmology. Here, the expansion goes 
on forever, and the expansion rate is approaching a final value H8 = v (L
/3) = Ho v (1 – Om) with O m = 
r m,o/r
c,o. Because of quantum effects at the horizon (analogous to Hawking radiation at the horizons of 
black holes) the universe cannot cool down to 0 Kelvin but reaches within a few hundred billion years a 
final temperature T of T = 1/2pv (3/L
 10-29 Kelvin (corresponding to 10-33 electron volts). This is the 
end for any living system because then it cannot radiate away waste heat – and there is no life without 
an energy gradient.13  
The chances are better for some  quintessence  models. Here, things get very complicated for there are 
many different models. In most of them the accelerated expansion also lasts forever, but is slower than 
in the case of a cosmological constant. Depending on the models, perhaps the energy gradient remains.16 
Or the quintessence field decays, which might lead eventually to a decelerated eternal expansion17 and a 
matter-dominated  universe18  or  even  to  a  revitalized  universe  if  new  matter  is  created  out  of  the 
decaying field, and the origin and evolution of life would start again.19 Or w could oscillate, causing 
alternating  periods  of  accelerated  and  decelerated  expansion.20  Furthermore,  it  is  not  known  whether 
quintessence is exactly homogeneous and whether it couples only gravitationally or in some other weak 
form, for example with neutrinos. Because the density of the dark energy ~ (10-3 electron volts)4 is in the 
order of the neutrino mass, it was argued that both are connected.21 These ideas are mere speculations at 
the moment, but not ruled out yet. 
So it seems to be very unlikely that a civilization can survive forever. In the end it will run out of 
energy.  But  this  is  a  statistical  argument,  since  it  is  based  on  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics. 
Entropy can decrease due to thermal fluctuations , and it is in principle possible that such fluctuations 
can sustain a civilization for an arbitrarily long time. The probability that a civilization will survive for 
some time is a sharply decreasing function of that time. However, for any finite time the probability is 
finite, and thus many civilizations in our universe will live longer than any given time, if the universe 
is large enough to allow those improbable events to occur. Of course, there is almost no chance that 
our successors are going to be among the lucky civilizations whose life will be prolonged by thermal 
fluctuations in such a lottery universe. 
Furthermore,  in  an  infinite  future  time  might  not  be  a  problem.  Eventually,  anything  could 
spontaneously  pop  into  existence  due  to  quantum  fluctuations.  They  would  mostly  result  in 
meaningless  garbage,  but  a  vanishingly  small  proportion  shall  be  people,  planets  and  parades  of 
galaxies.  This  paper  will  reappear  again,  too.  And  such  kinds  of  quantum  resurrection  might  even 
spark a new Big Bang. According to Sean Carroll and Jennifer Chen one must be patient, however, 
and wait some 101056
 years (if de Sitter vacuum is the „natural ground state“).22 

2.3 

Big Splat and cosmic collapse 

Despite the accelerated expansion today, the Big Crunch scenario is als o not entirely refuted. However, 
as far as the latest measurements of w can tell, we are safe from the collapse for at least another 25 
billion years – almost twice the age of our universe today. 23 
Within the framework of string cosmology, there is even a quite robust class of models, which describe 
our universe as a four-dimensional brane within a five-dimensional spacetime in which other 4D-branes 
might exist  –  literally  parallel  universes.  And  one  of  them  might  collide  with  our  universe,  perhaps 
countle ssly  often.  Imagine  two  hands  clapping  repeatedly  together.  From  the  perspective  within  our 
universe every collision, sometimes called a Big Splat, looks like a Big Crunch and acts like a new Big 
Bang:  The  extradimension  temporarily  vanishes,  and  after  the  other  brane-universe  retreats,  the 
expansion starts again and lasts for trillions of years. Note, that the branes are and remain infinite, only 

 

–   6   – 

the inherent curvature looks like a collapse everywhere. One appeal of this Cyclic Universe24 scenario is 
that it can explain the whole evolution by the action of dark energy. This is derived from string theory, 
that is it is the manifestation of a field called dilaton with has to do with the size of the extradimension.  
Whether a civilization could survive the Big Splat and spread again in the new expansion phase is not 
known. It seems to be unlikely, but perhaps advanced technology could create some kind of sheltering 
castles, for example with the help of black holes, to prevent the full brane collision locally. One could 
also envison a computer made of light, which would store all of our memories and information, might 
transmit it through the Big Splat, and recover it in the new expanding epoch of the universe. Whether 
this cyclic universe scenario or others are really future-enernal remains an open issue. 
There are other possibilities for a Big Crunch, too.  
Either dark energy leads to the contraction of our universe within a few dozens of billions of years only 
– a surprising possibility at least in the framework of supergravity and string theory. 25  
Or something like quintessence masks a negative cosmological constant today, which will dominate the 
far future if the accelerating cause vanishes. A negative cosmological constant leads inevitably  – and 
independent of whether the universe is closed or not – to a collapse.  
Or  the  current  positive  cosmological  constant  fluctuates  due  to  quantum  effects  and,  ultimately  and 
irreversibly, turns negative. It was argued that this necessarily happens under quite weak condit ions.26 
This would lead to a collapse of the universe within some trillions of years.  
Whether a collapsing universe ruled by dark energy allows life to continue forever, as Frank Tipler has 
imagined10,  is  unclear.  If  dark  energy  is  a  homogeneous  property  of spacetime geometry, it probably 
cannot be changed and accumulated somewhere like matter. But the manipulation of anisotropies are a 
necessary condition for a Tiplerian eschatology. 

2.4 

Big Rip and phantom energy 

Dark energy offers a third option beyond the Big Whimper and Big Crunch scenarios if w < –1. Then the 
universe is ruled by what is called  phantom energy.27 It tears space literally apart and leads irrevocably 
to a complete disruption of everything, even atomic nuclei. This  Big Rip could happen already soon in 
cosmological terms, that is in the order of tenths of billions of years. There is no mechanism by which life 
could stop such a process, so it seems to be doomed in this case. (By the way, there is even the possibility 
that some kind of matter ends in a Big Rip and some other kind does not28, and there are also models 
without dark energy, but with some modifications of General Relativity containing the possibility for a 
Big Rip  – or for a „Bigger Rip“ due to an even more divergent scale factor within the next few billion 
years.29 On the other hand, not all phantom energy scenarios end in a Big Rip singularity.30) 
One the other hand, phantom energy could be the solution for a problem of some oscillating universe 
scenarios with repeated Big Bang/Big Crunch cycles: Black holes might survive the crunch and grow in 
each cycle until they swallow the whole universe. But according to one model, phantom energy even 
tears  black  holes  apart,  effectively  making  them  boil  away.31  In  a  string-theory-inspired  braneworld 
model phantom energy disturbs fields in the fifth dimension outside our universe. Those fields might 
turn the parameter w of dark energy around, stop the Big Rip and let the universe recollapse. Although 
nothing  would  survive  the  Big  Rip,  new  structures  might  form  during  the  collapse.  In  addition,  the 
higher dimensional fields would let the contraction bounce back to become the expansion of a new Big 
Bang.  

2.5 

A preposterous universe 

So  what  is  the  ultimate  future?  At  the  moment  we  cannot  say.  Further  measurements  have  to 
determine w and its time derivative as precise as possible. As it seems currently, w is close to –1 (that 
is  –0,8  >  w  >  –1,2,  observationally  speaking)  and  constant  over  time,  which  is  consistent  with  a 
positive cosmological constant.23 However, if w  »
 –1, then we have an empirical limit we probably 
never  can  go  beyond.  This  is  a  simple  implication  of  the  uncertainty  and  intrinsic  error  of  every 
measurement. Thus, we can never empirically proof that w = –1, only that the error bars are very small 
around that value. Therefore, strictly speaking, the cosmological constant could only be established by 

 

–   7   – 

 could even fluctuate nevertheless). The same is 

other means, that is theory (and, as it was noted26, L
true for other limiting cases, for instance the widely hold flat or Euclidean universe with Ototal = 1.  
Even worse, we simply do not understand why the energy density of dark energy is about 0,7 today. 
From  calculations  in  quantum  physics  it  should  be  1050  to  10120  times  higher,  which  is  comple tely 
unrealistic  and  the  biggest  discrepancy  between  theoretical  prediction  and  observation  ever  in  the 
history of physics. Also we do not understand why the dark energy density has roughly the same order 
as the matter density today – is this just pure chance or are there deeper connections?  
So there is some kind of paradoxical situation: On the one hand we are in a golden age of cosmology, 
measuring the fundamental cosmological parameters with higher and higher precision – and on the other 
hand  we  do  understand  much  less  than  expected.  We  seem  to  live  in  a  „preposterous  universe“,  as 
Michael Turner has said.   

2.6 

Big Decay or Big Hit  

There is another depressing possibility which might even threaten us right now:  
The Big Decay: The vacuum state in which we live in, that is our universe is in, might not be stable, but 
metastable.32 Then it would be a kind of false vacuum like the one that, according to the inflationary 
scenario, might have driven the very early universe to an exponential (superluminal!) expansion until its 
field,  the  inflaton,  had  decayed  (which  might  have  released  all  the  energy  that  turned  into  matter). 
Whether  or  not  that  epoch  of  inflation  happened,  and  whether  it  is  or  is  not  related  to  the  current 
accelerated  (but  much  slower)  expansion,  for  example  as  a  kind  of  left-over,  it  is  possible  and  even 
plausible that our universe has not reached its ground state (the „true vacuum“). But if the vacuum is 
metastable, it can and ultimately will decay. This could happen spontaneously, as a kind of quantum 
tunnel effect, or even by accident, for example due to an high-energy experiment of a very advanced 
civilization. From such a phase transition a wave of destruction would spread with nearly the velocity of 
light in every direction. It cannot be seen, and it almost instantly wipes out everything it hits without a 
warning.  Similar  effects  would  occur  if  there  are  very  tiny  extradimensions,  as  string  theory  claims, 
which  are  compactified,  that  is  curled  up,  but  could  unfurl  or  decompactify.  Even  if  only  one  tiny 
extradimension  gets  large,  the  whole  universe  would  be  burned  to  death.  Perhaps  new  forms  of  life 
would  arise  out  of  the  ashes,  so  to  speak,  but  because  the  constants  of  nature  would  have  changed, 
nothing could be like anything we know. 
Not yet excluded but very improbable is the „rather unpleasant possibility“ (Alexei Starobinsky) of a 
Big Hit: that our future world line will cross a space-time singularity, for example a gravitational shock 
wave  with  an  infinite  amplitude,  or  that  it  hits  a  finite-time  singularity  or  a  space-like  curvature 
singularity which might form as a result of sudden growth of anisotropy and inhomogeneity at some 
moment during expansion or due to quantum gravitational effects.33 (The Big Rip can be interpreted as a 
future singularity, too.)  

2.7 

Wormhole escapism and designer universes 

All the scenarios reviewed here look more or less disappointing. If our universe is ultimately doomed, or 
at  least  the  sufficient  conditions  for  any  possible  information  processing  system  disappear, the only 
chance for life would be to leave its universe and move to another place. There are bold speculations 
about  traversable  wormholes  leading  to  other  universes.34  This  seems  to  be  possible  at  least  in  the 
framework of General Relativity (but like dark energy it violates some fundamental energy conditions). 
Perhaps wormholes could be found in nature and modified, or they could be built from scratch. If so, 
life  could  switch  to  another  universe,  escaping  the  death  of  its  home.  And  if  there  is  no  life-friendly 
universe with the right conditions (physical constants and laws), an advanced civilization might even 
create  a  sort  of  replacement  or  rescue  universe  on  its  own.  In  fact,  some  renowned  physicists  have 
speculated about such a kind of world-making.35 If such a switching of universes is possible, life might 
continue endlessly.  
But  even  if  our  universe  and  every  living  being  in  it  would  be  finally  doomed,  perhaps  that  doesn’t 
matter  ultimately.  Because  there  could  be  infinitely  many  other  universes  and/or  our  universe  might 

 

–   8   – 

recycle   itself  due  to  new  inflationary  phase  transitions  out  of  black  holes36  or  out  of  its  high  energy 
vacuum state, that is it creates new expanding bubbles growing to new universes elsewhere and cut their 
cords, metaphorically speaking.37 

2.8 

Eternal recurrence 

Something strange is inevitable, if two conditions are true: Firstly, if our universe is infinite, or if there 
are infinitely many other universes with the same laws and constants. And, secondly, if quantum theory 
holds and there is, therefore, a finite number of possible states (that is due to Heisenberg’s uncertainty 
relation  there  is  no  continuum  of  states  and  perhaps  not  even  of  space  and  time).  If  those  two 
assumptions  are  valid,  then  according  to  Alexander  Vilenkin  every  combination  of  discrete  finite 
physical states are realized arbitrarily or infinitely often.38 (Imagine a lattice built randomly out of zeros 
and ones: Every finite combination of zeros and ones, that is every local pattern occurs infinitely often.) 
Thus, there is a kind of spatial eternal recurrence.  
This also implies that we would have perfect copies:  Doppelgänger which are identical to us as far as 
quantum physics allows, and also Doppelgänger biographies, Doppelgänger earths, solar systems, Milky 
Ways  and  even  Hubble  volumes.  Their  distances  are  vast,  but  not  infinite,  and  they  could  even  be 
estimated, as Max Tegmark has shown: Our personal neighboring Doppelgänger should be 101029
 meter 
apart, and another Doppelgänger Hubble volume, that is a region of  space exactly like our observable 
universe, 1010115
 meter.39 This means spatial eternal recurrence, but it could extend in time, which seems 
to be true either in a future-eternal inflationary or cyclic scenario with a flat universe. Thus, even if the 
history of our universe (and/or every universe) might lead to a global death, everything and every life-
form might reappear over and over again, infinitely often both in space and time. Then, it is true that 
there is no personal eternal life, because every organism is doomed, but life as such could not be driven 
out of existence completely everywhere and everywhen. It would be truly eternal.  
On the other hand, eternal recurrence seems to be absurd. And it is not only exact duplication  – it is 
also every possible alternative, because all variations are equally real. As Alexander Vilenkin has said, 
some people „will be pleased to know that there are infinitely many […] regions where Al Gore is 
President and – yes – Elvis is still alive“. Thus, physical potentiality and actuality would ultimately be 
the same. If so, the search for options and the struggle for life doesn’t matter globally. Everything that 
might happen will happen at one place or another – in fact, it will happen infinitely often. This might 
be disappointing or encouraging. Perhaps this is only a matter of personal taste. However, it seems 
very strange and for many people even insulting, that we are not unique, and that everything we try 
might succeed here but not elsewhere and vice versa – infinitely often. However, as Steven Weinberg 
reminded us, „our mistake is not that we take our theories too seriously, but that we do not take them 
seriously enough“.40 

2.9 

Conclusion 

In conclusion, we can safely say that the future is not, what it used to be. There is  a diverse range of 
alternative cosmological scenarios (both for the future and for the past41), some of which look really 
eery. It is premature, however, to announce the ultimate and unavoidable end of everything in the very 
far future. But undoubtly huge  challenges are imminent. As Niels Bohr once joked, it is difficult to 
make predictions, especially about the future. But it would be of no surprise, if big surprises out there 
are still waiting for us to be discovered. Perhaps the universe, as John Burdon Sanderson Haldane once 
said, is „not only queerer than we imagined, it’s queerer than we can imagine“. 
 

 

–   9   – 

Acknowledgments  

It  is  a  pleasure  to  thank  Hans-Joachim  Blome,  Rob  Caldwell,  Freeman  Dyson,  Gia  Dvali,  Katherine  Freese, 
Gerson  Goldhaber,  Alan  Guth,  Renata  Kallosh,  Claus  Kiefer,  Robert  Kirshner,  Lawrence  Krauss,  John  Leslie, 
Andrei  Linde,  Mario  Livio,  Saul  Perlmutter,  Wolfgang  Priester,  Adam  Riess,  Antonio  Riotto,  Subir  Sarkar, 
Larry  Schulman,  Lee  Smolin,  Glenn  Starkman,  Paul  Steinhardt,  Michael  Turner,  Neil  Turok,  Carsten  Van  der 
Bruck, Alex Vilenkin, Christof Wetterich, and H. Dieter Zeh for comments and discussion, André Spiegel for his 
kind support, and Vladimir Burdyuzha as well as Claudius Gros for the invitation to  „The Future of Life and the 
Future  of  Our  Civilization“  symposium  at  the  Johann  Wolfgang  Goethe  University  in  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
Germany, where an earlier version of this paper was presented on May, 5th 2005. 

REFERENCES 

1. F. C. Adams, G. Laughlin, A dying universe,  Rev. Mod. Phys. 69: 337–372 (1997); astro-ph/9701131. – F. C. 
Adams,  G.  Laughlin,  The  Five  Ages  of  the  Universe  (Free  Press,  New  York,  1999).  –  M.  M.  Cirkovic,  A 
Resource Letter on Physical Eschatology, Am. J. Physics 71: 122– 133 (2003); astro-ph/0211413. – P. Davies, 
The  Last  Three  Minutes  (New  York,  Basic  Books,  1994).  –  G.  F.  R.  Ellis  (ed.),  The  Far-Future  Universe 
(Templeton Press, Radnor, 2002).  – J. N. Islam,  The  Ultimate  Fate  of  the  Universe  (Cambridge  University 
Press, Cambridge, 1983).  –  A.  Loeb,  The  Long-Term Future  of Extragalactic Astronomy.  Phys.  Rev.  D65: 
047301  (2002);  astro-ph/0107568.  –  N.  Prantzos,  Our  Cosmic  Future  (Cambridge  University  Press, 
Cambridge, 2000 [1998]).  – R. Vaas, Die fernste Zukunft, in: U. Anton:  Die Lebensboten (Heyne, München, 
2004),  255–320. – R. Vaas, Die ferne Zukunft des Lebens im All, in: S. Mamczak, W. Jeschke (eds.): Das 
Science Fiction Jahr 2004 (Heyne, München, 2004), 512– 594. – R. Vaas, Ein Universum nach Maß?, in: J. 
Hübner,  I.-O.  Stamatescu,  D.  Weber  (eds.):  Theologie  und  Kosmologie  (Mohr  Siebeck,  Tübingen,  2004), 
375–498. 

2. A. Sandage, Cosmology: A Search for Two Numbers, Phys. Today 23: 34–41 (1970). 
3.  D.  N.  Spergel  et  al.,  First  Year  Wilkinson  Microwave  Anisotropy  Probe  (WMAP)  Observations: 

Determination of Cosmological Parameters, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 148: 175-194 (2003). 

4. S. Perlmutter et al., Measurements of Omega and Lambda from 42 High-Redshift Supernovae, Astrophys. J. 
517: 565–586 (1999); astro-ph/9812133. – A. G. Riess et al., Observational Evidence from Supernovae for 
an  Accelerating  Universe  and  a  Cosmological  Constant,  Astron.  J.  116:  1009–1038  (1998);  astro-
ph/9805201. – S. Perlmutter, Supernovae, Dark Energy, and the Accelerating Universe,  Phys.  Today 4: 53–
60 (2003).  

5. P. D. Mannheim, Alternatives to Dark Matter and Dark Energy; astro-ph/0505266. – S. M. Carroll et al., Is 
Cosmic Speed-Up Due to New Gravitational Physics?, Phys. Rev. D70: 043528 (2004); astro-ph/0306438. 
6. E. W. Kolb, S. Matarrese, A. Riotto, On cosmic acceleration without dark energy; astro-ph/0506534. –  E. W. 
Kolb  et  al.,  Primordial  inflation  explains  why  the  universe  is  accelerating  today;  hep-th/0503117.  –  E. 
Barausse,  S.  Matarrese,  A.  Riotto,  The  Effect  of  Inhomogeneities  on  the  Luminosity  Distance-Redshift 
Relation:  Is  Dark  Energy  Necessary  in  a  Perturbed  Universe?,  Phys.  Rev.  D71:  063537  (2005);  astro-
ph/0501152.  –  J.  W.  Moffat,  Late-time  Inhomogeneity  and  Acceleration  Without  Dark  Energy;  astro-
ph/0505326. – D. L. Wiltshire, Viable inhomogeneous model universe without dark energy from primordial 
inflation; gr-qc/0503099. 

7.  C.  M.  Hirata,  U.  Seljak,  Can  superhorizon  cosmological  perturbations  explain  the  acceleration  of  the 
universe?;  astro-ph/0503582.  –  E.  R.  Siegel,  J.  N.  Fry,  Effects  of  Inhomogeneities  on  Cosmic  Expansion; 
astro-ph/0504421. –  E. E. Flanagan, Can superhorizon perturbations drive the acceleration of the Universe?, 
Phys. Rev. D71: 103521 (2005); hep-th/0503202. 

8. K. Tomita: A Local Void and the Accelerating Universe,  Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 326: 287–292 (2001); 
astro-ph/0011484.  –  A.  Blanchard  et  al.,  An  alternative  to  the  cosmological  ,concordance  model’,  Astron. 
Astrophys. 412: 35–44 (2003); astro-ph/0304237.  

9. C. Kiefer, H. D. Zeh, Arrow of time in a recollapsing quantum universe, Phys. Rev. D51: 4145– 4153 (1995). 
10. F. J. Tipler, The Physics of Immortality (Anchor Books, New York, 1994). 
11. F. J. Dyson, Time without end, Rev. Mod. Phys. 51: 447– 460 (1979). 
12. F. J. Dyson, Infinite in all directions (Penguin, London, 1990 [1985]), 111. 
13.  L.  M.  Krauss,  G.  D.  Starkman,  Life,  The  Universe,  and  Nothing,  Astrophys.  J.  531:  22–30  (2000);  astro-

14. J. D. Barrow, S. Hervik, Indefinite Information Processing in Ever-expanding Universes, Phys. Lett. B566: 

ph/9902189 

1–7 (2003); gr-qc/0302076. 

 

–   10   – 

15.  P.  J.  E.  Peebles,  B.  Ratra,  The  Cosmological  Constant  and  Dark  Energy,  Rev.  Mod.  Phys.  75:  559– 606 
(2003);  astro-ph/0207347.  –    R.  P.  Kirshner,  Throwing  Light  on  Dark  Energy.  Science  300:  1914–1918 
(2003).  –  J.  C.  N.  de  Araujo,  The  dark  energy-dominated Universe,  Astropart.  Phys.  23:  279– 286  (2005); 
astro-ph/0503099. 

16.  K.  Freese,  Cardassian  Expansion:  Dark  Energy  Density  from  Modified  Friedmann  Equations.  New Astron. 

Rev. 49: 103–109 (2005); astro-ph/0501675. 

17.  U.  Alam,  V.  Sahni,  A.  A.  Starobinsky,  Can  dark  energy  be  decaying?,  JCAP  0304:  002  (2003);  astro-

18. J. Barrow, R. Bean, J. Magueijo, Can the Universe escape eternal acceleration?,  Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 

ph/0302302. 

316: L41– L44 (2000); astro-ph/0004321. 

19. J. P. Ostriker, P. Steinhardt, The Quintessential Universe, Sci. Am. 284 (1), 47–53 (2001). 
20.  S.  Dodelson,  M.  Kaplinghat,  E.  Stewart,  Solving  the  Coincidence  Problem:  Tracking  Oscillating  Energy, 
Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  85:  5276– 5279  (2000);  astro-ph/0002360.  –  K.  Griest,  Toward  a  Possible  Solution  to  the 
Cosmic Coincidence Problem, Phys. Rev. D66: 123501 (2002); astro-ph/0202052. 

21. R. D. Peccei, Neutrino Models of Dark Energy; hep-ph/0411137. 
22. S. M. Carroll, J. Chen, Spontaneous Inflation and the Origin of the Arrow of Time; hep-th/0410270. 
23. A.  G.  Riess  et  al.,  Type  Ia  Supernova  Discoveries  at  z>1  From  the  Hubble  Space  Telescope:  Evidence  for 
Past  Deceleration  and  Constraints  on  Dark  Energy  Evolution,  Astrophys.  J.  607:  665– 687  (2004);  astro-
ph/0402512. 

24.  P.  J.  Steinhardt,  N.  Turok,  Cosmic  Evolution  in  a  Cyclic Universe,  Phys.  Rev.  D65:  126003  (2002);  hep-
th/0111098. – P. J. Steinhardt, N. Turok: The Cyclic Model Simplified,  New Astron. Rev. 49: 43–57 (2005); 
astro-ph/0404480. 

25. R. Kallosh, A. Linde, Dark Energy and the Fate of the Universe,  JCAP 0302: 002 (2003); astro-ph/0301087. 
– R. Kallosh et al., Observational Bounds on Cosmic Doomsday, JCAP 0310: 015 (2003); astro-ph/0307185. 
26.  J.  Garriga,  A.  Vilenkin,  Testable  anthropic  predictions  for  dark  energy,  Phys.  Rev.  D67:  043503  (2003); 

astro-ph/0210358. 

27.  R.  R.  Caldwell,  M.  Kamionkowski,  N.  N.  Weinberg,  Phantom  Energy  and  Cosmic  Doomsday,  Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 91: 071301 (2003); astro-ph/0302506. 

28. M. Gasperini, Towards a future singularity?, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D13: 2267– 2274 (2004); gr-qc/0405083. 
29. P. H. Frampton, T. Takahashi, Bigger Rip with No Dark Energy, Astropart. Phys. 22: 307–312 (2004); astro-

30.  P.  Wu,  H.  Yu,  Avoidance  of  Big  Rip  In  Phantom  Cosmology  by  Gravitational  Back  Reaction;  astro-
ph/0407424; – R. Curbelo, T. Gonzalez, I. Quiros, Interacting Phantom Energy and Avoidance of the Big Rip 
Singularity; astro-ph/0502141. 

31.  M.  G.  Brown,  K.  Freese,  W.  H.  Kinney,  The  Phantom  Bounce:  A  New  Oscillating  Cosmology;  astro-

ph/0405333. 

ph/0405353. 

32. J. Leslie, The End of the World (Routledge, London and New York, 1998 [1996]), 108–122. 
33. A. Starobinsky, Future and Origin of our Universe: Modern View, in: V. Burdyuzha, G. Khozin (eds),  The 
Future of the Universe and the Future of Our Civilization (World Scientific, Singapore etc., 2000), 71– 84; 
astro-ph/9912054. – J. D. Barrow, C. G. Tsagas, New Isotropic and Anisotropic Sudden Singularities, Class. 
Quant. Grav. 22: 1563– 1571 (2005); gr-qc/0411045. 

34. M. Visser,  Lorentzian Wormholes (American Institute of Physics Press, Woodbury, 1996).  – R.  Vaas, Tunnel 

durch Raum und Zeit (Franckh-Kosmos, Stuttgart, 2005). 

35. E. Farhi, A. H. Guth, An obstacle to creating a universe in the laboratory,  Phys. Lett. B183: 149–155 (1987). 
–  V.  P.  Frolov,  M.  A.  Markov,  M.  A.  Mukhanov,  Through  a  black  hole  into  a  new  universe?,  Phys.  Lett. 
B216: 272–276  (1989). – A. Linde, Hard Art of the Universe Creation,  Nucl. Phys. B372: 421–442 (1992); 
hep-th/9110037. –  E. R. Harrison, The natural selection of universes containing intelligent life, Quart. J. R. 
astr. Soc. 36: 193– 203 (1995). 

36. L. Smolin, Did the universe evolve?  Class. Quant. Grav. 9: 173–191 (1992). – R.  Vaas, Is there a Darwinian 

Evolution of the Cosmos?; gr-qc/0205119. 

37. K. M. Lee, E. J. Weinberg, Decay Of The True Vacuum In Curved Space-Time, Phys. Rev. D36: 1088–1094 
(1987). – J. Garriga, A. Vilenkin, Recycling universe, Phys. Rev. D57: 2230–2244 (1998); astro-ph/9707292. 
38. J. Garriga, A. Vilenkin, Many worlds in one,  Phys. Rev. D64: 043511 (2001); gr-qc/0102010. – J. Knobe, K. 

D. Olum, A. Vilenkin, Philosophical Implications of Inflationary Cosmology; physics/0302071. 

39. M. Tegmark, Parallel Universes, in: J. Barrow, P. C. W. Davies, C. L. Harper jr. (eds.): Science and Ultimate 

Reality (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004), 459– 491; astro-ph/0302131. 

40. S. Weinberg, The First Three Minutes (Basic Books, New York, 1977), 131. 
41. R. Vaas, Time before Time; physics/0408111. 

