Testing the distance-dependence of the van der Waals interaction  
between an atom and a surface  
through spectroscopy in a vapour nanocell 

 

A. Laliotis, I. Maurin, P. Todorov, I. Hamdi, G. Dutier, A. Yarovitski,  
S. Saltiel, M.-P. Gorza, M. Fichet, M. Ducloy and D. Bloch 
 

Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers, UMR7538 du CNRS et de l'Université Paris13,  
99 Avenue Jean-Baptiste Clément, 93430 Villetaneuse, France 
 

ABSTRACT  

 
This paper presents our current measurements in a vapor nanocell aiming at a test of the distance-dependence of the 
atom-surface interaction, when simple asymptotic descriptions may turn to be not valid. A state-of-the-art of atom-
surface interaction measurements is provided as an introduction, along with the comparison with  the theory of the 
van der Waals (or Casimir-Polder) interaction; it is followed by a presentation of the most salient features of nanocell 
spectroscopy. 
 
Keywords : atom-surface, reflection spectroscopy, van der Waals, nanocell, fundamental test, Casimir-Polder, Dicke 
narrowing 
 
 
1. From van der Waals to Casimir interaction and the state-of-the-art in the measurements 
 
The interaction between neutral bodies can be seen as the universal attraction at the scale of atomic, molecular and 
solid-state physics. It is indeed at the origin of covalent interaction, and other type of “van der Waals” crystals. If 
interaction between “particles” was recognized by van der Waals (1873) to be a major cause for gases not to follow 
the equation of state of an ideal gas, the effective origin of these interactions were identified in the 1930 with the 
works of London and Lennard-Jones and coined as “van der Waals” (hereafter vW) type (for references, see [1,2]). It 
is  indeed  the  instantaneous  correlation  between  (quantum)  fluctuations  of  particles  that  is  responsible  for  their 
attraction.  For  an  atom  in  front  of  a  reflecting  surface,  the  concept  of  electrostatic  image  implies  that  an  electric 
image of each of the elementary charges in the atomic system atom is created. Although the atom is neutral, and even 
without a permanent dipole, the atom is attracted by its image through the non-zero dipole–dipole attraction resulting 
from its quantum dipole fluctuations. These fluctuations have to be developed over the (virtual) dipole transitions. 
Naturally, the idea of an “instantaneous” correlation of fluctuation is not acceptable in regards to light propagation, in 
particular when the distance of separation is non negligible relatively to the wavelength of the considered transition. 
As early as 1948, the Casimir-Polder work [3], triggered by the “mundane” problem of interaction between colloids, 
has shown that retardation effect should be considered when the atom-surface distance is non negligible relatively to 
the wavelength of the virtual transitions responsible for the quantum dipole fluctuations. In particular, the predicted 
1/z3  potential  (z:  the  atom-surface  distance)  should  be  replaced  by  an  interaction  decaying  even  faster  with  the 
distance,  up  to  a  long  range  regime  in  1/z4  .  In  the  same  year,  Casimir  discovered  as  a  consequence  of  Quantum 
Electrodynamics  that  two  reflecting  surfaces  should  attract  each  other,  with  a  1/d4  dependent    pressure  (d  :  the 
distance between the two surfaces) [4]. 
 
Although a very tiny effect in most cases, the Casimir interaction (for reviews, see [5]) has been the topic of some 
experiments in the 50's, that were merely able to evidence an attraction compatible with the prediction. In the same 
time,  an  alternative  theoretical  approach  was  developed  by  Lifchitz  based  upon  thermodynamics  arguments  [6]. 
Some experiments on the vW interaction (see [2] and references therein) between two plates should also be included 
in these early attempts to measure the Casimir interaction. Only recently the Casimir interaction has become a hot 
spot of fundamental physics, following the experimental advances of Lamoreaux in 1997 [7] - with a torsion balance- 
and of Mohideen et al. [8] with an atomic force microscope (since 1999), and the claim of very high accuracy ( ~ 
1%) and of a succesful comparison between the experiment and the theory. In these experiments, the measurement 
includes  a  demonstration  of  the  distance  dependence  on  a  0.6µm-6µm  range  in  the  Lamoreaux  experiment,  in  the 
100-900  nm  range for  the  Mohideen work,  a  range  that  has  been now pushed down  to  62 nm.  These  experiments 
have stimulated refinements in the theoretical description (QED at non zero temperature, corrections for non ideal 

C
3
3
z
1
12

 

reflectivity,  ...  influence  of  the  exact  shape  of  the  surface,  ...  ).  It  is  now  recognized  that  the  evaluation  of  the 
cosmological constant may depend on the exactness of the QED predictions among which the Casimir interaction is a 
major  test.  Also,  the  measurement  of  a  possible  deviation  to  the  Newtonian  gravitation  ("fifth  force")  with  an 
additional  short  distance  gravity  can  be  attempted  only  if  the  unavoidable  Casimir  interaction  is  rightly  taken  into 
account  [5].  Apart  from  this  fundamental  interest,  the  Casimir  interaction  being  responsible  for  a  pressure 
comparable to the atmospheric pressure for d~10 nm, is also nowadays considered as a limitation, or a possible tool, 
for the development of nano-actuators (NEMS).  
 
Measurements of the atom-surface interaction had remained scarce for a long time owing to the extreme weakness of 
the  force.  If  the  vW  interaction  for  an  atom-atom  potential  can  be  of  the  order  of  a  few  tenths  of  eV,  and  can  be 
estimated,  but  with  a  limited  accuracy,  as  the  asymptotic  tail  of  an  interatomic  potential  for  distances  exceeding 
several atomic units, the current distance of observation for atom-surface interaction is considerably larger, leading to 
extremely tiny effects. Remarkably, the vW interaction is supposed to span over ~10 orders of magnitude in energy 
on a distance scale that approximately covers the 1nm-1 µm distance. The first observations were conducted in the 
Columbia  group  in  the  late  60's  [9].  They  demonstrated  a  deflection  of  an  atomic  (and  molecular)  beam  by  a 
cylinder, and an effective impact parameter covering a range ~50-100 nm (a too strong attraction makes the atoms 
caught by the surface, a too weak one is undetectable). A deflection compatible with a z-3 law could be found, that 
looked  to  be  relatively  more  satisfying  than  a  z-2  law  or  a  z-4  law.  About  20  years  later,  a  second  generation  of 
experiments [10] was conducted by the Yale group based upon the measurement of the transmission rate of a beam 
of Rydberg atoms through a system of two metal-coated plates. These experiments allowed a precise observation of 
the  distance-dependence  in  the  500-3000  nm  range  -  distance  between  plates-,  and  also  evidenced  the  predicted 
dependence  of  the  vW  interaction  with  the  level  of  atomic  excitation.  Indeed,  one  expects  for  a  state  i>  a  vW 

interaction governed by a potential: VvW(i>)= 

−

, with the C3 coefficient depending on the quantum fluctuations 

of the atom dipole : 

C

3

=

atom, one has 

2

i

D

i

≠

0

2

i

2
zDD
+

1
16
, in spite of the absence of a permanent dipole (< iD i>=0) : the dipole fluctuations, of 

 if the atom is isotropic]. A notable point is that for an 

=C
3

[or 

D

i

i

i

2

quantum origin, corresponds to a summing over all virtual dipole transitions 

2

i

D

i

∑=
i

i

D

j

2

, which are much 

stronger in the far IR, as found for the couplings relevant for a Rydberg level, than for a ground state or a low excited 
level. In these experiments on Rydberg levels, that combine a mechanical detection with a spectroscopic excitation, 
energy shifts up to 500 MHz were obtained. A derived set-up was used to obtain the first evidence of the retarded 
Casimir-Polder regime [11], that can be seen only for ground state atoms, because excited atoms tend to undergo a 
real  -  and  not  virtual-  emission  process:  indeed,  excited  states  radiate  according  to  the  far  field  regime  of  an 
oscillating dipole, and largely exceeds the retarded vW attraction. 
 
Contemporarily  to  the  Yale's  group  experiments,  our  Paris13  group  entered  into  the  field  of  measurement  of  vW 
atom-surface interaction [12,13],  through a spectroscopic technique (for a review, see [1]) of selective reflection in a 
vapor that typically probes the vapor on a depth ~λ/2π (~ 100 nm) from the surface. Two peculiar features should be 
mentioned  for  these  types  of  experiments:  (i)  spectroscopy  is  intrinsically  sensitive  to  the  energy  of  a  transition 
between atomic levels, so that what is measured is the difference between the vW interaction for an excited level, and 
the vW level of another level (ground state for a one-photon experiment, another excited level on more complex set-
up); (ii) as a major difference with mechanical detection, spectroscopy allows to study the vW interaction undergone 
by short-lived atoms, instead of being intrinsically limited to ground states, or long-lived Rydberg levels. Naturally, 
reflection  spectroscopy  at  an  interface  requires  transparent  surfaces,  so  that  dielectric  materials  are  investigated. 
Among the variety of results [1] that we have demonstrated on the basis of this selective reflection technique, one 
should  mention  as  far  as  the  atom-surface  interaction  is  concerned:  (i)  the  observation  of  weak  and  strong  vW 
regimes  [13]  that  bring  respectively  either  a  perturbation  (shift  and  distortion)  to  the  lineshape  expected  in  the 
absence  of  the  vW  interaction,  or  a  severe  change  in  the  lineshapes,  and  (ii)  the  influence  of  the  nature  of  the 
dielectric surface, with the possibility to resonantly enhance the vW attraction, or to turn it into a vW repulsion when 
the surface mode structure coincides with a virtual atomic emission [14]. As will be reported in the next sections, we 
have essentially upgraded our selective reflection spectroscopic technique, providing a fixed spatial resolution, to a 
technique of spectroscopy in a vapor nanocell, allowing us to study the spatial dependence of the vW interaction in a 
sub-100 nm range.  
 
To  complete  this  description  of  the  state-of-the  art,  it  is  needed  to  mention  the  recent  blossom  of  experimental 
techniques  for  the  measurement  of  the  vW  attraction,  that  has  notably  been  triggered  by  the  importance  of  the 

problem  of  surface  interaction  for  the  storage  and  manipulation  of  cold  atoms,  and  by  development  in  atom 
interferometry as well. Cold atom techniques have been used to measure the vW interaction through a combination 
with an applied repulsive potential [15]. Very recently, the repulsion from a strong magnetic field allowed a test of 
the  distance  dependence  in  the  20-100  nm  range  (for  Cs  ground  state  [16]),  and  showed  a  C3  value  remaining 
constant  within  15-20%.  Interestingly,  this  verification  of  a  C3  value  remaining  constant  with  the  atom-surface 
distance seems to disagree with refined theoretical predictions [17], because at the shorter distances, the transitions 
from the atomic core, often negligible due to the severe retardation effects owing to their short wavelengths, cannot 
be ignored. In the other measurements based upon a cold atom technology, it is rather the long distance range that is 
conveniently probed, as can be inferred from the comparison between the thermal energy kBT and the vW potential 
VvW = -C3z-3  .  Indeed,  for  a  ground  state  atom,  the  vW  interaction  exceeds  the  thermal  energy  only  for  z < 1nm  at 
room  temperature,  but  for  z ~ 100  nm  one  has  already  an  interaction  potential  ~300  µK,  corresponding  to  a 
temperature much hotter than the one commonly attained with cold atoms. This long-distance probing is a favorable 
situation  for  the  observation  of  the  Casimir-Polder  regime,  probably  observed  in  [15],  and  that  influences  the 
quantum  reflection  of  very  cold  atoms  [18].  A  record  long  distance  -6µm-  has  now  been  attained  in  a  BEC-type 
experiment  [19].  This  paves  the  way  to  observation  of  temperature  effects,  and  enables  to  rule  out  some  coupling 
strength for an hypothetical non-Newtonian gravity whose range would span over the micronic range. In addition to 
these  long-distance  measurements  enabled  with  cold  atoms,  experiments  connected  to  atom  interferometery  [20] 
enable the exploration of the interaction at a very short distances (~5 nm), in a manner that globally integrates the 
spatial variation of the vW potential, not allowing to resolve details concerning its shape or spatial dependence. 
 
2.  Spectroscopy  in  micro-  and  nano-cells  of  resonant  vapor  :  from  sub-Doppler  spectroscopy  to 
atom-surface interaction  
 
Selective reflection spectroscopy under near normal incidence has been known from early times [21] to lead to sub-
Doppler resonances, recognized to originate in the transient interaction regime undergone by those atoms leaving the 
surface.  Indeed,  in  selective  reflection,  only  the  atoms  of  a  slice  of  vapor  of  a  thickness  λ/2π  emit  backward 
coherently,  so  that  under  normal  incidence,  only  slow  atoms  (insensitive  to  the  Doppler  shift)  reach  an  efficient 
steady-state of interaction in the ascribed length. This sub-Doppler nature of selective reflection spectroscopy, that 
helps to make this technique sensitive to the atom-surface interaction [1] - because the response of atoms spending a 
long  time  in  a  region  of  strong  atom-surface  interaction  is  enhanced-  has  inspired  us  to  look  for  an  equivalent 
signature in the transmission regime [22,23], expected to be independent of the cell length – as opposed to regular 
volume absorption. Our earliest experimental attempts were conducted on 10-1000 µm thin vapor cells [24, 25], in 
order to maximize the ratio between the region sensitive to atoms departing from the surface, and the isotropic "bulk" 
of the vapor. The pressure of the (dilute) vapor was kept low enough so that most atomic trajectories are wall-to-wall, 
with the light beam diameter largely exceeding the cell thickness. This offers the key condition of an atomic free path 
that  becomes  anisotropic.  With  such  microcells,  we  observed  indeed  a  sub-Doppler  signal  (whose  contrast  is 
enhanced with a frequency derivation technique, as provided by demodulating an applied FM), yielding an original 
sub-Doppler  method  with  a  single  beam,  that  originated  in  a  velocity-selective  non  linear  effect  (enhanced optical 
pumping  for  slow  atoms).  Such  a  sub-Doppler  spectroscopic  technique  had  been  independently  predicted  by 
Izmailov [26]. Soon after, in an effort to keep incident intensities well below the (quite low) intensities required for 
optical pumping, we obtained in a linear regime a different sub-Doppler signature [27], purely relying on a two-level 
model (with no need of considering an "open" two-level model, i.e. a model where at least a third level influences the 
atomic  lifetime).  Several  differences  can  be  pointed  out  with  the  sub-Doppler  regime  of  optical  pumping  :  in 
particular, the sub-Doppler signature, even in FM technique, is reduced if the cell length exceeds the mean distance 
needed for a thermal atom to reach the steady state. Also, because 2-level absorption is a coherent process, the sub-
Doppler spectral properties, initially calculated in [23] for a situation limited to a thickness between λ/2 and λ, can be 
shown to depend interferometrically on the cell length, in a way consistent with the predictions by Romer and Dicke 
[28], established 50 years ago for microwave experiments : for a λ/2 thick cell, the transient response of all velocity 
groups  interfere  constructively  at  line  center,  yielding  a  narrow  signal,  while  for  a  λ-thick  cell,  the  successive 
absorption and gain corresponding to a full Rabi oscillation would lead to a null signal in the absence of absorption 
relaxation. This is why successive revivals – with a λ periodicity- of these spectroscopic features is predicted [25,27]. 
If some interesting features for sub-Doppler spectroscopy could be revealed with experiments in a 10 µm-thick cell, 
such a cell was nevertheless not convenient to observe the vW atom-surface interaction. 
 
As  will  be  established  in  the  next  section, the  production  of  sub-micrometric  thin  vapor  cells  by  the  D.  Sarkisyan 
group [29] has been the key to apply realistically spectroscopy in a thin cell to the monitoring of the atom-surface 
interaction.  A  remarkable  point  with  these  cells,  that  are  described  in  more  detail  in  the  presentation  given  by  D. 
Sarkisyan [30], is that after evacuation (before proceeding to the filling with a metallic vapor), and in spite of their 

construction  with  two  thick  and  well-polished  windows  separated  by  a  spacer  of  a  constant  thickness,  the  cell 
undergoes local deformations of the windows, leading to a variable local thickness of the thin cell, usually spanning 
from a few 10's of nm to one or a few microns [31]. This provides a key ingredient, when using a focused beam, to 
study  the  thickness  dependence  of  the  spectrum  and  ultimately  to  monitor  the  distance  dependence  of  the  vW 
interaction. Practically, it is indeed sufficient to simply translate the cell, that is truly a "nanocell" in some regions. 
Before being able to perform an evaluation of the atom-surface potential, it has been needed to demonstrate a full 
understanding of the spectroscopy in these sub-micrometric cells. A notable point is that, because, the two windows 
of a nanocell are intrinsically extremely parallel – in spite of the minute deformation after evacuation- a nanocell is a 
genuine  Fabry-Perot  cavity  [32],  although of  a  low finesse  :  on  the one  hand,  this provides  a  very suitable  tool  to 
measure  the  local  cell  thickness  with  an  interferometric  accuracy  [31];  on  the  other  hand;  all  nanocell  spectra  are 
unavoidably the result of a mixing [32] between absorption-like transmission, and reflection (which would be a pure 
dispersive  signal  only  for  an  infinite  cell  length  (see  appendix  of  ref.  13).  Our  initial  studies  have  enabled  the 
observation of the Dicke revival as predicted in [25,27] with the corresponding lineshapes both in transmission and 
reflection  detection.  The  easiest  interpretations  are  naturally  obtained  in  non  saturating  conditions,  that  are  more 
convenient  to  reach  than  in  longer  cells  (even  micro-cells):  indeed  the  interaction  time  is  very  limited,  and  the 
smaller interaction region is usually compensated by a stronger atomic density, implying an increase in the saturation 
intensity because of collision broadening. Note that a fluorescence detection can be used in nanocell spectroscopy, as 
it eventually provides narrower linewidths than transmission/reflection spectra [29,33]. However, fluorescence is an 
incoherent second-order process:  apart from being insensitive to the periodical coherent Dicke narrowing [33], this 
makes  fluorescence  spectra  intrinsically  much  more  delicate  to  interpret  when  the  evaluation  of  the  atom-surface 
interaction is at stake.  
 
3. The monitoring of atom-surface interaction in nanocells 
 
The general theory of spectroscopy in a thin cell or a nanocell [32] resembles by many aspects the theory of selective 
reflection spectroscopy in the presence of a potential, as developed in [34]. There are additional spectroscopic effects 
due  to  the  finite  length  of  the  cell  (i.e.  integrations  are  performed  within  finite  limits,  and  not  within  infinite 
boundaries [22]), and eventually the Fabry-Perot mixing of transmission and reflection. Moreover, a dual detection 
of reflection and transmission is possible. The basic ingredients of the theory include :  
  (i)  evaluation  of  the  atomic  response  at  a  given  point,  as  resulting  from  the  integration  of  the  transient  response 
from  the  departing  wall  to  the  actual  position.  This  response,  that  would  be  elementary  to  calculate  -  and  time 
integrate-  in  the  absence  of  a  vW  potential,  depends  on  the  interaction  potential  (for  a  2  wall-interaction).  An 
interesting variety of situations has to be considered if the dispersive nature of the surface response is included, that 
implies a lot of complexity to describe the shape of the interacting potential [35, 36]. In a pure electrostatic approach, 
that  neglects  the  dispersive  properties  of  the  surface,  the  potential  should  include  the  equivalent  of  multiple 
electrostatic images, and the interacting potential is then described with a Lerch function. Although not rigorous, an 
elementary model simply adding the elementary vW contribution of each wall (i.e. V(z)= -C3[(1/z)3 + [(1/d-z)3], with 
d the cell thickness) can be most often sufficient, as the difference with the exact Lerch potential does not exceed 
5 % when dispersive properties are neglected. 
   (ii)  spatial  integration  all  over  the  cell  of  the  instantaneous  response  of  an  atom  at  a  given  position;  for  the 
reflective  contribution,  or  in  some  terms  of  the  transmission  response  when  a  Fabry-Perot-like  response  has  to  be 
considered, this integration has to includes an  exp(2ikz) phase factor (with k the wave vector). 
   (iii) a velocity integration, over the (usually) thermal distribution of atoms. Instead of a family of curves depending 
on  a  unique  parameter  that  describes  in  dimensionless  units  all  the  features  of  vW,  as  was  obtained  for  selective 
reflection  spectroscopy  (at  least  in  the  approximation  of  the  infinite  Doppler  width),  one  predicts  for  thin  cell 
spectroscopy independent sets of spectral lineshapes when varying the cell thickness,  or the vW strength, or also the 
velocity  distribution  (in  a  regime  of  small  thickness,  the vW  interaction is  not negligible  relatively  to  the  Doppler 
broadening, and the "infinite Doppler width" cannot hold). 
 
 Figure  1  illustrates  some  predicted  lineshapes,  when  the  strength  of  the  van  der  Waals  is  varied  for  a  given 
thickness,  and  when  the  cell  thickness  varies  for  a  given  vW  coefficient.  The  potential  is  an  approximate  Lerch 
function, but  similar  results would  actually  be  obtained  for  the  elementary  summing of  two  single-wall  potentials. 
Experimentally, we have already mentioned in [36] that by using the above described modeling of the transmission 
lineshapes  in  a  nano-cell,  we  observe  on  the  Cs  D1  resonance  line  (λ=894  nm)  some  deviations  relatively  to  the 
lineshape predicted in the absence of an atom-surface interaction for a 225 nm (λ/4)-thick cell. Also, in even earlier 
experiments  [37],  we  had  shown  through  a  stepwise  two-photon  excitation  that  allows  to  reach  the  high-lying  6D 
level  of  Cs,  that  considerable  shifts  and  broadenings  could  be  observed  in  extremely  thin  regions.  We  had  even 
attempted  to  verify a   z-3  dependence through  the position of the  transmission  peak.  However, these  preliminary  

 
 
 

 

0

(a) 

(a) 

 

0

 

C3 = 28 kHz.µm3 
 C
=15kHz.µm
3
C3 = 14 kHz.µm3 
 C
=7.5kHz.µm
3
C3 = 0 
=0
 C
3
C3 = - 14 kHz.µm3 
 C
=-7.5kHz.µm
3

5GHz

5GHz

(b) 

(b) 

 L=50nm 
L = 50 nm 
L = 65 nm 
 L=65nm 
L = 80 nm 
 L=80nm 
L = 130 nm 
 L=130nm

0

(ω−ω
0

) GHz

0

(ω−ω
0

)

Figure 1 : Theoretical transmission lineshapes for a Doppler width ku = 250 MHz : 
 (a) for a 80 nm thickness and various C3 values,  (b) for C3 = 14 kHz.µm3 and indicated thicknesses.  

 
 
 
experiments  were not  conducted in a systematic way: the pressure  effects were not controlled, and there was at that 
time  no  lineshape  analysis.  Indeed,  the  major  goal  was  an  attempt  to  check  for  resonant  2-wall  atom-surface 
coupling, as our observation of a vW repulsion had been performed on Cs(6D3/2) in front of a sapphire surface [14].  
 
Here our report is on a systematic series of experiments [38] performed on the Cs(6P3/2)-Cs(6D5/2) transition (λ= 917 
nm), as reached after a pumping step (λpump= 852 nm) to the resonant Cs(6P3/2) level. Such an experimental choice 
has two important conveniences : on the one hand, the detection sensitivity approaches the quantum noise sensitivity 
in a modulated pump-probe scheme, as the detection is not performed at a null frequency (when all low-frequency 
noises are present), but at the frequency of the modulation applied to the pump (50 kHz in our case) : the sensitivity 
issue is obviously an important one when the measurements of interest should deal with the minimal atomic density; 
on the other hand, the vW interaction is predicted to be larger by about an order of magnitude for Cs(6D) than for 
Cs(6P), so that larger interactions should be observed if there is a minimal nanocell thickness that can be technically 
reached.  The  principle  of  the  experiment,  schematized  in  figure  2,  is  very  simple.  One  monitors,  through  lock-in 
detectors,  the changes in the transmission  (T) and reflection (R) signals in the nanocell when the pump beam  
 
 

Nanocell
Nanocell

Transmission
Transmission

Reflection
Reflection

Probe 
Probe 
(917 nm)
(917 nm)

AM
AM

Pump
Pump
(852 nm)
(852 nm)

Figure 2 : principal scheme of the experimental set-up 

 
is  on.  The  incident  pump  and  probes  are  focused  (diameter~100  µm).  The  pump  and  probe  beam  are  nearly 
counterpropagating  (to  avoid  unwanted  pump  scattering  light)  and  sent  at  normal  incidence  on  the  nanocell.  The 
local  nanocell  thickness  is  measured  through  the  reflection  coefficient  of  the  pump  beam  (once  detuned  off-
resonance) and of an auxiliary He-Ne beam : in the range of very small thickness ( <150 nm) that we consider, a dual 
wavelength measurement is sufficient to provide unambiguously a reliable thickness measurement. Moreover, being 
interested in the smaller thickness, we explore a region of the cell that is intrinsically flat, and the accuracy in the 
thickness measurement, currently ~ 5 nm, can occasionnally reach a 1-2 nm level. An auxiliary reference set-up of 
volume saturation spectroscopy is implemented on the 917nm line (with prior 852 nm pumping), while the 852 nm 
frequency itself is kept fixed on one hyperfine component of a Doppler-free saturated absorption line. 
 
 
 
 

 

 

0

0

0

0

ω

ω

5G H z

5G H Z

Reflection 

Transmission 

Figure 3 : Transmission and reflection spectra recorded in a 50 nm nanocell, with a 
discreetly tunable laser 917 nm laser. The full lines are a theoretical fitting. The vertical 
dashed line is  a frequency reference as determined by an auxiliary saturated absorption 
(volume) reference  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  typical  experimental  result  is  shown  in  figure  3  for  a  thickness  50  nm,  with  a  simultaneous  recording  of 
transmission (T) and reflection (R) spectra. The spectra are quite broad (the Doppler width is only ~250 MHz) and 
strongly red-shifted relatively to the volume reference. The influence of the pressure on these features reveals to be 
quite weak (e.g. spectra recorded with a higher Cs pressure remain unchanged). Such spectra can be fitted with one 
set (T and R) of the calculated lineshapes for d=50 nm. In the fitting adjustment, only adjustable amplitudes have 
been used (one parameter for T, one for R) . In the velocity integration, the resonant Cs(6P3/2) level has been assumed 
to be pumped in a thermal manner. Even if such an assumption may be problematic, the influence of this velocity 
distribution on the global spectrum remains quite weak - in particular, the choice of a smaller Doppler width, that 
would correspond to a more efficient pumping of the slow atoms, provides very similar results-. A notable result is 
hence that T and R lineshapes can be fitted simultaneously with the same C3 parameter. In this regime in which the 
vW interaction dominates over the pressure or Doppler broadening, it is easily seen (see e.g. fig . 1) that any attempt 
to fit a given lineshape with notably different C3 values will lead to a differing frequency shift at the peak, and to 
different lineshapes. It is only for marginal changes of C3 around an acceptable value that a least square fitting is a 
help to determine the C3 value with an increased accuracy.  
 
To study systematically the distance dependence of the C3 value, shown above to be measurable with our technique, 
we had studied various Cs densities (pressure)  conditions for each considered cell  thickness. As shown in  figure 4,  

 (kHz µm 3)

C

3

20

10

0

  160°C
  180°C
  200°C
  220°C
  240°C
  260°C

40

60

80

100

120

140

d (nm)

 
 

Figure 4 : optimal fittings C3 values for various thicknesses,  
and in differing pressure conditions 

 
 
we obtain constant C3 values independent of the pressure, except for the larger thickness, when the vW interaction 
can turn out to be smaller than the pressure broadening – for high Cs densities, or temperature, as an increase of 20°C 
is roughly a doubling in Cs density- Also, for the larger thickness, the unresolved hyperfine structure of the pumped 
state  Cs  (6P3/2)  - 350  or 450  MHz depending  on  the  ground  state  hyperfine  component  -  makes  more  difficult  the 
frequency referencing to the volume resonance. This constant value of the estimated C3 vW interaction constant is 
illustrated  in  the  spectra  of  figure  5,  when  the  conditions  for  Cs  vapor  are  identical,  and  when  a  single  set  of 
parameter for C3 and for the transition width is considered. Only the amplitudes are adjustable by an arbitrary factor, 
because the density of active Cs – in the resonant 6P3/2 level - is expected to change with the thickness, owing to the 
limited  time  available  for  the  excitation.  Also,  for  a  given  thickness,  slight    disagreements  between  the  relative 
amplitudes  for R and T can be simply due to the (local) scattering properties of the surfaces, which makes the non 
resonant reflection and transmission factor apparently disagree with the Fresnel formulae. 

S 
R

S 
T

4 0  n  m

5  0  n  m

6  5  n  m

8  0  n  m

1  0  0  n  m

1  3  0  n  m

1  0  G  H  z

 

Figure 5 : Reflection and Transmission 917nm spectra recorded  in a Cs nanocell heated-up at 
200°C for different local thickness. The dotted lines are a fitting obtained with a single C3 
 
value 14 kHz.µm3, and a single width for the optical transition 300 MHz. The vertical dashed 
line is a reference frequency for the volume transition 

 
 
Before  comparing  the  experimental  findings  and  the  predictions,  it  is  worth  discussing  the  reproducibility  of  the 
results presented here. The surface that we probe is typically a spot ~(100µm)² size, as a result of the laser focusing. 
Although  this  is  a  small  size  relatively  to  most  comparable  studies,  this  remains  very  large  in  comparison  to  the 
atom-surface  distance.  The  defects  in  planarity,  roughness,  or  parallelism  of  the  surfaces,  naturally  affect  the 
measurement of the distance-dependence that we are interested in. Moreover, it is known that various stray fields can 
severely affect the measurement of atom-surface interaction, notably for a dielectric surface. Indeed, local domains 
generate residual fields. This is why we have repeated each measurement performed on a spot of a given "nominal" 
(average)  thickness  (as  determined  by  our  2-wavelength  interferometric  measurement)  by  measurements  on  other 
spots of a similar nominal thickness, either through a systematic density analysis, or at least in the most significant 
conditions (i.e. low density). We have found that for all experiments for d ≥ 65 nm or above, the spectra are identical 
within our accuracy. For d = 50 nm, some variations are observed from spot to spot, although some spots are able to 
provide identical spectra. These spectra only are retained, because any broadening or shift induced by a residual field 
would  be  strongly  specific  of  the  considered  spot,  not  being  susceptible  to  produce  the  same  spectrum  as  another 
spot. For d = 40 nm, the vW shift is so considerable that minor changes (e.g. in the distribution of the local thickness 

over the spot size) can induce visible changes on the lineshape. However, the analysis of the lineshapes reveal that 
these  minute  changes have  a  negligible  influence  on  the parameters  that  can  be  estimated  in  the  fitting  procedure. 
This  reproducibility  may  appear  unexpectedly  good  relatively  to  what  can  be  inferred  from  other  experimental 
results. Among the favorable points in our experiments, is the fact that the vW energy is pretty strong, owing to the 
investigated range of small distances, and to the relatively low excitation of the Cs (6D) (notably in comparison with  
experiments on Rydberg levels that are very sensitive to residual Stark shifts) 
 
4. Discussion and prospects  
 
Our experiments evidence the possibility to fit the lineshapes for the Cs(6P3/2)-Cs(6D5/2) transition with lineshapes 
governed by a C3 value ~ 14 (±3) kHz/µm3 for a cell thickness comprised between 40 nm and 130 nm, and hence for 
a maximal atom-surface distance ranging from 20 nm to 65 nm. This corresponds to a surface-induced shift obeying 
a  1/z3  law  for  an  energy  range  spanning  from  ~200  MHz  to  6  GHz,  i.e.  a  factor  ~30.  Higher  energies  have  been 
demonstrated to be observable [36,37], although not fully analyzed, and hence perhaps not to be attributed entirely to 
the  surface  interaction.  Nevertheless,  these  experiments  represent  a  bridge  between  the  asymptotic  limit  of  long 
distance  Casimir-polder  measurements,  and  the  tail  of  a  chemical  potential.  It  shows  also  that  in  spite  of  a  strong 
interacting  potential,  the  atomic  structure  is  still  recognizable  in  spite  of  important  shifts  and  broadening. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  clear  that  in  the  explored  range,  with  the  observation  of  record  energy  shifts  exceeding  several 
GHz, mechanical effect should have considerable effects for the slowest atoms. 
 
 In  addition  to  the  experimental  findings,  the  comparison  with  the  theoretical  prediction,  detailed  in  [38],  is 
remarkably good. The theoretical predictions is indeed evaluated to ~15 kHz./µm3 [– i.e. 17 kHz./µm3 for Cs(6D), 
and  2  kHz./µm3  for  Cs(6P)],  once  taken  into  account  the  dielectric  coefficient,  and  a  summing  over  the  virtual 
transitions,  assumed  to  be  isotropically  pumped.  There  are  anyhow  various  pitfalls  susceptible  to  affect  the 
theoretical  predictions:  the  modeling  assumes  the  population  to  be  thermal  and  spatially  homogeneous,  while  it  is 
here  provided  through  a  pumping  step  in  a  confined  environment.  The  modeling  also  assumes  an  isotropic 
preparation of substates, allowing all orientations of the fluctuating atomic dipole to contribute [35]. The interaction 
between  the  highly-excited  Cs  atom,  and  the  YAG  windows,  may  include  some  resonant  contributions,  hard  to 
determine in view of various uncertainties concerning the detailed spectrum of YAG surface resonances [39]. 
 

Preliminary experiments on the Cs D1 resonance  line ( 894 nm) are now in progress. Their interpretation, 
and the possible comparison with theory, should be easier than for an interaction mostly affecting a highly-excited 
state. However, the additional  difficulties are  that shorter distances are needed to reach a comparable strength of the 
vW  interaction.  Also,  the  sensitivity  is affected  by  the fact  there  is  no possibility  to  modulate  an  external  (pump) 
beam, so that the detection has to be operated with all the amplitude noise of the source in the low-frequency range. 
Preliminary measurements enable us to record reproducible spectra down to a 30 nm thickness - i.e. all atoms are at 
less than 15 nm from the wall- but the observed vW shift seems larger (by a factor up to 2) than expected.  

 
Our  measurements clearly show that reaching an effective atom-surface distance below 10 nm is a realistic 
objective. This contrasts with the measurements based upon the reflection of slow atoms [15,16] when the minimal 
distance of approach of the observed atomic trajectories is limited by the considerable force needed to compensate 
for the vW attraction. In the range of small distances that we explore here, we have evidenced an interaction energy 
largely  exceeding  the  ones  obtained  for  all  previous  investigations  (up  to  ~5  GHz,  or  0.25K).  The  corresponding 
acceleration is considerable (~ 8.107 g  for a Cs(6D) atom 20 nm away from one of the wall), notably with respect to 
the one obtained in laser cooling techniques. Extrapolating to even smaller distance, one may even wonder if some 
kind  of    "atmospheric"  gradient  of  density  could  not  be  found  for  an  atomic  gas  in  the  extreme  vicinity  with  a 
surface.  The  specificity  of  a  spectroscopic  measurement  implies  that  we  are  essentially  sensitive  to  a  difference 
between  the  interaction  undergone  by  the  different  states:  on  the  one  hand,  this  may  make  our  measurements 
insensitive to an hypothetical non Newtonian gravity, on the other hand, this allows a simpler test of the validity of 
the van der Waals interaction at small distances, nearly-free of the influence of core transitions, as they are expected 
to  be  nearly  independent  of    the  excitation  degree  of    the  peripheral  electron  [1].  At  last,  our  measurements  on 
excited states could be pushed up to the situation of resonantly coupled excited states, with atoms confined between 
two walls by a repulsive potential [36].  
 
Acknowledgments 
 
Work supported by the European Union through the  research training network FASTnet (contract HPRN-CT-2002-
00304), and by the French-Bulgarian  programme of  co-operation (RILA 09813UK) 

 

 

REFERENCES 

1. D. Bloch and M. Ducloy "Atom-wall interaction", Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 50 pp. 91-154 (B. Bederson and H. 
Walther eds., Elsevier-Academic Press, 2005). 
2. J.N. Israelachvili and D.Tabor, Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 331, 19-38 (1972) and references therein 
3. H. B. G. Casimir and D. Polder. Phys. Rev., 73, 360 (1948) 
4. H. B. G. Casimir, Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad. Wetenshap 60, 793 (1948) 
5.  M.  Bordag,  U.  Mohideen  and  V.  Mostepanenko,  Phys.  Rep.  353,  1  (2001);    A.  Lambrecht  and  S.  Reynaud,  in 
Poincaré seminar 2002, Vacuum energy, (B.V. Rivasseau ed., Birkhauser,) p.109 (2003); K.A. Milton, J. Phys. A, 
37, R209 (2004). 
6. E. M. Lifshitz. Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 29,94, 1956. [Soviet Phys. JETP 2, 3,(1956)] 
7. S. K. Lamoreaux,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 5 (1997); e : 81, 5475 (1998) 
8. U. Mohideen and A. Roy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4549  (1998); see also F. Chen, G. L. Klimchitskaya, U. Mohideen 
and V. M. Mostepanenko, Phys. Rev. A 69, 022117 (2004) 
9. D. Raskin and P. Kusch,  Phys. Rev. 179, 712 (1969; A.  Shih and V.A.  Parsegian  Phys. Rev. A 12, 835 (1975). 
10. V. Sandoghdar, C. I. Sukenik, E. A. Hinds, and S. Haroche V., Phys. Rev . Lett. 68 3432 (1992); V. Sandoghdar, 
C. I. Sukenik, S. Haroche, and E. A. Hinds, Phys. Rev. A 53, 1919 (1996). 
11. C. I. Sukenik, M. G. Boshier, D. Cho, V. Sandoghdar, and E. A. Hinds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 560 (1993) 
12. M. Oriá,  M. Chevrollier, D. Bloch, M. Fichet and M. Ducloy, Europhys. Lett. 14, 527 (1991) 
13. M. Chevrollier M. Fichet, M. Oriá, G. Rahmat, D. Bloch and M. Ducloy,  J. Phys. II (France) 2, 631(1992) 
14. H. Failache, S. Saltiel, M. Fichet, D. Bloch and M. Ducloy, Phys. Rev. Lett.  83, 5467 (1999);  Eur. Phys. J. D, 
23, 237 (2003).  
15. A. Landragin, J.-Y. Courtois, G. Labeyrie, N. Vansteenkiste, C.I. Westbrook and A. Aspect,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 
1464  (1996).   
16. A. K. Mohapatra and C. S. Unnikrishnan, Europhys. Lett., 73, 839 (2006) 
17. A. O. Caride,  G. L. Klimchitskaya, V. M. Mostepanenko and S. I. Zanette, Phys. Rev. A 71, 042901 (2005). 
18. F. Shimizu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 987 (2001) 
19. D. M. Harber, J. M. Obrecht, J. M. McGuirk and E. A. Cornell, Phys. Rev. A 72, 033610 (2005) 
20. R.E. Grisenti, W. Schöllkopf, J.P. Toennies,  G.C. Hegerfeldt and T.  Köhler, Phys. Rev. Lett.  83, 1755 (1999) 
M. Boustimi, B. Viaris de Lesegno, J. Baudn,  J. Robert and M. Ducloy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 86, 2766 (2001).  
21. M.F.H. Schuurmans, J. Phys.(Paris) 37, 469 (1976), see also J.-L. Cojan, Ann. Phys. (Paris) 9, 385 (1954). 
22. T. A. Vartanyan and D. L. Lin, Phys. Rev. A 51, 1959–1964 (1995) 
23.  B. Zambon and G. Nienhuis, Opt. Commun. 143, 308 (1997). 
24. S. Briaudeau, D. Bloch and M. Ducloy M., Europhys. Lett. 35, 337 (1996); Phys. Rev. A 59, 3723 (1999). 
25. S. Briaudeau,  PhD thesis,  Université Paris 13 (1998) (unpublished). 
26. A. Ch. Izmailov, Laser Phys., 2, 762 (1992); 3, 507(1993); Opt. Spectrosc., 74, 25 (1993); 75, 395 (1994). 
27. S. Briaudeau, S. Saltiel, G. Nienhuis, D. Bloch, and M. Ducloy, Phys. Rev. A 57, R3169 (1998). 
28. R. H. Romer and R. H. Dicke,  Phys. Rev. 99, 532 (1955). 
29. D. Sarkisyan, D. Bloch, A. Papoyan and M. Ducloy, Opt. Commun. 200, 201 (2001). 
30. D. Sarkisyan, see contribution in the same SPIE Proceedings volume 
31. G. Dutier, A. Yarovitski, S. Saltiel, A. Papoyan, D. Sarkisyan, D. Bloch and M. Ducloy, Europhys. Lett. 63, 35 
(2003) 
32. G. Dutier, S. Saltiel, D. Bloch and M. Ducloy. J. Opt. Soc. Am.  B, 20, 793 (2003) 
33. D. Sarkisyan, T. Varzhapetyan, A. Sarkisyan, Yu. Malakyan, A. Papoyan, A. Lezama, D. Bloch and M. Ducloy, 
Phys. Rev. A 69, 065802 (2004) 
34. M. Ducloy and M. Fichet, J. Phys. II 1, 1429 (1991). 
35. M.-P. Gorza et al, in preparation  
36 I. Hamdi ,  P. Todorov, A. Yarovitski, G. Dutier, I. Maurin, S. Saltiel, Y. Li, A. Lezama,T. Varzhapetyan, D. 
Sarkisyan, M.-P. Gorza, M. Fichet, D. Bloch and M. Ducloy, Laser Phys, 15, 987 (2005). 
37. G. Dutier, A. Yarovitski, S. Saltiel, D. Sarkisyan, A. Papoyan, T. Varzhapetyan, D. Bloch, M. Ducloy, in "Laser 
Spectroscopy,  Proceedings  of  the  XVI  International  Conference",  (P.  Hannaford  et  al.,  eds.,  World  Scientific, 
Singapore, 2004) pp. 277-284 
38. M.  Fichet, G. Dutier, A.Yarovitsky, P. Todorov, I. Hamdi, I. Maurin, S. Saltiel, D. Sarkisyan, M.-P. Gorza, D. 
Bloch and M. Ducloy., submitted to Europhys. Lett (http://hal.ccsd.cnrs.fr/ccsd-00069106) 
39. S. Saltiel, D. Bloch and M. Ducloy, Opt. Commun. 265, 220 (2006) 

 

 

