Comment on  
“Flow of temperature-dependent viscous fluid between parallel heated 
walls: Exact analytical solutions in the presence of viscous dissipation” , 
by K.S. Adegbie and F.I. Alao [Journal of Mathematics and Statistics,
2007, Volume 3, pp. 12-14]

Asterios  Pantokratoras
Associate Professor of Fluid Mechanics
School of Engineering, Democritus University of Thrace,
67100 Xanthi – Greece
e-mail:apantokr@civil.duth.gr

In the above paper  an analysis has been carried out to obtain results in the 
Couette  flow  of  a  Newtonian  fluid  with  viscous  dissipation  and 
temperature  dependent  viscosity.    The  fluid  viscosity  is  an  exponential  
function  of  temperature.    Exact  analytical  solutions  are  obtained  for  the 
calculation  of  velocity  and  temperature.  However,  there  are  some 
fundamental errors  in this paper which are presented below:

1.  The upper plate has temperature  Tb and the lower plate temperature 
T0  (  see  Figure  2.1  and  equation  2.6).  Taking  this  into  account  the 
temperature profile shown schematically in figure 2.1 is wrong. 

2.  The temperature  boundary condition  at the upper plate in equation 

(2.4) is wrong .The correct  condition is

3. In  page  13  it  is  mentioned  that  “from  symmetry  consideration,  we 
need  only  solve  the  equation  (3.2)  with  combined  boundary 
conditions:”.  The  above  argument  and  the  temperature  boundary 
conditions  given  in  equation  (3.3)  are  all  wrong.  Due  to  unequal 
plate temperatures  the fluid temperature profiles are non-symmetric. 
The correct form of  the temperature profiles should be as follows ( 
White, 2006, page, 99) 

1)1( 

                (upper  plate)                                                                                                                     

  

4. It is clear that there is no symmetry in the above temperature profile

and the above paper  is completely wrong.   

       

REFERENCES

1. Adegbie,  K.  S.  and  Alao,  F.  I.  (2007).  Flow  of  temperature-
dependent  viscous  fluid  between  parallel  heated  walls:  Exact 
analytical solutions in the presence of viscous dissipation, Journal of 
Mathematics and Statistics, Volume 3, pp. 12-14.

2. White,  F.  (2006).  Viscous  Fluid  Flow,  3rd  ed.,    McGraw-Hill,  New 

York. 

