1/f fluctuations of DNA temperature at thermal denaturation 

Marc JOYEUX(#), Sahin BUYUKDAGLI and Michaël SANREY 

Laboratoire de Spectrométrie Physique (CNRS UMR 5588), 

Université Joseph Fourier - Grenoble 1, 

BP 87, 38402 St Martin d'Hères, FRANCE 

PACS numbers : 87.15.Aa, 87.15.Ya, 87.14.Gg, 64.70.-p 

Abstract  -  We  theoretically  investigated  the  temperature  fluctuations  of  DNA  close  to 

denaturation  and  observed  a  strong  enhancement  of  these  fluctuations  at  the  critical 

temperature.  Although  in  a  much  lower  frequency  range,  such  a  sharp  increase  was  also 

reported  in  the  recent  experimental  work  of  Nagapriya  et  al  [Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  96,  038102 

(2006)].  We  showed  that  there  is  instead  no  enhancement  of  temperature  fluctuations  when 

the dissipation coefficient  in Langevin equations is assumed to be larger than a few tens of 

ps-1,  and  pointed  out  the  possible  role  of  the  solvent  in  real  experiments.  We  sought  for  a 

possible correlation between the growth of large bubbles and the enhancement of temperature 

fluctuations  but  found  no  direct  evidence  thereof.  Finally,  we  showed  that  neither  the 

enhancement  of  fluctuations  nor  the 

  dependence  are  observed  at  the  scale  of  a  single 

base pair, while these properties show up when summing the contributions of a large number 

of base pairs. We therefore conclude that both effects result from collective motions that are 

facilitated by the divergence of the correlation length at denaturation. 

(#) email : Marc.JOYEUX@ujf-grenoble.fr 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

f/1I - Introduction 

The  physics  of  DNA  thermal  denaturation  (or  melting),  that  is,  the  separation  of  the 

two strands upon heating, is a subject which has a long history [1-3] because it can be viewed 

as a preliminary for understanding transcription  and/or replication.  The  wide  interest  in  this 

problem is also motivated by the fact that UV absorption spectroscopy experiments  indicate 

that  the  whole  denaturation  process  looks  like  a  chain  of  sharp  first-order  like  phase 

transitions, in the sense that large portions of inhomogeneous DNA sequences separate over 

narrow temperature intervals [4]. Statistical models ascribe the discontinuous character of the 

transitions  to  excluded  volume  effects  [5,6],  while  dynamical  ones  invoke  instead  a  strong 

entropic effect due to significant softening of the DNA chain at large displacements [7,8]. In a 

recent  Letter  [9],  Nagapriya,  Raychaudhuri  and  Chatterji  reported  the  measurement  of  the 

fluctuations  of  DNA  temperature  close  to  the  critical  temperature,  an  issue  which  had 

apparently not been addressed before, neither experimentally nor theoretically. They observed 

a strong  enhancement of the low-frequency fluctuations (0.01 to  1 Hz range)  at the melting 

temperature  and  suggested  that  this  might  be  the  result  of  coexisting  phases  that  are  in 

dynamical  equilibrium.  Triggered  by  these  experimental  findings,  we  performed  molecular 

dynamics  calculations  to  investigate  this  point  theoretically.  Although  in  a  much  higher 

frequency range (1 MHz to 10 GHz), we also observed a strong enhancement of temperature 

fluctuations  at  the  melting  temperature.  Calculations  additionally  showed  that  the  power 

spectra of temperature fluctuations follow an unexpected 

 law over several decades. The 

purpose of this paper is to report on our results and to discuss the possible origin of the 

fluctuations. 

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Computation  procedures  are 

briefly  sketched  in  Section  II.  The  enhancement  of  temperature  fluctuations  and  the 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

f/1f/1f/1dependence are put in evidence in Section III on the basis of molecular dynamics simulations 

performed  with  three  rather  different  mesoscopic  models.  The  extent  to  which  these  results 

depend on the value of the dissipation coefficient   in  Langevin  equations is investigated in 

Section  IV.  In  Section  V,  we  discuss  the  lack  of  correlation  between  the  growth  of  large 

bubbles  and  the  enhancement  of  temperature  fluctuations.  Finally,  we  study  in  Section  VI 

how the enhancement of fluctuations and the 

 dependence arise from the summation of 

the contribution of an increasing number of base pairs and discuss these properties in terms of 

slow collective motions and the divergence of the correlation length at denaturation. 

II - Models and simulations 

Results  presented  in  this  paper  were  obtained  with  three  different  dynamical  models 

that  were  shown  to  reproduce  the  denaturation  dynamics  of  homogeneous  and/or 

inhomogeneous DNA sequences quite accurately. All of them are of the form 

 ,   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(II-1) 

where 

  and 

  are  the  kinetic  and  potential  energies,  which  are  expressed  as  a 

function of n position coordinates 

 and their derivatives with respect to time 

.  Since  for  the  three  models  the  kinetic  energy  is  taken  in  the  form  of  a 

where  the 

  denote  positive  real  parameters,  the  temperature  of  the  sequences  is 

diagonal quadratic expansion 

,  

 

 .  

 

 

 

 

 

straightforwardly estimated from 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(II-2) 

(II-3) 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

 

 

 

f/1qqPKEEEqKEqPE),...,,(21nqqqq),...,,(21nqqqqnkkkKqE12qkBKknETq2The  three  models  also  agree  in  describing  the  interaction  between  two  paired  bases  with  a 

Morse  potential,  as  suggested  by  Prohofsky  et  al  [10].  The  models  however  differ  by  the 

number of degrees of freedom which are used to describe each base pair (from 1 to 4) as well 

as the form of the stacking energy, i.e. the interaction between two successive base pairs : 

 

In the Dauxois-Peyrard-Bishop (DPB) model, each base pair k is described by a single 

variable 

, which represents the transverse stretching of the hydrogen bonds connecting 

the  two  bases,  so  that  the  number  n  of  degrees  of  freedom  is  equal  to  the  length  N  of  the 

sequence.  Moreover,  the  stacking  energy  is  modelled  by  an  harmonic  potential  plus  an 

exponential  correction  that  reduces  the  stacking  interaction  at  large  inter-strand  separations 

and  makes  the  denaturation  much  sharper.  See  Eqs.  (1)-(2)  of  Ref.  [7]  for  the  explicit 

expression of the DPB model. 

 

The  second  (JB)  model  was  derived  in  our  group  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that 

stacking  energies  are  necessarily  finite.  Each  nucleotide  is  modelled  by  a  point  mass  which 

moves  along  the  axis  connecting  the  two  strands,  so  that  base  pair  k  is  described  by  two 

position coordinates 

 and 

 (for this model n is equal to 

). Stacking interactions are 

represented  by  gaussian  holes,  whose  depths  are  the  stacking  enthalpies  determined  from 

thermodynamics calculations [11]. See Eq. (4) of Ref. [8] for the explicit expression of the JB 

model. 

 

In  the  last,  more  complex  BSJ  model,  stacking  interactions  are  again  represented  by 

gaussian  holes,  but  the  bases  and  the  associated  phosphate/sugar  groups  are  modelled  by 

separate sets of point masses. The phosphate/sugar groups move along the axis connecting the 

two strands while the bases rotate in the plane perpendicular to the sequence axis. The motion 

of each base pair is thus described by two position coordinates 

 and 

 plus two angles 

 

and 

 (

). See Eq. (1) of Ref. [12] for the explicit expression of the BSJ model. 

 

4 

kkyqkukvN2kxkXkkNn4 

Note that the JB and BSJ models were shown to give results in good agreement with 

statistical  ones  for  inhomogeneous  sequences  [8,12].  Molecular  dynamics  simulations 

consisted in integrating numerically, with a second-order Brünger-Brooks-Karplus integrator 

[13] and time steps of 10 fs, the equations of motion 

 , 

 

 

 

 

 

(II-4) 

where  is  the dissipation coefficient  and 

 a normally distributed random  function with 

zero mean and unit variance. The second and third terms in the right-hand side of Eq. (II-4) 

model the dissipation and stochastic collisions exerted by the solvent on DNA. These terms 

are  crucial  for  heating  the  sequence  to  the  requested  temperature,  since  this  is  achieved  by 

slowly increasing the T variable, standing for the temperature of the solvent, which appears in 

the collision term. A dissipation coefficient 

 ns-1 was assumed for the heating phase. At 

the  end  of  this  phase,  the  time  average  of  the  temperature  of  the  DNA  sequence,  obtained 

from Eq. II-3, must be equal to the temperature imposed by the solvent in Eq. (II-4). Once the 

correct  temperature  is  reached,  the  last  two  terms  in  Eq.  (II-4)  can  be  either  maintained 

(Langevin  dynamics)  or  dropped  (Hamilton  dynamics).  For  each  set  of  initial  conditions, 

spectral power density (SPD) was finally computed according to 

 ,   

 

 

 

 

 

(II-5) 

where T is the temperature of the DNA sequence, 

 denotes the integration time and 

 the 

average  of 

  between  0  and 

.  Practically,  we  set 

  to  0.5  s  and  systematically 

averaged 

  over  10  to  20  different  sets  of  initial  conditions  at  the  same  temperature. 

Finally, we slightly smoothed the obtained curves to further reduce the speckle noise. 

 

 

III - Enhancement of temperature fluctuations at thermal denaturation 

5 

TktwdtdqqEdtqdBkkkkPkk2)(22)(tw520maxmax2exp2)(tdtiftTTtfPmaxtTTmaxtmaxt)(fP 

 

 

Figs.  1  to  3  show  SPD  curves  obtained  from  Hamilton  dynamics  calculations  for, 

respectively, a 2000 base pair (bp) homogeneous sequence and the DPB model [7], a 2399 bp 

inhibitor of the hepatocyte growth factor activator [14] and the JB model [8], and the 1793 bp 

human  -actin  cDNA  (NCB  entry  code  NM_001101)  and  the  BSJ  model  [12].  All 

computations were performed with open boundary conditions. The melting temperatures  for 

these three systems, i.e. the temperature at which 50% of the base  pairs are open, are about 

354  K,  335  K  and  385  K,  respectively.  These  temperatures  were  determined  from  melting 

curves calculated as in Fig. 3 of Ref. [8]. 

 

Although  in  a  much  higher  frequency  range,  these  curves  clearly  exhibit  the  same 

behaviour  as  the  experimental  results  of  Ref.  [9]  :  (i)  fluctuations  vary  slowly  with 

temperature  below  denaturation,  (ii)  they  increase  strongly  at  the  critical  temperature, 

especially in the red part of the spectrum, (iii) they become again smaller as soon as the two 

strands  are  fully  separated.  Most  importantly,  comparison  of  Figs.  1  to  3  indicates  that  this 

behaviour  is  not  model-dependent  in  the  sense  that  it  is  exhibited  by  three  quite  different 

models.  It  can  therefore  reasonably  be  speculated  that  the  enhancement  of  fluctuations  is 

characteristic of DNA melting and not of the peculiar model used to describe DNA melting. 

 

All  the  sequences  we  tested  display  the  characteristic  behaviour  of  Figs.  1  to  3, 

whatever  the  sequence  and  the  model.  This  includes  homogenous  and  regular  sequences  as 

well, whereas Nagapriya et al noted that "fluctuation is larger in heterogeneous samples" [9]. 

However, it appears that this conclusion is  based on the properties of a single short 100 bp 

regular ATAT... sequence, while all the sequences we investigated contained more than 1500 

bp,  essentially  because  it  is  numerically  rather  difficult  to  impose  a  given  temperature  to  a 

short sequence. Since the dynamics of short sequences is particularly sensitive to the opening 

at the two ends, it may differ qualitatively from that of longer sequences. It might therefore be 

6 

interesting  to  check  whether  measurements  performed  on  longer  regular  sequences  confirm 

the conclusion of Nagapriya et al or match the calculations in the higher frequency range. 

Another  feature,  which  is  common  to  all  the  sequences  and  the  three  investigated 

models, is the fact that SPD varies as 

 over several decades. We will come back to this 

point in Sect. VI. 

IV - Influence of the dissipation coefficient  on temperature fluctuations 

As  we  already  mentioned,  the  results  presented  in  Sect.  III  were  obtained  by 

integrating Hamilton's equations of motion, which means that  was turned to zero in Eq. (II-

4)  after  the  heating  phase.  Depending  on  the  value  of  the  dissipation  coefficient  ,  quite 

different  results  may however be  obtained when integrating  Langevin's equations  of motion 

instead  of  Hamilton's  ones.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that,  in  the  thermodynamic  limit  of 

infinitely long sequences, the averages of thermodynamic observables in the micro-canonical 

(Hamiltonian dynamics)  and canonical (Langevin dynamics) ensembles do coincide, but not 

their  fluctuations  [15].  For  example,  Fig.  4  shows  SPD  curves  for  the  2399  bp  inhibitor  at 

different  temperatures  obtained  by  integrating  Langevin's  equations  of  motion  for  the  JB 

model  [8].  We  used  a  dissipation  coefficient  =5  ns-1  that  lies  in  the  range  of  commonly 

accepted values for this parameter. In contrast with Fig. 2, the curves in Fig. 4 do not exhibit 

significant  changes  at  the  melting  temperature.  To  characterize  the  influence  of    on 

temperature  fluctuations  in  more  detail,  we  further  plotted  in  Fig.  5  the  SPD  curves  at  the 

melting temperature (335 K) for increasing values of . It is seen that values of  up to 0.05 ns-

1  have  little  influence  on  temperature  fluctuations  down  to  the  MHz  range.  In  contrast, 

dissipation  coefficients  of  0.5  ns-1  and  5  ns-1  damp  all  oscillations  with  frequencies  smaller 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

f/1than  10  MHz  and  100  MHz,  respectively,  while  the  SPD  curve  obtained  with  =50  ns-1 

departs from those obtained with lower values of  in the whole 106-1010 Hz range. 

 

Conclusion therefore is that erratic collisions with solvent molecules may well damp 

the strong enhancement of temperature fluctuations experienced by isolated DNA sequences. 

Whether this happens in the range of "physical" values of  or not remains at present an open 

question. Nonetheless, we noted with interest that the measurements reported in Ref. [9] were 

performed after the solution was allowed to evaporate off, in order that the thermal mass of 

the solvent does not reduce experimental sensitivity. Of course, most DNA sequences are still 

in contact with each other, with residual solvent molecules and with the thermometer, but they 

are probably more isolated than in solution, which may result in a lower effective value of the 

dissipation  coefficient  .  To  fix  this  question  regarding  the  possible  effect  of  the  solvent,  it 

might  be  interesting  -  if  technically  feasible  -  to  repeat  the  measurements  for  increasing 

quantities of solvent and/or for solvents which interact more or less strongly with DNA. 

V - Temperature fluctuations versus bubbles dynamics 

It is well known that large bubbles develop precisely in the temperature range where 

enhancement of fluctuations is observed [3,8,12]. It is thus legitimate to wonder whether there 

exists  a  connection  between  the  enhancement  of  temperature  fluctuations  and  bubble 

dynamics.  More  precisely,  the  question  that  naturally  arises  is  whether  temperature 

fluctuations are larger in bubbles than in closed portions of the sequence. If this were the case, 

then  bubble  formation  would  be  directly  responsible  for  the  observed  enhancement  of 

fluctuations  at  the  critical  temperature.  In  order  to  check  this  hypothesis,  we  investigated 

temperature fluctuations not only of the whole sequence but also of smaller subsections. This 

is  illustrated  in  the  upper  plot  of  Fig.  6,  which  shows  the  melting  profile  of  the  2399  bp 

 

 

 

 

8 

inhibitor [14] at 325 K and 330 K. Larger values of the average distance between paired bases 

indicate regions where bubbles are preferentially formed, that is, regions with a higher local 

percentage of AT base pairs [8,12] (see the lowest plot of Fig. 6). We considered the 2399 bp 

sequence  to  consist  of  11  different  subsections  labelled  A  to  K.  Some  of  these  subsections 

(like A, D, F, H and K) are often melted at 325 K while other ones (like B, E and I) remain 

essentially  closed  at  this  temperature.  At  the  melting  temperature  (335  K),  all  subsections, 

except for B, are open most of the time. We next plotted the SPD of temperature fluctuations 

for  each  subsection  j  separately.  For  example,  Fig.  7  shows,  for  the  11  subsections  of  the 

inhibitor  sequence  at  335  K,  log-log  plots  of  the  product  of  the  SPD  (of  each  subsection) 

times the length 

 of each subsection. It is seen that all the curves are superposed, as is also 

the case at 325 K. Thus, at both temperatures, (i) power spectra scale as 

, (ii) except for 

this global scaling, SPD is identical  for all subsections and identical to that of the complete 

sequence. This is clearly seen by comparing Fig. 7 with the curve for the whole sequence at 

335 K in Fig. 2.  In particular, the curve for subsection B (thick line in Fig. 7), which is the 

only closed one at 335 K, does not differ from that of open subsections. 

 

Down to the MHz range, the enhancement of temperature fluctuations at the melting 

temperature is thus uniform in the chain and not localized in open subsections, i.e. in bubbles. 

At that point, it should be reminded that bubbles  and closed subsections are the two phases 

that coexist at the critical temperature at the level of the secondary structure of DNA.  As an 

interpretation  of  their  experimental  work  in  the  0.01-1  Hz  range,  Nagapriya  et  al  suggested 

that  the  observed  large  fluctuations  may  be  "a  result  of  coexisting  phases  that  are  in 

dynamical  equilibrium"  [9].  Of  course,  the  "coexisting  phases"  mentioned  by  these  authors 

may well relate to the tertiary structure (or higher order conformations) of DNA. On the other 

hand, if they indeed relate to its secondary structure, that is to bubbles and open sections, then 

the  calculations  presented  above  show  that  the  enhancement  of  temperature  fluctuations  at 

 

9 

jNjN/1melting  temperature  is  due  to  a  mechanism  which  is  more  complex  than  the  existence  of 

larger fluctuations in the phase that becomes predominant at denaturation (bubbles) compared 

to the phase that prevails at lower temperatures (closed subsections). 

 

Before  concluding  this  section,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  power  spectra  disregard 

relative  phases,  so  that  the  fact  the  enhancement  of  temperature  fluctuations  at  the  melting 

temperature  (estimated  from  the  increase  of  PSD  curves)  is  uniform  in  the  chain  (at  least 

down  to  the  MHz  range)  does  not  imply  that  fluctuations  themselves  are  uniform  in  the 

sequence. This can be checked in Fig. 8, which shows the time evolution of the temperature of 

the 2399 bp inhibitor [14] at 325 K and 335 K. In these plots, each pixel corresponds to the 

temperature averaged over 10 successive base pairs and 50 ns.  If the diagram at 325 K (top 

plot  of  Fig.  8)  and  the  profile  shown  in  Fig.  6  seem  to  be  largely  uncorrelated,  this  is  no 

longer the case at 335 K (bottom plot of Fig. 8). At the denaturation temperature, one indeed 

observes a rather clear difference between the motions of base pairs located below and above 

 : the former ones, which are still quite often closed, display fluctuations which look 

like those at 325 K, while the latter ones display fluctuations involving the coherent motion of 

a larger number of base pairs over longer time scales. 

VI - Collective phenomena, enhancement of fluctuations and 

 dependence 

As  mentioned  in  Sect.  III,  the  two  features  that  are  common  to  all  models  and  all 

sequences are (i) the enhancement of fluctuations at the melting temperature, and (ii) the fact 

that  SPD  varies  as 

  over  several  decades.  For  the  simpler  DPB  and  JB  models  [7,8], 

which  involve  only  stretch  degrees  of  freedom,  the  frequency  range  where  the 

 

dependence holds broadens sharply at the threshold. This range extends down to 100 MHz for 

the DPB model at 354 K (see Fig. 1) and to less than 2 MHz for the 2399 bp inhibitor [14] at 

 

 

 

 

10 

750kf/1f/1f/1335 K and the JB model (see Fig. 2). For the more complex BSJ model [12], which involves 

both  stretch  and  bend  coordinates,  the  frequency  range  where  the 

  dependence  is 

observed seems instead to vary only slightly with temperature and extends down to about 100 

MHz for the 1793 bp actin (Fig. 3). 

 fluctuations, occasionally called "flicker noise" or 

"pink noise" (because located between the constant "white noise" and the 

 "red noise"), 

have been observed in  many areas  of  electronics,  physics, biology,  geophysics, traffic flow, 

financial data,  etc,  and the search for an explanation that would account  for  this ubiquity is 

one  of  the  oldest  unsolved  problems  in  physics.  If  such  an  all-encompassing  theory  is  still 

missing, the observed 

 fluctuations have however in most cases been explained by ad hoc 

models.  In deterministic dynamical  systems, the  explanation which prevails [16] is  that this 

phenomenon takes place at the stochastic transition, that is in the energy range where quasi-

regular portions of the phase space are separated from completely chaotic ones by a hierarchy 

of nested broken tori (also called "cantori"). 

 fluctuations then appear as a consequence 

of the trapping of the system in the nested cantori and its subsequent release at variable rates 

[16].  The  validity  of  this  explanation  is  difficult  to  check  in  systems  with  many  degrees  of 

freedom,  because  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  draw  Poincaré  surfaces  of  section  like  those 

shown  in  Figs.  2-4  of  Ref.  [16].  Moreover,  we  checked  that  for  all  models  the  largest 

Lyapunov exponent drops abruptly to almost zero when both strands separate but that it does 

not display any other significant evolution at and slightly below the denaturation temperature 

(see for example Fig. 3 of Ref. [17]). The purpose of the remainder of this section is instead to 

stress that, for the ADN sequences investigated in this work, both the 

 dependence and 

the  enhancement  of  temperature  fluctuations  at  the  denaturation  threshold  are  collective 

phenomena, in the sense that they arise from the coherence of many individual motions. 

 

11 

f/1f/12/1ff/1f/1f/1 

as 

It was shown in the previous section and Fig. 7 that SPD at a given temperature scales 

. However, this is true only for values of 

 larger than a certain threshold, which is 

of  the  order  of  100-200  for  the  2399  bp  inhibitor  [14]  at  335  K  and  the  JB  model  [8].  The 

evolution of the SPD for a broader range of 

 values (

) is shown in Fig. 9. It 

is  seen that  for small values of 

  fluctuations scale only as 

 (slope  -1/2) instead of 

  (slope  -1).  As 

  increases,  the  amplitude  of  higher  frequency  fluctuations  decreases 

however more rapidly than that of lower frequency ones, till the 

 dependence is reached 

at  the  threshold  value  of  100-200.  For  values  of 

  larger  than  the  threshold,  higher  and 

lower  frequency  fluctuations  decrease  at  the  same  rate,  so  that  one  observes  the 

 

dependence when averaging over the whole sequence. 

 

This  point  is  illustrated  in  more  detail  in  Fig.  10,  which  shows  the  evolution  of  the 

power  of  temperature  fluctuations  as  a  function  of 

  for  exponentially  increasing 

frequencies f (2, 20 and 200 MHz and 2 GHz) and three typical temperatures : 315 K (double 

stranded DNA, top plot), 335 K (melting temperature, middle plot) and 345 K (single stranded 

DNA, bottom plot). This figure can be understood by invoking the Wiener-Khinchin theorem, 

which states that the SPD of a signal is equal to the Fourier transform of its autocorrelation 

function. This means that the SPD of temperature fluctuations computed over subsections of 

length 

 is proportional to the Fourier transform of 

 .  

 

          (VI-1) 

The  second  term  in  the  right-hand  side  of  Eq.  (VI-1)  describes  cross-correlations  of 

fluctuations from different base pairs and vanishes if the fluctuations are independent. In the 

absence of correlations, the SPD is thus expected to vary as the inverse of 

 if, as is the case 

 

12 

jN/1jNjN23991jNjNf/1f/1jNf/1jNf/1jNjNjjjNkNkmmmkjNkkkjjtptpNtptpNNC112221222)()(1)()(1),(jNhere,  the  fluctuations  of 

  are  uniform  in  the  sequence,  i.e.  they  do  not  depend  on  the 

base pair position k. On the other hand, if all the base pairs belonging to the same subsection 

move as a rigid body, then the second term in Eq. (VI-1) is equal to 

 times the first one, 

so that the SPD no longer depends on 

. Finally, destructive correlation (like the flip-flop of 

water molecules) must necessarily take place for the SPD to vary more sharply than 

. 

 

Examination  of  Fig.  10  indicates  that,  at  the  level  of  a  single  base  pair,  temperature 

fluctuations  decrease  with  increasing  temperatures.  The  enhancement  of  temperature 

fluctuations which is observed at the melting temperature is therefore a direct consequence of 

the correlations that grow up at this temperature. More precisely, it is seen that the intensity of 

high frequency fluctuations (

 MHz) varies at all temperatures as 

 for 

, 

while the slope is smaller for 

. This suggests that these high frequency fluctuations 

arise from rapid motions which however do not correlate beyond the first few neighbours. In 

contrast, at both 315 K and 345 K the intensity of low frequency fluctuations (

 MHz) 

varies much more sharply  than 

 for large values of 

. This indicates that excitations 

involving up to several hundreds of base pairs travel along the chain, so that the temperature 

of the complete sequence varies much less than that of given subsections. This can be checked 

in  the  top  plot  of  Fig.  8,  where  diffuse  darker  regions  with  lower  temperature  are  seen  to 

wander almost erratically in the sequence. This phenomenon is similar to the flip-flop that is 

observed for neighbouring water molecules. Finally, at the melting temperature (335 K), the 

intensity of low frequency fluctuations (

 MHz) varies more slowly than 

. This is 

probably  due  to  the  fact  that  the  JB  model  [8],  as  well  as  the  DBP  one  [7],  exhibit  a  well 

characterized  first  order  phase  transition  at  denaturation  [18,19].  The  correlation  length 

becomes infinite at the critical temperature, thus allowing for very slow collective motions. It 

 

13 

)(2tpk1jNjNjN/1200fjN/120jN20jN20fjN/1jN2fjN/1may therefore reasonably be hypothesized that the divergence of the correlation length at the 

melting temperature is responsible for the sharp  extension to lower frequencies of the range 

where the 

 dependence holds (see Figs. 1 and 2). For the more complex BSJ model [12], 

the  frequency  range  where  the 

  dependence  is  observed  seems  instead  to  vary  only 

slightly with temperature (see Fig. 3). This might indicate that denaturation is sharper in this 

latter model than in the two former ones and that the temperature range where the correlation 

length  diverges  is  too  narrow  to  be  investigated  by  means  of  Langevin  dynamics.  Further 

work is needed to ascertain this point. 

VII - Conclusion 

To  summarize,  we  theoretically  investigated  the  temperature  fluctuations  of  DNA 

close to denaturation and observed a strong enhancement of these fluctuations at the critical 

temperature.  Although  in  a  much  lower  frequency  range,  such  a  sharp  increase  was  also 

reported  in  the  recent  experimental  work  of  Nagapriya  et  al  [9].  We  showed  that  there  is 

instead  no  enhancement  of  temperature  fluctuations  when  the  dissipation  coefficient    in 

Langevin  equations  is  assumed  to  be  larger  than  a  few  tens  of  ps-1,  and  pointed  out  the 

possible role of the solvent in real experiments. We sought for a possible correlation between 

the  growth  of  large  bubbles  and  the  enhancement  of  temperature  fluctuations  but  found  no 

direct evidence thereof. Finally, we showed that neither the enhancement of fluctuations nor 

the 

  dependence  are  observed  at  the  scale  of  a  single  base  pair,  while  these  properties 

show  up  when  summing  the  contributions  of  a  large  number  of  base  pairs.  We  therefore 

concluded  that  both  effects  result  from  collective  motions  that  are  facilitated  by  the 

divergence of the correlation length at denaturation. 

 

 

 

 

14 

f/1f/1f/1 

  fluctuations  of  the  temperature  -  or  equivalently  of  the  total  potential  energy  - 

have been predicted to occur in a variety of biophysical systems [19-22]. The frequency range 

where the 

 dependence is expected to take place extends down to about 1 GHz [19-22] or 

even a few MHz (this work). In contrast, the recent work of Nagapriya et al [9] is one of the 

few experimental studies dealing with temperature fluctuations in such systems. According to 

Fig.  3  of  Ref.  [9],  it  appears  that  the  measured  power  spectrum  decays  much  more  rapidly 

than 

 in the investigated 0.01-1 Hz range. It is therefore probable that slow processes not 

included in  our models are at  work in  this range. Many  experimental and theoretical  efforts 

will  certainly  be  necessary  to  bridge  the  gap  between  the  frequency  ranges  amenable, 

respectively, to experimental and theoretical investigations and complete our understanding of 

the corresponding dynamics. 

 

 

15 

f/1f/1f/1REFERENCES 

[1]  D.  Poland  and  H.A.  Scheraga,  Theory  of  Helix-Coil  Transitions  in  Biopolymers 

(Academic Press, New York, 1970) 

[2] R.M. Wartell and A.S. Benight, Phys. Rep. 126, 67 (1985) 

[3] M. Peyrard, Nonlinearity 17, R1 (2004) 

[4] O. Gotoh, Adv. Biophys. 16, iii (1983) 

[5] D. Poland and H.A. Scheraga, J. Chem. Phys. 45, 1464 (1966) 

[6] E. Carlon, E. Orlandini and A.L. Stella, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 198101 (2002) 

[7] T. Dauxois, M. Peyrard and A.R. Bishop, Phys. Rev. E 47, R44 (1993) 

[8] M. Joyeux and S. Buyukdagli, Phys. Rev. E 72, 051902 (2005) 

[9] K.S. Nagapriya, A.K. Raychaudhuri and D. Chatterji, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 038102 (2006) 

[10] M. Techera, L.L. Daemen and E.W. Prohofsky, Phys. Rev. A 40, 6636 (1989) 

[11] R.D. Blake, J.W. Bizzaro, J.D. Blake, G.R. Day, S.G. Delcourt, J. Knowles, K.A. Marx 

and J. SantaLucia, Bioinformatics, 15, 370 (1999) 

[12] S. Buyukdagli, M. Sanrey and M. Joyeux, Chem. Phys. Lett. 419, 434 (2006) 

[13] A. Brünger, C.B. Brooks and M. Karplus, Chem. Phys. Lett. 105, 495 (1984) 

[14] T. Shimomura, K. Denda, A. Kitamura, T. Kawaguchi, M. Kito, J. Kondo, S. Kagaya, L. 

Qin, H. Takata, K. Miyazawa and N. Kitamura, J. Biol. Chem. 272, 6370 (1997) 

[15] R. Balian, From microphysics to macrophysics - methods and applications of statistical 

physics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991) 

[16] T. Geisel, A. Zacherl and G. Radons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2503 (1987) 

[17] J. Barré and T. Dauxois, Europhys. Lett. 55, 164 (2001) 

[18] N. Theodorakopoulos, T. Dauxois and M. Peyrard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 6 (2000) 

[19] S. Buyukdagli and M. Joyeux, Phys. Rev. E 73, 051910 (2006) 

 

 

16 

[20] A.R. Bizzarri and S. Cannistraro, Phys. Lett. A 236, 596 (1997) 

[21] M. Takano, T. Takahashi and K. Nagayama, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 5691 (1998) 

[22] A.R. Bizzarri and S. Cannistraro, Physica A 267, 257 (1999) 

[23] P. Carlini, A.R. Bizzarri and S. Cannistraro, Physica D : Nonlinear phenomena 165, 242 

(2002) 

 

17 

FIGURE CAPTIONS 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure  1 :  (Color online)  Log-log plots,  at  several  temperatures, of the SPD of temperature 

fluctuations  for  a  2000  bp  homogeneous  sequence  and  the  DPB  model  [7].  Melting 

temperature is about 354 K. For denaturated sequences, 

 is smaller than 10-12 K2Hz-1, so 

that  the  corresponding  curves  do  not  show  up  in  the  figure.  Within  this  model,  the 

configuration of a sequence with N bp is described by 

 coordinates. 

Figure  2 : (Color online)  Log-log plots, at  several  temperatures, of  the SPD  of temperature 

fluctuations for the 2399 bp inhibitor [14] and the JB model [8]. Melting temperature is about 

335 K. Within this model, the configuration of a sequence with N bp is described by 

 

coordinates. 

Figure  3 : (Color online)  Log-log plots, at  several  temperatures,  of  the SPD  of temperature 

fluctuations  for  the  1793  bp  actin  (NCB  entry  code  NM_001101)  and  the  BSJ  model  [12]. 

Melting temperature is about 385 K. Within this model, the configuration of a sequence with 

N bp is described by 

 coordinates. 

Figure 4 : (Color online) Same as Fig. 2, except that SPD curves were obtained by integrating 

Langevin's equations of motion instead of Hamilton's ones. A dissipation coefficient =5 ns-1 

was assumed. 

Figure 5 : (Color online) Log-log plots, for increasing values of the dissipation coefficient , 

of the SPD of temperature fluctuations for the 2399 bp inhibitor [14] at 335 K (denaturation 

temperature) and the JB model [8]. 

18 

)(fPNnNn2Nn4 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 6 : (Color online) Top : plot, as a function of their position k in the sequence, of the 

average distance between paired bases for the 2399 bp inhibitor [14] at 325 and 330 K and the 

JB  model  [8].  Bottom  :  plot,  as  a  function  of  k,  of  the  AT  percentage  averaged  over  40 

consecutive base pairs of the same sequence. 

Figure  7  :  (Color  online)  Log-log  plots,  at  the  melting  temperature  (335  K)  and  for  the  JB 

model,  of  the  product  of  the  SPD  times  the  length 

  of  the  subsection,  for  the  11 

subsections of the 2399 bp inhibitor [14] (see Fig. 6). The thicker line denotes the curve for 

subsection B, which is the only closed one at the critical temperature. 

Figure 8 : (Color online) Time evolution, at 325 K and 335 K (melting temperature), of the 

temperature  of  the  2399  bp  inhibitor  [14]  computed  with  the  JB  model  [8].  Each  pixel 

corresponds  to  the  temperature  averaged  over  10  successive  base  pairs  and  50  ns. 

Temperatures range from -10 K (blue/dark pixels) to +10 K (yellow/bright pixels) relative to 

the average one. 

Figure 9 : (Color online) Log-log plots of the SPD of temperature fluctuations for the 2399 

bp  inhibitor  [14]  at  335  K  (melting  temperature)  and  the  JB  model  [8].  Each  curve 

corresponds to a different value of the length 

 of the subsections over which temperature 

fluctuations are computed. 

Figure 10 : (Color online) Evolution of the power of temperature fluctuations of the 2399 bp 

inhibitor [14]  as a function of 

  for exponentially  increasing frequencies  f (2, 20 and 200 

19 

jNjNjNMHz  and  2  GHz)  and  three  typical  temperatures  :  315  K  (double  stranded  DNA,  top  plot), 

335 K (melting temperature, middle plot) and 345 K (single stranded DNA, bottom plot). 

 

 

20 

Figure 1 

 

 

 

 

 

21 

Figure 2 

 

 

 

 

 

22 

Figure 3 

 

 

 

 

 

23 

Figure 4 

 

 

 

 

24 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5 

 

25 

Figure 6 

 

 

 

 

26 

Figure 7 

 

 

 

 

 

27 

Figure 8 

 

 

 

 

28 

Figure 9 

 

 

 

 

 

29 

Figure 10 

 

 

 

 

 

30 

