Fluctuation-Enhanced Sensing of Molecules with Biased Carbon
Nanotubes, or Nanowires, and Adsorption-Desorption Fluctuations

Laszlo B. Kish(1), Robert Vajtai(2), Pulickel Ajayan(2), Chiman Kwan(3), Gabor Schmera(4)

(1) Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College,
Station, TX 77843-3128, USA

(2) Department of Material Science and Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
Troy, NY 12180, USA.

(3) Signal Processing, Inc., 13619 Valley Oak Circle, Rockville, MD 20850, USA

(4) Space and Naval Warfare System Center, Signal Exploitation & Information
Management, San Diego, CA 92152-5001, USA

Abstract. A new nanoscale device for fluctuation-enhanced sensing is proposed.

Fluctuation-Enhanced sensing (FES) [1] has recently been proposed for the detection of
chemical  and  biological  agents  with  sensitivity  and  selectivity  superior  to  sensing
methods based on the steady-state sensor signal. The stochastic component of the sensor
signal  is  separated,  strongly  amplified  and  statistically  analyzed  to  generate  a  pattern
which serves as the finger print of the agent.

To utilize all the advantages of FES, the characteristic size of the sensor should be in the
nanoscale  range  (non-Gaussian  fluctuations)  and  a  large  number  of  micro-integrated
integrated detectors (electronic dog nose) should be used for enhanced sensitivity and
very low agent concentrations.

In this short note, we propose a simple FES element to generate a FES-based fingerprint
of  large  molecules,  see  Figure  1.  A  carbon  nanotube  or  nanowire  pair,  or  ladder  is
deposited over a gateless MOSFET channel (covered with thin oxide). The pair is driven
by a variable DC voltage generator and the ladder is driven by alternating polarity. Large
agent molecules with inherent or induced polarization will be captured by the DC field
which will influence the activation energy of desorption (evaporation) of the molecule
from this site. The value of the activation energy E is characteristic of the molecule and
even more information can be extracted from the function E(U), the dependence of the
activation  energy  on  the  DC  voltage.  The  presence  of  the  molecule  at  the  nanotube
structure  can  be  detected  by  the  drain  current  of  the  MOSFET  and  the  absorption-
desorption process will generate a Lorentzian type excess noise, which can be observed
provided  the  inherent  noise  of  the  MOSFET  is  low  enough,  and  its  characteristic
crossover frequency provides information about the value of the activation energy.

1

The cleaning of chemical sensors is an especially difficult issue and the usual methods
based overheating cause early aging and is not always sufficient. The present structure
can however be cleaned very easily without heating by a short voltage pulse of opposite
polarity.  The  pulse  should  be  shorter  than  the  polarization  relaxation  time  of  the
molecule.

Captured large
molecule with
inherent or induced
polarization

Carbon nanotube or
nanowire pair, or ladder
with alternating DC polarity

Gateless MOSFET
channel (covered
with thin oxide)

Variable DC voltage for varied
desorption activation energy; or
short voltage pulse with
opposite polarization for
cleaning

-

+

Figure 1. Outline of the FES element.

References

[1] L.B. Kish, Y. Li, J.L. Solis, W.H. Marlow, R. Vajtai, C.G. Granqvist, V. Lantto,

J.M. Smulko, G. Schmera, "Detecting Harmful Gases Using Fluctuation-Enhanced
Sensing", IEEE Sensors Journal 5 (2005) 671-676.

2

