Proceedings of the International Conference on Undergraduate Physics
Education  (College Park, August 1996)

PARTNERSHIPS FOR PHYSICS TEACHING REFORM
––a crucial role for universities and colleges

David Hestenes and Jane Jackson
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Arizona State University
Tempe, Arizona 85287-1504

Abstract: To meet National Standards recommended by the National Research Council
for  high  school  physics,  inservice  teachers  must  be  integrated  into  the  physics
community. They must be empowered  by access to resources of the physics community
and by sustained support for their professional development. To that end, university and
college  physics  departments  must  assume  an  essential  role  in  establishing  and
maintaining  the  necessary  local  infrastructure.  Nevertheless,  this  can  be  done  within
their  current  systems  at  negligible  cost  by  forming  partnerships  with  local  alliances  of
inservice  teachers.  Practical  details  have  been  worked  out,  and  working  partnerships
have been established in several localities.  This  effort  should  be  extended  to  a  national
infrastructure  for  reform  of  physics  teaching  in  community  colleges  as  well  as  in  high
schools. Most teachers are eager to participate in teaching reform.

1.  Introduction

Representing a broad consensus within the scientific and educational
communities, the National Research Council (NRC) has recently published
detailed National Standards for K-12 science education (1). That document is a
call to action with guidelines for extensive reforms in science teaching and the
professional development of teachers. University (and college) physics
departments must play a role in the reform of high school physics, as the training
of physics teachers has traditionally been their responsibility. However, this
responsibility has been too narrowly conceived in the past and must be broadened
if teaching reform is to be successful.

The Standards emphasize that "coherent and integrated programs"
supporting "lifelong professional development" of science teachers are essential
for significant reform. They state that "The conventional view of professional
development for teachers needs to shift from technical training for specific skills
to opportunities for intellectual professional growth." Such a program cannot be
consistently maintained and enriched in any locality without dedicated support
from a local university or college. Therefore,  physics departments must assume
responsibility for supporting a program of sustained professional development for
local inservice physics teachers.

Incredibly, this responsibility can be effectively discharged without
significant costs to the university or new burdens on the physics faculty. As
explained below, inservice physics teachers are able and eager to take
responsibility for their own professional development. All they need is support

from faculty to offer well-designed professional development courses for
university credit. Such courses are best taught by exceptional inservice teachers,
so the demands on physics faculty are minimal. A local alliance of physics
teachers can ensure that the courses are filled, so costs to the university are trivial
or nil.

With professional development courses as an academic anchor, a
partnership between university physics faculty and a local physics teacher alliance
can achieve many other good things. For example, it provides an avenue for
recruiting physics majors to the university and for effective outreach programs to
the schools. However, to be optimally effective a partnership must have strong
connections with current physics education research and curriculum development.
We are currently running an NSF-funded project to supply such connections (2),
and its unqualified success provides a "proof of concept" for the
recommendations in this paper. However, the project needs to be expanded if it is
to be available nationwide. That will require a broad commitment from the U.S.
physics community.

State universities are best equipped to support partnerships for the
professional development of inservice physics teachers, and their responsibility is
the greater because they are supported by public funds. However, some private
universities and colleges have concerned faculty and the necessary resources, so
they should be encouraged to participate. Though we focus on high school
physics teachers in this paper, community college teachers are equally in need of
professional development. They should be encouraged to participate in local
alliances with high school teachers, though they have some special needs of their
own.

2. Empowering teachers––the key to reform

Judged by the National Standards (1) and a recent AIP survey (3), high
school physics nationwide is badly in need of reform. The problems are many,
but one thing is certain: Only the teachers can do it! The action is in the
classroom. Physics cannot be "canned" in a "teacher-proof" textbook or
curriculum materials. Physics is a way of thinking that requires skillful coaching
by the teacher to develop.

Unfortunately, most physics teachers are poorly prepared for the task and
lack the resources to improve. According to a recent nationwide AIP survey (3),
about 70% believe that they are well-prepared to teach physics, though only 30%
have a B.A. in physics or physics education. Only 15% feel qualified to discuss
recent developments in physics. Even fewer are aware of advances in physics
education research with practical implications for teaching. We estimate that less
than 3% have implemented significant research-based reforms in their teaching.

Of the 18,000 physics teachers nationwide, 81% are the only physics

teacher in the school. Despite being overworked, under-prepared, ill-informed
and isolated from their peers, physics teachers have remarkably strong élan and

2

Systemic Reform of Physics Teaching
putting the pieces together

Local peer
collaboration
among teachers

Commitment of
University/College
Physics Departments

Cooperation
of schools
and districts

LPA/APS

NSF

Professional Development
          & Support of
       Physics Teachers

Leadership
by Master
Teachers

Educational
Research &
Development

National
Standards

PTRA/AAPT

NSF

NAS/AAAS

satisfaction (3). More than 90% want to teach physics as often as possible, though
only 35% teach it every year. In our program, so far involving teachers from 23
states (2), we have found that most teachers are eager and able to work hard and
productively with their peers at improving their teaching. All they need is the
opportunity and well-informed guidance. However, their efforts must be extended
over many years to produce substantial improvements, so a stable infrastructure is
needed to support it.

As the National Standards maintain (1):  "The current reform effort in

science education requires a substantive change in how science is taught. Implicit
in this reform is an equally substantive change in professional development

FIGURE 1.

3

practices. . . . Professional development for teachers should be analogous to
professional development for other professionals. Becoming an effective science
teacher is a continuous process that stretches across the life of a teacher, from his
or her undergraduate years to the end of a professional career. . . . Teachers
require the opportunity to study and engage in research on science teaching and
learning, and to share with colleagues what they have learned. . . . Practicing
teachers have the opportunity to become sources of their own growth as well as
supporters of the growth of others.  Teachers should have opportunities for
structured reflection on their teaching practice with colleagues, for collaborative
curriculum planning, and for active participation in professional teaching and
scientific networks. The challenge of professional development for teachers of
science is to create optimal collaborative learning situations in which the best
sources of expertise are linked with the experiences and current needs of the
teachers."

To meet this challenge, physics teachers everywhere must be embraced by
the physics community as respected professional colleagues. Physics teachers are
the representatives of the physics community in their classrooms. If they are to
convey the message that physics is our common cultural heritage –– that physics
belongs to everyone –– if they are to wipe out the widespread perception of
physics as an elitist foreign culture –– if they are to promote access to physics for
everyone, then they themselves must feel secure as respected members of the
physics community. Token respect is not enough. Genuine respect by the physics
community can be expressed only by fulfillment of its responsibility to support
the professional development of teachers and the improvement of teaching
conditions in the schools.

To establish and maintain a coherent program for sustained professional

development and support of physics teachers will require leadership and
commitment from the physics community. As indicated in Fig. 1, the pieces are
in hand, many of them developed with NSF funding through the AAPT, APS,
NAS, and the AAAS, but they are yet to be assembled. There are five major
pieces:

• National Standards informed by expertise in science and educational

research

• Peer support and collaboration among teachers
•

Leadership by master teachers who are well-informed about
educational research and curricula

• Commitment from physics departments in universities and colleges
• Cooperation of schools, school districts and communities.

Each piece will be described more fully before a plan to assemble them is
proposed.

3. Peer support through Local Physics Alliances

As in any other profession, for continued professional growth teachers

need the stimulus of interaction with their peers. Because so few have colleagues

4

in their schools who share their interest in physics, physics teachers must look to
professional organizations for peer contact. They hunger for such contact. Nearly
half of them belong to the NSTA and/or the AAPT, but these organizations do
not satisfy their need for regular peer contact. Recognizing this need, the APS
Local Physics Alliance (LPA) program has organized physics teachers in high
schools, colleges and universities across the country into local alliances to reduce
the isolation and provide support for individual teachers. This is the beginning of
a teacher support system that can be enhanced by electronic networking and
professional development programs. University physics departments should take
advantage of this powerful mechanism for reform of high school physics by
supporting alliances in their localities and helping to organize new ones when
necessary.

Teacher ownership and control of each local alliance is essential, because

it is a professional organization by and for the teachers. The relation of the
alliance to the university should be one of partnership with the common objective
of promoting improvements in physics teaching. Identification of university
faculty who are willing to support this partnership is essential. Through such
faculty partners the alliances can draw on the resources of the university. This
could include arrangements for a suitable meeting place for the alliance as well as
information and advice about physics and physics teaching.

Internet electronic networking of all teachers in an alliance should be

regarded as essential. Universities are ideally situated to help organize and
support such networks. Universities can also provide valuable technical advice
and support for computer infusion into high school physics.

There are now about 150 LPAs across the country, with memberships
ranging from less than ten to well over a hundred. Surveys show that members
value the LPA, reading the newsletter even if they do not attend meetings. The
LPA has increased their awareness of student needs and the school situations of
colleagues. However, many teachers are reluctant to become more involved
because they cannot afford the time. This reluctance is likely to dissolve in LPAs
which are of direct help to teachers in improving their teaching. That can be
done!

Although some LPAs are very popular, none has come close to realizing

its full potential, largely because they have a limited sense of purpose, but also
because of meager support by the physics community. The avowed purpose of the
LPAs is to share ideas about teaching, to learn about teaching strategies and new
developments in physics. In reality, the LPAs contribute little to the improvement
of teaching practice, and their main benefit is social. They could do better!

The LPAs lack systematic programs to improve physics pedagogy, and

they have failed to recognize the power of organizing teachers into (action
research) teams, which work on specific projects to improve teaching practice and
report to their peers for critique and evaluation. In short, the  LPAs have not
learned to function as a learning community to improve teaching. To realize their
potential they need informed leadership and partnerships with universities to
establish coherent programs for professional development.

5

4. Programs for Professional Development––a role for universities

Most states encourage the professional development of teachers by
coupling salary levels to academic credit from universities. Unfortunately, most
post-baccalaureate coursework is so incoherent that it contributes little to the
enhancement of teacher expertise. Universities can do much better by
coordinating course offerings with the needs and desires of local teacher alliances
–– in other works, by offering the teachers greater control of their own
professional development.

The most useful university course for high school physics teachers is a
Methods of Physics Teaching course which thoroughly addresses all aspects of
high school physics teaching, including the integration of teaching methods with
course content as it should be done in the high school classroom. The course
should incorporate up-to-date

•
•
•
•

results of physics education research
best high school curriculum materials
use of technology
experience in collaborative learning and guidance.

A two semester course is needed to cover the main topics of introductory physics.

In the past, those few universities which have offered such a course have
intended it for training preservice physics teachers. No wonder they had trouble
getting the enrollment to sustain the course –– nationwide, only about 150
degrees for physics teaching are awarded each year! The enrollment problem
disappears when the course is reconceived to meet the needs of inservice physics
teachers –– for the vast majority of the 18,000 teachers could benefit from it. We
have such a course at ASU and have observed that it is a great benefit to
preservice teachers to mix them with experienced inservice teachers. Indeed, the
course has been an eye-opener to regular physics majors who have stumbled into
it, and we think that it would be valuable for graduate teaching assistants as well.
Requiring at least one semester of the course for all physics majors would
sensitize them to the profound challenges of physics education.

The "Methods course" should not stand alone; it should be an integral part

of a balanced program for professional development. Its purpose is to fill a
serious gap in the education of physics teachers. As asserted by the National
Standards (1): "Effective science teaching is more than knowing science content
and some teaching strategies. Skilled teachers of science have special
understandings and abilities that integrate their knowledge of science content,
curriculum, learning, teaching, and students. Such knowledge allows teachers to
tailor learning situations to the needs of individuals and groups. This special
knowledge, called "pedagogical content knowledge," distinguishes the science
knowledge of teachers from that of scientists. It is one element that defines a
professional teacher of science. In addition to solid knowledge of science,
teachers of science must have a firm grounding in learning theory––
understanding how learning occurs and is facilitated."

6

To integrate the Methods course into a professional development program

the following conditions should be satisfied:

peer teaching
summer scheduling

•
•
• LPA follow-up.

These points require some elaboration.

The "peer teaching principle" holds that professionals are best taught by
peers who are exceptionally well-versed in the objectives, methods and problems
of the profession. Accordingly, the Methods course should be taught by a master
inservice teacher. University faculty rarely have the pedagogical knowledge or
the intimate familiarity with the high school scene to teach such a course.
Moreover, the inservice teacher is a stakeholder in the teaching profession and
therefore cares deeply about the course outcomes. It could be valuable, though
not essential, for a physics professor to assist in teaching the course. That would
enable faculty to get to the teachers personally, become sensitive to their needs
and to contribute physics expertise. Some universities may require faculty
participation to award academic credit for the course, but that is a local matter.
Ideally, the master teacher would be given adjunct professor status and treated as
a respected colleague by the faculty. This connection could be considerably
strengthened by giving the master teacher a half time appointment during the
academic year to work directly with physics teachers in the LPA.

The Methods course must be scheduled at a time when the teachers can

attend. At an urban university within commuting distance, an evening or Saturday
schedule would be feasible. However, summer scheduling is much to be
preferred. From our experience, we know that a "workshop format" which
immerses the teachers in collaborative efforts for the better part of each day for a
minimum of four weeks is most effective, because it stimulates the formation of
strong working relationships among the teachers. That is possible only in a
summer course offered for up to six academic credits. By consultation with the
LPA a sufficient enrollment of inservice teachers can be assured in advance.
Moreover, teachers from rural schools can be included, especially if some
provisions are made to help defray their expenses to attend.

The LPA, as a true learning community, should follow-up the Methods

course with peer collaboration to help teachers implement and extend what they
have learned. Teachers should be organized into action research teams which aim
to solve practical problems to improve classroom teaching. As the National
Standards assert (1): "Inquiry into practice is essential for effective teaching.
Teachers need continuous opportunities to do so. Through collaborations with
colleagues, teachers should inquire into their own practice." The LPA provides a
forum for action research teams to share the results of their efforts with peers.
Action research is a means for continuous critique and improvement of teaching
practice. Because few teachers know how to conduct such research, one purpose
of the Methods course should be to get them started. Thereafter, guidance and
assistance by a master teacher and other peers is probably necessary for most
teachers.

7

The primary responsibility for professional development lies with the

teachers themselves. However, they cannot fulfill it effectively without resources
supplied by a university or college. Any physics department with the will can
easily meet the minimal commitment to support an LPA in a significant
professional development program. Indeed, commitment from a single professor
may be sufficient. All that is required of the professor is to schedule a Methods
course taught by a master teacher. A good LPA can take care of the rest. It is to
be hoped, though, that from a minimal commitment much more will grow.

5. Training Master Teachers––agents for reform

The most problematic factor in the formation of professional development

programs is the enlistment of master teachers to conduct Workshop-courses and
guide action research teams. There are many capable physics teachers with
extensive teaching experience, but few are sufficiently well-informed and
prepared to teach the kind of Methods course that is needed. They need some
special training.

The AAPT has a leadership training program which certifies exceptionally

qualified high school physics teachers as Physics Teaching Resource Agents
(PTRA). The objective of this program is to prepare a cadre of teachers who are
willing and able to assist others in improving their teaching. Universities can be a
great help, especially by contributing to the creation and maintenance of an
infrastructure through which the PTRA teachers can act effectively. The natural
way is a marriage of local alliances with the PTRA. About 400  PTRAs have been
trained so far.

PTRA training has focused on implementing technology, physics demos

and some bits of physics education research. A systematic approach to physics
pedagogy has been lacking. Our NSF-funded Modeling Workshop program aims
to remedy this deficiency with intensive training over a three year period. (See (2)
and references therein for details.) The Workshops in this program model in
content and duration the kind of Methods course needed for local professional
development programs. Out of more than 50 participants in the first phase of the
program, we have identified 22 who are capable, eager and well-trained to
function as master teachers. Many more will emerge from subsequent phases of
the program. This program could be adapted and expanded into a national
program for training and supporting master teachers nationwide.

6. Cooperation with schools and wider reform

As already described, university-LPA partnerships for professional
development can be organized and operated without involving schools or school
districts. In the long run, however, cooperation with schools will be necessary to
improve teaching conditions. Most teachers have little time and meager resources
for teaching innovation. The average physics class is allocated only $250 for
supplies (3). Nevertheless, only 12% of physics teachers are dissatisfied with the

8

support they receive from the school administration (3). Indeed, in our work with
teachers we have found that most schools are able to supply funds for computers,
release time and other affordances when it is justified by the teacher’s
involvement in a program with the credibility of NSF support.

A major reason that physics teachers have insufficient resources for

innovation is that principals and school boards do not understand their needs or
respond to unusual requests by individual teachers. Involvement in professional
development partnerships can give teachers leverage for reforms in their schools
through credible backing by universities. Strong university backing for a coherent
professional development program can induce schools, school districts and
communities to vie for its benefits. Thus, they may be induced to  reduce contact
hours, give release time for action research or pay teachers to participate in the
summer workshops. In fact, many school districts and funding agencies have
earmarked funds to support professional development, but they have trouble
finding good ways to spend them. Great strides in science education reform could
be made through regular support of teacher professional development in the
summers. Adequate programs do not yet exist. However, the physics community
could institute such a program nationwide in just a few years. The resources are
in hand, only the will is needed.

A strong nationwide professional development program for physics
teachers would be a great help to the entire K-12 science education reform
movement. High school physics is usually neglected in plans and programs for
science education reform. Two reasons are commonly given: First, physics is
regarded as elitist and suitable for only a small minority of students. Second,
science teaching reform in primary and middle school is regarded as a more
serious problem which must be addressed first. Let us see what is wrong with
these views.

We know that physics is an essential component of science and
technology, so its place in science education at all levels must be strengthened.
Between 20 and 25% of high school students take physics, but many more would
do so if the teaching and course reputation were improved. Indeed, in schools
with outstanding physics teachers the enrollment is invariably much higher than
the norm. By improving the quality and relevance of physics courses, professional
development partnerships could make this the rule rather than the exception. This
is certainly the best way to increase physics enrollment –– better than simply
making physics a required course. If physics is to be taken by the majority of high
school students, instruction must be reformed to make it worth their while.

The bottom-up approach to science education reform focusing on primary

and middle school teachers overlooks the power of a top-down approach
beginning with high school physics at the top. Both approaches are needed, and
the latter may be essential success of the former. Though professional
development is widely recognized as essential to reform at all grade levels, many
efforts are foundering for lack of qualified leaders––experienced teachers with
strong scientific and pedagogical backgrounds. We have found that physics
teachers with the pedagogical training supplied by our Modeling Workshops are

9

Blueprint for Sustained, Rapid Reform

    "All reform is ultimately local."

J. Russell

University/College
physics depts.

Partnership

Local
Infrastructure

professors

Local Physics
Alliances

teachers

Professional
Development

Workshop
Courses

Action
Research
Teams

Reform
Agents

National
Resources
& Programs

Master Teachers

New developments

educational research

curriculum materials
technology

software
electronic networking

FIGURE 2.

10

well prepared and eager to help other science teachers at lower grade levels.
Already, many of them are in demand for this purpose. We are thus confident in
asserting that a strong professional development for physics teachers will serve as
a source of excellent inservice leaders for science education reform generally.

7. A Blueprint for Sustained and Rapid Physics Teaching Reform

Physics education research and development has recently emerged as a

respectable academic discipline within university physics departments. This will
accelerate new developments in physics pedagogy, curriculum materials and
technology-enabled instruction. We need a rapid delivery system to incorporate
such advances into classroom practice and thereby drive educational reform. The
traditional educational delivery system has enormous inertia and resistance to
change. We need to short circuit it with direct delivery to inservice teachers. We
cannot wait for the weighty action of academic curriculum committees, state
certification boards, school boards and the like.

Figure 2 is the schematic for a rapid response system to drive physics

education reform. It requires an infrastructure to keep a cadre of master teachers
well-informed about new developments in physics education. The master teachers
will be the principal agents of reform, linking educational research and
development to the reform of classroom teaching. They will incorporate new
results into their Workshop courses and feed new ideas and materials to action
research teams to be evaluated and adapted for classroom use by the teachers.
Thereby the master teachers will provide a continual stimulus to local
partnerships for professional development.

Our Modeling Workshop Project (2) offers a ready framework for training

and supporting master teachers. It provides a realization of the National
Standards in a robust and flexible pedagogical framework for evaluating and
integrating new pedagogical ideas and curriculum materials into effective
instructional designs. It is thus an open system which can assimilate valuable
instructional innovations from any quarter of the physics community for rapid
dispersal to active teachers.
It is a system in which inservice teachers are the final arbiters of pedagogical
value.

Acknowledgment: This work has been supported by a grant from the National Science
Foundation.

References

(1) National Research Council,  National Science Education Standards , National Academy Press,

Wash. DC, 1996.

(2) Hestenes, D., Modeling Methodology for Physics Teachers, These Proceedings.
(3) Neueschatz, M. & Alpert, L., 1993 Nationwide Survey of High School Teachers, American

Institute of Physics, College Park, 1996.

11

