8
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
h
t
a
m

[
 
 
1
v
9
1
0
1
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Momentum Maps and Classical
Relativistic Fields

Part I: Covariant Field Theory

Mark J. Gotay ∗
Department of Mathematics
University of Hawai‘i
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96822, USA
gotay@math.hawaii.edu

James Isenberg †
Department of Mathematics
University of Oregon
Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA
jim@newton.uoregon.edu

Jerrold E. Marsden ‡
Control and Dynamical Systems 107-81
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, California 91125, USA
marsden@cds.caltech.edu

With the collaboration of

Richard Montgomery

J¸edrzej ´Sniatycki

Philip B.Yasskin

November 18, 1997

∗Research partially supported as a Ford Foundation Fellow, by NSF grants DMS 88-05699,

92-22241, and 96-23083, and grants from ONR/NARC.
†Partially supported by NSF grant PHY 92-01196.
‡Partially supported by NSF grant DMS 96-33161.

i

Contents

1 Introduction

I—Covariant Field Theory

2 Multisymplectic Manifolds

2A The Jet Bundle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2B The Dual Jet Bundle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Lagrangian Dynamics

3A The Covariant Legendre Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3B The Cartan Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3C The Euler–Lagrange Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

4A Jet Prolongations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4B Covariant Canonical Transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4C Covariant Momentum Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4D Symmetries and Noether’s Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Interlude I—On Classical Field Theory

References

1

15

15
15
17
20
23

25
26
27
27
31

35
35
37
39
40
43
48

53

57

§1 Introduction

1

1

Introduction

This is the ﬁrst paper of a four part work in which we study the Lagrangian and
Hamiltonian structure of classical ﬁeld theories with constraints. Our goal is
to explore some of the connections between initial value constraints and gauge
transformations in such theories (either relativistic or not). To do this, in the
course of these four papers, we develop and use a number of tools from sym-
plectic and multisymplectic geometry. Of central importance in our analysis is
the notion of the “energy-momentum map” associated to the gauge group of
a given classical ﬁeld theory. We hope to demonstrate that, as illustrated and
explained below, many diﬀerent and apparently unrelated facets of ﬁeld theories
can be thereby tied together and understood in an essentially new way.

Our research is motivated by previous exhaustive studies of several stan-
dard examples following the methods of Choquet–Bruhat, Lichnerowicz, Dirac–
Bergmann, and Arnowitt–Deser–Misner. In particular, if one performs an ini-
tial value (or “canonical”) analysis of Einstein’s theory of gravity (either alone
or coupled to Dirac, electromagnetic, or other ﬁelds), Yang–Mills theory, rel-
ativistic ﬂuid theories, bosonic string theory, topological ﬁeld theories, and so
forth, one ﬁnds that they share the following striking features. (See Fischer and
Marsden [1979a, b], Isenberg and Nester [1980], K¨unzle and Nester [1984], Bao,
Isenberg, and Yasskin [1985], Batlle, Gomis, and Pons [1986], and Horowitz
[1989] and references therein for discussions of these and other ﬁeld theories.)

1. The Euler–Lagrange equations are underdetermined; that is, there are not
enough evolution equations to propagate all the ﬁeld components. This is because
the theory has gauge freedom. The corresponding gauge group is known at the
outset.

As a consequence, some of the ﬁelds do not have their evolution determined
by the Euler–Lagrange equations. These “kinematic ﬁelds” have no physical
signiﬁcance. Amongst the remaining ﬁelds are the “dynamic ﬁelds” ψ (with
conjugate momenta ρ); these are the ﬁelds that have physical meaning.

The situation is further complicated in that the initial data (ψ(0), ρ(0))

cannot be freely speciﬁed.

2. The Euler–Lagrange equations are overdetermined in that they include con-
straints

Φi(ψ, ρ) = 0

(1.1)

on the choice of Cauchy data.

Equations (1.1) typically comprise an elliptic system whose component
equations can be of variable order. For simplicity we suppose that all constraints
are “ﬁrst class” in the terminology of Dirac [1964]. (The case when second class
constraints are present will be discussed in a later work.)

It is remarkable that the Euler–Lagrange equations are simultaneously un-
derdetermined and overdetermined. The next feature ties these two properties
together.

2

§1 Introduction

3. The constraint functions Φi generate gauge transformations of the dynamic
ﬁelds via the canonical symplectic structure on the space of Cauchy data.

Thus, the presence of (ﬁrst class) initial value constraints is intimately re-
lated to the gauge freedom of the theory. Since gauge transformations are part
of the dynamics and since the constraints generate gauge transformations, one
expects the functions Φi to appear in the Hamiltonian. Indeed, in these example
theories, we ﬁnd:

4. The Hamiltonian (with respect to a slicing of spacetime, usually taken to
consist of Cauchy surfaces) has the form

H =

αiΦi(ψ, ρ)dΣ

ZΣ Xi

(1.2)

depending linearly on the “atlas ﬁelds” αi. Here Σ is a hypersurface modeling
a tyical member of the given slicing.

The atlas ﬁelds, discussed in more detail later, are closely related to the kine-
matic ﬁelds mentioned in item 1. (Being sections of an associated bundle, they
may be regarded as certain combinations of the kinematic ﬁelds and elements of
the Lie algebra of the gauge group.) The atlas ﬁelds are arbitrarily speciﬁable;
intuitively, one can view them as governing the propagation of coordinates on a
Cauchy surface (and on bundles of ﬁelds over a Cauchy surface) in time—hence
the name. Their importance derives from the fact that they “drive” the entire
gauge ambiguity of the theory (cf. the next item).

Introduce an L2 inner product on the space of Cauchy data (with correspond-
ing adjoint denoted by ∗), and let J be an almost complex structure compatible
with both the given inner product and the symplectic form. Let λ be a pa-
rameter (“time”) labeling the slicing mentioned above. From (1.2), it follows
that

5. The evolution equations for the dynamic ﬁelds (ψ, ρ) take the “adjoint form”

d
dλ (cid:18)

ψ
ρ(cid:19)

= J

DΦi(ψ(λ), ρ(λ))
(cid:3)

· Xi (cid:2)

∗

αi(λ).

(1.3)

Equations (1.3) are typically a hyperbolic system; hence, for ﬁxed αi(λ),
they uniquely determine the evolution of the dynamic ﬁelds and their conjugate
momenta from given initial data. Here, the atlas ﬁelds αi(λ) are to be speciﬁed
ab initio; this amounts to a gauge–ﬁxing. Equations (1.3) display, in the clearest
and most concise way, the interrelations between the dynamics, the initial value
constraints, and the gauge ambiguity of a theory.

The constraint equations (1.1) are preserved by the evolution equations (1.3).

Of course,

6. The covariant Euler–Lagrange equations are equivalent, modulo gauge trans-
formations, to the combined evolution and constraint equations (1.3) and (1.1)

§1 Introduction

3

This result, together with items 4 and 5, constitute the theoretical back-
ground necessary to analyze the structure of the solution space of the Euler–
Lagrange equations. For the theories mentioned above, we have:

7. The space of solutions of the ﬁeld equations is not necessarily a smooth mani-
fold. It may have quadratic singularities occurring exactly at those solutions that
are symmetric (in the sense of being invariant under the action of a nondiscrete
subgroup of the gauge group).

See Fischer, Marsden, and Moncrief [1980], Arms, Marsden, and Moncrief
[1981, 1982], Marsden [1988], Arms [1977, 1981], Arms, Gotay, and Jennings
[1990], Arms, Cushman, and Gotay [1991], Sjamaar and Lerman [1991] and
Interlude III for more information on the meaning of item 7. These results
are an outgrowth of the extensive literature on linearization stability, which
concerns the success or failure of the linearization process as far as predicting the
valid directions of perturbation theory, as well as that on symplectic reduction,
which is the means of eliminating those degrees of freedom of a system that are
associated with symmetries.

Noether’s theorem and the formal Dirac–Bergmann analysis of constraints
do much to predict and explain features 1–6. However, we wish to go further and
provide (realistic) suﬃcient conditions which guarantee that they must occur
in a given ﬁeld theory. In this work we provide such criteria for the ﬁrst six
conditions and lay the groundwork needed for the analysis of the seventh. One
of the goals is thus to derive the adjoint formalism for classical ﬁeld theories.
A key tool throughout this work is the energy-momentum map, which we
deﬁne in paper II. A recurrent theme in this work is that the energy-momentum
map encodes essentially all the dynamical information carried by a given classi-
cal ﬁeld theory: its Hamiltonian, its initial value constraints, its gauge freedom,
and even its stress-energy tensor. Indeed, in Part III we shall prove

The Energy-Momentum Theorem. The constraints (1.1) are
given by the vanishing of the energy-momentum map associated to
the gauge group of the theory.

Thus the constraint functions Φi are “components” of the energy-momentum
map. Item 4 then shows that the same is true for the Hamiltonian.

Certain of these results are known in speciﬁc instances and have to some
extent acquired “folk theorem” status. But we wish to prove that they hold
rather generally. In this regard we emphasize that the energy-momentum map
it leads to
does more than merely provide reformulations of known results;
fundamental insights into the foundations of physical theories. In view of their
importance—and ubiquity—in classical ﬁeld theory, one is tempted to elevate
the statement “momentum maps are everything” to a general principle!

To understand the role played by the energy-momentum map, recall the
two traditional approaches to classical ﬁeld theory, which we may characterize
as “group-theoretical” and “canonical.” The group-theoretical approach is con-
cerned with the gauge covariance of a given system, and is based upon Noether’s

4

§1 Introduction

theorem. It operates on the (spacetime) covariant level, and is usually phrased
in Lagrangian terms. (See Trautman [1967], Olver [1986], and references con-
tained therein for relevant background.) In contrast, the canonical approach is
used to analyze the initial value problem in a Hamiltonian setting; the basic
tool here is the Dirac–Bergmann theory of constraints. Such an analysis re-
quires that the theory be space + time decomposed relative to a ﬁxed choice of
Cauchy surface in spacetime. (See Dirac [1964], Hanson, Regge and Teitelboim
[1976], Gotay, Nester, and Hinds [1978], Isenberg and Nester [1980], as well as
the review by Sundermeyer [1982] for detailed accounts.)

The group-theoretical and canonical aspects of a mechanical system are
linked by the momentum map (see, for example, Abraham and Marsden [1978]
and Marsden [l992]). One would like to have an analogous connection in ﬁeld
theory which, in particular, relates gauge symmetries to initial value constraints.
But—and this is a crucial point—the standard notion of a momentum map as-
sociated to a symplectic group action usually cannot be carried over to spacetime
covariant ﬁeld theory. The reason is that the gauge group typically does not
act in the space + time decomposed (or “instantaneous”) framework, because
spacetime diﬀeomorphisms move Cauchy surfaces. Because the Hamiltonian
formalism is only deﬁned relative to a ﬁxed Cauchy surface, there is no possi-
bility of obtaining a momentum map for the gauge group in the usual sense on
the instantaneous phase space.

The prime example where this situation arises is Einstein’s theory of vac-
uum gravity, in which case the gauge group is the spacetime diﬀeomorphism
group. The only remnants of this group on the instantaneous level are, in the
ADM (Arnowitt, Deser and Misner [1962]) language, the superhamiltonian H
and supermomenta J which are interpreted as the generators of temporal and
spatial deformations of a Cauchy surface, respectively. But these deformations
do not form a group, nor are H and J components of a momentum map. (See
Kuchaˇr [1973] for further details.) More generally, this diﬃculty appears for any
theory which is parametrized in that its gauge group “includes” the spacetime
diﬀeomorphism group (in an appropriate sense).

This circumstance forces us to work on the covariant level. But it is then
necessary to construct a covariant counterpart to the instantaneous Hamilto-
nian formalism. In the spacetime covariant (or “multisymplectic”) framework
we develop here—which is an extension and reﬁnement of the formalism of Ki-
jowski and Szczyrba [1976]—the gauge group does act. This enables us to deﬁne
the notion of a covariant (or “multi-”) momentum map on the corresponding
covariant (or “multi-”) phase space. This covariant momentum map satisﬁes
Noether’s theorem, and has all the properties one would expect. It remains to
correlate this object with the dynamics once a Cauchy surface has been sin-
gled out. To this end, a careful study of the mechanics of the space + time
decomposition shows that the covariant momentum map induces an energy -
momentum map Φ on the instantaneous phase space.
It is not a genuine
momentum map, as there is no group action in this context; nonetheless, Φ is
the instantaneous “shadow” of a covariant momentum map, and this is enough.
The energy-momentum map is the crucial object that reﬂects the gauge trans-

§1 Introduction

5

formation covariance of a classical ﬁeld theory in the instantaneous formalism.
(H, J), so that the superhamiltonian
In the ADM formulation of gravity, Φ =
and supermomenta are the components of the energy-momentum map.

−

The energy-momentum map thus synthesizes the group-theoretical and ca-
nonical approaches to classical ﬁeld theory. Consonant with this observation,
we view the gauge group of a theory as being fundamental, and suppose it to
be known ab initio. This is certainly the case in the standard examples cited
previously. Our plan is then to use the energy-momentum map associated to
the gauge group of the theory to study, and indeed derive, items 1–6 above.
This shift in viewpoint proves to be surprisingly fruitful, enabling us to obtain
deeper results than by the traditional methods alone.

The theoretical underpinnings of the adjoint formalism for classical ﬁeld

theories consist of four components:

I. a covariant analysis of ﬁeld theories;

II. a space + time decomposition of the covariant formalism followed by an

initial value analysis of ﬁeld theories;

III. a study of the relations between gauge symmetries and initial value con-

straints; and

IV. the actual derivation of the adjoint formalism.

The ﬁrst two components constitute the foundation for the last two, where most
of the hard work is concentrated. We present each of these four components
as a paper in this series, starting with the covariant analysis. Before beginning
Part I, we now comment brieﬂy on each of the four parts, in turn. (For the
convenience of the reader, we append a table of contents of Parts II–IV at the
end of this paper.)

In Part I we develop some of the basic theory of classical ﬁelds from a
spacetime covariant viewpoint. Throughout we restrict attention to ﬁrst or-
der theories; these are theories whose Lagrangians involve no higher than ﬁrst
derivatives of the ﬁelds.

§

We begin in

2 with a study of the covariant Lagrangian and Hamiltonian
formalisms, mirroring the approach usually taken in classical mechanics. Let
X be an (n + 1)–dimensional parameter space, which in applications is usually
spacetime. We suppose that we are given a bundle Y over X whose sections are
the ﬁelds of interest; Y is the covariant conﬁguration bundle. The ﬁeld–
theoretic analogue of the tangent bundle of mechanics is the ﬁrst jet bundle J 1Y
of Y . By taking an appropriate dual of J 1Y we obtain the space Z which is,
roughly speaking, the covariant cotangent bundle of the bundle Y . As such, it
carries a canonical (n+1)-form Θ. The multisymplectic (n+2)-form Ω =
dΘ
is the covariant generalization of the symplectic form in Hamiltonian mechanics.
The pair (Z, Ω) is called multiphase space.

−

Next, in

3, we introduce a Lagrangian density L on J 1Y . The covariant
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formalisms are then related by the covariant
Legendre transformation FL : J 1Y
Z which is deﬁned, as in mechanics,

§

→

6

§1 Introduction

by means of the ﬁber derivative of L. Pulling the form Ω on Z back by FL
we obtain the Cartan form on J 1Y (also variously known as the “Hamilton–
Cartan” and “Poincar´e–Cartan” form). We use it to construct an intrinsic
formulation of the variational calculus and the Euler–Lagrange equations, cf.
Goldschmidt and Sternberg [1973] and Garc´ıa [1974].

Our approach to covariant ﬁeld theory has a number of advantages over other
formulations. For instance, unlike those of Kijowski and Tulczyjew [1979], Ra-
gionieri and Ricci [1981], G¨unther [1987], Sardanashvily [1993], and Kanatchikov
[1996], our multisymplectic structure and corresponding covariant Hamiltonian
formalism are intrinsically deﬁned, independent of other constructs (such as a
background connection). Other formalisms such as those of Goldschmidt and
Sternberg [1973] and ´Sniatycki [1984], although intrinsic, do not carry multi-
symplectic structures at all. The approach we take here is also promising for
higher order ﬁeld theories, which are plagued by a number of ambiguities; see
Gotay [1991a,b] and references therein. Perhaps most importantly, our approach
allows us to deﬁne covariant momentum maps for groups that act nontrivially
on X.
In

4 we discuss symmetries and conservation laws of classical ﬁeld theories
in terms of “covariant momentum maps,” generalizing the concept of momentum
map familiar from mechanics. If one introduces a Lie group G (possibly inﬁnite
dimensional) with Lie algebra g that acts on (Z, Ω) in an appropriate way, then
ΛnZ
one can deﬁne a multi —or covariant momentum map J : Z
that intertwines the group action with the multisymplectic structure via the
equation

g∗

→

⊗

§

ξZ Ω = dJ(ξ),

∈

g, ξZ is the inﬁnitesimal generator on Z of
where J(ξ) denotes J paired with ξ
the one parameter group generated by ξ, and d is the exterior derivative. It of-
ten happens that such group actions are lifted from actions on Y , in which case
4D we prove Noether’s the-
one has an explicit formula for J; see
orem, which provides the basic relation between symmetries of the Lagrangian
and conserved quantities. Our multisymplectic formulation of Noether’s theo-
rem is speciﬁcally designed with later applications to the relationship between
constraints and the momentum map in mind. Here we also state and prove a
converse to Noether’s theorem, subject to a certain transitivity assumption on
the group action.

4C. Then in

§

§

All the discussion in Part I is spacetime covariant. In Part II we use space
+ time decompositions to reformulate classical ﬁeld theories as inﬁnite di-
mensional dynamical systems. The transition from the multisymplectic to the
instantaneous formalism once a Cauchy surface (or a slicing by Cauchy surfaces)
has been chosen is essential to deﬁne the energy-momentum map and thence to
cast the ﬁeld dynamics into adjoint form.

Consider an n–dimensional Cauchy surface Σ

X (assumed compact and
boundaryless). In the instantaneous context, the conﬁguration space for ﬁeld
dynamics is the space YΣ of sections of Y restricted to Σ, and the phase space
is T ∗YΣ with its canonical symplectic form. We emphasize that this symplectic

⊂

§1 Introduction

7

structure lives on the space of Cauchy data for the evolution equations, and not
on the space of solutions thereof (as in, e.g., Zuckerman [1986] and Crnkoviˇc
and Witten [1987]). This is an important distinction, as the former space is
typically better behaved than the latter (cf. item 7 as well as the discussion in
Horowitz [1989]). It also obviates the problem of constructing a diﬀerentiable
structure on the space of solutions, as was attempted by Kijowski and Szczyrba
[1976].

§

In Part II, the main result of

5 is that the multisymplectic structure on Z
induces the canonical symplectic structure on T ∗YΣ. To bridge the gap between
the covariant and instantaneous formalisms, we introduce an intermediate space
ZΣ, the space of sections of Z restricted to Σ. The multisymplectic (n + 2)-
form Ω on Z induces a presymplectic 2-form ΩΣ on ZΣ by integration over Σ.
Reducing ZΣ by the kernel of ΩΣ produces a symplectic manifold ZΣ/(ker ΩΣ),
which we prove is canonically symplectomorphic to T ∗YΣ.

§§

This shows how to space + time decompose covariant multisymplectic phase
spaces into instantaneous symplectic phase spaces. Next, in
6A–D, we perform
a similar decomposition of dynamics using the notion of slicings. An important
result in this section states that the dynamics is compatible with the space
+ time decomposition in the following sense: Solutions of the instantaneous
Hamilton equations correspond directly to solutions of the covariant Euler–
Lagrange equations and vice versa. This fact—a prerequisite for establishing
item 6—is usually taken for granted in the literature. Here we provide a proof,
assuming only mild regularity assumptions that are satisﬁed in cases of interest.
An important tool throughout this work is the initial value analysis. One
of the hallmarks of ﬁeld theories is that not all of the Euler–Lagrange equations
necessarily describe the temporal evolution of ﬁelds; some of them may impose
constraints on the choice of initial data. The constraints that are ﬁrst class
reﬂect the gauge symmetry of the theory and eventually will be related to the
vanishing of various (energy-) momentum maps. Thus, it is important to fully
analyze the roles of constraints and gauge transformations in dynamics and the
relations between them. To this end, we utilize the symplectic version of the
Dirac–Bergmann treatment of degenerate Hamiltonian systems (patterned after
Gotay, Nester and Hinds [1978], cf. also Sundermeyer [1982]). This formalism,
6E, yields an essentially complete understanding of
which we summarize in
items 1–3, and lays the groundwork for correlating the ﬁrst class constraints
with the gauge group of the theory via the energy-momentum map.

§

§

In

7 we space + time decompose multimomentum maps associated to covari-
ant group actions, thereby correlating these objects with momentum mappings
(in the usual sense) in the instantaneous formalism. Thus, suppose that G is a
group of automorphisms of Y . As emphasized earlier, G usually does not act on
YΣ or on T ∗YΣ as it need not stabilize Σ. Nonetheless, by integrating over Σ,
g∗, which can then be
the covariant momentum map J gives rise to a map ZΣ →
g∗, where the “primary con-
shown to project to a well–deﬁned map EΣ : PΣ →
straint set” PΣ is the image of T YΣ in T ∗YΣ under the instantaneous Legendre
transform. This map EΣ is the energy-momentum map. It is typically not
a true momentum map. However, if one considers only the subgroup GΣ of G

8

§1 Introduction

that stabilizes the Cauchy surface (and that therefore acts in the instantaneous
formalism), then EΣ restricts to a genuine momentum map for the GΣ-action on
T ∗YΣ that corresponds in relativity to the supermomenta, without the inclusion
of the superhamiltonian. In the general case EΣ corresponds to both H and J.
Parts I and II provide the requisite background for the study of items 4–6,
which we carry out in Parts III and IV. Part III, in particular, focuses on estab-
lishing a relationship between the initial value constraints on the one hand, and
the energy-momentum map corresponding to the gauge transformations on the
other. (See the Energy-Momentum Theorem.) We begin the study of this rela-
tionship in
8 of Part III, in which we characterize the “gauge group” of a given
classical ﬁeld theory. Surprisingly, this notion, although familiar and intuitive,
has never been precisely deﬁned in any generality. It is—for the moment—to
be distinguished from the notion of “instantaneous gauge transformation” `a la
Dirac that was alluded to above. Of course, one of the main goals of Part III is
to show that these two notions of “gauge” are in fact the same. This will follow
once item 3 and the Energy-Momentum Theorem are established.

§

The gauge group G is taken to be a subgroup of Aut(Y ), the group of

automorphisms of the bundle Y . It must satisfy certain properties, viz.:

(i) G acts by symmetries, for example, the Lagrangian density L is G-

equivariant.

(ii) G is localizable, which intuitively means that elements of G can be “turned
oﬀ” in the “future” or the “past.” This property is crucial; it is what
distinguishes a gauge group from a mere symmetry group.

(iii) G is the largest such subgroup of Aut(Y ).

In

8A we give a principal bundle construction of G.
§
One should bear in mind, however, that some ﬁeld theories may have no
gauge freedom (or initial value constraints) at all; the Klein–Gordon ﬁeld on
a noninteracting background spacetime is a simple example of such a system.
Theories like this can be subsumed into our formalism by requiring them to be
parametrized , in the sense that G maps onto Diﬀ(X) (or at least a localizable
subgroup thereof) under the natural projection Aut(Y )
Diﬀ(X). Thus, the
gauge groups of parametrized theories are always nontrivial. Many ﬁeld theories
are “already” parametrized (e.g., the Polyakov string, topological ﬁeld theories,
gravity). In any case, this requirement involves no loss of generality, since a
theory that is not parametrized can often be made so, for example, by simply
introducing a metric on X and treating it as an auxiliary variable (which may
or may not be dynamic), or else by coupling it to gravity. Kuchaˇr [1973] gives
an alternate way of parametrizing a theory. Henceforth we assume that the
systems under consideration are parametrized. (Although our formalism is best
suited to parametrized theories, much of it—with appropriate modiﬁcations—
will apply to “background” theories as well. These points are discussed further
in the text; see also Interlude I.)

→

We start building towards the main results of Part III by establishing the
following result, which is basic to the entire development. Fix a hypersurface

§1 Introduction

9

∈

g with the property that its associated spacetime vector
Σ and an element ζ
ﬁeld ζX is transverse to Σ. (Such a vector ﬁeld exists since the theory is param-
etrized.) The Lie algebra element ζ may be thought of as deﬁning an “evolution
direction”; it is analogous to the “lapse” and “shift” in relativity. In
7F we
show that the instantaneous Hamiltonian density HΣ,ζ on PΣ corresponding to
the evolution direction ζ

g is given by

§

∈

HΣ,ζ =

EΣ(ζ).

−

(1.4)

Thus the instantaneous Hamiltonian is a component of EΣ (hence the appel-
lation energy–momentum map). It follows that EΣ actually generates the dy-
namics of the system. This result is familiar in the ADM formulation of gravity:
X(X), (1.4) reduces
using the fact that EΣ =
to

(H, J) and setting ζ = (N, M )

−

∈

HΣ (N,M) = N H + M

J.

·

Equation (1.4) forms the basis for item 4; in this regard, the fact that HΣ,ζ is
manifestly linear in ζ presages its linearity in the atlas ﬁelds, discussed later for
general ﬁeld theories.

§

Next, in

9, we prove the vanishing theorem (aka the “second Noether
theorem”), which states that on any solution of the Euler–Lagrange equations,
the multimomentum map integrated over a hypersurface is zero. This result
follows from Noether’s theorem, G–equivariance, and localizability. The vanish-
ing theorem implies that the energy-momentum map must vanish on admissible
Cauchy data for the evolution equations. (The fact that EΣ must vanish, as
opposed to merely being constant, is a direct consequence of localizability.)

With these results in hand, in

11 we establish the Energy-Momentum
Theorem, which asserts that for any ﬁeld theory which is ﬁrst class and satis-
ﬁes certain technical conditions, the set CΣ of admissible Cauchy data for the
evolution equations is exactly the zero level set of the energy-momentum map
associated to the gauge group:

§

CΣ = E

−1
Σ (0) .

(1.5)

The set CΣ is known as the “ﬁnal constraint set” in Dirac’s terminology. More
succinctly, this theorem says that the initial value constraints are given by the
vanishing of the energy-momentum map. Although often quoted in the liter-
ature, to our knowledge no proof of this fact has ever been given. It may at
ﬁrst appear that (1.5) is “just” the vanishing theorem, but this is not the case.
Certainly the second Noether theorem implies that the vanishing of the energy-
momentum map yields initial value constraints, which can then be shown to
be ﬁrst class. But it is far from obvious that in fact all such constraints arise
in this fashion. Moreover, the proper context for the second Noether theorem
is the multisymplectic formalism described above. Only in this setting is one
able to obtain constraints that are associated to gauge transformations that
move Cauchy surfaces in spacetime, such as the superhamiltonian constraint in

10

§1 Introduction

general relativity. It should be observed that other covariant Hamiltonian for-
malisms are deﬁcient in this regard, for example, that of Kijowski and Tulczyjew
[1979].

One corollary of the Energy-Momentum Theorem is that since G

= ∅, ﬁrst
class constraints are always present in parametrized theories (in which all ﬁelds
are dynamic). Thus, with this proviso, items 1–3 are never vacuous. Another
corollary is that the covariant and instantaneous notions of gauge coincide; more
precisely, when space + time decomposed, the gauge group generates exactly
the instantaneous gauge transformations in the sense of the Dirac constraint
theory. This indicates that the above deﬁnition of G is “correct.”

There are computational advantages that accrue from this theorem as well.
For instance, one can always compute the initial value constraints of a given
ﬁeld theory according to the Dirac–Bergmann procedure. But the ensuing cal-
culations can be quite involved, and the results are not always easy to interpret.
An analysis based on the gauge group and the energy-momentum map, on the
other hand, is often substantially simpler—and has the advantage of attaching a
group theoretical interpretation to the constraints. A case in point is again pro-
vided by ADM gravity. If one merely carries out the Dirac–Bergmann analysis,
one obtains the superhamiltonian and supermomentum constraints, but it is en-
tirely unclear from these analyses what their geometric signiﬁcance is. Only by
“hindsight” is one able to correlate these constraints with temporal and spatial
deformations of a Cauchy surface, reﬂecting the 4–dimensional diﬀeomorphism
gauge freedom of the theory. The problem is that the spacetime diﬀeomorphism
group is “hidden” once one performs a space + time decomposition—a neces-
sary prerequisite to the initial value analysis. But our procedure yields these
constraints rather routinely, and their geometric meaning is clear from the be-
ginning. Thus, one has a method for identifying the ﬁnal constraint set that
does not in principle require one to invoke the entire constraint preservation
algorithm. The criteria which must be checked are not always easy to verify
11 do guarantee an equivalence between the
but, in any case, the theorems of
results of the Dirac–Bergmann algorithm and the results of an analysis based
on the energy-momentum map of a given gauge group action.

§

§

In

T ∗YΣ.

The Energy-Momentum Theorem is really a statement about (ﬁrst class)
secondary constraints, as EΣ is only deﬁned on the primary constraint set
PΣ ⊂
10 we show that (ﬁrst class) primary constraints can be
recovered in much the same way, but the proof is more diﬃcult and requires
diﬀerent techniques. For the primaries the relevant object is not G but rather a
certain foliation ˙GΣ of YΣ derived from G; intuitively, ˙GΣ consists of the “time
derivatives” of elements of the subgroup GΣ which stabilizes Σ. This foliation
has a “momentum map” ˙JΣ and, provided zero is a regular value, the primary
constraints are obtained by equating ˙JΣ to zero. It is possible—with some ad-
ditional assumptions on the nature of the gauge group—to realize this foliation
as the orbits of a genuine subgroup of GΣ; this is the subject of

12B.

We have thus far seen that both the Hamiltonian and the initial value con-
straints are “components” of the energy-momentum map. In Interlude II we
show, following Gotay and Marsden [1992], that the stress-energy-momentum

§

6
§1 Introduction

11

tensor of a given collection of ﬁelds arises in a similar manner, again demon-
strating the capacity of the multimomentum map to unify disparate concepts
into a single geometric entity. The stress-energy-momentum tensor Tµ
ν so ob-
tained satisﬁes a generalized version of the classical “Belinfante–Rosenfeld for-
mula” (Belinfante [1940], Rosenfeld [1940]), and hence naturally incorporates
the canonical stress-energy-momentum tensor and the “correction terms” that
are necessary to make the latter gauge–covariant. Furthermore, in the presence
of a metric on X, our Tµν coincides with the Hilbert stress-energy-momentum
tensor and hence is automatically symmetric.

Part IV derives the adjoint formalism for ﬁeld theories. This is the capstone
of our work, where all the various aspects of a classical ﬁeld theory meld into
a coherent whole. The adjoint formalism is the starting point for investigations
into the structure of the space of solutions of the Euler–Lagrange equations,
linearization stability, quantization, and related questions.

§

To accomplish this objective, in

12 we distinguish two types of ﬁeld variables
that play an especially important role in the initial value analysis. The dynamic
ﬁelds are those whose evolution from given initial data is determined by well–
posed evolutionary equations. These are the ﬁelds that carry the dynamical
content of the theory and with which the adjoint formalism is concerned. By
way of contrast, the evolution of the kinematic ﬁelds is determined not by
the Euler–Lagrange equations, but rather by the way the spacetime X and the
covariant conﬁguration bundle Y are sliced. In fact, the kinematic ﬁelds are
closely related to the ﬁrst class primary constraints and their existence can be
directly attributed to the presence of gauge symmetries.

The space of dynamic ﬁelds is DΣ = YΣ/ ˙GΣ. The kinematic ﬁelds are
abstractly realized as sections of this quotient; this deﬁnition makes sense as
the primary constraints are components of the momentum map associated to
the foliation ˙GΣ, so their canonically conjugate ﬁelds are parametrized by ˙GΣ.
By a slight generalization of the cotangent bundle reduction theorem (Abraham
and Marsden [1978], Kummer [1981], Marsden [1992]), the instantaneous phase
space T ∗YΣ can then be cut down to the space T ∗DΣ of dynamic ﬁelds ψ and
their conjugate momenta ρ. (Physically, this reduction consists of imposing the
primary constraints and then factoring out the kinematic ﬁelds.)

The goal is to project the dynamics on the primary constraint set PΣ in T ∗YΣ
to parametric dynamics on T ∗DΣ. The parameters will be certain combinations
of the kinematic ﬁelds and elements of g which we call “atlas ﬁelds.”

g

→

R, also depends upon ξ

Unfortunately, the energy-momentum map EΣ on PΣ does not directly
project to T ∗DΣ, as it involves the kinematic ﬁelds. But EΣ, thought of as
a map PΣ ×
g. By algebraically lumping the
kinematic ﬁelds together with elements of the Lie algebra of the gauge group in
a “ ˙GΣ-equivariant” fashion, one forms the nondynamic atlas ﬁelds αi. Their
abstract deﬁnition turns out to be rather delicate, and necessitates some tech-
nical assumptions regarding the action of the gauge group on Y . In any case,
the atlas ﬁelds are constructed in such a way that EΣ depends only upon (ψ, ρ)
and the αi. The energy-momentum map then can be pushed down to a func-
tion ΦΣ on T ∗DΣ depending upon the parameters αi. This function ΦΣ is the

∈

12

§1 Introduction

“reduced” energy-momentum map. We observe that the Energy Momentum
Theorem remains valid in this context, since the secondary constraints restrict
only (ψ, ρ)—the kinematic ﬁelds being correlated with the primary constraints.
Combining these results with (1.4) then leads to item 4.

The essential content of item 4 is not so much that the Hamiltonian can be
expressed in terms of the constraints, as remarkable as that is. (Indeed, this
is already apparent from (1.4).) Rather, it is the fact that the Hamiltonian is
linear in the atlas ﬁelds. This is vital for the adjoint form (1.3) of the evo-
lution equations, which now follows readily from (1.2) by inverting Hamilton’s
equations on T ∗DΣ.

The salient features of the adjoint form (1.3) are:

•

•

•

The constraints generate the dynamics, via the appearance of the energy-
momentum map in (1.3).

The atlas ﬁelds “drive” the entire gauge ambiguity of the theory. This is
a remarkable result, especially when viewed from the standpoint of Dirac
constraint theory: no matter how complex the cascade of constraints,
the gauge freedom generated by the totality of ﬁrst class constraints is
encapsulated in the ﬁelds αi (which are closely linked to the ﬁrst class
primaries).

The gauge freedom of the theory is completely subsumed in the choice
of slicing. This is convenient computationally, as the form of the adjoint
equations (1.3) is ideally suited for studying evolution relative to various
slicings.

•

The dynamics is independent of the choice of slicing, which is a conse-
quence of the preceding remark.

These statements are familiar in the case of the ADM formulation of gravity,
but our results are more general and include theories which have “internal” (i.e.,
not spacetime-based) gauge freedom.

The independence of the adjoint formalism on the choice of slicing together
6 give item 6. The adjoint formalism is now ready to be
with the results of
used for such purposes as the singularity analysis of the solution space, as we
have mentioned.

§

The results of this work apply to a large class of systems including many,
if not all, ﬁeld theories of current interest. To bolster this claim, throughout
the work we provide a numbber of illustrations of the formalism as we develop
it. These examples include particle mechanics, Maxwell’s theory of electromag-
netism, Einstein’s theory of gravity, bosonic string theory, and a topological
ﬁeld theory.

All these examples have ﬁrst order Lagrangians and, except for gravity and
the topological ﬁeld theory, all of them involve only constraints which are ﬁrst
class in the sense of Dirac. Indeed, many of the theorems as stated in this work
are restricted to ﬁeld theories with these properties. However, we do believe that
the essential thrust of this work holds for more general classical ﬁeld theories.

§1 Introduction

13

Second class constraints, for example, should not cause trouble. The main
eﬀect of the presence of second class constraints is the failure of equality (1.5);
−1
we are only guaranteed that CΣ ⊂
Σ (0). As a consequence, one can no
E
longer compute the ﬁnal constraint set using the energy-momentum map alone.
However, the strong tie between ﬁrst class constraints and gauge transformations
should remain, and one should still be able to provide theoretical support for
items 1–7, including the adjoint form (1.3), for such theories. Note that one way
to deal with second class constraints is to eliminate them via a Dirac bracket
construction (´Sniatycki [1974]); while this presents no problem in principle, it
is unsatisfactory from a computational standpoint. Another way to handle
second class constraints might be based on the work of Lusanna [1991, 1993],
which relates them to transformations that leave the Lagrangian quasi-invariant.
Note also that in well-known ﬁeld theories with second class constraints—for
example, the Einstein–Dirac theory (see Bao, Isenberg, and Yasskin [1985], and
Bao [1984])—those constraints do not introduce undue diﬃculties.

We also expect—modulo some technical diﬃculties—that the formalism de-
veloped here can be straightforwardly applied to higher order ﬁeld theories. In
fact, the multisymplectic setup and its space + time decomposition have already
been extended to ﬁeld theories of any order in Gotay [1991 a,b]. However, for
third or higher order systems the Cartan form is not uniquely determined by
the Lagrangian (Kol´aˇr [1984]). This circumstance bears on an important fact
which underlies our analysis; viz. for ﬁrst (or second) order theories, a symme-
try of the Lagrangian is also a symmetry of the Cartan form. (This is essential
for Noether’s theorem among other things.) Thus in the higher order case it is
necessary to determine whether there exist G-invariant Cartan forms. The work
of Mu˜noz [1985] may be helpful in this context.

We believe that one further generalization should hold. Namely, the prin-
cipal ideas of this work should apply to cases in which one is naturally led to
consider a Poisson, as opposed to a symplectic structure, such as in certain
formulations of general relativistic perfect ﬂuids and plasmas (cf. Bao, Mars-
den, and Walton [1985] and references therein). It could be useful to develop
a covariant analogue of Poisson manifolds (perhaps along the lines of Marsden,
Montgomery, Morrison, and Thompson [1986]) and to develop a version of co-
variant reduction that could start with the multisymplectic ideas of this work
and produce Poisson structures as in the nonrelativistic case. (See, for example,
Marsden et al. [1983] and Marsden [1992] for a summary of the nonrelativistic
reduction theory, and Holm [1985] for indications of how the relativistic theory
should proceed.)

Finally, we remark that multisymplectic geometry may be used for other in-
teresting purposes besides the investigation of the intrinsic structure of classical
ﬁeld theories. In particular, Marsden and Shkoller [1997] and Marsden, Patrick,
and Shkoller [1997] have shown that Bridges’ [1997] treatment of water waves
and their instabilities may be understood in multisymplectic terms and that one
can build numerical integrators using these ideas.

Our conventions follow Misner, Thorne and Wheeler [1973] to a large extent.

14

§1 Introduction

Acknowledgments

We thank Judy Arms, David Bao, Paul Dedecker, Christian G¨unther, Mar-
vin Ortel, Gunter Schwarz, Jim Stasheﬀ and Wiktor Szczyrba for their help-
ful comments. We thank the University of California Committee on Research
and Cornell University which helped defray the typing costs. We also thank
MSRI at Berkeley, whose hospitality allowed us to frequently collaborate during
the 1988–1989 symplectic geometry year. This work began in Calgary in 1979
and continued in Aix-en-Provence, Annapolis, Berkeley, Boston, Boulder, Brno,
Canberra, Champaign–Urbana, Clausthal–Zellerfeld, College Station, Eugene,
Hamburg, Honolulu, Houston, Ithaca, Minneapolis, Montr´eal, Paris, Pasadena,
Philadelphia, San Diego, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Santa Cruz, Seattle,
Stockholm, Waterloo, Washington, and in the Friendly Skies. We thank the
people who have been patient with us during the writing of this book, both
readers and the typesetters, Sue Knapp, Marnie McElhiney, Wendy McKay,
June Meyerman, Teresa Wild, Esther Zack, and Arlene Baxter, Sean Brennan,
Jo Butterworth, David Mostardi, and Margaret Pattison of MSRI. This work is
dedicated to graduate students who may undertake to read it, and to the spirit
of G. Gimmsy, may she rest in peace.

§2 Multisymplectic Manifolds

15

I—COVARIANT FIELD THEORY

In this part we develop some of the basic theory of classical ﬁelds from a co-
variant viewpoint. This is done in the framework of multisymplectic geometry,
which is analogous to the geometry of the cotangent bundle in classical non-
relativistic mechanics—which we often call particle mechanics (even though it
also includes continuum mechanics). We also develop the geometry of the jet
bundle and the Euler–Lagrange equations, which is analogous to the geometry
of the tangent bundle and the Lagrange equations of motion in the case of par-
ticle mechanics. The ﬁnal section of this part discusses conservation laws and
Noether’s theorem from the point of view of covariant momentum maps, again
generalizing the concept of momentum map familiar from particle mechanics.

2 Multisymplectic Manifolds

There are two major approaches to the symplectic description of classical ﬁeld
theory, covariant (“multisymplectic”) formalism and the instantaneous, or the
“3+1” framework. In the latter approach dynamics is described in terms of the
inﬁnite-dimensional space of ﬁelds at a given instant of time, whereas in the
former dynamics is phrased in the context of the ﬁnite-dimensional space of
ﬁelds at a given event in spacetime. Each formalism has its own advantages.

In this and the next several sections, we summarize those aspects of the
multisymplectic formalism and its relation to the 3+1 framework that will
be important for subsequent developments. There are many recent references
for the multisymplectic formalism, such as Dedecker [1953, 1977], Gaw¸edzki
[1972], Goldschmidt and Sternberg [1973] (see also Guillemin and Sternberg
[1977, 1984]), Kijowski [1973, 1974], Garc´ıa [1974], Kijowski and Szczyrba [1975,
1976], Kijowski and Tulczyjew [1979], Aldaya and Azc´arraga [1980a], Kupersh-
midt [1980], Kosmann–Schwarzbach [1981], Ragionieri and Ricci [1981], Kastrup
[1983], ´Sniatycki [1970a, 1984], de Le´on and Rodrigues [1985], G¨unther [1987],
Gotay [1991a,b], Sardanashvily [1993], and Kanatchikov [1996]. Historically,
much credit should also be given to Cartan [1922], De Donder [1930], Weyl
[1935] and Lepage [1936]. Our presentation here is self-contained, but not ex-
haustive; topics not needed for our main results as well as alternative approaches
have been omitted.

Throughout this work, all manifolds and maps are assumed to be of class C∞.

2A The Jet Bundle

Let X be an oriented manifold, which in many examples is spacetime, and
X be a ﬁnite-dimensional ﬁber bundle called the covariant
let πXY : Y
−1
conﬁguration bundle. The ﬁber π
X is denoted Yx
XY (x) of Y over x

→

∈

16

§2 Multisymplectic Manifolds

and the tangent space to X at x is denoted TxX, etc. The physical ﬁelds will
be sections of this bundle, which is the covariant analogue of the conﬁguration
space in classical mechanics.

We shall develop classical ﬁeld theory in parallel to classical mechanics. First
we discuss the ﬁeld theoretic analogues of the tangent and cotangent bundles.
The role of the tangent bundle is played by J 1Y , the ﬁrst jet bundle of Y . It
is convenient to use the natural identiﬁcation of J 1Y with the aﬃne bundle over
Y whose ﬁber above y
TyY
satisfying

Yx consists of those linear mappings γ : TxX

→

∈

T πXY ◦

γ = Identity on TxX.

The vector bundle underlying this aﬃne bundle is the bundle whose ﬁber over
y

Yx is the space L(TxX, VyY ) of linear maps of TxX to VyY , where

VyY =

v

{

∈

TyY

T πXY ·

|

v = 0

}

is the ﬁber above y of the vertical subbundle V Y
γ

J 1Yy, we have the splitting

⊂

T Y . Note that for

∈

∈

(2A.1)

(2A.2)

(2A.3)

TyY = im γ

VyY.

⊕

Remark. One can view sections of J 1Y over Y as Ehresmann connections
on Y . (See Hermann [1975] or Marsden, Montgomery, and Ratiu [1990] for a
brief review of Ehresmann connections.) The horizontal-vertical splitting (2A.3)
deﬁnes the connection associated to such a section. If Y is a principal G-bundle,
then J 1Y
Y is the bundle whose equivariant sections are connections in the
usual sense of principal bundles.1
(cid:7)

→

§

In

3 we shall study Lagrangians on J 1Y and the attendant Euler–Lagrange
equations, etc., by a procedure parallel to that used for Lagrangians on the
tangent bundle of a conﬁguration manifold. Our choice of J 1Y as the ﬁeld
theoretic tangent bundle reﬂects the fact that essentially all of the theories we
shall consider have Lagrangians which depend at most on the ﬁelds and their
ﬁrst derivatives. For higher order ﬁeld theories, the appropriate objects to
study are the higher order jet bundles; see, for example, Aldaya and Azc´arraga
[1980b], Shadwick [1982], Ferraris and Francaviglia [1983], Krupka [1987], Hor´ak
and Kol´aˇr [1983], de Le´on and Rodrigues [1985], Gotay [1991a,b], and references
therein.

We let dim X = n + 1 and the ﬁber dimension of Y be N . Coordinates on
X are denoted xµ, µ = 1, 2, . . . , n, 0, and ﬁber coordinates on Y are denoted
1In this case J 1Y , as a principal bundle over the connection bundle CY = J 1Y /G, itself
has a canonical connection. For the bundle Q × R → Q regarded as an R-bundle, J 1(Q × R)
is isomorphic to the bundle T ∗Q × R and the canonical connection is the usual contact one-
form θ. The curvature of this connection is the canonical symplectic form dθ, up to a sign
depending on conventions.

§2A The Jet Bundle

17

Y is a section of πXY , its tangent map at x

µ on the ﬁbers of J 1Y . If
by yA, A = 1, . . . , N . These induce coordinates vA
X, denoted Txφ, is
φ : X
an element of J 1Yφ(x). Thus, the map x
Txφ is a section of J 1Y regarded
as a bundle over X. This section is denoted j1φ and is called the ﬁrst jet
prolongation of φ. In coordinates, j1φ is given by

7→

→

∈

xµ

7→

xµ, φA (xµ) , ∂νφA (xµ)
(cid:0)

,

(cid:1)
where ∂ν = ∂/∂xν. A section of the bundle J 1Y
X which is the ﬁrst jet of
X is said to be holonomic. In this work we shall use global
a section of Y
sections, although at certain points in the arguments one should really work
with local sections. It will be clear in each instance what is meant.

→

→

(2A.4)

Examples

a Particle Mechanics. For non-relativistic classical mechanics with conﬁg-
uration space Q, let X = R (parameter time) and Y = R
Q, with πXY the
projection onto the ﬁrst factor. The ﬁrst jet bundle J 1Y is the bundle whose
holonomic sections are tangents of sections φ : X
Y (for example, curves in
Q), so we can identify J 1Y = R
T Q. (Note however that J 1Y is an aﬃne
bundle, while R
T Q has a vector bundle structure). Using coordinates (t, qA)
on R
Q, the induced coordinates on J 1Y are the usual tangent coordinates
×
(t, qA, vA).

→

×

×

×

In the case of a relativistic particle we would take Q to be the physical
spacetime equipped with a Lorentzian metric g. (In this context, A = 1, 2, 3, 0
is now a spacetime index.)

b Electromagnetism. For electromagnetism on a ﬁxed background (so that
the spacetime metric is non-dynamic), X is four-dimensional spacetime and Y is
the bundle Λ1X of one-form potentials A. Coordinates for J 1Y are (xµ, Aν, vνµ),
where the derivative index µ is placed at the end:

vνµ = ∂µAν = Aν,µ.

The one-forms A may be thought of as connections on a principal U (1)-bundle.
However, in this book we treat electromagnetism as an ordinary one-form ﬁeld
theory. Similarly, one could treat Yang–Mills ﬁelds with all the results of the
paper holding, by taking Y to be the connection bundle over spacetime (i.e.,
the bundle whose sections are connections of a given principal bundle).

We also consider the case when the spacetime metric g is variable (but still
not dynamic), so that the theory is parametrized. (See Interlude I. If we wanted
the spacetime metric to be dynamic, we could couple electromagnetism to grav-
ity.). To accomplish this, we merely append g to the other ﬁeld variables as a
parameter , replacing Y and J 1Y by ˜Y = Y
2 (X),

2 (X) and J 1Y

×X S3,1

×X S3,1

18

§2 Multisymplectic Manifolds

respectively, where S3,1
2 (X) is the bundle of symmetric covariant symmetric two-
tensors of Lorentz signature (+, +, +,
2 (X)
−
are now (xµ, Aν, vνµ; gσρ), where we use a semicolon to separate dynamical vari-
ables from parameters. Note, in particular, that there are no “multivelocities”
vσρµ corresponding to the gσρ.

). The coordinates on J 1Y

×X S3,1

−

c Gravity. The gravitational ﬁeld is a somewhat exceptional case. Here
X is again spacetime and the natural choice for Y is S3,1
2 (X), the bundle of
). With this
symmetric covariant two-tensors of Lorentz signature (+, +, +,
choice, however, one is forced to work on the second jet bundle J 2Y since the
standard Hilbert Lagrangian depends upon the second derivatives of the metric.
To avoid this, one may adopt the Palatini approach, using the metric and the
torsion-free connection as the primary ﬁelds. In terms of these variables, the
Hilbert Lagrangian is ﬁrst order, and so the analysis may be done on the ﬁrst
jet bundle. ´Sniatycki [1970b], Szczyrba [1976b] and Binz, ´Sniatycki and Fischer
[1988] have studied this approach and it is the one which we shall follow. An
alternative approach has been developed by Ashtekar [1986,1987] using another
set of canonical variables. It would be of interest to develop the formalism herein
for this formulation of gravity; ﬁrst steps in this direction have been taken by
Esposito, Gionti, and Stornaiolo [1995]. An analysis of the Hilbert Lagrangian
directly on J 2Y is given in Gotay and Hanson [1998].

2 (X)

The standard choice of the conﬁguration bundle Y for Palatini gravity is the
bundle S3,1
×X Aﬀ(X), where Aﬀ(X) is the bundle over X whose sections are
torsion-free (symmetric) linear connections. However, we ﬁnd it more convenient
to represent the metric by a contravariant tensor density. That is, we replace
gµν by

where gσρgρτ = δσ

τ and, correspondingly, the metric bundle by the bundle

gσρ := gσρ

det g

p−

S2

3,1 (X) = S2

3,1 (X)

Λ4X

⊗

of symmetric contravariant 2-tensor densities of Lorentz signature (+, +, +,
Thus, our conﬁguration bundle is

).

−

with coordinates (xµ, gσρ, Γλ
denoted

Y = S2

3,1 (X)

×X Aﬀ (X) ,
σρ = Γλ

σρ), where Γλ

ρσ. The coordinates for J 1Y are

(2A.5)

xµ, gσρ, Γλ
(cid:0)
µ and wλ
where the components vσρ
σρµ are symmetric in the indices σ and ρ.
When necessary to avoid notational confusion, we shall denote the bundle Y for
gravity by YG.

σρ, vσρ

µ, wλ

σρµ

(cid:1)

,

§2A The Jet Bundle

19

d A Topological Field Theory. Examples b, c and e following are all
“metric” ﬁeld theories, that is, theories which carry a metric (of some signature,
usually Lorentzian) on the parameter space X. Here we give a simple example of
a non-metric ﬁeld theory: the (abelian) Chern–Simons theory. Topological
ﬁeld theories—of which the Chern–Simons theory is perhaps the best-known
illustration—behave rather diﬀerently than metric theories, and exhibit a variety
of interesting phenomena. We refer the reader to Horowitz [1989] for a fuller
discussion of such theories.

Superﬁcially, the Chern–Simons theory resembles electromagnetism. We
take X to be a 3-manifold and Y = Λ1X. Coordinates on J 1Y are then
(xµ, Aν , vνµ). As with electromagnetism, one could view A as a connection
on some principal U (1)-bundle over X. One could also consider non-abelian
generalizations, where U (1) is replaced by an arbitrary Lie group. But the key
diﬀerence here is that we do not introduce a metric on X.

e Bosonic Strings. Let X be a 2-dimensional manifold with coordinates xµ
for µ = 1, 0. (X is the domain of the string.) Also, let (M, g) be a (d + 1)-
dimensional spacetime manifold M with coordinates φA for A = 1, . . . , d, 0 and
(M is the range of the
a ﬁxed metric g of Lorentz signature (+, ..., +,
string and g is not necessarily ﬂat.) A bosonic string is a map φ : X
M .
M over X. To
Equivalently, its graph is a section of the product bundle Y = X
write down the Lagrangian, we also need a metric (or at least a conformal metric)
on X. Thus, let S1,1
2 (X) denote the bundle over X of symmetric covariant rank
two tensors of Lorentz signature (+,
2 (X) is a metric
h on X.

). Then a section of S1,1

→

×

−

−

).

There are (at least) three approaches to classical bosonic string theory which
diﬀer in the choice of independent variables and the Lagrangian. In the ﬁrst
(due to Polyakov [1981]), φ and h are taken as independent variables and the
Lagrangian is taken as the harmonic map Lagrangian. In the second (due to
Nambu [1970]), φ is taken as the independent variable, while h is taken to be
the induced metric

∗
hσρ (x) = (φ

g)σρ (x) = gAB (φ(x)) ∂σφA∂ρφB.

(2A.6)

Plugging these into the harmonic map Lagrangian, it reduces to the minimal
surface (i.e., area) Lagrangian. Between these two extremes is the third version
which takes φ and the conformal part of h as the independent variables. Since
the harmonic map Lagrangian is conformally invariant, it may be reexpressed
in terms of these variables. For simplicity, we shall only consider the Polyakov
model in this paper since it treats the metric h dynamically. This model has
also been treated by Batlle, Gomis and Pons [1986]; however they assume that
g is ﬂat whereas our g is not necessarily ﬂat. Our analysis of the bosonic string
should also be compared with that of Beig [1989]. One can analyze the Nambu
model in a similar way; see, for example, Scherk [1975].

With φ and h chosen as the independent variables, the covariant conﬁgura-

20

§2 Multisymplectic Manifolds

tion bundle is Y = (X

M )

(X) and

×X S1,1

2

×

J 1Y = J 1 (X

M )

×X J 1(S1,1

2 (X)).

×

The coordinates on J 1Y are then (xµ, φA, hσρ, vA

µ, wσρµ).

(2A.7)

(cid:7)

2B The Dual Jet Bundle

∈

Next we introduce the ﬁeld theoretic analogue of the cotangent bundle. We
deﬁne the dual jet bundle J 1Y ⋆ to be the vector bundle over Y whose ﬁber at
Yx is the set of aﬃne maps from J 1Yy to Λn+1Xx, where Λn+1X denotes
y
the bundle of (n + 1)-forms on X. A smooth section of J 1Y ⋆ is therefore an
aﬃne bundle map of J 1Y to Λn+1X covering πXY . We choose aﬃne maps
since J 1Y is an aﬃne bundle, and we map into Λn+1X since we are ultimately
thinking of integration as providing the pairing on sections.

Fiber coordinates on J 1Y ⋆ are (p, pA

µ), which correspond to the aﬃne map

given in coordinates by

where

vA

µ 7→

p + pA
(cid:0)

µvA

µ

dn+1x

(cid:1)

(2B.1)

dn+1x = dx1

dxn

dx0.

∧ · · · ∧
Analogous to the canonical one- and two-forms on a cotangent bundle, there
are canonical forms on J 1Y ⋆. To deﬁne these, another description of J 1Y ⋆ will
be convenient. Namely, let Λ := Λn+1Y denote the bundle of (n + 1)-forms on
Y , with ﬁber over y
Y . Let
Z

Y denoted by Λy and with projection πY Λ : Λ

Λ be the subbundle whose ﬁber is given by

→

∧

∈

⊂

Zy =

z

{

Λy |

∈

iviwz = 0 for all v, w

VyY

∈

,

}

(2B.2)

where iv denotes left interior multiplication by v.
Elements of Z can be be written uniquely as

z = p dn+1x + pA

µdyA

dnxµ

∧

(2B.3)

where

Here,
(p, pA

µ).

dnxµ = ∂µ

dn+1x

and, as before, ∂µ =

(2B.4)

∂
∂xµ .

denotes the interior product. Hence ﬁber coordinates for Z are also

Equating the coordinates (xµ, yA, p, pA

µ) of Z and of J 1Y ⋆ deﬁnes a vector

bundle isomorphism

Φ : Z

J 1Y ⋆.

→

(2B.5)

§2B The Dual Jet Bundle

21

Intrinsically, Φ is deﬁned by

where z
coordinates vA

Zy, γ

∈

∈
µ, then

and so

Φ (z) (γ) = γ

∗

z

∈

Λn+1Xx

(2B.6)

J 1Yy and x = πXY (y). To see this, note that if γ has ﬁber

∗

γ

dxµ = dxµ

and

∗

γ

dyA = vA

µdxµ

(2B.7)

∗

γ

p dn+1x + pA
(cid:0)

µdyA

dnxµ

=

∧

p + pA
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

µvA

µ

dn+1x,

(2B.8)

where we have used

dxν

dnxµ = δν

µdn+1x.

∧

The inverse of Φ can also be deﬁned intrinsically, although it is somewhat
more complicated. Notice that a connection is not needed to deﬁne this isomor-
phism.

We summarize:

Proposition 2.1. The spaces J 1Y ⋆ and Z are canonically isomorphic as vector
bundles over Y .

We shall construct canonical forms on Z and then use the isomorphism
between J 1Y ⋆ and Z to transfer these to J 1Y ⋆. We ﬁrst deﬁne the canonical
(n + 1)-form ΘΛ on Λ by

ΘΛ (z) (u1, . . . , un+1) = z (T πY λ ·

u1, . . . , T πY λ ·
∗
Y λz) (u1, . . . , un+1) ,

= (π

un+1)

(2B.9)

where z
on Λ by

Λ and u1, . . . , un+1 ∈

∈

TzΛ. Deﬁne the canonical (n + 2)-form ΩΛ

ΩΛ =

dΘΛ.

(2B.10)

−
Note that if n = 0 (i.e., X is one-dimensional), then Λ = T ∗Y and ΘΛ is
the standard canonical one-form. If iΛZ : Z
Λ denotes the inclusion, the
canonical (n + 1)-form Θ on Z is deﬁned by

→

and the canonical (n + 2)-form Ω on Z is deﬁned by

Θ = i

∗
ΛZΘΛ

Ω =

dΘ = i

∗
ΛZΩΛ.

−

(2B.11)

(2B.12)

The pair (Z, Ω) is called multiphase space or covariant phase space. It is
an example of a multisymplectic manifold ; see Remark 3 below.

22

§2 Multisymplectic Manifolds

From (2B.3), (2B.9), (2B.10), (2B.11) and (2B.12), one ﬁnds that the coor-

dinate expression for Θ is

Θ = pA

µdyA

dnxµ + p dn+1x,

∧

Ω = dyA

µ

dpA

∧

dnxµ −

∧

dp

∧

dn+1x.

(2B.13)

(2B.14)

and so

Remarks.

1. There are other possible choices of multiphase space (cf. the cited refer-
ences), but this one is the most relevant and eﬃcient for our purposes. There
are good reasons for this choice: it is natural, as shown in Proposition 2.1, and
it carries a canonical multisymplectic structure. We refer to Gotay [1991a,b] for
more on why one makes this particular choice of multiphase space.

2. A notable feature of the covariant formalism is the appearance of several
µ, spatial in addition to temporal, for each ﬁeld component yA.
momenta pA
The Legendre transformation of
3 will provide a physical interpretation of
§
these “multimomenta” as well as of the “covariant Hamiltonian” p.

3. A multisymplectic manifold (Z, Ω) is a manifold Z together with a
closed form Ω which is non-degenerate in the sense that iV Ω
= 0 whenever V is
a nonzero tangent vector to Z. Some of the theory of multisymplectic manifolds
(cid:7)
is presented in Martin [1988] and Cantrijn, Ibort and de Le´on [1997].

We next recall that there is a characterization of the canonical one-form θ
on T ∗Q by β∗θ = β for any one-form β on Q (Abraham and Marsden [1978],
3.2.11). Here is an analogue of that fact for the canonical (n + 1)-form.
Proposition 2.2. If σ is a section of πXZ and φ = πY Z ◦

σ, then

∗

∗
Θ = φ

σ

σ,

(2B.15)

where φ∗σ means the pull-back by φ to X of σ regarded as an (n + 1)-form on
Y along φ.

Proof. Evaluate the left-hand side of equation (2B.15) on tangent vectors
v1, . . . , vn+1 to X at x:

∗

(σ

Θ)(x)(v1, . . . , vn+1) = Θ (σ(x)) (T σ
= σ(x) (T πY Z ·
= σ(x) (T φ
∗
= (φ

·

v1, . . . , T σ
·
T σ
v1, . . . , T φ

vn+1)
·
v1, . . . , T πY Z ·
vn+1)

·

·

σ) (x) (v1, . . . , vn+1) .

T σ

vn+1)

·

(cid:4)

6
§2B The Dual Jet Bundle

23

Examples

×

and

a Particle Mechanics. Let X = R and Y = R
T ∗R

×
T ∗Q has coordinates (t, p, q1, . . . , qN , p1, . . . , pN ),

Q. Then Z = T ∗Y =

Θ = pAdqA + p dt

Ω = dqA

dpA + dt

dp.

∧

∧

(2B.16)

(2B.17)

(2B.18)

(2B.19)

In this case the multisymplectic approach reduces to the extended state space
formulation of classical mechanics.

b Electromagnetism. For the Maxwell equations, coordinates on Z are

(xµ, Aν , p, Fνµ).

Later we shall see that Fνµ can be identiﬁed, via the Legendre transform, with
the electromagnetic ﬁeld density, so we use this notation in anticipation. From
(2B.13) and (2B.14), we get

Θ = FνµdAν ∧

d3xµ + p d4x

and

and

Ω = dAν ∧

dFνµ

d3xµ −

∧

dp

∧

d4x.

When the spacetime metric g is treated parametrically, Z is replaced by ˜Z =
×X S3,1
2 (X) with coordinates (xµ, Aν, p, Fνµ; gσρ). There are no multimomenta
Z
conjugate to the gσρ. The expressions for the canonical forms remain the same.

c Gravity. For Einstein’s equations in Palatini form, coordinates on Z are

(xµ, gσρ, Γλ

σρ, p, pσρ

µ, qσρµ
λ

),

where the pσρ
give

µ and the qσρµ

λ

are symmetric in (σ, ρ). Thus, (2B.13) and (2B.14)

µdgσρ + qσρµ

λ dΓλ

σρ

d3xµ + p d4x

(2B.20)

Θ =

pσρ
(cid:2)

∧

(cid:3)

Ω =

dgσρ

dpσρ

µ + dΓλ

∧

(cid:2)

dqσρµ
λ

σρ ∧

d3xµ −

dp

∧

d4x.

∧

(cid:3)

(2B.21)

24

§2 Multisymplectic Manifolds

d A Topological Field Theory.
coordinates on Z are (xµ, Aν, p, pνµ). The canonical forms are
Θ = pνµdAν ∧

d2xµ + p d3x

In the case of the Chern–Simons theory,

Ω = dAν ∧

dpνµ

d2xµ −

∧

dp

∧

d3x.

e Bosonic Strings. Corresponding to Y = (X
dinates on Z are (xµ, φA, hσρ, p, pA
by

2 (X), the coor-
µ, qσρµ), and the canonical forms are given

×X S1,1

M )

×

Θ =

pA

µdφA + qσρµdhσρ

d1xµ + p d2x

(2B.24)

(cid:2)

∧

(cid:3)

Ω = [dφA

dpA

µ + dhσρ ∧

∧

dqσρµ]

d1xµ −

∧

dp

∧

d2x.

(2B.25)

d2x = dx1

dx0 = dx1

dx0

dx0

dx1 = εµν dxµ

dxν ,

⊗

−

⊗

⊗

where εµν =

and where

∧

0 1
1 0(cid:19)

(cid:18)

−

d1xµ = εµνdxν

and

and

Here,

so that

(2B.22)

(2B.23)

(2B.26)

(2B.27)

d1x1 = dx0

and d1x0 =

dx1.

−

A word of caution: d1xµ = εµνdxν is not to be confused with dxµ = hµν dxν . (cid:7)

We conclude this section with a few remarks on Poisson brackets. Poisson
brackets are not essential for the main points in this paper, but we believe that
they are important for linking up the results of this paper with those of Marsden
et al. [1986] and for the future development of covariant reduction (see Marsden
[1988]). For more thorough discussions of Poisson brackets in ﬁeld theory, we
refer the reader to the recent papers by Kanatchikov [1997] and Lawson [1997].
Recall that on a symplectic manifold (P, Ω), the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld

Xf of a function f

F(P ) is deﬁned by

∈
Ω(Xf , V ) = df

and the Poisson bracket is deﬁned by

V

·

for any V

X(P ),

∈

f, h

= Ω(Xf , Xh).

{

}

§3 Lagrangian Dynamics

25

The multisymplectic analogue of a function is an n-form. In Goldschmidt and
Sternberg [1973] and Kijowski and Szczyrba [1975] a Poisson bracket is deﬁned
on certain types of n-forms. A special case relevant for later considerations is
as follows. Let V be a vector ﬁeld on Y which is πXY -projectible; that is, there
is a vector ﬁeld U on X such that

T πXY ◦
Consider an n-form on Z of the type

V = U

πXY .

◦

f (z) = π

∗
Y Z iV z

(2B.28)

(2B.29)

for some πXY -projectible vector ﬁeld V ; we call such an f a momentum ob-
servable. (As we shall see in
4C, a covariant momentum map for the group of
bundle automorphisms of Y can be regarded as a momentum observable.) The
Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld Xf of such a momentum observable f is deﬁned
by

§

df = Xf Ω

(2B.30)

where Ω is the canonical (n + 2)-form on Z. Since Ω is nondegenerate, this
uniquely deﬁnes Xf . The Poisson bracket of two such n-forms is the n-form
deﬁned by

f, h

= Xh

(Xf Ω).

{

}

(2B.31)

For momentum observables f and h,
is, up to the addition of exact terms,
f, h
another momentum observable; these constitute an important class since, as we
shall see, it includes the gravitational superhamiltonian and supermomentum
functions, for instance. Also, the development in
5 (Part II) shows that when
(2B.31) is integrated over a hypersurface, it produces a canonical cotangent
bundle bracket.

{

}

§

3 Lagrangian Dynamics

This section summarizes some of the basic facts concerning the Euler–Lagrange
equations, the Legendre transformation and the Cartan form that will be needed
later. There are many formulations available in the literature, including those
of Carath´eodory [1935], Weyl [1935], Lepage [1936, 1941, 1942], Cartan [1922],
Dedecker [1957, 1977], Trautman [1967], Hermann [1968], ´Sniatycki [1970a,
1984], Krupka [1971], Ouzilou [1972], Goldschmidt and Sternberg [1973], Garc´ıa
[1974], Szczyrba [1976a], Sternberg [1977], Kupershmidt [1980], Aldaya and de
Azc´arraga [1980a], Griﬃths [1983] and Anderson [1992]. For second order the-
ories, see Krupka and ˇStep´ankov´a [1983] and for the nth order case, Hor´ak and
Kol´aˇr [1983], Mu˜noz [1985], and Gotay [1991a,c]. Exactly which route one takes
to end up with the basic results is, to some extent, a matter of personal prefer-
ence. For example, one may introduce the Cartan form axiomatically and then

26

§3 Lagrangian Dynamics

deﬁne the Legendre transformation in terms of it; see for instance ´Sniatycki
[1970a, 1984] for this point of view. We have chosen to introduce the Legendre
transformation directly and then use it to deﬁne the Cartan form to most closely
parallel the standard treatment in classical mechanics (Abraham and Marsden
[1978], Section 3.6). We shall conﬁne ourselves to ﬁrst order theories.

As before, let πXY : Y

X be a bundle over X whose sections will be the
ﬁelds of the theory. In Section 2 we studied the spaces J 1Y and Z ∼= J 1Y ⋆
which are the ﬁeld theoretic analogues of the tangent and cotangent bundles in
particle mechanics. Here we are concerned with the relationship between the
two and with Lagrangian dynamics on the former.

→

3A The Covariant Legendre Transformation

Let

→
the Lagrangian density , be a given smooth bundle map over X. In coordi-
nates, we write

L : J 1Y

Λn+1X,

L = L

xµ, yA, vA
(cid:0)

µ

(cid:1)

dn+1x.

(3A.1)

We remark that since X is assumed oriented, we may take L(γ) to be an (n+1)-
form on X. If X were not orientable, then we should more properly take L(γ)
to be a density of weight one on X.

Our ﬁrst goal is to construct the covariant Legendre transformation for L.

This is a ﬁber preserving map

over Y which has the coordinate expressions

FL : J 1Y

J 1Y ⋆

∼= Z

→

pA

µ =

∂L
∂vA

µ

,

p = L

∂L
∂vA

µ

−

vA

µ

(3A.2)

µ and the covariant Hamiltonian p. An intrinsic deﬁ-

for the multimomenta pA
nition follows.

J 1Yy then FL(γ) is to be an aﬃne map from J 1Yy to Λn+1Xx (where
If γ
Yx). Deﬁne FL(γ) to be the ﬁrst order vertical Taylor approximation to L:

∈

y

∈

FL(γ)

= L(γ) +

L(γ + ε(γ

′

′

γ

·

d
dε

,

ε=0

−

γ))
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(3A.3)

∈

where γ′
J 1Yy. If one wishes, the second term in (3A.3) can be interpreted
in terms of a standard ﬁber derivative. To derive the coordinate expressions
(3A.2), suppose γ = vA
µ. Then the right hand side of (3A.3)
reads

µ and γ′ = wA

L(γ) +

(cid:26)

∂L
∂vA

µ

(wA

µ −

vA

µ)

dn+1x,

(cid:27)

§3B The Cartan Form

27

(3B.1)

(3B.2)

(3B.3)

which is an aﬃne function of wA
µ with linear and constant pieces given by the
ﬁrst and second equations of (3A.2) respectively. Hence (3A.2) is indeed the
coordinate description of FL. (The coordinatization of J 1Y ⋆ was deﬁned by
(2B.1).)

3B The Cartan Form

The Cartan form is the (n + 1)-form ΘL on J 1Y deﬁned by

∗
ΘL = (FL)

Θ,

where Θ is the canonical (n + 1)-form on Z. We also deﬁne the (n + 2)-form
ΩL by

ΩL =

∗
dΘL = (FL)

Ω,

−

where Ω =

dΘ is the canonical (n + 2)-form on Z.
In coordinates, (2B.13), (2B.14) and (3A.2) yield

−

ΘL =

∂L
∂vA

µ

dyA

dnxµ +

∧

L

(cid:18)

−

∂L
∂vA

µ

vA

µ(cid:19)

dn+1x

and

nomic ﬁelds as

ΩL = dyA

d

∧

(cid:18)

∂L
∂vA

dnxµ −

d

L

(cid:18)

−

µ (cid:19) ∧

∂L
∂vA

µ

vA

µ(cid:19) ∧

dn+1x.

(3B.4)

One application of the Cartan form is to re-express the Lagrangian for holo-

∗
L(j1(φ)) = (j1(φ))

ΘL.

(3B.5)

To see this, we use (3B.3) to compute

ΘL =

∗
(j1(φ))
∂L
∂vA

µ

(j1(φ))dφA

dnxµ +

L(j1(φ))

∧

(cid:18)

∂L
∂vA

µ

−

(j1(φ))φA

dn+1x.

(3B.6)

,µ(cid:19)

The ﬁrst and last terms cancel and so we obtain (3B.5). We refer to Marsden,
Patrick and Shkoller [1997] for an interesting way to construct ΘL directly from
an action functional.

3C The Euler–Lagrange Equations

We now use the formalism developed so far to re-express, in an intrinsic way,
the Euler–Lagrange equations, which in coordinates take the standard form

∂L
∂yA

j1(φ)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)

∂

−

∂xµ (cid:18)

∂L
∂vA

µ

(j1(φ))

= 0

(cid:19)

(3C.1)

for a (local) section φ of Y . The left hand side of (3C.1) is often denoted δL/δφA
and is called the Euler–Lagrange derivative of L.

28

§3 Lagrangian Dynamics

Theorem 3.1. The following assertions regarding a section φ of the bundle
πXY : Y

X are equivalent:

→

(i) φ is a stationary point of

L((j1(φ));

ZX

(ii) the Euler–Lagrange equations (3C.1) hold in coordinates;

(iii) for any vector ﬁeld W on J 1Y ,

∗

j1(φ)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)

(iW ΩL) = 0.

(3C.2)

Remarks.

1. The theorem still holds if the section φ is only a local section: φ : U
YU
where U is an open subset of X. The only change is that the integral in (i) is now
over U . The case that will be of importance to us is where U is a neighborhood
of a Cauchy surface.

→

2. The meaning of “stationary point” is in the formal sense of the calculus of
variations. Namely, a variation of φ is provided by a curve φλ = ηλ ◦
φ, where
ηλ is the ﬂow of a vertical vector ﬁeld V on Y which is compactly supported in
X. One says that φ is a stationary point if

d
dλ (cid:20)ZX

L(j1(φλ))

= 0

(3C.3)

λ=0

(cid:21)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

for all variations φλ of φ.

3. This theorem appears more or less as we present it in, for example, Dedecker
[1953], Trautman [1967], ´Sniatycki [1970a, 1984], Ouzilou [1972], Goldschmidt
and Sternberg [1973] and Guillemin and Sternberg [1977].

4. The direct proof of equivalence of (i) and (ii) is a standard argument in the
calculus of variations that we shall omit. We shall work towards a proof of the
equivalence of (i) and (iii) and then of (iii) and (ii).

If in (3C.2) one requires that s∗(iW ΩL) = 0 for any section s of J 1Y
5.
X,
not necessarily holonomic; that is, not necessarily of the form j1φ, then condi-
tion (iii) will be equivalent to the Euler–Lagrange equations and the assertion
that s is holonomic under the assumption that the Lagrangian is “regular.” A
Lagrangian is called regular if the Legendre transformation is of maximal rank
or, equivalently, if (J 1Y, ΩL) is a multisymplectic manifold. In the formulation
as we have given it, no assumption of regularity is needed ; in fact such an as-
sumption would be very much inappropriate, since it is not valid in any of our
examples. See, however, Garc´ıa and Mu˜noz [1985, 1991] and Saunders [1992].

→

§3C The Euler–Lagrange Equations

29

6. Because the Euler–Lagrange equations are equivalent to the intrinsic con-
ditions (i) and (iii), they too must be intrinsic. One can in fact write the
Euler–Lagrange derivative intrinsically in a direct way. See Trautman [1967]
and Marsden, Patrick and Shkoller [1997]. In fact, one can pursue this point of
view further, as this reference does, and use the action to uniquely determine
ΩL. In addition, this line of reasoning leads one to the multisymplectic ana-
logue of the fact from particle mechanics that the ﬂow of a Hamiltonian system
(cid:7)
consists of canonical transformations.

In the course of the proof, we will examine three cases for the vector W in

equation (3C.2). The following lemma shows that two of the cases are trivial.

Lemma 3.2. If φ is a section of πXY and if either W is tangent to the graph
(i.e., the image) of j1φ or W is πY,J 1Y -vertical, then

∗

j1 (φ)

(iW ΩL) = 0.

Proof. First assume that W is tangent to the graph of j1φ in J 1Y ; that is,
W = T j1(φ)

v for some v

T X. Then

·

∈

∗

j1 (φ)

(iW ΩL) = j1 (φ)

∗

= v

(cid:0)(cid:0)
j1 (φ)

T j1 (φ)
∗

ΩL,

v

·

(cid:1)

ΩL

(cid:1)

which vanishes since j1(φ)∗ΩL is an (n + 2)-form on the (n + 1)-manifold X.

Secondly, if W is πY,J 1Y -vertical, then W has the coordinate form

A calculation using (3B.4) shows that

W = (0, 0, W A

µ).

iW ΩL =

W B

ν

−

∂2L
µ∂vB

∂vA

dyA

dnxµ −

∧

vA

µdn+1x
(cid:1)

,

ν (cid:0)

which vanishes when pulled back by the jet of a section of Y .

(cid:4)

Proof of Theorem 3.1. To show that (i) is equivalent to (iii), consider a
φ of φ (as in Remark 2) corresponding to a πXY -vertical
variation φλ = ηλ ◦
vector ﬁeld V on Y with compact support in X. Using (3B.5), we compute

d
dλ (cid:20)ZX

L(j1(φλ))

(cid:21)(cid:12)
λ=0
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

d
dλ (cid:20)ZX

∗
j1(φλ)

d
dλ (cid:20)ZX

∗
j1(φ)

λ=0

ΘL

(cid:21)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
∗
j1(ηλ)

ΘL)

λ=0

(cid:21)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

=

=

=

j1(φ)

∗£j1(V )ΘL,

ZX

(3C.4)

30

§3 Lagrangian Dynamics

j1(V ) =

d
dλ

j1 (ηλ)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

λ=0

is the jet prolongation of V to J 1Y , given in coordinates by

j1(V ) =

∂V A
∂yB vB
and where Lj1(V ) is the Lie derivative along j1(V ).
4A for an intrin-
sic deﬁnition of jet prolongations and for more information; in particular, see
Remark 1 of that section). Thus, from (3C.4) and

∂V A
∂xµ +

0, V A,

(See

µ(cid:19)

(cid:18)

§

£W ΘL =

iW Ω + diW ΘL,

−

where

we get

d
dλ (cid:20)ZX

L(j1(φλ))

∗
j1 (φ)

=

− ZX

(cid:21)(cid:12)
λ=0
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

j1(V ) ΩL
(cid:0)
∗
dj1(φ)

(cid:1)

j1(V ) ΩL
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

j1(V ) ΘL
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

+

ZX
∗
j1(φ)

=

− ZX

(3C.5)

by Stokes’ theorem and the fact that V , and hence j1(V ) is compactly supported
in X. From (3C.5) it follows that (iii) implies (i).

To show the converse, we ﬁrst observe that any tangent vector W on J 1Y
can be decomposed into a component tangent to the image of j1φ and a πX,J 1Y -
vertical vector. Similarly, any πX,J 1Y -vertical vector can be decomposed into a
jet extension of some πXY -vertical vector on Y and a πY,J 1Y -vertical vector.

Thus, if (i) holds, (3C.5) and Lemma 3.2 show that

∗
j1(φ)

iW ΩL = 0

ZX

for all vector ﬁelds W on J 1Y with compact support in X. Since W can be
multiplied by an arbitrary scalar function on X, an argument like that in the
Fundamental Lemma of the Calculus of Variations shows that the integrand
must vanish for all vector ﬁelds W with compact support in X. A partition of
unity argument then shows that the integrand vanishes for any vector ﬁeld W
whatsoever, which proves (iii).

To see directly that (iii) is equivalent to the Euler–Lagrange equations, one

readily computes in coordinates that along j1(φ),

∗
j1φ

ij1(V )ΩL
(cid:0)

= V A

∂
∂xµ (cid:18)

∂L
∂vA

(cid:20)

j1(φ)
(cid:1)

(cid:19) −

∂L
∂yA

j1(φ)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)

(cid:21)

(cid:1)

µ (cid:0)
for all πXY -vertical vector ﬁelds V on Y . Thus (iii) implies (ii). On the other
hand, (3C.6) combined with the above remarks on decompositions of vector
(cid:4)
ﬁelds and Lemma 3.2 shows that (ii) implies (iii).

dn+1x (3C.6)

§3C The Euler–Lagrange Equations

31

Examples

a Particle Mechanics. With the Lagrangian density L = L(t, q, v)dt, ex-
pressions (3A.2) become pA = ∂L/∂vA and p = L
E, the
Cartan form becomes the usual one-form for describing time-dependent me-
chanics

vA∂L/∂vA =

−

−

and the Euler–Lagrange equations take the standard form

Let us speciﬁcally work out the details for a relativistic free particle of mass
= 0. The Lagrangian density is

m

where v = (v1, v2, v3, v0) is the velocity of the particle (with respect to param-
gABvAvB]1/2, g being the spacetime metric. The
v
eter time t) and
k
Cartan form is thus

= [

−

k

ΘL =

∂L
∂vA dqA

−

Edt,

d
dt

∂L
∂vA =

∂L
∂qA .

L =

m

v

dt,

−

k

k

ΘL =

mgABvB
v

k

k

dqA,

whence

pA =

mgABvB
v

k

k

and p = 0.

(3C.10)

The equations of motion (3C.7) are just the geodesic equations for the spacetime
metric g:

d
dt (cid:18)

gABvB
v

k

k

=

(cid:19)

1
v

2

k

k

gBC,AvBvC

(3C.11)

where t is used as the curve parameter.

b Electromagnetism. For electromagnetism on a ﬁxed background space-
time X with metric g, the Lagrangian density is

where √
g :=
tensor Fµν is deﬁned by

−

−

p

det gµν and, viewed as a function on J 1(Λ1X), the ﬁeld

L =

Fµν F µν √

g d4x,

−

1
4

−

Fµν = vνµ −

vµν .

(3C.7)

(3C.8)

(3C.9)

(3C.12)

(3C.13)

6
32

§3 Lagrangian Dynamics

1/4,
[For convenience, in this example, we use (3C.12), with the coeﬃcient
instead of the Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler [1973] Lagrangian, with coeﬃcient
1/16π. One may pass from one convention to the other by scaling the electro-

−
magnetic ﬁelds.] The Legendre transformation gives the relations

−

1
4

1
4

g.

−

−

Fµν = F µν √

and p =

Fµν F µν √

(3C.14)

g

−

The Cartan form ΘL is

ΘL = √

d3xµ +

Fµν F µν √

g d4x

(3C.15)

−

gF νµdAν ∧
dΘL is

and the 5-form ΩL =

−
g(gνσgµρ

ΩL = √

−

gνρgµσ)dAν ∧

dvρσ ∧

d3xµ −

√

gF µν dvνµ ∧

−

−

d4x.
(3C.16)

For a section A of Y = Λ1X, (3C.13) gives j1(A)∗F = dA and the Euler–
Lagrange equations reduce to

(Aν,µ

Aµ,ν );ν = 0.

−

(3C.17)

Here the semicolon denotes a covariant derivative with respect to the background
metric, so (3C.17) is a covariant divergence.

When g is treated parametrically, none of the formulas above change. In

particular, since g is not dynamic, it has no Euler–Lagrange equations.

c Gravity. The Hilbert Lagrangian density for gravity is

L =

R√

g d4x,

1
16π

−

where R = gσρRσρ is the scalar curvature and Rσρ is the Ricci curvature of the
connection Γλ

σρ. As a function on J 1Y ,

R√

g = gσρ

wλ

−

wλ

σλρ

+

σρλ −

σρΓτ
Γλ
(cid:0)

λτ −

(cid:1)(cid:3)
The Legendre transform yields the following three equations:

(cid:2)(cid:0)

(cid:1)

σλΓλ
Γτ
ρτ

.

pσρ

µ = 0

qσρµ
λ =

(2gσρδµ

gσµδρ

gρµδσ
λ)

p =

gσρ(Γλ

λ −
σρΓτ

λτ −

λ −
σλΓλ
Γτ

ρτ ).

1
32π
1
16π

From these results and (3B.3) and (3B.4), we compute

16πΘL = (gσρδµ

gσµδρ

λ) dΓλ

σρ ∧

λ −

d3xµ + gσρ

σρΓτ
Γλ
(cid:0)

λτ −

(cid:1)

σλΓλ
Γτ
ρτ

d4x (3C.23)

(3C.18)

(3C.19)

(3C.20)

(3C.21)

(3C.22)

§3C The Euler–Lagrange Equations

33

and

16πΩL =

dΓµ

(cid:2)
−
(cid:2)(cid:0)
+gσρ

dgσµ
dgσρ

dgσρ

dΓρ
σρ ∧
σρ ∧
−
Γλ
σρΓτ
Γτ
σλΓλ
λτ −
ρτ
(cid:1)
λτ dΓλ
λτ + Γτ
σρdΓτ
Γλ
(cid:0)

σρ −

(cid:3)

d3xµ

∧

σλdΓλ
Γτ

ρτ −

ρτ dΓτ
Γλ
σλ

∧

(cid:1)(cid:3)

d4x (3C.24)

The Euler–Lagrange equations are obtained by varying the g’s and the Γ’s

in turn; they are

R(σρ) = 0
gσρ
;λ = 0.

(3C.25)

(3C.26)

The equations (3C.25) are a set of ten ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equations for the
connection Γ, while (3C.26) imply that Γ is the Levi–Civita connection of g,
that is,

Γτ

σρ =

gτ λ(gλσ,ρ + gλρ,σ −

gσρ,λ).

1
2

(3C.27)

This in turn implies that R[σρ] = 0, so that (3C.25) are equivalent to the stan-
dard vacuum Einstein equations Rσρ = 0 now viewed as a set of second-order
diﬀerential equations for the metric g.

d A Topological Field Theory. The Chern–Simons Lagrangian density is

L =

ǫµνσFµν Aσd3x,

1
2

(3C.28)

where the curvature F of A is deﬁned by (3C.13). Intrinsically, L = F
Applying the Legendre transformation, we get

A.

∧

pνµ = ǫµνσAσ and p = 0.

(3C.29)

The Cartan form is thus

whence

ΘL = ǫµνσAσdAν ∧

d2xµ,

ΩL =

ǫµνσdAσ ∧

−

dAν ∧

d2xµ.

(3C.30)

(3C.31)

The Euler–Lagrange equations are ǫµνσFµν = 0, which are equivalent to the
connection A being ﬂat:

∗
j1 (A)

F = dA = 0.

(3C.32)

34

§3 Lagrangian Dynamics

e Bosonic Strings.
In the Polyakov model, with φ and h as independent
variables, the action is taken as the negative of the “energy” functional. Thus
as a function on J 1Y , the Lagrangian density is

L =

1
2

−

h
p|

hσρgABvA
|

σvB

ρd2x.

The Legendre transformation is

pA

µ =

hµνgABvB
h
−p|
|
qσρµ = 0

ν

p =

1
2

h
p|

hµνgABvA
|

µvB

ν,

(3C.33)

(3C.34)

(3C.35)

(3C.36)

so that the Cartan form is

ΘL =

h
p|

| (cid:18)−

Then

hµνgABvB

ν dφA

d1xµ +

hµνgABvA

µvB

ν d2x

(3C.37)

.

(cid:19)

∧

1
2

ΩL = dφA

∧

d

h
(cid:16)−p|

hµν gABvB
|

ν

d1xµ

h
p|
and the Euler-Lagrange equations reduce to

−

(cid:18)

(cid:17) ∧
1
d
2

hµν gABvA
|

µvB

ν(cid:19) ∧

d2x (3C.38)

(hµν gAB(φ)φB

,ν);µ = 0

1
2

(cid:18)

hµν gAB(φ)φA

,µφB

hαβ = gCD(φ)φC

,αφD

,β.

,ν(cid:19)

(3C.39)

(3C.40)

Equation (3C.39) says that φ satisﬁes the harmonic map equation. Equation

(3C.40) does two things:

(i) it says h is conformally related to the induced metric φ∗g on

X : Λ2hαβ = (φ∗g)α β, and

(ii) it determines the conformal factor: Λ2 = 1

2 hµν gAB(φ)φA

,µφB

,ν.

At ﬁrst glance, it might appear that (ii) is signiﬁcant while (i) is insigniﬁcant,
since in two dimensions “any two metrics are conformally related.” However,
the content of (3C.40) is, in fact, just the reverse. The actual theorem states
that in two dimensions, given two metrics, there is a diﬀeomorphism which
transforms one metric into a multiple of the other. Equation (3C.40) says that
in any coordinate system h is proportional to φ∗g. There is no need for a
diﬀeomorphism.

We summarize the content of (3C.40): There are three equations. Two say
that the components of h and φ∗g are proportional while the third determines
the proportionality constant. The ﬁrst two have content while the third is an
(cid:7)
identity.

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

35

4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s

Theorem

A key feature of relativistic ﬁeld theories is that not all of the Euler–Lagrange
equations necessarily describe the temporal evolution of ﬁelds; some of the equa-
tions may impose constraints on the choice of initial data. Those constraints
which are ﬁrst class in the sense of Dirac [1950, 1964] reﬂect the gauge sym-
metry of the theory and play a central role in our development. In Part II we
will see that these ﬁrst class constraints are related to the vanishing of various
momentum maps.

To lay the groundwork for this, we now study symmetries in the Lagrangian
and multisymplectic formalisms. First, we show how automorphisms of Y lift
to J 1Y in a way compatible, via the Legendre transform, with their canonical
lifts to Z. Second, we introduce the notion of a covariant momentum map for
a group G acting on Z by covariant canonical transformations. Third, we prove
that the lifted action of a group G on J 1Y has a covariant momentum map
(with respect to the Cartan form) which is given by the pull-back to J 1Y of the
covariant momentum map on Z by FL. Then we prove Noether’s theorem, here
formulated in terms of covariant momentum maps.

4A Jet Prolongations

Here we show how to naturally lift automorphisms of Y to automorphisms of
J 1Y . In eﬀect, we shall construct the covariant analogue of the tangent map.
Y be a πXY -bundle automorphism covering a diﬀeomorphism

Let ηY : Y

TyY is an element of J 1Y , let ηJ 1Y (γ) : TηX (x)X

→

→

ηX : X
TηY (y)Y be deﬁned by

X. If γ : TxX

→

→

ηJ 1Y (γ) = T ηY ◦
◦
The πY,J 1Y -bundle automorphism j1(ηY )
ηJ 1Y so constructed is called the
ﬁrst jet extension or prolongation of ηY to J 1Y . In coordinates, if γ =
(xµ, yA, vA

(4A.1)

µ), then

T η

≡

γ

−1
X .

ηJ 1Y (γ) =

ηµ
X (x), ηA

Y (x, y),

∂νηA

Y +

(cid:16)

(cid:2)

∂BηA
Y
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

vB

ν

∂µ

(cid:3)

ν

−1
η
X
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

.

(cid:17)

(4A.2)

In some situations we are interested in the case when ηY is vertical; that is, ηX
is the identity. Equations (4A.1) and (4A.2) simplify accordingly in this case.

If V is a vector ﬁeld on Y whose ﬂow is ηλ; that is,

V

ηλ =

◦

dηλ
dλ

,

then its ﬁrst jet extension or prolongation j1(V )
on J 1Y whose ﬂow is j1(ηλ); that is,

≡

VJ 1Y is the vector ﬁeld

j1 (V )

j1 (ηλ) =

j1 (ηλ) .

◦

d
dλ

(4A.3)

36

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

(4A.5)

(4A.6)

(4A.7)

In coordinates, by diﬀerentiating (4A.2), we obtain

j1(V ) =

V µ, V A,

(cid:18)

∂V A
∂xµ +

∂V A
∂yB vB

µ −

vA

ν

∂V ν
∂xµ (cid:19)

.

(4A.4)

It is important to note that if φ is a section of πXY and ηY is a πXY -bundle
φ = ηY ◦

automorphism covering ηX , then ηY ·

−1
X is another section and
η

φ

j1 (ηY ·

φ) = j1 (ηY )

◦
j1(φ)

◦

−1
X .
η

◦

See Garc´ıa [1974] and Aldaya and de Azc´arraga [1980a] for more information.

Remarks.

reduces to

1.
identity and (4A.5) becomes

If φλ = ηλ ◦

φ is a variation of φ (as in Remark 2 of

3C), then ηX is the

§

j1 (φλ) = j1 (ηλ)

j1(φ).

◦

In this case, the generating vector ﬁeld of the ﬂow ηλ is vertical and (4A.4)

j1(V ) =

0, V A,

(cid:18)

∂V A
∂xµ +

∂V A
∂yB vB

.

µ(cid:19)

In the above mentioned references, an additional term vB

λ∂V λ/∂yB is
2.
present in the third component of (4A.4); this is absent here since we consider
only transformations of Y which are bundle automorphisms so V λ is indepen-
dent of yB.

µvA

3. A word of caution: one can also view V as a section of the bundle T Y
Y
and take its ﬁrst jet in the sense of equation (2A.4). Then one gets the section
of J 1(T Y )

Y given in coordinates by

→

→

(xµ, yA)

xµ, yA, V µ, V A,

7→ (cid:18)

∂V µ
∂xν ,

∂V µ
∂yB ,

∂V A
∂xν ,

∂V A
∂yB (cid:19)

.

(4A.8)

This section is not to be confused with j1(V ) as deﬁned by (4A.3) and (4A.4);

they are two diﬀerent objects.

4. From the deﬁnitions one ﬁnds that

j1 ([V, W ]) =

j1(V ), j1(W )
(cid:3)

(cid:2)

.

(4A.9)

(cid:7)

(4B.1)

(4B.2)

(4B.3)

§4B Covariant Canonical Transformations

37

4B Covariant Canonical Transformations

A covariant canonical transformation is a πXZ -bundle map ηZ : Z
covering a diﬀeomorphism ηX : X

X such that

Z

→

We say ηZ is a special covariant canonical transformation if

→
∗
η
Z Ω = Ω.

∗
η
Z Θ = Θ.

If ηY : Y
phism ηX : X

Y is a πXY -bundle automorphism (also covering a diﬀeomor-
X), its canonical lift ηZ : Z

Z is deﬁned by

→
→

→

ηZ (z) = (η

−1
∗
Y )

(z);

that is,

where

and

ηZ(z) (v1, . . . , vn+1) = z

v1, . . . , T η

vn+1

,

(4B.4)

−1
Y ·

T η
(cid:0)

−1
Y ·

(cid:1)

z

Zy

and v1, . . . , vn+1 ∈
Since ηY is a πXY -bundle map, T ηY maps vertical vectors to vertical vectors, so
ηZ does indeed map Z to Z. In coordinates, if we write z = p dn+1x + pA
dnxµ, and notice that

TηY (y)Y.

µdyA

∧

∈

∗

−1
η
Y
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

dxµ =

−1
η
X

∗

dxµ

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

∗

−1
η
Y
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

dyA = ∂ν

dxν + ∂B

A

−1
η
Y
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

A

dyB,

−1
η
Y
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(4B.5)

where ∂B = ∂

∂yB , we get

ηZ (z) =

∗

−1
η
Y
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(z) =

p + ∂ν
h

A

pA

µ∂µην
X

−1dn+1x

J

−1
η
Y
(cid:0)
∂A
h

(cid:1)
−1
η
Y
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

+

B

pB

i
ν∂ν ηµ
X

i

−1dyA

J

dnxµ,

(4B.6)

∧

where J is the Jacobian determinant of ηX and where the quantities in (4B.6)
are evaluated at the appropriate points.

Proposition 4.1. Lifts are special covariant canonical transformations.

This proposition is readily proved using a method similar to the cotangent

bundle case (Abraham and Marsden [1978], Theorem 3.2.12).

Here is a second way to understand the lift of a πXY -bundle automorphism
X, which proceeds via J 1Y ⋆
ηY : Y
rather than directly to Z. We deﬁne the lift of ηY to J 1Y ⋆ to be the aﬃne dual

Y covering a diﬀeomorphism ηX : X

→

→

38

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

of the prolongation ηJ 1Y ; that is, if z : J 1Yy →
let

Λn+1Xx is an element of J 1Y ⋆
y ,

be the aﬃne map deﬁned by

ηJ 1Y ⋆ (z) : J 1YηY (y) →

Λn+1XηX (x)

[ηJ 1Y ⋆ (z)] (γ) =

∗

−1
η
X
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

z
(cid:0)

(cid:2)

−1
J 1Y (γ)
η

.

(cid:3)(cid:1)

(4B.7)

(4B.8)

In coordinates, if z = (p, pµ
(4A.2)

A) acts on γ = (xµ, yA, vA

µ ) as in (2B.1), then from

[ηJ 1Y ∗ (z)] (γ)

∗

−1
η
X
(cid:0)

h(cid:16)
(cid:1)
p + ∂ν

=

=

h(cid:16)

p + pA

µ∂µην
X

∂ν

+ vB

ν∂B

h
pµ
A∂µην

X

A

−1
η
Y
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

A

−1
η
Y
(cid:0)
+

(cid:1)
∂A

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

B

−1
η
Y
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

dn+1x
i

A

−1
η
Y
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
B∂νηµ
pν
X

i(cid:17)
vA

(cid:17)

µ

i

−1dn+1x

J

so that the terms in (4B.8) correspond to the components in (4B.6) via (2B.8).
Consequently, we have given a coordinate proof of

Proposition 4.2. The canonical isomorphism Φ : Z
with respect to the lifts ηZ and ηJ 1Y ⋆; that is,

→

J 1Y ⋆ is equivariant

Φ

ηZ = ηJ 1Y ⋆

Φ

◦

◦

(4B.9)

Here is an invariant proof of Proposition 4.2 using (2B.6), (4A.1), (4B.3)

and (4B.7) above. For z

Z and γ

J 1Y , we have

ηJ 1Y ⋆ [Φ(z)]
}

{

(γ) =

∈

−1
η
X
(cid:0)
−1
η
X
(cid:0)
−1
η
X
(cid:0)
−1
η
X
(cid:0)

∗

∗
(cid:1)

∗
(cid:1)

∗
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

=

=

=

∈

{

}

{

Φ(z)

Φ(z)

−1
J 1Y (γ)
η
(cid:3)
(cid:2)
−1
γ
T η
Y ◦
(cid:2)
−1
γ
T η
Y ◦
◦
{
(cid:2)
−1
∗
∗
∗
z = γ
Y )
(η
X γ
η

◦
T ηX
(cid:3)
∗

T ηX
∗

z

}

}
(cid:3)

[ηZ(z)] =

Φ [ηZ (z)]
}

{

(γ),

and so (4B.9) holds. Thus, the identiﬁcation of Z and J 1Y ⋆ respects the action
of a lifted covariant canonical transformation.

Let V be a vector ﬁeld on Y whose ﬂow ηλ maps ﬁbers of πXY to ﬁbers. The
canonical lift of V to Z is the vector ﬁeld VZ that generates the canonical lift
of this ﬂow to Z. By diﬀerentiating (4B.6) we obtain

VZ = (V µ, V A,

pV ν

pB

νV B

,ν, pA

νV µ

pB

µV B

pA

µV ν

,ν) (4B.10)

−

,ν −

,ν −

,A −

in coordinates, where V = (V µ, V A). By either direct calculation or by Propo-
sition 4.1, we get

£VZ Θ = 0.

§4C Covariant Momentum Maps

39

4C Covariant Momentum Maps

We now introduce the covariant analogue of momentum maps in symplectic and
Poisson geometry (see for example, Abraham and Marsden [1978], Marsden,
Weinstein, Ratiu, Schmid and Spencer [1983], Guillemin and Sternberg [1984],
and Marsden [1992]).

Let G denote a Lie group (perhaps inﬁnite-dimensional) with Lie algebra g
that acts on X by diﬀeomorphisms and acts on Z (or Y ) as πXZ (or πXY )-
G, let ηX , ηY and ηZ denote the corresponding
bundle automorphisms. For η
g, let ξX , ξY and ξZ denote the
transformations of X, Y and Z, and for ξ
corresponding inﬁnitesimal generators. If G acts on Z by covariant canonical
transformations, then the Lie derivative of Ω along ξZ is zero:

∈

∈

and if G acts by special covariant canonical transformations, then

£ξZ Ω = 0

£ξZ Θ = 0

(4C.1)

(4C.2)

If G acts on Z by covariant canonical transformations, then a covariant

momentum map (or a multimomentum map) for this action is a map

J : Z

g∗

→

⊗

ΛnZ = L(g, ΛnZ)

covering the identity on Z such that

dJ(ξ) = iξZ Ω,

(4C.3)

where J(ξ) =
covariant momentum map is said to be Ad

is the n-form on Z whose value at z
-equivariant if

J, ξ
h

i

∗

∈

Z is J(z)(ξ). A

−1
η ξ

= η

∗
Z [J(ξ)] .

J

Ad
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(4C.4)

If G acts by special covariant canonical transformations, there is an explicit
formula for a special covariant momentum map. We claim that

J(ξ) = iξZ Θ = ξZ Θ

(4C.5)

is a covariant momentum map. Indeed,

dJ(ξ) = diξZ Θ = (£ξZ −

iξZ d)Θ = iξZ Ω.

Proposition 4.3. Special covariant momentum maps are Ad

∗-equivariant.

The proof is analogous to that for the cotangent bundle case (Abraham and
Marsden [1978], Theorem 4.2.10). For the particular case of lifted actions, we
have:

40

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

Proposition 4.4. If the action of G on Z is the lift of an action of G on Y ,
then the special covariant momentum map is given by

J(ξ)(z) = π

∗
YZ iξY z.

(4C.6)

This momentum map is Ad

-equivariant.

∗

J(ξ) and Θ, and Proposition 4.3.

This follows from the recognition that ξY = T πYZ ◦
In coordinates, if ξX has components ξµ and ξY has components (ξµ, ξA),

ξZ , the deﬁnitions of

then equation (4C.6) reads

J(ξ)(z) = (pA

µξA + pξµ)dnxµ −

pA

µξνdyA

dn−1xµν ,

∧

dn−1xµν = i∂ν i∂µdn+1x.

(4C.7)

(4C.8)

In passing, we reformulate equivariance for lifted actions in terms of Pois-
son brackets, just as one does in the usual context of symplectic and Poisson
manifolds.

Proposition 4.5. For lifted actions,

J(ξ), J(ζ)
}

{

= d(iξZ iζZ Θ) + J([ξ, ζ]).

(4C.9)

Proof. Set ηλ = exp(λζ). Diﬀerentiating the equivariance relation (4C.4)
with respect to λ at λ = 0 gives

J([ξ, ζ]) = £ζZ J(ξ) = diζZ J(ξ) + iζZ dJ(ξ) = diζZ J(ξ) + iζZ iξZ Ω

by (4C.3). This, (4C.5) and (2B.31) give (4C.9).

(cid:4)

Examples

Since X is assumed oriented, Diﬀ(X) will henceforth denote the group of

orientation-preserving diﬀeomorphisms of X.

a Particle Mechanics. For classical mechanics with time reparametrization
freedom (see, for example, Kuchaˇr [1973]), we let G = Diﬀ(R), the diﬀeomor-
phism group of X = R. Then G acts on Y = R
Q by time reparametrizations
and this action may be lifted to Z = T ∗R
T ∗Q. We identify g with the space
F(R) of smooth functions on R and identify F(R)∗, the space of densities on R,
with F(R). In terms of the coordinates of Example a of

2B, we have

×

×

fY = f (t)

∂
∂t

for f (t)

F(R).

∈

§

§4C Covariant Momentum Maps

41

The momentum map

is deﬁned by

J : Z = T

∗R

∗

Q

T

∗
F(R)

F(R)

×

→

≈

J(f )(t, p, q1, . . . , qN , p1, . . . , pN ) = pf (t).

(4C.10)

If we consider a classical mechanical system with a ﬁxed time parametriza-
tion and with a group G acting on Q, then the covariant momentum map J(ξ)
induced on Z is the usual momentum map on T ∗Q regarded as a map on Z.

In this example, note that covariant canonical maps include time-dependent

canonical transformations.

b Electromagnetism. The appropriate invariance group for electromag-
netism on a ﬁxed spacetime background X is G = F(X), the additive group
of smooth functions on spacetime. Let G act on Y = Λ1X as follows: For
f

F(X) and A

Λ1Xx,

∈

∈

For λ

∈

g ∼= F(X), the inﬁnitesimal generator is given by

f

A = A + df (x)

·

Λ1Xx.

∈

From (4C.7), the corresponding covariant momentum map is

λY (A) = λ,ν

∂
∂Aν

.

J(λ)(z) = Fνµλ,ν d3xµ.

(4C.11)

(4C.12)

(4C.13)

If we treat the metric g on X parametrically, we may enlarge the group G to
be the semi-direct product Diﬀ(X) s F(X), with Diﬀ(X) acting on F(X) by
push-forward; that is, η

η−1. Then G acts on ˜Y = Y

f = f

×X S3,1

2 (X) by

(4C.14)

(η, f )

◦
(A; g) =

·

·

(cid:16)

∗
−1)

(η

A + df ;

The inﬁnitesimal generator ξ ˜Y at the point (A; g)

(ξS

3,1

2 (X)(g))σρ

+ (ξY (A))ν

+ (λY (A))ν

∂
∂gσρ

∂
∂Aν

+ ξµ(x)

∂
∂xµ ,

(4C.15)

g

.

(cid:17)

∗

−1

(cid:1)
˜Yx is

η
(cid:0)

∈

∂
∂Aν

where

(ξS

3,1

2 (X)(g))σρ =

(gσµξµ

,ρ + gρµξµ

,σ),

−

(ξY (A))ν =

Aµξµ

,ν,

−

(4C.16)

(4C.17)

and λY (A) is given by (4C.12). From (4C.7), the multi-momentum map ˜J :
˜Z

Λ3Z for this action is

g∗

→
⊗
˜J(z; g), (ξ, λ)
i
h

= [

FνµAτ ξτ

−

,ν + Fνµλ,ν + pξµ]d3xµ −

Fτ µξν dAτ ∧

d2xµν .

(4C.18)

42

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

c Gravity. For gravity, let G = Diﬀ(X), the diﬀeomorphism group of space-
time, so elements of g are identiﬁed with vector ﬁelds ξ on X. Let G act on
S2
3,1(X)η(x)
is given by

3,1(X) by push-forward: If η

3,1(X)x, then η

G and g

S2

S2

∈

∈

∈

g

·

g)σρ = J σ

(η

(4C.19)
µ = ∂µησ(x) is the Jacobian matrix of η at x. Similarly, G acts on
Aﬀ(X)η(x) is

where J σ
Aﬀ(X) by push-forward in the usual way: for Γ
deﬁned by

Aﬀ(X)x, η

∈

∈

Γ

ν gµν (det J)

µJ ρ

·

·

−1 ,

(η

Γ)λ
where K = J −1 and J λ
at x.

·

σρ = J λ

τ Kσ

µKρ

νΓτ

K µ

σK ν

ρJ λ

µν ,

µν −

(4C.20)

µν = ∂νJ λ

µ = ∂µ∂νηλ(x) is the Hessian matrix of η

For ξ

g, it follows from (4C.19) and (4C.20) that the components of

ξYG (g, Γ) are given by the “partial Lie derivatives”

∈

(ξYG (g))σρ = gσνξρ

,ν + gρνξσ

gσρξν

,ν

(4C.21)

,ν −

and

(ξYG (Γ))λ

σρ = Γν
= Rλ

σρξλ
σρν ξν

,ν −

Γλ
ρνξν
ξλ

,σ −
;σρ + Γλ

Γλ
σνξν
σρ,ν ξν

ξλ

,σρ

,ρ −

−

(4C.22)

on the ﬁber, and ξµ on the base. (The “remainder” of the Lie derivative will
appear when we consider the action on ﬁelds; see
7 (Part II).) From (4C.7),
(4C.21) and (4C.22) we get

§

J(ξ)(z) = [ pσρ

µ (gσν ξρ
,ν + gρν ξσ
+qσρµ
σρν ξν
Rλ
ξλ
λ
−
(cid:0)
µdgσρ + qσρµ
λ dΓλ
pσρ
As we shall see in Part III this covariant momentum map is closely related
to the gravitational superhamiltonian and supermomentum constraints of Ein-
stein’s theory.

,ν −
;σρ + Γλ
ξν

gσρξν
,ν)
σρ,ν ξν

(cid:1)
d2xµν .

(4C.23)

+ pξµ

d3xµ

−

∧

σρ

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

d A Topological Field Theory. Just as in Example b above, we take
G = Diﬀ(X) s F(X) acting on Y according to

(η, f )

A = (η

∗
−1)

A + df.

The corresponding inﬁnitesimal generator is

ξY (A) = (ξY (A))ν

+ (λY (A))ν

∂
∂Aν

+ ξµ(x)

∂
∂xµ ,

·

∂
∂Aν

(4C.24)

(4C.25)

where (ξY (A))ν and λY (A) are given by (4C.17) and (4C.12), respectively. Then
we compute

J(z), (ξ, λ)
i
h

−
(cid:2)

=

pνµAτ ξτ

,ν + pνµλ,ν + pξµ

d2xµ −

pτ µξνdAτ ∧

d1xµν .

(4C.26)

(cid:3)

§4D Symmetries and Noether’s Theorem

43

e Bosonic Strings. Corresponding to Y = (X
the invariance group G for bosonic strings to be the semi-direct product

M )

2 (X), we take

×

×X S1,1

G = Diﬀ (X) s CS1,1

(X)

2

(4C.27)

of Diﬀ(X) and the group CS1,1
2 (X) of conformal transformations of the metric h
on X (which may be identiﬁed with the group F(X, R+) of positive real-valued
functions on X), where η
2 (X) by pushforward; that
is,

Diﬀ(X) acts on Λ

CS1,1

∈

∈

−1.

η

◦

η

Λ = Λ

·
Y by

(4C.28)

Then (η, λ)

G acts on (φ, h)

∈

∈
(φ, h) =

(η, λ)

·

φ
(cid:0)

◦

−1, Λ2(η

∗
−1)

η

h

.

(4C.29)

(cid:1)

Hence, for (ξ, λ)
(ξ, λ)Y at (φ, h)

g ∼= X(X) s F(X), the corresponding inﬁnitesimal generator
Y is

∈
∈

(λY (h))σρ

+ (ξY (h))σρ

∂
∂hσρ

∂
∂hσρ

+ ξµ ∂

∂xµ ,

(4C.30)

where

and

(λY (h))σρ = 2λhσρ

(4C.31)

(ξY (h))σρ =

(hσµξµ

,ρ + hρµξµ

,σ).

(4C.32)

−

Note that there is no component in the direction ∂/∂φA since φ is a scalar ﬁeld
on X. From (4C.7), we get the covariant momentum map

J (ξ, λ) (z) = [qσρµ (2λhσρ −

hσν ξν

hρν ξν

,σ) + pξµ] d1xµ

(pA

µξν dφA + qσρµξνdhσρ)εµν .

(4C.33)

,ρ −
−

(cid:7)

The covariant momentum maps discussed and illustrated in this section do
not involve the Lagrangian at all. In the next section, however, we will show that
when a theory possesses symmetries, an important link between the Lagrangian
and the covariant momentum map may be established.

4D Symmetries and Noether’s Theorem

Having assembled the necessary background in
4A–C, we are now able to state
and prove Noether’s Theorem. This fundamental result will be used in Part
III to show that the energy-momentum map in the Lagrangian representation

§§

44

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

§§

vanishes identically on solutions of the Euler–Lagrange equations. As we shall
see in
10 and 11, the vanishing of this energy-momentum map on a single
Cauchy surface is often equivalent to the totality of the ﬁrst class constraints
of the theory. However, its vanishing on a whole family of hypersurfaces is
equivalent to the entire Euler–Lagrange system under a suitable hypothesis on
the gauge group; see Part III,

9C.

Suppose that a group G acts on Y by bundle automorphisms. Prolong this
4A). We say that the Lagrangian

action to J 1Y by setting η
·
density L is equivariant with respect to G if for all η

γ = ηJ 1Y (γ) (see

G and γ

J 1Y ,

§

§

∈

∈

L (ηJ 1Y (γ)) =

L(γ),

(4D.1)

∗

−1
η
X
(cid:0)

L(γ) = (ηX )∗ L(γ) means that the (n + 1)-form L(γ) at x

where
X
is pushed forward to an (n + 1)-form at η(x); equality in (4D.1) thus means
equality of (n + 1)-forms at the point η(x). The inﬁnitesimal version of this is
the following equation obtained from (3A.1) and (4A.4):

∈

(cid:1)

∗

−1
η
X
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

∂L
∂xµ ξµ +

∂L
∂yA ξA +

∂L
∂vA

ξA

,µ −

µ (cid:18)

vA

νξν

,µ + vB

µ

+ Lξµ

,µ = 0.

(4D.2)

∂ξA
∂yB (cid:19)

The quantity δξL deﬁned by the left hand side of this equation is called the
variation of L in the direction ξ.

One of the fundamental assumptions that we shall make in this work is the

following:

A1 Covariance. The group G acts on Y by πXY -bundle automorphisms and
the Lagrangian density L is equivariant with respect to G.

This is a strong assumption but, amazingly, the gauge groups of most ﬁeld
theories satisfy it. One general class of exceptions are the topological ﬁeld
theories, whose gauge groups tend to leave ΩL, but not L, invariant. We will
discuss how to deal with such cases in Example d below. This assumption has
a number of important consequences, some of which are stated in the following
proposition.

Proposition 4.6. Let L be equivariant with respect to the lifted action of G on
J 1Y . Then

(i) FL is also equivariant; that is, ηZ ◦

FL = FL

ηJ 1Y . Thus, the diagram

ηJ1 Y

J 1Y



J 1Y
y

FL

−−−−→

FL

−−−−→

◦

ηZ

Z



Z
y

commutes for every η

G,

∈

§4D Symmetries and Noether’s Theorem

45

(ii) the Cartan form ΘL is invariant ; that is, η∗

J 1Y ΘL = ΘL for all η

G,

∈

and

(iii) the map J L(ξ) := FL∗J(ξ) : J 1Y

Λn(J 1Y ) is a momentum map for

the lifted action of G on J 1Y relative to ΩL; that is, for all ξ

g,

→

L

∈

ξJ 1Y ΩL = dJ
where ξJ 1Y = j1(ξY ) is the inﬁnitesimal generator corresponding to ξ.
Moreover,

(ξ),

(4D.3)

L
ξ = ξJ 1Y y ΘL.
J

(4D.4)

Proof.

(i) It is convenient to identify L with J 1Y ∗ and use Proposition 4.2. From

(4B.7) and (3A.3), we have

ηJ 1Y ⋆ [FL(γ)]

{

′

γ

=

} ·

−1
η
X
(cid:0)
−1
η
X
(cid:0)

∗

(cid:1)
∗

(cid:1)

=

FL(γ)

−1
J 1Y (γ
η
(cid:2)
d
L(γ) +
dε

L

{

(cid:26)

′

)
}
(cid:3)
γ + ε[η

(cid:0)

′

−1
J 1Y (γ

)

−

γ]
(cid:1)

.

|ε=0(cid:27)

On the other hand, using (3A.3), we have

FL[ηJ 1Y (γ)]

′

γ

= L(ηJ 1Y (γ)) +

L (ηJ 1Y (γ)) + ε[γ

ηJ 1Y (γ)])

{
These are equal by the covariance condition A1.

} ·

′

−

|ε=0.

d
dε

(ii) The proof is analogous to that for Corollary 4.2.14 of Abraham and Mars-

den [1978].

(iii) The inﬁnitesimal version of (i) states

ξZ ◦

FL = T FL

ξJ 1Y .

·

(4D.5)

Pulling (4C.3) back from Z to J 1Y along the Legendre transformation
and using (4D.5) yields (4D.3). Similarly, pulling (4C.5) back by FL
(cid:4)
yields (4D.4).

Because of this theorem, we call J L the covariant momentum map in
the Lagrangian representation. From (4D.4) and (3B.3) or, equivalently,
from (4C.7) and (3A.2), we have the explicit formula

L
ξ =
J

∂L
∂vA
µ

(cid:18)

ξA +

L

(cid:20)

−

∂L
∂vA
ν

vA

ξµ

dnxµ −

(cid:19)

ν (cid:21)

∂L
∂vA
µ

ξν dyA

dn−1xµν . (4D.6)

∧

If φ is a solution of the Euler–Lagrange equations, then from Theorem 3.1,

∗
j1(φ)

iW ΩL = 0

for any vector ﬁeld W on J 1Y . In particular, setting W = ξJ 1Y and applying
j1(φ)∗ to (4D.3), we obtain the following basic Noether conservation law :

46

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

Theorem 4.7 (Divergence Form of Noether’s Theorem). If the covari-
ance assumption A1 is satisﬁed, then for each ξ

g,

∈

∗
d[j1(φ)

J

L

(ξ)] = 0

(4D.7)

for any section φ of πXY satisfying the Euler–Lagrange equations.

The quantity j1(φ)∗J L(ξ) is called the Noether current. We now proceed
to compute coordinate expressions for the Noether current and its divergence
without assuming that the ﬁeld equations are satisﬁed. In the process, we will
derive a criteria for when a theory has a converse to Noether’s theorem; that is,
when the Noether conservation law implies the Euler–Lagrange equations.

From (3A.2) and (4C.7) we get

j1(φ)

∗FL∗

J(ξ)

=

∂L
∂vA

(cid:20)

j1(φ)

ξA

∂L
∂vA

−

µ (cid:0)

(cid:1) (cid:0)
j1(φ)
(cid:1)

µ (cid:0)

+ L

◦

φ
(cid:1)
,λξνdxλ

ξµ

j1(φ)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
dn−1xµν

φA

∧

∂L
∂vA

−

j1(φ)
(cid:1)

ν (cid:0)

φA

,νξµ

dnxµ

(cid:21)

which, using the identity

simpliﬁes to

dxλ

dn−1xµν = δλ

∧

ν dnxµ −

µdnxν,
δλ

∗
j1 (φ)

J

L

(ξ) =

∂L
∂vA

(cid:20)

j1(φ)

ξA

µ (cid:0)

(cid:1) (cid:0)

φ

◦

−

φA

,νξν

+ L

j1(φ)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)

ξµ

dnxµ.

(cid:21)

(cid:1)

(4D.8)

Deﬁning the Lie derivative of φ along ξ by

£ξφ = T φ

ξY ◦
(4D.8) may be rewritten as

ξX −

·

φ;

i.e.,

(£ξφ)A = φA

,νξν

ξA

φ,

◦

−

(4D.9)

j1 (φ)

∗

L

J

(ξ) =

∂L
∂vA

µ

(cid:20)−

(j1(φ))(£ξφ)A + L(j1(φ))ξµ

dnxµ

(4D.10)

(cid:21)

where φ is any section of πXY , not necessarily satisfying the Euler–Lagrange
equations.

Next, taking the exterior derivative of the Noether current (4D.8) and using

the identity

d(V µdnxµ) = ∂ρV µdxρ

dnxµ = ∂µV µdn+1x

∧

(which justiﬁes the name “divergence” for the resulting quantity), we obtain

§4D Symmetries and Noether’s Theorem

47

after some rearrangement and cancellation,

∗
d[j1(φ)

J

L

(ξ)] = ∂µ (cid:20)

=

(cid:26)(cid:20)

φ

◦

−
∂L
∂vA

φA

,νξν) + L(j1(φ))ξµ

dn+1x

(cid:21)

(j1(φ))

ξA

[
−

◦

(cid:19)(cid:21)

φ + φA

,νξν]

µ

∂xµ (cid:18)
∂L
∂yA (j1(φ))(ξA
∂ξA
∂yB vB

∂ξA
∂xµ +

µ −

φ)

◦

dn+1x

∂ξν
∂xµ vA

ν (cid:21)

(j1(φ))

µ

∂

(j1(φ))(ξA

∂L
∂vA
∂L
∂yA (j1(φ))
∂L
∂xµ (j1(φ))ξµ +
∂L
(j1(φ))
∂vA

−

(cid:20)

µ

+

+

+L(j1(φ))

∂ξµ
∂xµ (cid:27)
δL
δφA (£ξφ)A + δξL

=

(cid:26)

(j1(φ)) dn+1x.

(cid:27)

(4D.11)

Here, δL/δφA is the Euler–Lagrange derivative of L deﬁned in (3C.1), which
vanishes when the ﬁeld equations are satisﬁed, and δξL is the variation of L
deﬁned in (4D.2), which vanishes when the Lagrangian is equivariant. Thus
equation (4D.11) again makes it obvious that the Noether conservation laws
hold when the Lagrangian is equivariant and the Euler–Lagrange equations are
satisﬁed.

To obtain a converse, we say that the G-action is vertically transitive if

for each y

Y and each local section φ through y,

∈

(£ξφ)(y)
ξ
|

g

= VyY.

∈

{
7A, we note that this is the inﬁnitesimal version
Looking forward to Part II,
of the statement that at each point x
X, there exists a group element that
∈
transforms any given value of the ﬁelds at x into any other speciﬁed value. This
is true for metrics and connections under the diﬀeomorphism group and for
connections under bundle automorphisms, but is rarely true for other ﬁelds.

}

§

(4D.12)

Equation (4D.11) now implies

Theorem 4.8. Assume that the action of G on Y is vertically transitive and
that the Lagrangian density is G-equivariant. Then a local section φ of Y is a
solution to the Euler–Lagrange equations (3C.1) if and only if it satisﬁes the
Noether conservation law (4D.7) for all ξ

g.

∈

To check whether the G-action for a given ﬁeld theory is vertically transitive,

we may use the equivalent formulations given in:

Proposition 4.9. Assume G acts on Y and let

g(y) =

ξY (y)

ξ

g

}

∈

|

{

denote the span of the inﬁnitesimal generators of the action at y
Y ; that is,
the tangent space to the orbit through y. Vertical transitivity of the action of g
on Y is equivalent to either of the following conditions:

∈

48

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

(i) For each y

Y and each local section φ with φ(x) = y, the image of φ is

∈
transverse to g(y); that is,

g(y) + im(Txφ) = TyY.

(4D.13)

(ii) For each y

Y and every choice of bundle coordinates (xµ, yA), we have

ξA(y)∂A |

ξ

g

}

∈

= VyY,

(4D.14)

∈

{
where ξY = ξµ∂µ + ξA∂A.

Note that an action can be vertically transitive even if none of the ξY are

vertical.

Examples

In each of the following examples, we compute the Noether current and its
divergence without assuming the ﬁelds satisfy the Euler–Lagrange equations,
and we then check for vertical transitivity.

a Particle Mechanics. A particle Lagrangian is Diﬀ(R)-equivariant if and
only if it is time-reparametrization invariant. Suppose also that there is a group
G acting on Q whose prolongation to T Q leaves the Lagrangian invariant. Take
G = Diﬀ(R)

G and write elements of g as pairs (f, ξ). Then (4D.8) reads

×

∗
j1(φ)

L
(f,ξ) =
J

∂L
∂vA (ξA

(cid:20)

−

vAf ) + Lf

= (J L

Ef ),

(cid:21)

ξ −

(4D.15)

ξ = ∂L

where J L
mechanics and where the energy E = vA(∂L/∂vA)
that on solutions of the Euler–Lagrange equations,

∂vA ξA is the usual momentum map for G acting on Q in Lagrangian
L. Then (4D.7) asserts

−

d
dt

J L
ξ −
(cid:0)

Ef

= 0,

(cid:1)

(4D.16)

which is equivalent to conservation of both J L
ξ and E. This group G is verti-
cally transitive iﬀ G acts transitively on Q. A transitive action means, roughly
speaking, that the system is completely integrable, so Theorem 4.8—asserting
the equivalence of conservation laws and the equations of motion—is in fact
reasonable in this case.

Remark. The combination J L
Ef is the quantity that is used in the energy
momentum method for nonlinear stability of relative equilibria; see Simo,
Lewis, and Marsden [1991] and Marsden [1992] for details. We could also take
G where R translates or R+ rescales (rather than
G = R
(cid:7)
reparametrizes) time.

G or G = R+

ξ −

×

×

§4D Symmetries and Noether’s Theorem

49

In the special case of the relativistic free particle, the Lagrangian density
given by (3C.8) is Diﬀ(R)-equivariant, where now Diﬀ(R) denotes the subgroup
of orientation-preserving diﬀeomorphisms. Then the corresponding momentum
map vanishes identically, consistent with the fact that p = 0, cf. (3C.10) and
(4C.10). On the other hand, suppose that (Q, g) is Minkowski space and that
G is the Poincar´e group. Then L is G-invariant and (4D.16) expresses the fact
that relativistic energy-momentum and angular momentum are constant along
dynamical trajectories. This is equivalent to the statement that the dynamical
trajectories are geodesics of g.

b Electromagnetism. Let G = F(X) act on Y = Λ1X as in example b of
4C. The Maxwell Lagrangian density (3C.12) is invariant under the prolonga-
§
tion of F(X) to J 1(Λ1X). In this case (4D.7) reads

d

∗
j1(A)

L
J
λ

(cid:2)

= d

(cid:3)

= d

∗
j1(A)
(Aµ,ν

(cid:2)

=

(cid:2)
(Aµ,ν

−

(cid:2)

F νµ √
−
(cid:0)
Aν,µ) √
−
Aν,µ) √

−

(cid:3)

g λ,ν d3xµ

(cid:1)(cid:3)
g λ,ν d3xµ
,µ λ,ν d4x = 0

(cid:3)

−
g

(4D.17)

where we have used dxλ
dropped out by symmetry. Since λ is arbitrary, (4D.17) is equivalent to

µd4x and noted that the terms λ,µν have

d3xµ = δλ

∧

(Aµ,ν

Aν,µ);µ = 0

−

(4D.18)

which are Maxwell’s equations. The group F(X) is vertically transitive in this
case.

Observe that when the spacetime metric g is ﬁxed, the Maxwell Lagrangian

density (3C.12) is not Diﬀ(X)-equivariant: L((η, 0)J 1Y (γ)) = L(γ), whereas

L(γ) = L (γ) J

−1,

∗

−1
η
X
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

J being the Jacobian determinant of ηX . We can remedy this by allowing g
g factor in L will give rise to
to vary parametrically, in which case the √
a factor of J which will cancel the oﬀending factor J −1 in the above. Com-
bined with our previous results, we see that parametrized electromagnetism is
(Diﬀ(X) s F(X))-equivariant: δ(ξ,λ)L = 0. But there is a price to be paid for
this extended equivariance: Noether’s theorem no longer holds for ˜J L = FL∗ ˜J.
Indeed, from (4D.11) we see that even if the section A of Λ1X satisﬁes Maxwell’s
equations,

−

d

j1(A)

h(cid:0)

g

∗ ˜J
(cid:1)

×

L
(ξ,λ)

=

i

∂L
∂gσρ

(£ξg)σρd4x

= Tσρ (£ξg)σρ d4x

50

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

need not vanish, where

Tσρ =

1
4

− (cid:20)

gσρFαβF αβ + gρβF ασFβα(cid:21)

√

g

−

(4D.19)

is the stress-energy-momentum tensor of the electromagnetic ﬁeld (cf. Gotay
and Marsden [1992] and Interlude II). The reason, of course, is that g is not a
dynamic ﬁeld, whence δL/δgσρ = ∂L/∂gσρ 6

= 0 necessarily.

c Gravity. The Hilbert Lagrangian density (3C.18) is equivariant with re-
spect to the spacetime diﬀeomorphism group. From (4D.10), we have

∗
j1 (g, Γ)

L
ξ =
J

∂L
∂vσρ

µ

(cid:20)−

(£ξg)σρ

∂L
∂wλ

σρµ

−

(£ξΓ)λ

σρ + Lξµ

d3xµ.

(cid:21)

(4D.20)

Using the Legendre transform (3C.20, 3C.21) for Einstein’s theory, together
with the formula

;σρ −
(derived from (4C.22) and (4D.9)), we obtain

(£ξΓ)λ

σρ = ξλ

Rλ

σρν ξν

(4D.21)

∗
j1 (g, Γ)

L
ξ =
J

gσρξµ

;σρ + gσµξρ

1
16π

−
(cid:2)

;σρ + gσρRµ

σρν ξν
σρν ξν + R√

gσµRρ

−

g ξµ

d3xµ

(4D.22)

−

(cid:3)

as the expression for the Noether current for Einstein’s theory.

We now calculate the exterior derivative of this Noether current. Since the

expression in brackets in (4D.22) is a vector density, we ﬁnd

16πd

∗
j1(g, Γ)
(cid:2)

L
J
ξ

(cid:3)

= [

gσρξµ

;σρ + gσµξρ

−

;σρ + gσρRµ
gσµRρ

σρν ξν
σρν ξν + R√

−

g ξµ

−

;µ d4x.
(cid:3)

Carrying out the diﬀerentiation, and using the deﬁnition of the curvature oper-
ator to eliminate third derivatives of ξν, this formula becomes

16πd

∗
j1 (g, Γ)
(cid:2)

L
J
ξ

=

(cid:3)

ξν

gσρRµ
n
(cid:2)
+ ξν

;µ [

σρν −

2Rµ

ν + δµ

νR]√

gσµRσν + Rδµ

ν √

g

−

;µ
(cid:3)

g

−

−
δρ
(cid:2)

+ ξν

νgµλ

;µρ

;λ −
X, the tensors ξν , ξν

gµρ

;ν

d4x.

(cid:3)o
;µ, and ξν

(4D.23)

At a given point x

;µρ can be assumed to
be arbitrary. Hence all of the bracketed terms in (4D.23) must vanish as a
consequence of Noether’s Theorem. The ξν

;µρ piece implies that

∈

gµρ

;ν = 0,

(4D.24)

§4D Symmetries and Noether’s Theorem

51

which states that Γ is metric compatible. The ξν
;µ piece is minus twice the
Einstein tensor, so its vanishing implies Einstein’s equations. Finally, the van-
ishing of the coeﬃcient of ξν provides no new ﬁeld equations, as it follows from
(4D.24) and Einstein’s equations.

We see from this analysis that the diﬀerential of the Noether current corre-
sponding to a given set of ﬁelds (g, Γ) vanishes for all ξν iﬀ those ﬁelds satisfy
the Euler Lagrange equations of Einstein’s theory. This is consistent with Theo-
rem 4.8, which applies to Einstein’s theory since the group Diﬀ(X) is vertically
transitive. One may verify this by examining (4C.21) and (4C.22). Note that
the latter equation may be checked most easily by choosing (at a point x in
question) coordinates such that Γλ

µν(x) = 0. Then (4C.22) becomes

and we see that condition (4D.12) holds.

(ξYG(Γ))λ

σρ =

ξλ

,σρ

−

d A Topological Field Theory. The behavior of the Chern–Simons ﬁeld
is exactly opposite to that of parametrized electromagnetism: the Lagrangian
density (3C.28) is equivariant under the action of Diﬀ(X), but not under that
of F(X). Indeed, we compute

δ(ξ,λ)L =

ǫµνσFµν λ,σ.

1
2

(4D.25)

Consequently the Legendre transformation is not equivariant, and the Cartan
form is not invariant.

We can work around this problem as follows. For the moment we return to
ΛnX

the general case. Assume that there exists an X-bundle map Ψ : G
J 1Y,
such that for all η

G and γ

→

×

Y

∈

L (ηJ 1Y (γ))

∈

−1
η
X
(cid:0)

−

∗

L(γ) =

∗

−1
η
X
(cid:0)

(cid:1)
Λn+1X is the “horizontal” or “formal diﬀerential” deﬁned

(cid:1)

[DΨη(γ)] ,

(4D.26)

where DΨη : J 1Y
by

→

DΨη ◦

j1 (φ) = d (Ψη ◦
(cf. Hor´ak and Kol´aˇr [1983] and Anderson [1992] for the relevant background).
In other words, L is equivariant “up to a divergence.” (Morally, this means that
the action of L is G-invariant.) It is straightforward to check that under this
assumption

(4D.27)

φ)

∗
J 1Y ΘL = ΘL + dπ
η

∗
Y,J 1Y Ψη,

(4D.28)

where in this expression we regard Ψη as a horizontal n-form on Y . It follows
that ΩL is invariant.

and

then

Thus

52

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

The inﬁnitesimal versions of (4D.26) and (4D.28) are

(δξL) dn+1x = Dψξ

£ξJ1Y ΘL = dπ

∗
Y,J 1Y ψξ,

(4D.29)

(4D.30)

respectively, where ψ : g
ψξ = (dΨexp(εξ)/dε)
gives

Y

Λn(X) is the derivative of Ψ in the G-direction:
|ε=0. Expanding the Lie derivative in the latter equation

→

×

ξJ 1Y y dΘL + d(ξJ 1Y y ΘL) = dπ

∗
Y,J 1Y ψξ.

In view of (4D.4) (which holds regardless of whether FL is equivariant), we may
rewrite this in the form

ξJ 1Y y ΩL = d(J

L
ξ −

∗
Y,J 1Y ψξ).
π

Thus, if we set

K

L
ξ = J

L
ξ −

∗
Y,J 1Y ψξ,
π

(4D.31)

then the key relation (4D.3) remains valid with J L
ξ
quently, Noether’s theorem holds for K L
ξ .
One can also see this directly: if φ satisﬁes the Euler–Lagrange equations,

replaced by K L

ξ . Conse-

d

∗
j1(φ)
(cid:2)

K

L
ξ

(cid:3)

= d

∗
j1(φ)
(cid:2)
= δξL

L
J
ξ
j1(φ)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
j1(φ)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)

= δξL
= 0

−
(cid:3)
dn+1x
dn+1x

∗
d [φ

ψξ]
Dψξ ◦
δξL

j1(φ)

j1(φ)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)

−

−

dn+1x

by virtue of (4D.11), (4D.27) and (4D.29).

Returning to Chern–Simons, we see that (4D.29) holds with

ψ(ξ,λ) = ǫµσν Aµλ,σd2xν .

(4D.32)

K

L
(ξ,λ) = [

ǫµνσAσAτ ξτ

−

,ν + 2ǫµνσAσλ,ν]d2xµ −

ǫµτ σAσξν dAτ ∧

d1xµν

(4D.33)

and the Noether current is

∗
j1(φ)

K

L
(ξ,λ) =

ǫµνσ(

Aτ ξτ

(cid:20)

−

,ν −

Aν,τ ξτ + 2λ,ν) +

ǫντ σFντ ξµ

Aσd2xµ.

1
2

(cid:21)

(4D.34)

§4D Symmetries and Noether’s Theorem

53

e Bosonic Strings. The harmonic map Lagrangian density deﬁned by equa-
tion (3C.33) is equivariant under the action of G = Diﬀ(X) s CS1,1
2 (X) on
Y = (X
2 (X). Using (4C.30–4C.32) to compute the Lie derivatives
£ξφ, £ξh, and £λh via (4D.9), (4D.11) gives

×X S1,1

M )

×

d

∗
j1(φ, h)
h

J

L
(ξ,λ)

,νξν )

(cid:26)

δL
δφA (φA
(hσρ,ν ξν

=

i
δL
δhσρ

−

+

2λhσρ + hσν ξν

,ρ + hρνξν

,σ)

d2x.

(4D.35)

(cid:27)

X, the quantities λ, ξν , and ξν

,ρ can be speciﬁed arbitrar-
At a given point x
ily. The arbitrariness of ξν
,ρ implies that δL/δhσρ = 0, and so we obtain the
“conformal” Euler–Lagrange equation (3C.40) as a Noether conserved current.
The arbitrariness of ξν then gives

∈

δL
δφA φA

,ν = 0

which is not equivalent to the harmonic map equation (3C.39). This is consistent
with the fact that G is not vertically transitive; indeed (4D.12) is not satisﬁed
since, by (4C.30), (ξ, λ)Y has no component in the ∂/∂φA direction.
(cid:7)

Interlude I—On Classical Field Theory

Classical ﬁeld theories come in many forms and varieties, and it is useful to
attempt a broad classiﬁcation of such theories, based upon certain features which
play an important role in this work. The ﬁrst of these features devolves upon
the notion of gauge group which is, roughly speaking, the largest localizable
group of transformations of the theory under which the Lagrangian density is
equivariant (so that the group maps solutions of the Euler–Lagrange equations
8;
to solutions). The concept of gauge group is explored more fully in Part III,
for this discussion, we use the term loosely. It will be helpful in what follows to
keep in mind the examples in
4, since the groups studied there are in fact the
gauge groups of their respective theories.

§

§

Consider a classical ﬁeld theory with gauge group G. Suppose that G
⊂
Aut(Y ), the automorphism group of the covariant conﬁguration bundle Y . We
may distinguish two basic types of ﬁeld theories based upon the relationship
between the gauge group G and the (spacetime) diﬀeomorphism group Diﬀ(X).
The ﬁrst consists of those which are parametrized in the sense that the natural
ηX maps G onto Diﬀ(X) (or
Diﬀ(X) given by ηY 7→
homomorphism Aut(Y )
at least onto a “suﬃciently large” subgroup thereof, such as the compactly sup-
ported diﬀeomorphisms). This terminology reﬂects the fact that such a theory is
invariant under (essentially) arbitrary relabeling of the points of the parameter

→

54

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

“spacetime” X. (In relativity theory, cf. Anderson [1967], one would say that X
is a relative object in the theory.) The parametrized theory par excellence is of
course general relativity, in which case G equals the spacetime diﬀeomorphism
group. Another example is provided by the relativistic free particle, whose gauge
group consists of (oriented) time-reparametrizations. The Polyakov and Nambu
strings are also parametrized theories, as are most topological ﬁeld theories (see
Horowitz [1989]).

At the other extreme, there are the background theories in which G
⊂
AutId(Y ), the automorphisms of Y which cover the identity on X (or at least
in which the image of G in Diﬀ(X) is “suﬃciently small”—the Poincar´e group,
for instance). In this case X is called an absolute element of the theory, much
like time in Newtonian mechanics, or Minkowski spacetime in special relativity.
The prototypical background theory is electromagnetism treated on a ﬁxed ,
non-interacting, background spacetime; here G consists of shifts of the vector
potential by exact 1-forms and so is completely “internal.” Yang–Mills–Higgs
theory is similar. Traditionally, Newtonian mechanical systems are treated as
background theories; usually, such systems do not even have gauge groups.

In many ways, parametrized theories are preferred over background theories.
According to the principle of general covariance, one should model physical sys-
tems so that their descriptions contain no absolute objects. From a more prosaic
standpoint, parametrized theories are easier to handle since, for example, they
readily admit compatible slicings (necessary for the space + time decomposition
of the theory, cf. Part II,
6D, and to properly correlate the dynamics
and the initial value constraints of a theory with its gauge freedom, cf. Part
II
13.) In fact, the system must eﬀectively be parametrized
to do Hamiltonian dynamics “correctly,” as our development will show. For
more information on parametrized theories compared to background theories,
see Anderson [1967] and Kuchaˇr [1973].

7F, and Part III

6A and

§

§

§

§

Fortunately, most background theories can readily be converted into param-
etrized theories. The conversion usually involves the promotion of previously
ﬁxed objects, notably a metric on X, into the ranks of the ﬁeld variables. In
this way one can often make the Lagrangian density Diﬀ(X)-equivariant, and
thereby enlarge the gauge group to “include” the diﬀeomorphism group of X.
Thus, for example, when one encounters a background theory, such as Yang–
Mills–Higgs on Minkowski spacetime, one can parametrize it by simply “turning
the metric on.” This is precisely how we have parametrized electromagnetism
in Example b . As long as no new terms are added to the Lagrangian and
the previously ﬁxed ﬁelds are not varied to give Euler–Lagrange equations, the
converted theory, while now parametrized, remains physically equivalent to the
original background theory. Kuchaˇr [1973] ﬁves an alternate way to parametrize
a backgound theory, by introducing certain slicing parameters, treating them as
ﬁelds, and letting them evolve dynamically. Futher details of this approach can
be found in Kuchaˇr [1976].

Among either class of ﬁeld theories, we may further distinguish metric and
non-metric theories. Metric theories are those which carry a (Lorentzian, Rie-
mannian or general signature) metric on the parameter space X. Most familiar

§4D Symmetries and Noether’s Theorem

55

classical ﬁeld theories are metric, with topological ﬁeld theories and theories
whose action functionals measure length, area, volume, etc., being important
exceptions. Most mechanical systems (relativistic or nonrelativistic), on the
other hand, are non-metric. (In this regard, we emphasize that our terminology
refers to the metric structure of X, which in mechanics is usually taken to be
the time line; the kinetic energy metrics familiar in mechanics live instead on
the ﬁbers of Y
X. Our terminology here is also at odds with the standard
usage of “metric” and “non-metric” as applied to theories of gravity.)

→

In metric theories the metric may be an absolute object, in that it does not
“evolve” or dynamically interact with any of the other elements of the theory
(as in electromagnetism on a ﬁxed spacetime background), or it may be treated
as one of the ﬁeld variables. Again, the principle of general covariance suggests
that the metric should be treated as a relative object. When this is the case,
the metric may be dynamic in the sense that it is varied to give ﬁeld equations
(as in theories of gravity), or it may appear essentially as a parameter in that it
may take diﬀerent values, but is not varied to give Euler–Lagrange equations.
Electromagnetism on a variable but non-dynamic spacetime is an example of a
theory in which the metric is treated parametrically in this fashion. Theories
which contain dynamic or parametric metrics are typically parametrized whereas
theories with ﬁxed metrics are usually background theories.

A word of caution: If a theory has some ﬁelds which are parametric (but
not dynamic) then the Noether conservation laws may not hold because the
parametric ﬁeld is not varied and so does not satisfy any ﬁeld equations. We
have already encountered this in Example b of

4D.

As noted above, our formalism is best applied to parametrized theories.
Likewise, it is often advantageous to work in the context of metric theories, with
the metric being treated dynamically. This can sometimes be achieved using
the “Polyakov trick,” which transforms the Nambu string into the Polyakov
string. We show how this goes for the relativistic free particle in Part III,
10C. We suspect that this procedure could be useful in treating some of the
§
“nonstandard” vector ﬁeld theories of Isenberg and Nester [1977].

§

We summarize our classiﬁcation with a chart, indicating in which categories

various ﬁeld theories fall.

In this work, we discuss example theories from each category. But there
are many other theories, not touched upon here, to which our formalism may
be applied. Two especially important ones are ﬂuids and elasticity (cf. Bao,
Marsden, and Walton [1985]).

Let us speciﬁcally consider the case of a ﬂuid in the material representa-
tion. The basic variables are the particle placement ﬁelds φ : Σ
M
R) is the world line of the
which have the physical interpretation that φ(
{
Σ, where Σ is the ﬂuid “reference manifold”
particle with material label x
R)
and M is spacetime. Thus Y is the trivial bundle (Σ
M . Consistent with
standard practice in continuum mechanics, M carries the spacetime metric while
R carries a reference metric h out of which things like the internal energy are
Σ
R) encodes the
built (cf. Marsden and Hughes [1983]). Observe that Diﬀ(Σ
material symmetries (including particle relabeling and time reparametrization

} ×

→

×

×

×

×

×

R

∈

x

56

§4 Covariant Momentum Maps and Noether’s Theorem

Background
Theories

Classical Field
Theories

Non-Metric
Theories

{

Nonrelativistic Mechanics

Metric Theories

Electromagnetism
Yang-Mills-Higgs
Sigma Model
Relativistic Fluids/Elasticity/Plasmas

Non-Metric
Theories

Relativistic Free Particle
Nambu String
Minimal Membrane
Topological Field Theories

Parameterized
Theories

Parametric-Metric
Theories

Parametric Electromagnetism
Parametric Yang-Mills-Higgs
Parametric Sigma Model
Parametric Fluids/Elasticity/Plasmas

Dynamic Metric
Theories

Gravity
Einstein-Maxwell
Einstein-Yang-Mills-Higgs
Einstein-Sigma-Model
Polyakov String
Harmonic Membrane
Polyakov Particle
Einstein-Euler/Elasticity
Einstein-Maxwell-Vlasov

Figure 4.1: Classiﬁcation of Field Theories

{
{
{

{

×

symmetries). In this formulation, the theory is already parametrized; note also
R is treated parametrically.
that the metric h on Σ

This approach to ﬂuids is in keeping with our treatment of strings. But it
is not particularly suited to a discussion of general relativistic ﬂuids. In this
context it is more convenient to use the inverse material representation.
The ﬁelds then include the gravitational ﬁeld (treated dynamically or paramet-
R,
rically) with the ﬂuid described by particle labeling ﬁelds ψ : X
Σ
where ψ = φ−1. In addition to the material symmetries given by Diﬀ(Σ
R)
we have the spacetime-based Diﬀ(X) gauge symmetries associated with the
gravitational ﬁeld. The same “switch” to the inverse material representation
obviously can be made for strings, and similar remarks apply to elasticity (with
some qualiﬁcations). In some sense, the inverse material representation is the
more fundamental; see Part III,

10C.

×
×

→

§

References

57

References

R. Abraham and J. Marsden [1978], Foundations of Mechanics, Second Edi-

tion, Addison-Wesley, Menlo Park, California.

V. Aldaya and J. A. de Azc´arraga [1980a], Geometric formulation of classical

mechanics and ﬁeld theory, Rivista del Nuovo Cimento, 3, 1–66.

V. Aldaya and J. A. de Azc´arraga [1980b], Higher-order Hamiltonian formalism

in ﬁeld theory, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 13, 2545–2551.

I. Anderson [1992], Introduction to the variational bicomplex, Contemp. Math.,

J. L. Anderson [1967], Principles of Relativity Physics, Academic Press, New

132, 51–73.

York.

J. M. Arms [1977], Linearization stability of the Einstein-Maxwell system,

J. Math. Phys., 18, 830–833.

J. M. Arms [1981], The structure of the solution set for the Yang-Mills equa-

tions, Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 90, 361–372.

J. M. Arms, R. Cushman, and M. J. Gotay [1991], A universal reduction pro-
cedure for Hamiltonian group actions, The Geometry of Hamiltonian Sys-
tems (T. Ratiu, ed.), M.S.R.I. Publ. 22, 33–51, Springer-Verlag, New
York.

J. M. Arms, M. J. Gotay, and G. Jennings [1990], Geometric and algebraic
reduction for singular momentum mappings, Adv. in Math., 79, 43–103.

J. M. Arms, J. E. Marsden, and V. Moncrief [1981], Symmetry and bifurcations

of momentum mappings, Commun. Math. Phys., 78, 455–478.

J. Arms, J. Marsden, and V. Moncrief [1982], The structure of the space of so-
lutions of Einstein’s equations: II. Several Killings Fields and the Einstein-
Yang-Mills equations, Ann. Phys. 144, 81–106.

R. Arnowitt, S. Deser, and C. W. Misner [1962], The dynamics of general
relativity, Gravitation, an Introduction to Current Research (L. Witten,
ed.), 227–265, Wiley, New York.

A. Ashtekar [1986], New variables for classical and quantum gravity, Phys.

Rev. Lett., 57, 2244–2247.

Rev. D , 36, 1587–1602.

A. Ashtekar [1987], New Hamiltonian formulation of general relativity, Phys.

D. Bao [1984], A suﬃcient condition for the linearization stability of N = 1

supergravity: a preliminary report, Ann. Physics, 158, 211–278.

58

References

D. Bao, J. Isenberg, and P. B. Yasskin [1985], The dynamics of the Einstein
I. A principal bundle formulation of the theory and its

Dirac system.
canonical analysis, Ann. Physics, 164, 103–171.

D. Bao, J. Marsden, and R. Walton [1985], The Hamiltonian structure of
general relativistic perfect ﬂuids, Commun. Math. Phys., 99, 319–345.

C. Batlle, J. Gomis, and J. M. Pons [1986], Hamiltonian and Lagrangian con-

straints of the bosonic string, Phys. Rev. D, 34, 2430–2432.

R. Beig [1989], On the classical geometry of bosonic string dynamics, Int. J.

Theor. Phys., 30, 211–224.

F. J. Belinfante [1940], On the current and the density of the electric charge,
the energy, the linear momentum and the angular momentum of arbitrary
ﬁelds, Physica, vii, 449–474.

E. Binz, J. ´Sniatycki, and H. Fischer [1988], The Geometry of Classical Fields,

North Holland, Amsterdam.

T. J. Bridges [1997], Multi-symplectic structures and wave propagation, Math.

Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 121, 147–190.

F. Cantrijn, A. Ibort, and M. de Le´on [1997], On the geometry of multisym-

plectic manifolds, Preprint.

C. Carath´eodory [1935], Variationsrechnung und Partielle Diﬀerentialgleichun-
gen erster Ordnung, Teubner, Leipzig, (Reprinted by Chelsea, New York,
N.Y., 1982).

´E. Cartan [1922], Le¸cons sur les Invariants Int´egraux , Hermann, Paris.

ˇC. Crnkovi´c and E. Witten [1987], Covariant description of canonical formal-
ism in geometrical theories, Newton’s Tercentenary Volume (S.W. Hawk-
ing and W. Israel, eds.), 666–684, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

P. Dedecker [1953], Calcul des variations, formes diﬀ´erentielles et champs
g´eod´esiques, Colloq. Int. de G´eom´etrie Diﬀ´erentielle (Strasbourg), 17–34.

P. Dedecker [1957], Calcul des variations et topologie alg´ebrique, Mem. Soc.

Roy. Sc. Li`ege, 19, 1–216.

P. Dedecker [1977], On the generalization of symplectic geometry to multiple
integrals in the calculus of variations, Lecture Notes in Math., 570, 395–
456, Springer-Verlag, New York, N.Y.

Th. De Donder [1930], Th´eorie Invariantive du Calcul des Variations, Gau-

thier-Villars, Paris.

129–148.

P. A. M. Dirac [1950], Generalized Hamiltonian dynamics, Can. J. Math., 2,

References

59

P. A. M. Dirac [1964], Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, Academic Press, New

York, N.Y.

G. Esposito, G. Gionti, and C. Stornaiolo [1995], Spacetime covariant form of

Ashtekar’s constraints, Nuovo Cimento, B110, 1137–1152.

M. Ferraris and M. Francaviglia [1983], On the global structure of Lagrangian
and Hamiltonian formalisms in higher order calculus of variations, Proc.
of the Meeting “Geometry and Physics” (M. Modugno, ed.), 43–70, Pita-
gora Editrice, Bologna.

A. E. Fischer and J. E. Marsden [1979a], Topics in the dynamics of general
relativity, Isolated Gravitating Systems in General Relativity (J. Ehlers,
ed.), 322–395, Italian Physical Society.

A. E. Fischer and J. E. Marsden [1979b], The initial value problem and the dy-
namical formulation of general relativity, General Relativity (S.W. Hawk-
ing and W. Israel, eds.), 138–211, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.

A. E. Fischer, J. E. Marsden, and V. Moncrief [1980], The structure of the
space of solutions of Einstein’s equations I: One Killing ﬁeld, Ann. Inst.
H. Poincar´e, 33, 147–194.

P. L. Garc´ıa [1974], The Poincar´e-Cartan invariant in the calculus of variations,

Symp. Math., 14, 219–246.

P. L. Garc´ıa and J. Mun˜oz [1991], Higher order regular variational problems,
Symplectic Geometry and Mathematical Physics (P. Donato, C. Duval,
J. Elhadad, and G. M. Tuynman, eds.), Birkh¨auser, Boston.

K. Gaw¸edzki [1972], On the geometrization of the canonical formalism in the

classical ﬁeld theory, Rep. Math. Phys., 3, 307–326.

H. Goldschmidt and S. Sternberg [1973], The Hamilton-Cartan formalism in

the calculus of variations, Ann. Inst. Fourier , 23, 203–267.

M. J. Gotay [1991a], A multisymplectic framework for classical ﬁeld theory and
the calculus of variations I. Covariant Hamiltonian formalism, Mechanics,
Analysis, and Geometry: 200 Years After Lagrange (M. Francaviglia, ed.),
203–235, North Holland, Amsterdam.

M. J. Gotay [1991b], A multisymplectic framework for classical ﬁeld theory
and the calculus of variations II. Space + time decompostion, Diﬀ. Geom.
Appl., 1, 375–390.

M. J. Gotay [1991c], An exterior diﬀerential systems approach to the Cartan
form, Symplectic Geometry and Mathematical Physics (P. Donato, C. Du-
val, J. Elhadad, and G.M. Tuynman, eds.), 160–188, Birkh¨auser, Boston.

M. J. Gotay and J. Hanson [1998], The canonical analysis of second-order

Einstein gravity, (in preparation).

60

References

M. J. Gotay and J. E. Marsden [1992], Stress-energy-momentum tensors and
the Belinfante–Rosenfeld formula, Contemp. Math., 132, 367–391.

M. J. Gotay, J. M. Nester, and G. Hinds [1978], Presymplectic manifolds and
the Dirac–Bergmann theory of constraints, J. Math. Phys., 19, 2388–2399.

P. A. Griﬃths [1983], Exterior Diﬀerential Systems and the Calculus of Vari-

ations, Birkh¨auser, Boston.

V. Guillemin and S. Sternberg [1977], Geometric asymptotics, Amer. Math.

Soc. Surveys, 14.

V. Guillemin and S. Sternberg [1984], Symplectic Techniques in Physics, Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge.

C. G¨unther [1987], The polysymplectic Hamiltonian formalism in ﬁeld theory

and the calculus of variations, J. Diﬀ. Geom., 25, 23–53.

A. J. Hanson, T. Regge, and C. Teitelboim [1976], Constrained Hamiltonian

systems, Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, 22, Rome.

R. Hermann [1968], Diﬀerential Geometry and the Calculus of Variations, Aca-

demic Press, Second Edition, Math. Sci. Press, Brookline, Mass.

R. Hermann [1975], Gauge Fields and Cartan-Ehresmann Connections Part A,

Math Sci Press, Brookline, MA.

D. Holm [1985], Hamiltonian formalism of general relativistic adiabatic ﬂuids,

Physica 17D , 1–36.

Math. J., 33, 467–475.

M. Hor´ak and I. Kol´aˇr [1983], On the higher order Poincar´e-Cartan forms, Cz.

G. Horowitz [1989], Exactly soluble diﬀeomorphism invariant theories, Com-

mun. Math. Phys., 129, 417–437.

J. Isenberg and J. Nester [1977], The eﬀect of gravitational interaction on
classical ﬁelds: a Hamilton–Dirac analysis, Ann. Phys., 107, 56–81.

J. Isenberg and J. Nester [1980], Canonical analysis of relativistic ﬁeld theories,
General Relativity and Gravitation, Vol. I (A. Held, ed.), Plenum Press,
New York.

I. V. Kanatchikov [1996], Canonical structure of classical ﬁeld theory in the

polymomentum phase space, Preprint hep-th/9709229.

I. V. Kanatchikov [1997], On ﬁeld theoretic generalizations of a Poisson alge-

bra, Preprint hep-th/9710069.

H. A. Kastrup [1983], Canonical theories of Lagrangian dynamical systems in

physics, Phys. Rep., 101, 1–167.

References

61

J. Kijowski [1973], A ﬁnite-dimensional canonical formalism in the classical

ﬁeld theory, Commun. Math. Phys., 30, 99–128.

J. Kijowski [1974], Multiphase spaces and gauge in the calculus of variations,

Bull. Acad. Sc. Polon., 22, 1219–1225.

J. Kijowski and W. Szczyrba [1975], Multisymplectic manifolds and the geo-
metrical construction of the Poisson brackets in the classical ﬁeld theory,
G´eom´etrie Symplectique et Physique Math´ematique (J.-M. Souriau, ed.),
347–379, C.N.R.S., Paris.

J. Kijowski and W. Szczyrba [1976], A canonical structure for classical ﬁeld

theories, Commun. Math. Phys., 46, 183–206.

J. Kijowski and W. Tulczyjew [1979], A symplectic framework for ﬁeld theories,

Lecture Notes in Physics, 107, Springer-Verlag, New York.

I. Kol´aˇr [1984], A geometric version of the higher order Hamilton formalism in

ﬁbered manifolds, Journal of Geometry and Physics, 1, 127–137.

Y. Kosmann-Schwarzbach [1981], Hamiltonian systems on ﬁbered manifolds,

Lett. Math. Phys., 5, 229–237.

D. Krupka [1971], Lagrange theory in ﬁbered manifolds, Rep. Math. Phys., 2,

121–133.

D. Krupka [1987], Geometry of Lagrangean structures. 3., Supp. Rend. Circ.

Mat. (Palermo), ser II, 14, 187–224.

D. Krupka and O. ˇStˇep´ankov´a [1983], On the Hamilton form in second order
calculus of variations, Proc. of the Meeting “Geometry and Physics”
(M. Modugno, ed.), 85–101, Pitagora Editrice, Bologna.

K. Kuchaˇr [1973], Canonical quantization of gravity, Relativity, Astrophysics

and Cosmology (W. Israel, ed.), 237–288, Reidel, Dordrecht.

K. Kuchaˇr [1974], Geometrodynamics regained: a Lagrangian approach, J.

Math. Phys., 15, 708–15.

18, 1589–1597.

K. Kuchaˇr [1976], Geometry of hyperspace I–IV, J. Math. Phys., 17, 777–820;

M. Kummer [1981], On the construction of the reduced space of a Hamiltonian

system with symmetry, Indiana Univ. Math. J., 30, 281–291.

H. P. K¨unzle and J. M. Nester [1984], Hamiltonian formulation of gravitating

perfect ﬂuids and the Newtonian limit, J. Math. Phys., 25, 1009–1018.

B. A. Kupershmidt [1980], Geometry of jet bundles and the structure of La-
grangian and Hamiltonian formalisms, Lecture Notes in Math., 775, 162–
218, Springer-Verlag, New York, N.Y.

62

References

J. K. Lawson [1997], A frame bundle generalization of multisymplectic ﬁeld

theories, Preprint dg-ga/9706008.

M. de Le´on and P. R. Rodrigues [1985], Generalized Classical Mechanics and

Field Theory, North Holland, Amsterdam.

Th. H. J. Lepage [1936], Sur les champs g´eod´esiques du calcul des variations,

Bull. Acad. Roy. Belg., Cl. Sci., 22, 716–729, 1036–1046.

Th. H. J. Lepage [1941], Sur les champs g´eod´esique des int´egrales multiples,

Bull. Acad. Roy. Belg., Cl. Sci., 27, 27–46.

Th. H. J. Lepage [1942], Champs stationnaires, champs g´eod´esiques et formes

int´egrables, Bull. Acad. Roy. Belg., Cl. Sci., 28, 73–92, 247–265.

L. Lusanna [1991], The second Noether theorem as the basis of the theory of
singular Lagrangians and Hamiltonian constraints, Riv. Nuovo Cimento,
14(3), 1–75.

L. Lusanna [1993], The Shanmugadhasan canonical transformation, function
groups and the extended second Noether theorem, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A,
8, 4193–4233.

J. E. Marsden [1981], Lectures on geometric methods in mathematical physics,

S.I.A.M.

J. E. Marsden [1988], The Hamiltonian formulation of classical ﬁeld theory,

Contemp. Math., 71, 221–235.

J. E. Marsden [1992], Lectures in Mechanics, London Math. Soc. Lecture

Notes, 174, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

J. E. Marsden and T. J. R. Hughes [1983], Mathematical Foundations of Elas-
ticity, Prentice-Hall, Redwood City, California, Reprinted by Dover, 1994.

J. E. Marsden, R. Montgomery, P. J. Morrison, and W.B. Thompson [1986],
Covariant Poisson brackets for classical ﬁelds, Ann. Physics, 169, 29–48.

J. E. Marsden, R. Montgomery, and T. Ratiu [1990], Symmetry, Reduction,

and Phases in Mechanics, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 436.

J. E. Marsden, G. Patrick, and S. Shkoller [1997], Variational methods in

continuous and discrete mechanics and ﬁeld theory, Preprint.

J. E. Marsden and S. Shkoller [1997], Multisymplectic geometry, covariant
Hamiltonians and water waves, Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., (to ap-
pear).

References

63

J. E. Marsden, A. Weinstein, T. Ratiu, R. Schmid, and R. G. Spencer [1983],
Hamiltonian systems with symmetry, coadjoint orbits and plasma physics,
Proc. IUTAM- ISIMM Symposium on Modern Developments in Analyt-
ical Mechanics (S. Benenti, M. Francaviglia and A. Lichnerowicz, eds.),
Atti della Accademia delle Scienze di Torino, 117, 289–340.

G. Martin [1988], A Darboux theorem for multi-symplectic manifolds, Lett.

Math. Phys., 16, 133–138.

C. W. Misner, K. Thorne and J. A. Wheeler [1973], Gravitation, W.H. Free-

man, San Francisco.

J. Mu˜noz [1985], Poincar´e-Cartan forms in higher order variational calculus on

ﬁbered manifolds, Rev. Mat. Iberoamericana, 1, 85–126.

Y. Nambu [1970], Duality and Hydrodynamics, Lectures for the Copenhagen

Summer Symposium, unpublished.

P. J. Olver [1986], Applications of Lie groups in diﬀerential equations, Graduate
Texts in Mathematics, 107, Springer-Verlag, New York. Second Edition,
1993.

R. Ouzilou [1972], Expression symplectique des probl`emes variationnels, Symp.

A. M. Polyakov [1981], Quantum geometry of bosonic strings, Phys. Lett.,

Math., 14, 85–98.

103B, 207–210.

Belg. Sci., 18, 1–30.

Palm Harbor, Florida.

132, 573–593.

R. Ragionieri and R. Ricci [1981], Hamiltonian formalism in the calculus of

variations, Bollettino U.M.I., 18-B, 119–130.

L. Rosenfeld [1940], Sur le tenseur d’impulsion—´energie, M´em. Acad. Roy.

G.A. Sardanashvily [1993], Gauge Theory in Jet Manifolds, Hadronic Press,

D. J. Saunders [1992], The regularity of variational problems, Contemp. Math.,

J. Scherk [1975], An introduction to the theory of dual models and strings,

Rev. Mod. Phys., 47, 123–164.

W. F. Shadwick [1982], The Hamiltonian formulation of regular rth-order La-

grangian ﬁeld theories, Lett. Math. Phys., 6, 409–416.

J. C. Simo, D. Lewis, and J. E. Marsden [1991], Stability of relative equilibria
I. The reduced energy momentum method, Arch. Rat. Mech. Anal., 115,
15–59.

64

References

R. Sjamaar and E. Lerman [1991], Stratiﬁed symplectic spaces and reduction,

Ann. Math. 134, 375–422.

J. ´Sniatycki [1970a], On the geometric structure of classical ﬁeld theory in

Lagrangian formulation, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 68, 475–484.

J. ´Sniatycki [1970b], On the canonical formulation of general relativity, Proc.

Journ´ees Relativistes 1970, 127–135, Facult´e des Sciences, Caen.

J. ´Sniatycki [1974], Dirac brackets in geometric dynamics, Ann.

Inst. H.

Poincar´e, A20, 365–372.

J. ´Sniatycki [1984], The Cauchy data space formulation of classical ﬁeld theory,

Rep. Math. Phys., 19, 407–422.

S. Sternberg [1977], Some preliminary remarks on the formal variational calcu-
lus of Gel’fand and Dikki, Lecture Notes in Math., 676, 399–407, Springer-
Verlag, New York.

K. Sundermeyer [1982], Constrained dynamics, Lecture Notes in Physics, 169,

Springer-Verlag, New York.

Polon. Math., 32, 145–185.

W. Szczyrba [1976a], Lagrangian formalism in the classical ﬁeld theory, Ann.

W. Szczyrba [1976b], A symplectic structure of the set of Einstein metrics: a
canonical formalism for general relativity, Commun. Math. Phys., 51,
163–182.

A. Trautman [1967], Noether equations and conservation laws, Commun. Math.

Phys., 6, 248–261.

Ann. Math., 36, 607–629.

H. Weyl [1935], Geodesic ﬁelds in the calculus of variation for multiple integrals,

G. J. Zuckerman [1986], Action principles and global geometry, Mathematical
Aspects of String Theory, (S.T. Yau ed), World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.

Table of Contents for Parts II–IV

II—Space + Time Decompositions and the Canonical

Analysis of Covariant Field Theories

5

6

7

8

9

Symplectic Structures on Cauchy Surfaces
5A Cauchy Surfaces and Spaces of Fields
5B Canonical Forms on T ∗Yτ
5C Presymplectic Structure on Zτ
5D Reduction of Zτ to T ∗Yτ

Initial Value Analysis of Field Theories
6A Slicings
6B Space + Time Decomposition of the Jet Bundle
6C The Instantaneous Legendre Transform
6D Hamiltonian Dynamics
6E Constraint Theory

The Energy-Momentum Map
7A Induced Actions on Fields
7B The Energy-Momentum Map
7C Induced Momentum Maps on Zτ
7D Induced Momentum Maps on T ∗Yτ
7E Momentum Maps for Lifted Actions
7F The Hamiltonian and the Energy-Momentum Map

Interlude II—The Stress-Energy-Momentum Tensor

III—Gauge Symmetries and Initial Value Constraints

The Gauge Group
8A Principal Bundle Construction of the Gauge Group
8B Covariance, Localizability, and Gauge Groups
8C Gauge Transformations

The Vanishing Theorem and Its Converse
9A Flexibility
9B The Vanishing Theorem
9C The Converse of the Vanishing Theorem

65

10

Primary Constraints and the Momentum Map
10A The Foliation ˙Gτ
10B The Primary Constraint Set Lies in the Zero Level of the

Momentum Map

10C First Class Primary Constraints

11

Secondary Constraints and the Energy-Momentum Map
11A The Final Constraint Set Lies in the Zero Level of the

Energy-Momentum Map

11B First Class Secondary Constraints

Interlude III—Singularities in Solution Spaces of

Classical Relativistic Field Theories

IV—The Adjoint Formalism

The Dynamic and Atlas Fields
12A The Dynamic Bundle
12B Bundle Considerations
12C The Atlas Bundle

12

13

The Adjoint Formalism
13A Linearity of the Hamiltonian
13B Model Bundles
13C The Adjoint Form, Reconstruction and Decomposition

Conclusions

66

