8
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
h
t
a
m

[
 
 
1
v
3
2
0
1
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Constrained systems and analytical mechanics in
spaces with torsion
Sergei V. SHABANOV 1

Institute for Theoretical Physics, Free University of Berlin, Arnimallee 14, Berlin
D-14195, Germany

Abstract

A system with anholonomic constraints where the trajectories of physical degrees
of freedom are autoparallels on a manifold equipped with a general Cartan connec-
tion is discussed. A variational principle for the autoparallel trajectories is derived
from the d’Alambert-Lagrange principle for anholonomic constrained systems. A ge-
ometrical (coordinate-independent) formulation of the variational principle is given.
Its relation to Sedov’s anholonomic variational principle for dissipative systems and
to Poincar´e’s variational principle in anholonomic reference frames is established. A
modiﬁcation of Noether’s theorem due to the torsion force is studied. A non-local
action whose extrema contain the autoparallels is proposed. The action can be
made local by adding auxiliary degrees of freedom coupled to the original variables
in a special way.

1 Anholonomic constrained systems

There is no need to explain how important are constrained systems in modern physics
(e.g., electrodynamics, Yang-Mills theory, general relativity, etc). Constraints in dynami-
cal systems are usually regarded as a part of the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion which
do not involve time derivatives of order higher than one. In other words, both constraints
and equations of motion result from the least action principle applied to some Lagrangian.
The existence of the Lagrangian formalism is of great importance in constrained systems
because it allows one to develop the corresponding Hamiltonian formalism [1] and canon-
ically quantize the system [1]. Yet, the variational principle is a powerful technical tool
to ﬁnd integrals of motion of dynamical systems via symmetries of the Lagrangian.

The Hamiltonian (or Lagrangian) constrained systems form a relatively small class
of constrained dynamical systems. Given an ”unconstrained” system whose dynamics is
governed by a Lagrangian L = L(v, x), vi and xi being generalized velocities and coordi-
nates, respectively, one can turn it into a constrained system by imposing supplementary
conditions Fα(v, x) = 0 (constraints) which has to be fulﬁlled by the actual motion of
the system. There two ways to incorporate the constraints into a dynamical description.
First, one can simply modify the Lagrangian L → L + λαFα with λα being the Lagrange
multipliers and treat the latter as independent dynamical variables. In doing so, we are
led to the Lagrangian constrained dynamics. The other way is to supplement the uncon-
strained Euler-Lagrange equations d/dt(∂vL) − ∂xL = 0 by the constraints Fα = 0. It
is well known that if the constraints are not integrable, the two dynamical descriptions

1DFG fellow; on leave from Laboratory of Theoretical Physics, JINR, Dubna, Russia

1

are not equivalent [2, 3]. The non-integrable constraints are called anholonomic, and the
dynamical systems described in the latter of the above two ways are known as anholo-
nomic systems. There exists no Lagrangian or Hamiltonian formalism for anholonomic
systems, i.e. they are non-Lagrangian dynamical systems [2]. The existence of constraints
implies that the dynamical system has non-physical degrees of freedom, meaning that the
actual motion of the system is determined by a less number of independent parameters
than the number of initial values of generalized coordinates and velocities. For holonomic
systems, the motion of the physical degrees of freedom can be obtained by applying the
conventional variational principle to the Lagrangian reduced on the constraint surface
L → L|F =0. When applied to anholonomic constraints, this procedure leads to wrong
equations of motion [2, 3]. However dynamics of physical degrees of freedom in anholo-
nomic constrained systems may also possess ”good” properties, e.g., a covariance under
some group transformations, existence of integrals of motion with a clear physical inter-
pretation, etc, that is, the properties that one always wants to see in physical systems.

An example of this kind is provided by the autoparallel and and geodesic motions on a
manifold equipped with a general connection Γµ
νσ compatible with metric gµν, Dµgνσ = 0,
where Dµ is the covariant derivative. In [4] it has been shown that the autoparallels can
be realized as the trajectories of the physical degrees of freedom in a special anholonomic
constrained system, while the geodesics can always be regarded as the trajectories in a
holonomic constrained system. On a manifold M the autoparallels and geodesics are
determined respectively by the following equations covariant under general coordinate
transformations

Dvvµ = ˙vµ + Γµ
¯Dvvµ = ˙vµ + ¯Γµ

νσvνvσ = 0 ;
νσvνvσ = 0 .

(1.1)
(1.2)

Here Dv is the covariant derivative along the velocity vector vµ and ¯Γµ
νσ are the Christoﬀel
symbols. Both Eqs. (1.1) and (1.2) determine a curve that parallel-transports its tangent
vector along itself. The curve with such a property is the autoparallel when the most
general connection compatible with the metric is used to specify the parallel transport.
The geodesic motion occurs if the natural Riemannian connection (induced by the metric)
is chosen to deﬁne the parallel transport. The diﬀerence of (1.1) from (1.2) resides in the
torsion force term. Any connection compatible with the metric can always be represented
µν = ¯Γσµν + Kσµν, where Kσµν = Sσµν − Sµνσ + Sνσµ is called the
in the form [5] gσλΓλ
contorsion tensor, and gσλSλµν = Sσ
νµ) is the torsion tensor. The
deviation of the autoparallels from the geodesics is caused by the torsion force Kµνσvνvσ.
The geodesic equation (1.2) follows from the Hamilton variational principle applied to

µν = 1

µν − Γσ

2(Γσ

the action

or to its relativistic analog

S =

dtgµνvµvν ,

1
2 Z

(1.3)

(1.4)

S = −

ds = −

dt

gµνvµvν ,

Z

Z

q

2

with s being the proper time (or length) of the trajectory (in this case, vµ = dqµ/ds and
˙vµ = dvµ/ds in (1.2)). A particle moving along the autoparallel trajectory is an example
of a non-Lagrangian system. A system of diﬀerential equations of second order is called
Lagrangian if there exists a local Lagrangian such that the original system is equivalent
to the Euler-Lagrange equations. One can formulate the suﬃcient conditions for a given
dynamical system to be Lagrangian [6]. Even if these conditions are not fulﬁlled, one can
still try to ﬁnd a non-local action for a given dynamical system. In Section 6 we construct
an explicit example of a non-local action whose extrema contain the autoparallels. From
the geometrical point of view Eq. (1.1) is just as good as Eq. (1.2) and may be regarded
or postulated as an equation of motion of a spinless particle on a manifold 2.

Here we generalize the embedding procedure of [4] to arbitrary spaces with curvature
and torsion. Next we make use of the representation of the autoparallel motion as a
motion of an anholonomic system to establish a variational principle for the Lagrangians
(1.3) and (1.4) which leads to Eq. (1.1). The variational principle is derived from the well-
known variational principles for anholonomic systems, such as Gauss’ principle of least
constraint, H¨older and d’Alambert-Lagrange principles [2, 3, 10]. But in contrast to them,
it has an advantage that it applies to Lagrangians reduced on the surface of constraints.
We shall also show that the new variational principle can be given a completely covariant
(coordinate-independent) formulation on a manifold with a general Cartan connection.
For this reason we shall refer to it as a covariant variational principle.
Its relation to
the variational principle of Poincar´e [11] and to that proposed by Sedov for dissipative
systems [12] is explained. Finally, we propose a modiﬁcation of the actions (1.3) and (1.4)
by adding new auxiliary degrees of freedom so that the modiﬁed actions have extrema
being the autoparallels and admit the conventional Hamiltonian formalism.

2 Autoparallels from constrained motion

Consider a metric manifold M and local coordinates qµ on it. Let Γµ
νσ be components of
a connection on M in the coordinate basis. We denote P(M) the space of all paths in M,
TqM the tangent space at a point qµ, and T M the tangent bundle. Consider an auxiliary
Euclidean space IRn of the dimension greater than that of M, n > dim M. Cartesian
coordinates in IRn are denoted by xi. In the space P(IRn) of all paths in IRn we deﬁne a
subspace of conceivable paths (i.e., of those allowed by constraints) as an image of P(M)
in the embedding P(M) → P(IRn):

xi(s) =

dqµεi

µ(q) ,

s

Z

(2.1)

for any path qµ(s) in M. The embedding functions εi
path embedding (2.1) follows the embedding of the tangent space TqM into IRn

µ(q) are smooth on M. From the

(2.2)
2Here we do not discuss physical arguments which of those two trajectories should be identiﬁed with
a physical trajectory of a spinless point-like particle moving in a space with torsion. An interested reader
may ﬁnd physical arguments supporting both of them, geodesics [7] and autoparallels [8, 9].

vi = εi

µ(q)vµ ,

vµ ∈ TqM ,

3

because one can always ﬁnd a curve qµ(s) passing through a point qµ such that vµ =
dqµ(s)/ds.

The space M can not be embedded into IRn pointwise if the constraints (2.2) on
the tangent space (or on the velocities of the conceivable motion) are not integrable
(anholonomic constraints):

dqµεi

µ(q) 6= 0 ,

I

(2.3)

for any closed path in M. That is, the one-forms εi
mapping M → IRn, xi = xi(q), induced by (2.2).

µdqµ are not closed, and there exist no

The scalar product in IRn, (w, v) = δijwivj, induces the metric on M. For any two

vectors being the images of two elements of TqM we have

(w, v) = gµνwµvν ,

gµν = (εµ, εν) ,

vµ, wµ ∈ TqM .

(2.4)

Next, we determine a connection induced by the path embedding. To do so, we require
that the parallel transport in M must be compatible with the embedding (2.1). This
means the following. Consider a curve qµ(s) passing through a point qµ ∈ M and its
image xi(s). Take a vector ﬁeld wµ ∈ TqM and parallel-transport it along the curve
qµ(s). The resulting vector is then embedded into IRn by means of (2.2). Let us repeat
the procedure in the opposite way. We ﬁrst embed the vector wµ and then parallel-
transport its image along xi(s), the image of qµ(s). The compatibility condition implies
that the vectors obtained by these procedures may diﬀer by a vector orthogonal to the
hyperplane being the image of TqM, and this should hold for any curve and any wµ. We
remark that this condition is weaker than a similar condition of [4] and it is suﬃcient to
obtain the most general spaces with curvature and torsion.

An inﬁnitesimal variation of wµ under the parallel transport is proportional to Dvwµ,
µwµ, is Dvwi =
where vµ = ˙qµ, while the corresponding variation of its image, wi = εi
dvwi = dwi/ds because the connection in IRn is trivial. The compatibility condition
means that

µνvµwν ,
Computing the derivative in the left-hand side of (2.5) and assuming vµ and wµ to be
arbitrary we ﬁnd

µDvwµ = f i

(εσ, fµν) = 0 .

− εi

(2.5)

dwi
ds

Multiplying this equation by εi

Dµεi

ν = f i

µν .
σ we obtain the connection coeﬃcients

Γµ

νσ = gµλ(ελ, ∂νεσ) ,

(2.6)

(2.7)

where gνµgµσ = δν
σ. It is easy to verify that the compatibility condition holds for tensors
of higher rank, too, provided the induced metric is used to lower and rise tensor indices.
Thanks to the compatibility condition, the induced connection turns out to be compatible
with the induced metric Dµgνσ = (Dµεν, εσ) + (εν, Dµεσ) = 0. In the non-integrable case
(2.3), the induced connection may have a torsion

Sµ

νσ =

gµλ [(ελ, ∂νεσ) − (ελ, ∂σεν)] .

(2.8)

1
2

4

The tensor ﬁelds f i
from the commutation relation

µν must also satisfy the integrability condition for Eq. (2.6) resulting

[Dµ, Dν] = Rµν

σλLσλ − 2Sσ

µνDσ ,

(2.9)

where Lµν = −Lνµ are generators of a (pseudo)orthogonal group acting in the tangent
σλ is the Riemann-Cartan curvature tensor. Making use of the
space of M, and Rµν
integrability conditions we derive

(fµλ, fνσ) − (fνλ, fµσ) = 2Rµνλσ .

(2.10)

That is, the tensor ﬁelds f i
µν determine the Riemann-Cartan curvature tensor on M.
The case f i
µν = 0 corresponds to the so called teleparallel spaces with zero curvature and
nonzero torsion. With suﬃciently large n (at least one should have 2n > 1+(dim M)2, the
number of independent components of the metric and torsion tensors), one can construct
the most general connection on M.

Let us analyze dynamics induced by the anholonomic constraints (2.2), assuming the
unconstrained motion to be a free motion in the Euclidean space IRn. There are several
variational principles for anholonomic systems [10] that can be applied to our system to
derive the equations of motion. If the constraints are integrable, they all are equivalent
to the conventional Hamilton variational principle.

In the auxiliary Euclidean space the states of the system is labeled by pairs ψ = (vi, xi).
1,2(s) passing through the state ψ, Gauss’ deviation function is

For any two trajectories xi
deﬁned as [3, 2]

Gψ =

1 − ˙vi
˙vi
2

Hij

1
2

˙vj
1 − ˙vj
2
(cid:16)

,

(2.11)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
where Hij(ψ) = ∂2L/∂vi∂vj is the Hessian for a Lagrangian L in the state ψ. Gauss’
principle of least constraint says that the deviation of conceivable motions (allowed by
the constraints) from the released (unconstrained) motion takes a stationary value on the
actual motion. A physical meaning of Gauss’ principle is transparent: the acceleration (or
the force) caused by the constraints must have a minimal deviation from the acceleration
of the unconstrained motion. In our system the released motion is the free motion ˙vi =
0, Hij = δij, the accelerations of the conceivable motion are obtained by taking a time
derivative of (2.2). The Gauss deviation function assumes the form

Gψ =

gµνDvvνDvvµ +

(fv, fv) ,

v = f i
f i

µνvµvν .

(2.12)

1
2

1
2

The second term in the deviation function does not depend on the acceleration at the
physical state ψ = (qµ, vµ), while the ﬁrst term is non-negative and attains its absolute
minimum if Dvvµ = 0, i.e., for the autoparallel trajectories.

Let us denote the Lagrange derivative as [L]i = −d/ds(∂viL) + ∂xiL. We remind that
elements of the tangent space are also called virtual velocities in analytical mechanics.
The d’Alambert-Lagrange principle asserts that the conceivable motion of a system with
the Lagrangian L is an actual motion if for every moment of time [3, 2]

(w, [L]) = 0

5

(2.13)

for all virtual velocities of the constrained motion. We take L = (v, v)/2 and calculate
µvµ). For virtual velocities of the
[L]i for the conceivable motion [L]i = − ˙vi = −d/ds(εi
constrained motion wi = εi
µwµ, Eq. (2.13) assumes the form (w, [L]) = −gµνwνDvvµ = 0.
For an arbitrary wµ, it leads to the autoparallel equation (1.1).

There is an equivalent formulation of the d’Alambert-Lagrange principle known as
H¨older’s variational principle [3, 2]. A conceivable path is called a critical point of the
action functional if its variation vanishes when restricted on the subspace of virtual ve-
locities of the constrained motion. H¨older’s variational principle assumes that the actual
constrained motion is the critical point of the action. For an inﬁnitesimal variation of the
trajectory we have δxi(s) = uwi(s), u → 0. Then δS[x]/δxi = ∂uS[x + δx]|u=0 = 0. This
is equivalent to (2.13). Restricting the virtual velocity wi to the subset speciﬁed by the
constraint (2.2) we arrive at the autoparallel equation (1.1).

All the conventional variational principles for anholonomic systems are applied to non-
constrained Lagrangians, while the constraints are implemented through the restriction of
path variations to a speciﬁc class determined by the constraints. We shall now develop this
idea further and ﬁnd an equivalent variational principle that applies to the Lagrangian
restricted on the surface of constraints. We recall that for anholonomic constraints the
Hamilton variational principle leads to wrong equations of motion, when applied to the
Lagrangian restricted on the constraint surface. In particular, we shall ﬁnd a variational
principle for the Lagrangian (1.3) or (1.4) that leads to the autoparallel equation (1.1).

Before we proceed let us make a remark. Our treatment of the autoparallel motion as
an anholonomically constrained motion is somewhat unconventional. Typically, anholo-
nomic constraints are imposed directly on positions and velocities of the unconstrained
motion, i.e. on xi and vi (e.g., a skater on an inclined plane, a rolling ball on a rough
surface, etc, [3, 13]). They can be regarded as restrictions on the initial values of veloci-
ties and positions so that solutions of equations of motion depend on the less number of
parameters. A historical reason for such a treatment is that the positions xi can be mea-
sured and have a natural physical meaning in many concrete anholonomic systems [13]. It
is important to observe that for anholonomic constraints there exists no subspace in the
original conﬁguration space that could be identiﬁed with the physical conﬁguration space
formed by initial values of positions allowed by the constraints. In our anholonomic sys-
tem, we have explicitly introduced a physical conﬁguration space M, while the auxiliary
Euclidean space is used only to formulate a dynamical principle that speciﬁes the motion
in M. Since anholonomic constraints do not allow us to regard M as a submanifold in
the conﬁguration space IRn of the unconstrained system, we have imposed constraints
by restricting paths in IRn to a subclass permitted by the constraints, i.e., through the
embedding of all trajectories of physical degrees of freedom P(M) into P(IRn). This is
always possible for any type of constraints.

3 Variational principle on manifolds

Here we shall give a formulation of the variational principle on manifolds that is convenient
for the subsequent generalization to anholonomic systems.

6

Consider a vector ﬁeld wµ(q) on M satisfying the boundary condition

wµ(q1) = wµ(q2) = 0 ,

(3.1)

and an action functional S =
deﬁne a variation of the action relative the vector ﬁeld wµ by
R

dsL(v, q) for any trajectory connecting the points qµ

1,2. We

ds

δwS =

∂L
∂vµ dwvµ +
The derivative dwvµ of the velocity along the variation vector ﬁeld speciﬁes the variation
of vµ. Given a trajectory qµ = qµ(s), the velocity vector ﬁeld vµ is known only along the
trajectory, while we need to know the behavior of vµ in the vicinity of the trajectory in
order to calculate dwvµ for a generic wµ. We require

∂L
∂qµ wµ

(3.2)

!

 

Z

.

Lwvµ ≡ dwvµ − dvwµ = 0 ,

(3.3)

where Lwvµ = −Lvwµ denotes the Lie derivative on M. Thus, for any Lagrangian, being
a function on the tangent bundle T M, the smooth vector ﬁeld wµ on M determines a
variation of the position, and Eq. (3.3) speciﬁes the variation of the second independent
coordinate on T M, the velocity vµ. Eq. (3.3) can be given a tensor form symmetrical
relative the velocity and variation vector ﬁelds

Lwvµ = Lvwµ .

(3.4)

The Euler-Lagrange equation follows from dvwµ = dwµ/ds, the boundary condition (3.1)
and δwS = 0 that should hold for any wµ. Since the Lie derivative of a tensor is a tensor
[5], Eqs. (3.3) and (3.4) are covariant under general coordinate transformations, and so
are the corresponding equations of motion if the Lagrangian is a scalar.

The above geometrical formulation of the variational principle is equivalent to the
conventional one where the variation of the action is deﬁned via smooth path variations.
Indeed, equation (3.3) implies that for any trajectory qµ(s) with ﬁxed endpoints there
exists a one-parameter family of trajectories qµ(s, u) ≡ qµ
u(s) with the same endpoints
such that qµ(s, u = 0) = qµ(s) and wµ = ∂uqµ(s, u) in the vicinity of the trajectory qµ(s).
In other words, there exists a local coordinate net qµ(s, u) such that vµ and wµ are tangent
vectors for the coordinate lines u = const and s = const, respectively. The variable u
plays the role of the variation parameter so that δwS[q] = d/duS[qu]|u=0.

If the velocity variation is speciﬁed by means of a new principle, other than a smooth
deformation of the path, the condition (3.3) would get modiﬁed and, therefore, the vari-
ational principle would yield new equations of motion. To obtain such a new principle
for the autoparallel motion, we make use of the variational principles for anholonomic
systems discussed in Section 2.
If the condition (3.3) is dropped, then there exist no
coordinate net qµ(s, u) such that wµ = ∂uqµ(s, u) if vµ = ∂sqµ(s, u). For this reason the
variation (3.2) will be called non-coordinate or anholonomic. Note that wµ remains a
smooth vector ﬁeld on M.

7

4 Covariant variational principle

On a path qµ(s) with ﬁxed endpoints, consider a vector ﬁeld wµ that satisﬁes the boundary
condition (3.1). Its image wi(s) = εi
µ(q(s))wµ(q(s)) determines a variation vector ﬁeld on
the image trajectory xi(s). By construction the variation vector ﬁeld wi(s) belongs to the
class of virtual velocities allowed by the constraints. The variation of the velocity vector
dwvµ is to be determined by H¨older’s variational principle (2.13). We assume that the
variation (3.2) of the unconstrained action (µ is to be replaced by the Cartesian index i)
is equal to the H¨older variation (2.13) when the former is restricted on the constrained
surface

Integrating by parts in the right-hand side of (4.1) and making use of the boundary
condition (3.1) we obtain

δwS =

ds(w, [L]) .

Z

dwv,

 

∂L
∂v !

=

dvw,

 

∂L
∂v !

.

The integration has been omitted because (4.1) holds for an arbitrary variation vector
ﬁeld allowed by the constraints. On the constraint surface, we have ∂viL = εµ
i =
δijgµνεj

µwµ. Relation (4.2) leads to

ν and wi = εi

i ∂vµL, εµ

since ∂vµL is also arbitrary. From the compatibility condition (2.5) follows that

and, similarly,

Eq. (4.3) leads to the sought condition that speciﬁes the variation of the velocity vµ

(dwv − dvw, εµ) = 0 ,

(dwv, εµ) = Dwvµ ,

(dvw, εµ) = Dvwµ .

Dwvµ = Dvwµ .

(4.1)

(4.2)

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

(4.6)

It can be written as

σνvνwσ .

Lwvµ = dwvµ − dvwµ = 2Sµ

(4.7)
The derivative dwvµ is proportional to the diﬀerence of the vector ﬁeld vµ at two neighbor-
ing points qµ and qµ+uwµ, u → 0, i.e., udwvµ = (vµ+udwvµ)−vµ. A similar interpretation
holds for dvwµ. The left-hand side of Eq. (4.7) contains four vectors that can be combined
to form a parallelogram [wµ + (vµ + udwvµ)] − [vµ + (wµ + udvwµ)] which is not closed
as follows from (4.7). Thus, H¨older’s variational principle has led us to the conclusion
that the velocity variation must be chosen so that the closure failure of the parallelogram
formed by the velocity and variation vectors would be proportional to the torsion. Note
also that the closure failure of the parallelogram induced by the parallel transport of any
two vector ﬁelds along one another (4.6) is also used to deﬁne the torsion on a manifold
[5].

8

Let us take a Lagrangian L = L(v, q) on T M and ﬁnd the equation of motion resulting
from the new variational principle. Substituting dwvµ into (3.2) and making use of the
boundary condition (3.1) to integrate by parts, we get

δwS =

dswµ

[L]µ + 2Sν

µσ

Z

 

∂L
∂vν vσ

!

.

(4.8)

The modiﬁed Euler-Lagrange equations are

µσ

d
ds

∂L
∂vµ −

∂L
∂vν vσ = 0 .

∂L
∂qµ − 2Sν
Eq. (4.9) has also been considered in [14, 15] to describe the motion in spaces with torsion.
Taking the Lagrangian L = (v, v)/2 or L = −
(v, v) in the auxiliary Euclidean space
and restricting it on the constraint surface vi = εi
µvµ, we obtain the action (1.3) or
(1.4). By construction the variational principle δwS = 0, where the variation on T M is
determined by (4.6), should yield the autoparallel equation (1.1). It is not hard to be
convinced that the modiﬁed Euler-Lagrange equation (4.9) indeed leads to (1.1).

(4.9)

q

A few remarks are in order. Our derivation of the condition (4.6) does not rely on
that whether the unconstrained Lagrangian explicitly depends on the auxiliary Cartesian
variables xi or not. The terms involving ∂xiL in Eq. (4.1) are cancelled. For this reason
the ﬁnal condition (4.6) does not depend on the form of the auxiliary unconstrained
Lagrangian and may be applied to any Lagrangian on the physical conﬁguration space.

The condition (4.6) is covariant under general coordinate transformations on M and
has a transparent geometrical meaning. A covariant variation of vµ along wµ is equal to a
covariant variation of wµ along vµ. All the modiﬁcation of (3.4) we have made is that the
Lie variation has been replaced by the covariant variation. It is quite remarkable that for
tensors on a manifold there exists only two independent variations that produce tensors out
of tensors and involve a displacement [5], p.336: The Lie variation Lw and the covariant
variation Dw. Thus, two geometrically distinguished curves on a manifold, geodesics and
autoparallels, can be associated with the two independent variations available on the
manifold equipped with a connection compatible with the metric.

If the torsion is not zero, the variations induced by operators Dw and Dv are non-
coordinate (or anholonomic) because the basis Dµ in TqM is a non-coordinate basis [16].
Indeed, assume that there exists a coordinate net qµ = qµ(s, u) such that the relation
∂s,u = Dv,w holds. Taking F to be a scalar, from (2.9) we derive

[Dµ, Dν]F = −2Sσ

µνDσF .

(4.10)

The curvature term does not contribute to the commutator (4.10) because F is a scalar.
Thus, [∂s, ∂u] 6= 0, and there is no coordinate system for which the covariant derivatives
Dv,w play the role of the translation operators along the coordinate lines.

The use of a non-coordinate basis in the tangent space to determine a variation of
the action is not something unusual in mechanics. Some analogy can be made with
Poincar´e’s variational principle in non-inertial reference frames (e.g. a rigid body in

9

the body-ﬁxed reference frame) [11, 3]. One looks for a re-formulation of the Hamilton
variational principle in a non-coordinate basis in the tangent space of M. The coordinate
basis in TqM can always be chosen as ∂µ so that a variation of F (q) is δµF ∼ ∂µF . We can
also assume another basis eµ′ = eµ
µ′(q)∂µ in the tangent space to determine a variation of
any quantity on M. In general, this basis is non-commutative and, hence, non-coordinate

[eµ′, eν′] = 2C σ′

µ′ν′eσ′ ,

(4.11)

, eµ

σ eµ

µ′eµ′

µ′vµ′

= ˙qµ′

ν = δµ

µ′ν′ = eσ′

(q) such that vµ′

where the structure functions of the Lie algebra (4.11) are coeﬃcients of the object of
anholonomity [5]. In the new basis we have vµ = eµ
ν . The components
vµ′
of the velocity vector ﬁeld in a non-coordinate basis are called quasivelocities because
there is no qµ′
. The problem is to ﬁnd a variational principle
for the Lagrangian where the velocity components are taken in the non-coordinate basis,
˜L(vµ′
, qµ) = L(vµ, qµ). It is solved by rewriting Eqs. (3.2) and (3.3) in the non-coordinate
(3.3) assumes the form (4.6) where µ is replaced by µ′ and the covariant
basis. Eq.
derivative is taken relative to the connection, Γσ′
ν′, induced by going
over to the new basis. Such a connection has an antisymmetric part equal to the object
of anholonomity. The variational principle δS/δwµ′
= 0 yields celebrated Poincar´e’s
equations. They have the form (4.9) where L → ˜L, ∂vµ → ∂vµ′ , ∂qµ → eµ
µν →
C σ′

µ′ν′.
As we see Poincar´e’s variational principle is based on a coordinate variation (a smooth
deformation of the path), but the variation of the velocity components is taken in a non-
coordinate basis in the tangent space. Thus, no torsion force can be gained by considering
a variational principle in an anholonomically transformed basis. By deﬁnition [5], the
torsion transforms as a tensor Sσ′
σ eµ
µ′ν′.
If the torsion is zero in one basis it is zero in any other. The covariant variational
principle always induces the torsion force because the condition (4.6) is covariant under
all (coordinate and non-coordinate) transformations of the basis in the tangent space.
But it should be kept in mind that the variation speciﬁed by the condition (4.6) is no
smooth deformation of the path with ﬁxed ends.

ν′µ′)/2 − C σ′

µ′∂qµ and Sσ

µν = (Γσ′

µ′ν′ = eσ′

µ′ν′ − Γσ′

µ′∂µeσ

ν′Sσ

µ′eν

As a ﬁnal remark, we shall point out that anholonomic variations in analytical mechan-
ics have also been introduced by Sedov [12] to study dynamics of dissipative systems (they
are examples of non-Lagrangian systems). He also proposed an anholonomic variational
principle for such mechanical systems and considered its applications.

5 Noether’s theorem

In Lagrangian mechanics ﬁrst integrals of motion can be obtained from Noether’s theorem.
The covariant variational principle has led us to the new equations of motion (4.9). The
presence of the torsion force should aﬀect Noether’s integrals of motion. Therefore it is
natural to expect Noether’s theorem to be modiﬁed.

Consider a one-parameter group of diﬀeomorphism on a manifold. Given a trajectory
qµ(s), a vector ﬁeld ωµ determines a smooth deformation of the trajectory under the

10

(5.1)

(5.2)

(5.3)

(5.4)

(5.5)

(5.6)

one-parameter group of diﬀeomorphism on the manifold

dωqµ = ωµ ,

dωvµ = ˙ωµ .

Let the Lagrangian be invariant under the transformations (5.1) up to a total time deriva-
tive

If the motion is determined by the Euler-Lagrange equation, then in accordance with
Noether’s theorem [3], the system possesses the integral of motion

The proof follows from relation (5.2) that should be written in the form

dωL =

, Φ = Φ(v, q, s) .

dΦ
ds

dI
ds

= 0 ,

I =

∂L
∂vµ ωµ − Φ .

dI
ds

+ [L]µωµ = 0 .

dI
ds

= 2Sν

µσ

∂L
∂vν vσωµ .

For the actual motion [L]µ = 0, thus leading to the conservation law (5.3). Similarly,
expressing [L]µ from (4.9) and substituting it into (5.4), we derive modiﬁed Noether’s
theorem

In particular, for the time translation symmetry we have ωµ = vµ and Φ = L. The right-
hand side of (5.5) vanishes since the torsion tensor is antisymmetric. The corresponding
integral of motion is the system energy. On the other hand, assuming the Lagrangian to
be invariant under spatial translations and rotations (e.g., L = 1
2v2, gµν = δµν), we observe
that the momentum and the angular momentum are no longer integrals of motion for a
generic torsion tensor.

One can give two additional equivalent formulations of Noether’s theorem. Assume

that under the transformations (5.1) the following relation holds

dωL =

− 2Sν

µσ

dΦ
ds

∂L
∂vν vσωµ .

Then (5.3) is an integral of motion. Clearly, to achieve (5.6), the vector ﬁeld ωµ should, in
general, depend on the torsion. Although the torsion force violates the Noether conserva-
tion law as follows from (5.5), it may also admit new torsion-dependent integrals of motion
3. To illustrate our statement, consider two-dimensional motion in the constant metric
νσ = γµTνσ, where Tνσ = −Tσν is the generator of SO(2), T12 = 1,
and torsion ﬁelds, Sµ
and ∂µγν = 0, gµν = δµν. The Lagrangian L = v2
µ/2 exhibits the translational symmetry,
but this symmetry does not lead to the conservation of the momentum components as
one might see from (5.5). Nonetheless, we may solve Eq. (5.6) relative ωµ and ﬁnd new
ν aν,
integrals instead of the Noether’s integrals. The solution is Φ = 0, ωµ = [exp(ϕT )]µ

3This conclusion seems to be opposite to the one made in [15].

11

where aµ is an arbitrary constant vector and ϕ = 2δµνγµqµ. Since aµ is arbitrary, we have
two independent integrals of motion

I1 = v1 cos ϕ − v2 sin ϕ ,

I2 = v1 sin ϕ + v2 cos ϕ .

(5.7)

The integrals (5.7) comprise two independent ﬁrst integrals for the two-dimensional au-
toparallel motion in the homogeneous metric and torsion ﬁelds. We remark also that
1 + I 2
I 2

2 = 2E where E = L is the energy.

Instead of modifying the transformation law of the Lagrangian, one can modify the

transformation law of its arguments, the generalized coordinates and velocities. Set

dωqµ ≡ ωµ ,

dωvµ ≡ dvωµ + 2Sµ

νσωνvσ .

(5.8)

If the Lagrangian is invariant under these transformations up to a total time derivative (see
(5.2)), then (5.3) is an integral of motion. The attention should be paid to the fact that
in contrast to the conventional formulation of Noether’s theorem [3], the transformation
law (5.8) determines no smooth deformation of the path qµ(s) on a manifold and, in
this sense, is not induced by any diﬀeomorphism on M.
In fact, the relations (5.8) is
a postulate that speciﬁes the transformation law of two independent coordinates of the
tangent bundle. One ﬁrst calculates dωL(v, q), then one sets vµ = ˙qµ and looks for such
ωµ = ωµ(v, q) that (5.2) holds for some Φ. This procedure, though being somewhat
unusual, may turn out to be useful in seeking the integrals of motion for the modiﬁed
Euler-Lagrange equations (4.11).

As an example, consider the autoparallel motion in the teleparallel space (zero Rie-
mann-Cartan curvature and non-zero torsion). Such spaces are used to describe a crystal
with topological defects [17]. In the anholonomic system discussed in Section 2, we set
f i
µν = 0, then the curvature vanishes, while the torsion does not. We reduce either of the
actions (1.3) and (1.4) on the constraint surface and obtain L = L(v, q). Now it is not
hard to verify that the transformations (5.8) with wµ = (εµ, a), ai arbitrary constants,
leaves the Lagrangian invariant (Φ = 0). Since ai are arbitrary, the quantities

I i = εi

µ(q)vµ

(5.9)

are the integrals of motion. Thus, the autoparallel motion in the teleparallel spaces can be
characterized by a simple property: The velocity components taken in the non-coordinate
basis (ei = εµ
i ∂µ in TqM) that is transported parallel (Dµεi
ν = 0) are the integrals of
motion ( ˙I i = 0). This is, in general, not the case for non-teleparallel spaces.

6 A Lagrangian formalism for autoparallels

As has been pointed out in the introductionary remarks, there might exist a non-local
action whose extrema (relative to the conventional variational principle) would contain
autoparallels. In fact, there are inﬁnitely many such actions. We shall give one of the
possible actions. It has a few additional properties that seems to us useful for the canon-
ical quantization of the autoparallel motion. We require that the sought action should

12

coincide with a local action whose extrema are geodesics when the torsion is zero, and
the non-locality can be removed by adding new degrees of freedom coupled to the original
variables. Thus, the autoparallel motion can be modeled by a holonomic dynamics with
some auxiliary degrees of freedom which admits both a Hamiltonian formalism and the
canonical quantization.

We skip the details of our derivation and just give the answer. Let Sg be a local action

whose extrema are geodesics, i.e., we set

δSg
δqµ = gµν ¯Dvvν .

Let us introduce an integral operator ˆΛ by the relation

ds′Λµν(s, s′)

Dvvν(s′) = gµσδ(s − s′′) .

δ
δqσ(s′′)

Z

Here and below the integration is extended from the initial to ﬁnal moment of time.
Consider the non-local action

S = Sg +

ds

Dvvµ − ¯Dvvµ
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Z

Z

ˆΛµνDvvν = Sg +

dsK ν

µλvµvλ ˆΛνσDvvσ .

(6.3)

Making use of the properties (6.1) and (6.2), one can convince oneself that from Dvvµ = 0
follows δqµS = 0. So the autoparallels are extrema of the action (6.3). If the torsion is
zero, the non-local term in (6.3) vanishes and S = Sg.

The non-locality of the action (6.3) still prevents us from developing a Hamiltonian
formalism. We need a local action. Fortunately, the action (6.3) can be regarded as an
eﬀective action for physical degrees of freedom in a larger dynamical system which is
described by a local action. Let us extend the original conﬁguration space of the system
by auxiliary variables yµ whose dynamics is determined by the equation

Consider the action

yµ = gµν ˆΛνσDvvσ .

S = Sg +

ds

Kµνσvνvσyµ + λµ
h

gµν ˆΩνσyσ − Dvvµ
(cid:16)

(cid:17)i

.

Z

The operator ˆΩ is to be chosen so that the action (6.5) turns into the action (6.3) when
it is reduced on the solution of the equation of motion for the variable λµ.

We have

gµν(s)

δS
δλν(s)

=

Z

ds′Ωµσ(s, s′)yσ(s′) − gµνDvvν(s) = 0 .

(6.6)

From Eq. (6.2) follows that the kernel of the operator ˆΩ can be taken in the form

(6.1)

(6.2)

(6.4)

(6.5)

(6.7)

Ωµσ(s, s′′) = gµν(s)

δ
δqσ(s′′)

Dvvν(s) .

13

With this choice Eq.
order for yµ:

(6.6) becomes an ordinary linear diﬀerential equation of second

νσ + Γµ

¨yµ + (Γµ

σν) vσ ˙yν + yν∂νΓµ
(6.8)
Its solution is a sum of a general solution to the homogeneous equation ˆΩµνyν = 0 and
a special solution yµ = gµν ˆΛνσDvvσ. To recover the action (6.3), we have to supplement
Eq. (6.8) by the initial conditions such that the homogeneous equation has only a trivial
solution. This is always possible thanks to the linearity of the equation. In particular,
one can take ˙yµ = yµ = 0 at the initial moment of time.

σλvσvλ = Dvvµ .

The local action (6.5) linearly depends on the second-order derivatives ¨yµ and ¨qµ.
Assuming zero boundary conditions for the variable λµ, we may remove the second-order
time derivatives by integrating by parts, thus producing the ﬁnal local Lagrangian that
depends only on the coordinates and velocities in the extended conﬁguration space and
involves no higher-order time derivatives.
It is important to observe that the Hessian
of the Lagrangian is not degenerate, that is, the system exhibits no constraints. The
dynamics of the auxiliary degrees of freedom yµ and λµ has been chosen so that when
the torsion is present, the coupling between them and the original variables qµ causes the
deviation of the trajectory qµ(s) from the geodesic, making it the autoparallel.

In the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics, the auxiliary degrees of free-
dom λµ and yµ must be integrated out to obtain an eﬀective path integral for the original
system. This resembles the Feynman-Vernon approach to quantum dissipative systems
[18], where the non-potential friction force is generated by a special coupling of the oscil-
lator bath to the system. In our case, the non-potential (non-Lagrangian) torsion force is
modeled by a special coupling to the λ- and y-degrees of freedom. Extending this anal-
ogy further, one may expect that quantum mechanics in spaces with torsion, that favors
autoparallels in the classical limit, can not, in general, be described by the wave function
formalism, rather only the density matrix can be constructed like for dissipative systems.
The nice property which could be expected is that in the semiclassical approximation
the transition amplitude generated by the eﬀective action (6.3) is given by the geodesic
action Sg taken on the autoparallel, the non-local term of (6.3) will contribute only to
quantum ﬂuctuations because Dvvµ = 0. The canonical quantization of the model will be
considered elsewhere.

7 Conclusions

We have analyzed the autoparallel motion from the point of view of analytical mechanics
and succeeded to represent it as a very special anholonomic constrained system. Invoking
the variational principles for anholonomic dynamical systems, we have established the
covariant variational principle for the autoparallels. We have also analyzed a modiﬁcation
of Noether’s theorem due to the torsion force. Finally, we have found a possible local action
whose extrema determined by the conventional Hamilton variational principle contain the
autoparallels for some degrees of freedom. The model can be canonically quantized by
means of the Dirac formalism [1].

14

8 Acknowledgments

A. Chervyakov and H. Kleinert are thanked for useful discussions.

References

[1] P.A.M. Dirac, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics (Yeshiva University, NY, 1964).

[2] L.A. Pars, A Treatise on Analytical Dynamics (Heinemann, London, 1965).

[3] V.I. Arnold, V.V. Kozlov and A.I. Neishtadt, Mathematical Aspects of Classical and
Celestial Mechanics in: Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Science, Vol. III, Dynamical
Systems (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988).

[4] H. Kleinert and S.V. Shabanov, Spaces with Torsion from Embedding, and the Special

Role of Autoparallel Trajectories; gr-qc/9709067.

[5] J.A. Schouten, Ricci-Calculus. An Introduction to Tensor Analysis and its Geometrical

Applications (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1954).

[6] M. Henneaux, Ann. Phys.(NY), 140 (1982) 45.

[7] F.W. Hehl, Phys.Lett. 36A (1971) 225.

[8] V.N. Ponomarev, Bull. Acad. Pol. Sci. (Math., Astr.,Phys.), 19 (1971) 545.

[9] H. Kleinert, Path Integrals in Quantum Mechanics, Statistics and Polymer Physics

(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2nd Edition, 1995).

[10] L.S. Polak (ed.), Variational Principles of Mechanics, Collection of Papers (Moscow,

Fizmatgiz, 1959).

[11] H. Poincar´e, Les m´ethodes nouvelles de la m´ecanique c´eleste, Vols. 1-3 (Gauthier-

Villars, Paris, 1892); Engl. Transl. (Dover Publications, New York, 1957).

[12] L.I. Sedov, in: Proc. of the 11th Intern. Congr. Appl. Mech. (Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

1966), p.9;
in; Proc. IUTAM Symp., Vienna (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1968), p. 346;
Prikl. Math. Mekh., 32 (1968) 771.

[13] V.V. Kozlov, Mosc. Univ. Mech. Bull. 37, No 3-4, (1982) 27; ibid. (1982) 74; ibid.

38, No 3, (1983) 40;
V.V. Kozlov, Sov. Phys. Dokl., 28 (1983) 735.

[14] P.P. Fiziev and H. Keinert, Europhys. Lett. 35 (1996) 241.

[15] H. Kleinert and A. Pelster, Lagrange Mechanics in Spaces with Curvature and Tor-

sion; gr-qc/9605028.

15

[16] F.W. Hehl, J. McCrea, E. Mielke and Y. Ne’eman, Phys.Rep. 258 (1995) 1.

[17] E. Kr¨oner,

in: Physics of defects, Les Houches Summer School XXXV (North-

Holland, Amsterdam, 1981).

[18] R.P. Feynman and F.L. Vernon, Ann. Phys. (NY), 24 (1963) 118.

16

