8
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
h
t
a
m

[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
1
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Miron’s Generalizations of
Lagrange and Finsler Geometries:
a Self–Consistent Approach to
Locally Anisotropic Gravity

Sergiu I. Vacaru

Institute of Applied Physics, Academy of Sciences,
5 Academy str., Chi¸sinˇau 2028, Republic of Moldova

Fax: 011-3732-738149, E-mail: lises@cc.acad.md
— — — — —
Institute for Basic Research,
P. O. Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34682, U. S. A.

ibr@gte.net, http://home1.gte.net/ibr

In honour of Academician Radu Miron 70th birthday

Modern gauge theories of high energy physics, investigations in classical and quan-
tum gravity and recent uniﬁcations of superstring theories (the so–called M– F – and S–
theories) are characterized by a large application of geometric and topological methods.
There are elaborated a number of Kaluza–Klein models of space–time and proposed
diﬀerent variants of compactiﬁcation of higher dimensions. One of the still unsolved
important physical problem is the deﬁnition of the mechanism of (in general dynamical)
such compactiﬁcation with a rigorous ”selection” of the four dimensional space–time
physics from the low energy dynamics of (super) string and supergravitational theo-
ries. Another question of challenge of the modern physics is the local anisotropy of
background radiation and the development of a consistent scenarious of quantum and
classical cosmology.

In our works [4, 5, 6, 7] we have concerned the mentioned topics in a more general
context of modelling physical processes on (super)vector bundles provided with nonlin-
ear and distinguished connections and metric structures (containing as particular cases
both Kaluza–Klein spaces and various extensions of Lagrange and Finsler spaces). We
based our investigations on the fundamental results of the famous R. Mirons’s Roma-
nian school of Finsler geometry and its generalizations (as basic references we cite here
some monographs and recent works [1]).

Perhaps, in the special literature there are cited more than a thousand of works
on Finsler geometry, its generalizations and applications. It is well known that a met-
ric more general than a Riemannian one was proposed in 1854 by B. Riemann and
studied for the ﬁrst time, in 1918, by P. Finsler who was a post–graduate student
of C. Carath´eodory. The purpose of applications of such generalized metrics in ther-
modynamics and, more generally, in physics was obvious. At present time there are
published tens of monographs containing Finsler–like physical theories. Nevertheless
the bulk of physicists still persists on a broad implementation of Finsler geometry in
modern physics. This skepticism consists not only on a conservatism caused by the
predomination of Riemann geometry (with some extensions to Einstein–Cartan–Spaces
with torsion and nonmetricity) or by the ”excessive complexity” of Finsler geometry
for developing physical theories. At ﬁrst site the problem of construction of a general

1

”Finsler–physics” is very cumbersome and even unsurmountable. For instance, the
most fundamental physical concepts of energy, momentum and rotation momentum
are correspondingly strongly related with the supposed isotropy of space–time with re-
spect to time and space translations and rotations (there is a group of automorphisms
of the ﬂat Minkowski space, the so–called generalized Lorentz, or Poincar´e group,
which also acts in the tangent bundle of the (pseudo)–Riemannian space). There are
not local symmetries on spaces with generic local anisotropy and it ”was concluded”
that not having even local (pseudo)–rotations it impossible to construct a consistent
physical theory of Finsler–like space–time and to deﬁne a theory of fundamental locally
anisotropic ﬁeld interactions because, for example, electrons are described by spinor
ﬁelds, but spinors are closely related with the group of rotational isotropies which could
not be deﬁned for a general Finsler or Lagrange space.

It should be noted that the development of physical theories in media and spaces
with local anisotropy became a rather evident necessity if there are rigorously ana-
lyzed a number of recent experimental data from modern cosmology and astrophysics,
which reﬂects substantial anisotropies of the space–time structure at diﬀerent state of
evolution of the Universe, and if there are studied various processes in anisotropic, un-
ordered and nonhomogeneous media, with dislocations and disclinations and/or with
ﬂuctuations and anisotropic diﬀusion. Supposing that anisotropies are included only
in the energy–momentum tensors of matter (in order to develop some cosmological
scenarious), which directs as the source in the Einstein equations the dynamics of Uni-
verse, one does not obtain a self–consistent theory if the condition of isotropy of metric
(being a solution of ﬁeld equations) is imposed. The modern Cosmology requires a
more general geometric background with anisotropies of both matter and space–time
metric.

In our works we tried to demonstrate that all basic diﬃculties connected with
the elaboration of locally anisotropic physics are bridged over if the problems are
touched on by modelling both generalized Finsler geometries and physical theories
on vector bundles provided with compatible nonlinear and distinguished connections,
metric, gauge and spinor ﬁelds. Such idea and methods, being very important for a
further development of a number of directions in theoretical and mathematical physics,
have been manifested in an explicit geometric form in the R. Miron and co–authors
works. In some initial and diﬀerent forms the idea of modelling of physical interactions
on spaces with diﬀerent geometric structures was contained in the Yano and Ishihara
monograph [8] (lifts of geometric object on the total space of tangent bundles) and
in the A. Z. Petrov [2] and N. S. Sinyukov [3] works (deformation of connections and
metric structures by maps generalizing conformal transforms).

The ﬁrst our contributions to extensions of Finsler geometry and applications were
the formulation of the theory of nearly autoparallel maps of generalized Lagrange
and Finsler spaces [7] and the proposal of deﬁnition of conservation laws for locally
anisotropic ﬁeld interactions by using such generalizations of conformal maps. The next
step was the diﬀerential geometry of Cliﬀord and spinor ﬁbrations and of aﬃne and lin-
ear frame bundles provided with nonlinear connection structure [6] and in consequence
the formulation of the theory of locally anisotropic ﬁeld interactions.

In order to demonstrate that the locally anisotropic physics is naturally contained
in modern (super) string theories we investigated the low energy limit of string locally
anisotropic perturbations and proved that there are alternative variants when the grav-

2

itational and matter ﬁeld interactions could be locally isotropic or anisotropic [5]. We
formulated the supergeometry of vector superbundles enabled with general nonlinear
connections and extended the diagram methods of superstrings to the case of higher
order anisotropies. Another directions of our investigations is connected with higher
order supersymmetric stochastic processes and superdiﬀusion. The basic results are
summarized in monographs [4].

The main conclusion of this note is that after the R. Miron and co–authors idea
of modelling both geometric constructions and physical theories was applied in our
works in a manner as to unify both Kaluza–Klein and generalized Finsler (super)spaces
by imbedding them in modern string theories it was compelled that the present–day
physics can be generalized as to include locally anisotropic interactions and spaces.

References

[1] R. Miron, The Geometry of Higher Order Lagrange Spaces: Applications to Mechan-
ics and Physics (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Boston, London, 1997); R.
Miron, The Geometry of Higher Order Finsler Spaces (Hadronic Press, Instituto per la
Ricerca di Base, Italy, 1997); R. Miron and M. Anastasiei, Vector Bundles. Lagrange
Spaces. Application in Relativity (Academiei, Romania, 1987) [in Romanian], English
translation: (Geometry Balkan Press, 1996) R. Miron and M. Anastasiei, The Geometry
of Lagrange Spaces: Theory and Applications (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,
Boston, London, 1994); R. Miron and Gh. Atanasiu, Revue Roumaine de Mathematiques
Pures et Appliquees XLI N os 3–4 (1996) 205; 237; 251

[2] A. Z. Petrov, Modelling of physical ﬁelds, in Gravitation and the Theory of Relativity, ed.
A. Z. Petrov, N 4 & 5 (Kazani University Press, URSS, 1968) 7; A. Z. Petrov, Doklady
Academii Nauk SSSR 186 (1969) 1302; 190 (1970) 305; A. Z. Petrov, On Modelling of
Gravitational Fields. Preprint ITF-71-14R, Kiev, 1971 [in Russian]

[3] N. S. Sinyukov, Geodesic Maps of Riemannian Spaces (Nauka, Moskow, 1979) [in Rus-

sian]

[4] S. Vacaru, Interactions, Strings and Isotopies in Higher Order Anisotropic Superspaces
(Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, FL, USA, 1998); S. Vacaru, Field Interactions, Strings,
and Diﬀusion in Locally Anisotropic (Super)Spaces (under consideration); E–prints:
hep–th/9611091; physics/9705030; physics/9706038; gr–qc/9604014

[5] S. Vacaru, Locally anisotropic gravity and strings, Ann. Phys (N. Y.), 256 (1997) 39; S.
Vacaru, Superstrings in Higher Order Extensions of Finsler Superspaces Nucl. Phys. B,
434 (1997) 590; E–print: hep–th/9611034

[6] S. Vacaru, Spinor structures and nonlinear connections in vector bundles, generalized La-
grange and Finsler spaces, J. Math. Phys 37 (1996) 508; S. Vacaru and Yu. Goncharenko,
Yang-Mills ﬁelds and gauge gravity on generalized Lagrange and Finsler spaces, Int. J.
Theor. Phys. 34 (1995) 1955; E–print: dg–ga/9609004;

[7] S. Vacaru and S. Ostaf, Nearly autoparallel maps of Lagrange and Finsler spaces, in
Lagrange and Finsler Geometry, eds. P. L. Antonelli and R. Miron, (Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, Boston, London, 1996) 241; S. Vacaru and S. Ostaf, Twistors and
nearly autoparallel maps, Rep. Math. Phys. 37 (1996) 309; E-print: gr-qc/9602010

3

[8] K. Yano and S. I. Ishihara, Tangent and Cotangent Bundles. Diﬀerential Geometry

(Marcel Dekker, New York, 1973)

4

