8
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
h
t
a
m

[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
2
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Contact geometry in Lagrangean mechanics

Pavol ˇSevera

Dept. of Theor. Physics, Charles University,
V Holeˇsoviˇck´ach 2, 18000 Prague, Czech Republic

Abstract

We present a picture of Lagrangean mechanics, free of some unnatural
features (such as complete divergences). As a byproduct, a completely natu-
ral U (1)-bundle over the phase space appears. The correspondence between
classical and quantum mechanics is very clear, e.g. no topological ambiguities
remain. Contact geometry is the basic tool.

1

Introduction

In this paper we show how to get rid of some unnatural features of Lagrangean me-
chanics, such as multivaluedness and neglecting total divergences. There is almost
nothing new: we simply consider Hamilton–Jacobi equation and its characteristics.
The only point is in introducing, instead of M × R , a principal G- bundle U over
the spacetime M , where G = R or U (1). Even if U is trivial, it is, in a natural way,
only a bundle and not a product. This correspods to “up to a total divergence”
phrases. The Hamilton–Jacobi equation is simply a G-invariant hypersurface in the
space of contact elements of U .

In quantization, the wave functions are sections of a line bundle associated to
U , no topological ambiguity remains, so the correspondence classical ↔ quantum
is very clear. The space of characteristics Ch carries a natural contact structure;
the phase space Ph emerges as the quotient of Ch/G. Thus Ch → Ph is a principal
U (1)- (or R - ) bundle; the contact structure gives us a connection.

The plan of the paper is as follows: In Section 2 we present basic facts of contact
geometry, its connection with symplectic geometry and geometrical quantization,
with ﬁrst order PDE and the method of characteristics and with asymptotics of
linear PDE. In Section 3 we introduce the point of view described above and discuss
its correspondence with Lagrangians. For example, it may contain some additional
topological information (obviously the topological quantization ambiguity has to
be hidden somewhere). The bundle Ch → Ph and quantization are discussed in
Section 4. We conclude with the fact that one can replace the group U (1) by any
Lie group almost without changing anything. Finally we mention the obvious open
problem – what happens if we do not consider extremal curves, but surfaces etc.

2 Basic notions of contact geometry

A contact structure on a manifold M is a ﬁeld of hyperplanes HM ⊂ T M (a
It
subbundle of codimension 1) satisfying a maximal nonintegrability condition.
can be formulated as follows: as for any subbundle of T M , we have a map σ :

1

2 HM → T M/HM satisfying (and deﬁned by) the fact that for any 1-form α on

M , annulated on HM , the formula
V

α (σ(u, v)) = dα(u, v)

holds for any u, v ∈ HxM , x ∈ M . Alternatively, we may extend u and v to
sections of HM ; their commutator at x (when considered mod HM ) is σ(u, v).
The maximal nonintegrability condition requires σ to be regular. In that case, M is
clearly odd-dimensional. Any two contact manifolds with the same dimension are
locally isomorphic (a form of Darboux theorem).

We call a vector ﬁeld on M contact, if its ﬂow preserves the contact strucure.
There is a 1-1 correspodence between contact vector ﬁelds and sections of the line
bundle T M/HM . More precisely, for any w ∈ C∞(T M/HM ) there is a unique
contact v that becomes w when considered mod HM . The proof is easy: choose
any v′ that is w mod HM . As a rule, v′ is not contact, so it generates an inﬁnites-
imal deformation of the contact structure – say β : HM → T M/HM . But due
to the nondegeneracy of σ there is a unique v′′ ∈ C∞(HM ) producing the same
deformation. Thus v = v′ − v′′ is the required contact ﬁeld. The ﬁeld w is called
the contact hamiltonian of v.

An important example of contact geometry emerges when M is a principal G-
bundle over a symplectic manifold (N, ω), where G = R or U (1). Suppose we are
given a connection on M such that its curvature is ω. The horizontal distribution
makes M into a contact manifold. We can use the connection 1-form α to identify
sections of T M/HM (contact hamiltonians) with functions on M . The local ﬂow
generated by a contact ﬁeld v preserves the structure of G-bundle iﬀ v is G-invariant,
i.e.
iﬀ its contact hamiltonian f is (the pullback of) a function on N . Then the
ﬁeld v is projected onto a well-deﬁned vector ﬁeld vN on N whose ﬂow preserves
ω; in fact, f is a hamiltonian generating vN . We may put these facts together:
The Lie algebra C∞(N ) (with the Poisson bracket) is isomorphic to the Lie algebra
of G-invariant contact ﬁelds on M . A function f on N and the corresponding
hamiltonian vector ﬁeld vN are combined together (f as the vertical part and vN
as the horizontal part) to form a contact ﬁeld v on M .

This point of view is useful in geometrical quantization. Here one considers a line
bundle L → N associated to M → N , and represents the Lie algebra (C∞(N ), {, })
by operators on the space C∞(L). The sections of L are simply functions on M
equivariant with respect to G and the action of a function f ∈ C∞(N ) on such a
section is given by the derivative with respect to the corresponding contact vector
ﬁeld.

The classical example of a contact manifold is the space of contact elements
(i.e. hyperplanes in the tangent space) of a manifold M , which we denote as CM .
The distribution H(CM ) is given as follows: take an x ∈ CM ; it corresponds to
a hyperplane H in Tπ(x)M , where π : CM → M is the natural projection. Then
Hx(CM ) is (dxπ)−1(H).

Contact geometry, in particular on CM , was invented to give a geometrical
meaning to ﬁrst order partial diﬀerential equations and to Lagrange method of
characteristics. Suppose E ⊂ CM is a hypersurface; it will represent the equation.
Any hypersurface Σ ⊂ M can be lifted to CM :
for any point x ∈ Σ take the
hyperplane TxΣ to be a point of the lift ˜Σ. ˜Σ is a Legendre submanifold of CM , i.e.
T ˜Σ ⊂ H(CM ) and ˜Σ has the maximal possible dimension (dim CM = 2 dim ˜Σ + 1).
Σ is said to solve the equation if ˜Σ ⊂ E. This has a nice interpretation due to
Monge: For any x ∈ M we take the enveloping cone of the hyperplanes π−1(x) ∩ E
in TxM . In this way we obtain a ﬁeld of cones in M . Then Σ solves the equation
if it is tangent to the cones everywhere.

Lie’s point of view is to forget about M and to take as a solution any Legendre
submanifold contained in E. Such a solution may look singular in M (singularities

2

emerge upon the projection π : CM → M ). This deﬁnition uses only the con-
tact structure on CM and thus allowes using the entire (pseudo)group of contact
transformations.

Now we will describe the method of characteristics. The hyperplane ﬁeld H(CM )
cuts a hyperplane ﬁeld HE on E (there may be points where the contact hyperplane
touches E. Generally they are isolated and we will ignore them). The ﬁeld HE
does not make E into a contact manifold: the form σ becomes degenerate when
we restrict ourselves from Hx(CM ) to HxE. Thus at any x ∈ E there appears a
direction along which σ is degenerate. The integral curves of this direction ﬁeld
are called characteristics. For example, if the Monge cones coming from E are the
null cones of some pseudo-riemannian metrics on M then the projections of the
characteristics are the light-like geodesics in M .

Generally, if F is a manifold with a hyperplane ﬁeld HF , and the form σ :
2 HF → T F/HF has constant rank, then the bundle of kernels of σ, KF ⊂ HF ,
is integrable. Moreover, if one takes an open U ⊂ F small enough, so that the
V
integral manifolds of KF in U form a manifold Ch, then there is a well-deﬁned
contact structure on Ch coming from the projection of HF . Coming back to the case
of E ⊂ CM , it gives us a method of ﬁnding the Legendre submanifolds contained in
E. Just take a submanifold that is almost Legendre – up to the dimension, which
is less by 1. Suppose that the characteristics intersect it transversally. Then their
union form a Legendre submanifold.

Let us look at vector ﬁelds on E with ﬂow preserving the ﬁeld HE; we shall
call them contact, too. First of all, there are characteristic vector ﬁelds, i.e. ﬁelds
touching the characteristics. Thus it is no longer true that if we choose a w ∈
C∞(T E/HE) then there is a unique v ∈ C∞(T E) equal to w mod HE: we can
always add a characteristic ﬁeld to v. On the other hand, w cannot be arbitrary.
The ﬂow of a contact ﬁeld has to preserve the characteristic foliation. If Ch is the
space of characteristics, each contact ﬁeld on E can be projected onto a contact
ﬁeld on Ch (recall Ch is a contact manifold). This is the basis for conservation laws.
For example if a contact ﬁeld v ∈ HE (i.e. w = 0) at a point x ∈ E then v ∈ HE
(w = 0) along the characteristic γx running through x. Let us also notice that any
contact vector ﬁeld on E can be prolongated to a contact vector ﬁeld on CM (with
the ﬂow preserving E).

Hypersurfaces E ⊂ CM often come from an equation of the type Df = 0, where
D : C∞(M ) → C∞(M ) is a linear diﬀerential operator. Take the sybmol sD of D (a
function on T ∗M deﬁned by (iλ)nsD(dg) = D exp(iλg) + O(λn−1), λ → ∞, where
n is the degree of D and g ∈ C∞(M )). The equation sD = 0 speciﬁes a hypersurface
E ⊂ CM . The singularities of solutions of Df = 0 are located on hypersurfaces
solving the equation corresponding to E; also, if f = a(x) exp(iλS(x)), λ → ∞ is an
asymptotic solution of Df = 0 then the levels S(x) = const solve the E-equation.

3 The geometry of Lagrangean mechanics

We shall deal with ﬁrst-order variational principles. Suppose that at each point
x of a manifold M (the space-time or extended conﬁguration space) there is a 1-
homogeneous function Λx : TxM → R (and suppose everything is smooth outside
the zero section of T M ). Then on each oriented curve γ, Λ speciﬁes a 1-form, so
γ Λ. We are looking for extremals of S (in
we may compute its integral S(γ) =
R
this paper, extremal means stationary).

There are several reasons why this point of view is not entirely satisfactory. First
of all, even in the simplest problems, Λx is not deﬁned on all TxM , but only on an
open conic subset. Even worse, Λ may be multivalued. An example is drawn on
the following two ﬁgures. On the ﬁrst one, we suppose that Λx is positive (outside

3

0). The ﬁgure represents the endpoints of vectors satisfying Λx(v) = 1; it is called
the wave diagram in the beautiful elementary book [2]. The dashed lines represent
a covector p corresponding to the drawn vector (they are p = 0 and p = 1); p is
called the momentum.

Obviously, we may use the ﬁeld of wave diagrams instead of Λ. But we may work
as well with diagrams of the following shape; they correspond to multivalued Λ’s:

However, the real problem is that Λ is unnatural. The reason is that it is deﬁned
only up to a closed 1-form. For example, in the presence of an ‘electromagnetic ﬁeld’
F ∈ C∞(
2 T ∗M ), dF = 0, we take as the actual Λ (the one from which we compute
S) Λ + A, where dA = F . Of course A need not exist globally and it is not deﬁned
uniquely.

V

This problem appears also in Noether theorem: we take as an inﬁnitesimal
symmetry any vector ﬁeld v whose ﬂow preserves Λ up to some df . It is desirable
to have a picture in which v is an actual symmetry.

A way out is in the following construction: Let U → M be a principal G-bundle,
where G = U (1) or R (you may imagine that we added the action S to M as a
new coordinate; of course this interpretation is rather limited). Suppose we are
given a G-invariant hypersurface E ⊂ CU ; we are interested in its characteristics.
Their projections to M are the extremals for certain (multivalued) Λ (if c1(U ) 6= 0
then either Λ exists only locally or we must admit an elmg. ﬁeld F ). We simply
replaced Λ by the corresponding Hamilton–Jacobi equation E, but the new point
of view is rid of the problems listed above. For this reason we take E ⊂ CU and
its characteristics as fundamental and the Lagrangian Λ as a derived, sometimes
ill-deﬁned notion.

The correspondence between E and Λ is as follows: Let α be an arbitrary
connection 1-form on U . To ﬁnd the wave diagram at a point x ∈ M , take a point
y ∈ U above x. The intersection of the Monge cone in TyU with the hyperplane
α = 1 is the wave diagram. We have to take the curvature F as the elmg. ﬁeld.
We see that the transformation Λ → Λ + A, F → F − dA (A a 1-form) corresponds
simply to a change of the connection.

If we start with Λ and F , we have to suppose that the periods of F are integral (or
at least commesurable) to ﬁnd a U admitting a connection with F as the curvature.
Notice that if H 1(M, G) 6= 0, the picture E ⊂ CU contains more information
than the pair (Λ, F ) . The inequivalent choices of U together with a connection
correspond to the elements of the group H 1(M, G) (this group acts there freely
and transitively). The subgroup H 1(M, Z) ⊗ G corresponds to equivalent U ’s (with

4

ineqivalent connections); if G = U (1), even the quotient group may be nontrivial
(it is Tor H 2(M, Z)). These ambiguities are clearly connected with quantization.

A well known example is the following: Let the Monge cones on U be the light
cones of a Lorentzian metrics and suppose the vector ﬁeld uG generating the action
of G is spacelike. As a connection on U take the orthogonal complements of uG.
Then the wave diagrams are the (pseudo)spheres of a Lorentzian metrics on M .
This picture describes a charged relativistic particle and its antiparticle in an elmg.
ﬁeld given by the curvature of the connection.1 In the nonrelativistic limit the ﬁeld
uG becomes lightlike and the antiparticle disappears.

Let us look at Noether theorem. In the (Λ, F )-picture one takes as a symmetry

a vector ﬁeld v together with a function f satisfying

v(Λ) + F (v, .) + df = 0

(v(.) denotes the Lie derivative); then p(v) + f is constant on extremals. But
for E ⊂ CU we simply take a G-invariant vector ﬁeld on U preserving E. In fact
one easily sees the full statement of Noether theorem, claiming a 1-1 correspondence
between conservation laws and G-invariant contact ﬁelds on E modulo characteristic
ﬁelds.

4 A U(1)-bundle over the phase space and quan-

tization

Let us suppose that the characteristics in E form a manifold Ch.
It inherits a
contact structure. Notice that E is a G-bundle; we shall also suppose that the
group G acts nicely on Ch so that Ch becomes a G′-bundle where G′ = G/H and
H ⊂ G is discrete. Its base Ph = Ch/G′ is the phase space. Where the contact
hyperplanes on Ch may be used as a connection for Ch → Ph, the curvature is
the usual symplectic form on Ph. The points of Ph where this is impossible are
usually deleted and they should be regarded as ideal. For example, the full Ph of a
relativistic particle in 1+1-dimensions is on the following picture:

One half of the cylinder corresponds to particles, the other half to antiparticles and
the connecting lines to lightlike geodesics.

We see that there is a completely natural U (1)- or R -bundle Ch over the phase
space, together with a natural connection. It is important in the view of use of such
a bundle in quantization. Notice that Ch is even prior to Ph.

Let us now look at quantization using wave functions in M . This may have
nothing to do with quantum mechanics: we simply look for a wave equation that
leads to a given classical picture in a limit. Usually, one considers linear equations
1The connection dissects each light cone in U into two halfs. Thus the lightlike geodesics in U
(the characteristics) are (at least locally, and globally if there is a time orientation) divided into
3 classes; two of them are projected onto particles and antiparticles worldlines respectively, while
the curves in the third class are horizontal and they are projected onto lightlike geodesics in M .

5

Dhf = 0 (h being a parameter in D) and looks for the high-frequency asymptotics
as h → 0 and the wavelength is of order h. It is however much nicer if D is ﬁxed; an
outline of the theory was given at the end of Section 2. Thus let D be a G-invariant
linear diﬀ. operator on U . If we consider only G-equivariant functions (with the
weight 1/h), we get an operator Dh on the corresponding associated bundle.

For example, the Schroedinger equation comes from

1
2m

(cid:18)

△ + V (x, t)

ψ(x, t, s) = 0,

∂2
∂s2 +

∂2
∂s∂t (cid:19)

where s is the new coordinate (here U = M × R ): just notice that ∂/∂s becomes
i/~ for ψ with the weight 1/~.

Let E ⊂ CU be given by sD = 0 where sD is the symbol of D (notice that
the Monge cone in TxU is dual to the cone sD,x = 0 in T ∗
In the obvious
sense the equation Dhfh = 0 gives the classical E-theory as h → 0. For example,
take a (nonequivariant!) solution of Df = 0 with a singularity on a narrow strip
along a characteristic of E.
If we take the Fourier component fh for h → 0, it
is signiﬁcantly non-zero only close to the projection of the characteristic to M .
Perhaps an interesting point is that the equation Df = 0 contains Dhfh = 0 for
any h.

x U ).

Thus given E, quantization simply means a G-invariant D giving E by sD = 0.

Of course, the Monge cones of E have to be algebraic.

Finally, let us return to Ch → Ph. We have a situation typical to integral geom-
etry: Ch ← E → U . In geometrical quantization one considers sections of bundles
associated to Ch → Ph, but here we take all possible h’s at once, so we consider all
the functions on Ch instead. One should expect a correspondence between certain
such fuctions and functions on U satisfying Df = 0. A polarization on Ph gives
us a G-invariant Legendrean foliation (if it is real) or (if it is completely complex)
a G-invariant (codimension 1 and nondegenerate) CR-structure on Ch. The folia-
tion gives us a complete system of solution of the Jacobi–Hamilton equation. Thus
functions on Ch, constant on the leaves of the foliations, should correspond to solu-
tions of Df = 0 that are (integral) linear combinations of functions singular along
hypersurfaces in the complete system. The CR-case is somewhat more complicated.
The discussion above is useless in this complete generality (and several important

points were omitted), but it might be interesting for some classes of D’s.

5 Conclusion

In the present paper G was always 1-dimensional, but one can consider a principal
G bundle U → M and a hypersurface E ⊂ CU for another Lie group G. The
manifold Ch is still contact, but Ph = Ch/G is no longer symplectic; it carries only
an analogue of symplectic structure. Characterictics of E represent particles in a
Yang–Mills ﬁeld. We can also consider a G-invariant operator D : C∞(U ) → C∞(U ).
Suppose V is a G-module and the dual V ∗ contains a cyclic vector α. Let I be the
ideal in U (g) of elements annulating α. Then we can embed V into the regular
representation (namely onto functions annulated by I) via v 7→ α(gv). In this way
the functions on U annulated by I are sections of the vector bundle associated to
V . Thus D becomes an operator on these sections. We see the situation is quite
analogous to 1-dimensional G.

Perhaps the real problem is to go from extremal curves to surfaces and higher.

The problems with Lagrangians remain the same.

6

Acknowledgement
This work was partially supported by the grant GA ˇCR 201/96/0310.

References

1978.

1980.

1977.

York 1986.

[1] V.I. Arnold: Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, Springer, New York

[2] W. Burke: Spacetime, Geometry, Cosmology, Univ. Science Books, Mill Valley

[3] E. Cartan: Le¸cons sur la Invariants Int´egraux, Hermann, Paris 1922.

[4] V. Guillemin, S. Sternberg: Geometric Asymptotics, Providence, Rhode Island

[5] P. Olver: Applications of Lie Groups to Diﬀerential Equations, Springer, New

7

