8
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
h
t
a
m

[
 
 
1
v
4
4
0
2
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

February 24, 1998
physics/9802044

MIRROR SYMMETRY ON K3 SURFACES
AS A HYPERK ¨AHLER ROTATION

Ugo Bruzzo §‡ and Guido Sanguinetti ¶§

§ Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi Avanzati,
Via Beirut 2-4, 34014 Trieste, Italy

‡ Dipartimento di Matematica, Universit`a degli Studi
di Genova, Via Dodecaneso 35, 16146 Genova, Italy

¶ Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, Universit`a degli Studi
di Genova, Via Dodecaneso 33, 16146 Genova, Italy
E-mail: bruzzo@sissa.it, sanguine@sissa.it

Abstract. We show that under the hypotheses of [11], a mirror
partner of a K3 surface X with a ﬁbration in special Lagrangian tori can
be obtained by rotating the complex structure of X within its hyperk¨ahler
family of complex structures. Furthermore, the same hypotheses force the
B-ﬁeld to vanish.

1. Introduction

According to the proposal of Strominger, Yau and Zaslow [11], the mirror
partner of a K3 surface X admitting a ﬁbration in special Lagrangian tori
should be identiﬁed with the moduli space of such ﬁbrations (cf. also [7]). In
more precise terms, the mirror partner ˇX should be identiﬁed with a suitable
compactiﬁcation of the relative Jacobian of X ′, where X ′ is an elliptic K3
surface obtained by rotating the complex structure of X within its hyperk¨ahler
family of complex structures.

Morrison [10] suggested that such a compactiﬁcation is provided by the mod-
uli space of torsion sheaves of degree zero and pure dimension one supported by
the ﬁbers of X ′. (It should be noted that whenever the ﬁbration X ′ → P1 ad-
mits a holomorphic section, as it is usually assumed in the physical literature,
the complex manifolds X ′ and ˇX turn out to be isomorphic). In [1] Morrison’s
suggestion was implemented, and it was shown that the relative Fourier-Mukai
transform deﬁned by the Poincar´e sheaf on the ﬁber product X ′ ×P1 ˇX enjoys
1

some good properties related to mirror symmetry; e.g., it correctly maps D-
branes in X to D-branes in ˇX, preserves the masses of the BPS states, etc.
(The fact that the Fourier-Mukai transform might describe some aspects of
mirror symmetry was already suggested in [3].)

It remains to check that ˇX is actually a mirror of X in the sense of Dol-
gachev and Gross-Wilson, cf. [2, 5, 4]. In this note we show that this is indeed
the case. Roughly speaking, we prove that whenever X admits a ﬁbration in
special Lagrangian tori with a section, and also admits an elliptic mirror ˇX
with a section,1 then the complex structure of ˇX is obtained by that of X
by redeﬁning the B-ﬁeld and then performing a hyperk¨ahler rotation. A more
precise statement is as follows. Let M be a primitive sublattice of the standard
2-cohomology lattice of a K3 surface, and denote by KM the moduli space of
pairs (X, j), where X is a K3 surface, and j : M → Pic(X) is a primitive lattice
embedding. Let T = M ⊥. We assume that T contains a U(1) lattice P ; this
means that the generic K3 surface X in KM , possibly after a rotation of its
complex structure within its hyperk¨ahler family, admits a ﬁbration in special
Lagrangian tori with a section. After setting ˇM = T /P , we assume that the
generic K3 surface in K ˇM is elliptic and has a section. These hypotheses force
the B-ﬁeld to be an integral class. Then, by setting to zero this class (as it
seems to be suggested by the physics, since in string theory the B-ﬁeld is a
class in H 2(X, R/Z)), and rotating the complex structure of X within its hy-
perk¨ahler family of complex structures, we associate to X ∈ KM a K3 surface
ˇX in K ˇM such that Pic( ˇX) ≃ ˇM.

2. Special Lagrangian fibrations and mirror K3 surfaces

We collect here, basically relying on [6, 9, 2, 5], some basic deﬁnitions and

constructions about mirror families of K3 surfaces.

Special Lagrangian submanifolds. Let X be an n-dimensional K¨ahler man-
ifold with K¨ahler form ω, and suppose that on X there is a nowhere vanish-
ing holomorphic n-form Ω. One says that a real n-dimensional submanifold
ι : Y ֒→ X is special Lagrangian if ι∗ω = 0, and Ω can be chosen so that
the form ι∗ℜe Ω coincides with the volume form of Y . The moduli space of
deformations of Y through special Lagrangian submanifolds was described in
[9].

Let n = 2, assume that X is hyperk¨ahler with Riemannian metric g, and
choose basic complex structures I, J, and K. These generate an S2 of complex
structures compatible with the Riemannian metric of X, which we shall call
the hyperk¨ahler family of complex structures of X.

1These are the same assumptions made in [11] on physical grounds.

2

Denote by ωI, ωJ and ωK the K¨ahler forms corresponding to the complex
structures I, J and K. The 2-form ΩI = ωJ + i ωK never vanishes, and is holo-
morphic with respect to I. Thus, submanifolds of X that are special Lagrangian
with respect to I, are holomorphic with respect to J (this is a consequence of
Wirtinger’s theorem, cf. [6]). If X is a complex K3 surface that admits a fo-
liation by special Lagrangian 2-tori (in the complex structure I), then in the
complex structure J it is an elliptic surface, p : X ′ → P1. If one wants X to be
compact then one must allow the ﬁbration p : X ′ → P1 to have some singular
ﬁbers, cf. [8].

Mirror families of K3 surfaces [2]. Let L denote the lattice over Z

L = U(1) ⊥ U(1) ⊥ U(1) ⊥ E8 ⊥ E8
(by “lattice over Z” we mean as usual a free ﬁnitely generated Z-module
equipped with a symmetric Z-valued quadratic form). If X is a K3 surface, the
group H 2(X, Z) equipped with the cohomology intersection pairing is a lattice
isomorphic to L.

If M is an even nondegenerate lattice of signature (1, t), a M-polarized K3
surface is a pair (X, j), where X is a K3 surface and j : M → Pic(X) is a
primitive lattice embedding. One can deﬁne a coarse moduli space KM of M-
polarized K3 surfaces; this is a quasi-projective algebraic variety of dimension
19 − t, and may be obtained by taking a quotient of the space
⊗ C) | Ω · Ω = 0, Ω · ¯Ω > 0(cid:9)

DM = (cid:8)CΩ ∈ P(M

⊥

by a discrete group ΓM (which is basically the group of isometries of L that ﬁx
all elements of M) [2].

A basic notion to introduce the mirror moduli space to KM is that of ad-
missible m-vector. We shall consider here only the case m = 1. Let us pick a
primitive sublattice M of L of signature (1, t).

Deﬁnition 2.1. A 1-admissible vector E ∈ M ⊥ is an isotropic vector in M ⊥
such that there exists another isotropic vector E′ ∈ M ⊥ with E · E′ = 1.

After setting

ˇM = E⊥/ZE
one easily shows that there is an orthogonal decomposition M ⊥ = P ⊕ ˇM ,
where P is the hyperbolic lattice generated by E and E′. The orthogonal of
E is taken here in M ⊥. The mirror moduli space to KM is the space K ˇM . Of
course one has

dim KM + dim K ˇM = 20 .
The operation of taking the “mirror moduli space” is a duality, i.e. ˇˇM ≃ M
(this works so because we consider the case of a 1-admissible vector, and is no
longer true for m > 1).

3

The interplay between special Lagrangian ﬁbrations and mirror K3 surfaces.
Let again M be an even nondegenerate lattice of signature (1, t), and suppose
that X is K3 surface such that Pic(X) ≃ M. The transcendental lattice T (the
orthogonal complement of Pic(X) in H 2(X, Z)) is an even lattice of signature
(2, 19 − t). Let Ω = x + i y be a nowhere vanishing, global holomorphic two-
form on X. Being orthogonal to all algebraic classes, the cohomology class
of Ω spans a space-like 2-plane in T ⊗ R. The moduli space of K3 such that
Pic(X) ≃ M is parametrized by the periods, whose real and imaginary parts
are given by intersection with x and y, respectively. Indeed, one should recall
that if we ﬁx a basis of the cohomology lattice H 2(X, Z) given by integral
cycles αi, i = 1, . . . , 22, every complex structure on X is uniquely determined,
via Torelli’s theorem, by the complex valued matrix whose entries ̟i are given
by the intersections of the cycles αi with the class of the holomorphic two-form
Ω, i.e. ̟i = αi · Ω. This shows that generically neither x nor y are integral
classes in the cohomology ring. However, if we make the further request that
there is a 1-admissible vector in T , and make some choices, one of the two
classes is forced to be integral.

We recall now a result from [5] (although in a slightly weaker form).

Proposition 2.2. There exists in T a 1-admissible vector if and only if there
is a complex structure on X such that X has a special Lagrangian ﬁbration with
a section.

So we consider on X a complex structure satisfying this property (it follows
from [5] that this complex structure belongs to the same hyperk¨ahler family as
the starting one). As a direct consequence we have

Proposition 2.3. If there exists a 1-admissible vector in T one can perform a
hyperk¨ahler rotation of the complex structure and choose a nowhere vanishing
two-form Ω, holomorphic in the new complex structure, whose real part ℜe Ω
is integral.

Proof. By Proposition 1.3 of [5] the existence of a 1-admissible vector implies
the existence on X of a special Lagrangian ﬁbration with a section. On the
other hand by [6] what is special Lagrangian in a complex structure is holo-
morphic in the complex structure in which the K¨ahler form is given by ℜe Ω.
Thus in this complex structure the Picard group is nontrivial, which implies
that the surface is algebraic, i.e. ℜe Ω is integral.

3. The construction

We introduce now a moduli space ˜KM parametrizing M-polarized K3 sur-
faces together with of a 1-admissible vector in T = M ⊥. The generic K3
4

surface X in ˜KM admits a ﬁbration in special Lagrangian tori with a section;
the primitive U(1) sublattice P of the transcendental lattice T associated with
the 1-admissible vector is generated by the class of the ﬁber and the class of the
section. We ﬁx a marking2 of X, i.e., a lattice isomorphism ψ : H 2(X, Z) → L.
We have an isomorphism

L ≃ M ⊕ P ⊕ ˇM ,
where ˇM = T /P . The fact that ˇˇM ≃ M implies that the moduli spaces ˜KM
and ˜K ˇM are isomorphic. Generically, we may assume that M ≃ ψ(Pic(X)).

One easily shows that the following assumptions are generically equivalent
to each other (where “generically” means that this holds true for X in a dense
open subset of ˜KM ):

(i) The lattice ˇM contains a primitive U(1) sublattice P ′.
(ii) The generic K3 surface in the mirror moduli space K ˇM is an elliptic

ﬁbration with a section.

(iii) X carries two ﬁbrations in special Lagrangian tori admitting a section,

in such a way that the corresponding U(1) lattices P , P ′ are orthogonal.3

The two U(1) lattices P and P ′ are interchanged by an isometry of L. Thus,
the operation of exchanging them has no eﬀect on the moduli space KM (al-
though it does on DM ).

We shall assume one of these equivalent conditions. The form (ii) of the sec-
ond condition shows that we are working exactly under the same assumptions
that in [11] are advocated on physical grounds.

In the complex structure of X we have ﬁxed at the outset we have the K¨ahler
form ω and the holomorphic two-form Ω = x + i y, with x an integral class.
Condition (iii) means that P ′ is calibrated by x. If we perform a rotation around
the y axis, mapping the pair (ω, x) to (x, −ω), we still obtain an algebraic K3
surface X ′ whose Picard group contains P ′ [5].

Now we want to show that the K¨ahler class of X ′ is a space-like vector
contained in the hyperbolic lattice P ′. We remind here that the explicit mirror
map in [2] and [5] is given in terms of a choice of a hyperbolic sublattice of the
transcendental lattice. Let DM be deﬁned as in Section 2, and let
TM = {B + i ω ∈ M ⊗ C | ω · ω > 0} = M × V (M)+ .
Here V (M)+ is the component of the positive cone in M ⊗ R that contains the
K¨ahler form of X. The space TM can be regarded as a (covering of the) moduli
space of ‘ ‘complexiﬁed K¨ahler structures” on X. Let M ′ = T /P ′ ≃ ˇM . By [5]
Proposition 1.1, the mirror map is an isomorphism

φ : TM ′ → DM ,
2Since we are ﬁxing a marking of X in the following we shall often confuse the lattices

H 2(X, Z) and L.

3Then one shows that the direct sum P ⊕ P ′ is an orthogonal summand of T .

5

φ( ˇB + iˇω) = ˇB + E′ + 1

2(ˇω · ˇω − ˇB · ˇB)E + i (ˇω − (ˇω · ˇB)E) .

Here E and E′ are the two isotropic generators of the U(1) lattice P ′, while
ˇB is what the physicists call the B-ﬁeld. Our holomorphic two-form Ω is of
course of the form φ( ˇB + iˇω) for suitable ˇB and ˇω, since φ is an isomorphism.
The K¨ahler class of X ′ is given by

x = ℜe Ω = ˇB + E

′

+ 1

2 (ˇω · ˇω − ˇB · ˇB)E

and the new global holomorphic two-form is −ω + iy. Since ˇB is orthogonal to
E and E′, it is an integral class.

However, the Picard lattice of the K3 surface X ′ is generically not isomorphic
to ˇM . A better choice is suggested by the physics. Indeed in most string theory
models the B-ﬁeld is regarded as a Chern-Simons term, namely, as a class in
H 2(X, R/Z); so, if we consider the projection λ : H 2(X, R) → H 2(X, R/Z), the
relevant moduli space should be

˜TM ′ = λ(M ′ ⊗ R) × V (M ′)+
instead of TM ′. To take this suggestion into account we set ˇB = 0. Since
y = ˇω − (ˇω · ˇB)E, this changes the complex structure in X ′. Moreover, x lies
now in P ′.

So, let us now consider the intersection of P ⊗R with the spacelike two-plane
hΩi spanned by Ω. This cannot be trivial, since P is hyperbolic and T ⊗ R is
of signature (2, 19 − t). So we have a real space-like class in P ⊗ R ∩ hΩi that is
orthogonal to x by construction and thus must be equal (up to a scalar factor)
to y. But then, in the complex structure in which the K¨ahler form is given by
x, all the cycles of ˇM are orthogonal to the new holomorphic two-form, given
by ω + iy, and therefore are algebraic. (Notice that the class y is not integral.)

A ﬁrst conclusion we may draw is that the hypotheses of [11] force the B-
ﬁeld to be integral, namely, to be zero as a class ˇB ∈ H 2(X, R/Z). Moreover,
starting from a K3 surface X in ˜KM , the construction in the previous section
singles out a point in the variety ˜K ˇM ; so we have established a map

4. Conclusions

µ : ˜KM → ˜K ˇM

which is bijective by construction, and deserves to be the called the mirror
map. This map consists in setting ˇB to zero (as a class in H 2(X, Z)) and then
performing a hyperk¨ahler rotation.

If we do not set ˇB to zero, we obtain a family of K3 surfaces, labelled by
the possible values of ˇB ∈ M ′ ≃ ˇM . Its counterpart under mirror symmetry
is a family of K3 surfaces labelled by M. The two families are related by a
hyperk¨ahler rotation.

6

Acknowledgements. We thank C. Bartocci, I. Dolgachev and D. Her-
n´andez Ruip´erez for useful comments and discussions. This work was partly
supported by Ministero dell’Universit`a e della Ricerca Scientiﬁca e Tecnologica
through the research project “Geometria reale e complessa.”

References

[1] Bartocci, C., Bruzzo, U., Hern´andez Ruip´erez, D., and Mu˜noz Porras, J.M., Mirror
symmetry on K3 surfaces via Fourier-Mukai transform, alg-geom/9704023 (to appear
in Commun. Math. Phys.).

[2] Dolgachev, I.V., Mirror symmetry for lattice polarized K3 surfaces, alg-geom/9502005.
and ALE instantons,
[3] Douglas, M.R.,

and Moore, G., D-branes,

quivers,

hep-th/9603167.

[4] Gross, M., Special Lagrangian ﬁbrations I: Topology, alg-geom/9710006.
[5] Gross, M., and Wilson, P.M.H., Mirror symmetry via 3-tori for a class of Calabi-Yau

threefolds, alg-geom/9608004.

[6] Harvey, R., and Lawson Jr.,H.B, Calibrated geometries, Acta Math. 148 (1982), 47–157.
[7] Hitchin, N., The moduli space of special Lagrangian submanifolds, dg-ga/9711002.
[8] Kodaira, K., On complex analytic surfaces, II, Ann. Math. 77 (1963), 563–626.
[9] McLean, R.C., Deformations of calibrated submanifolds, Texas A&M University

[10] Morrison, D.R., The geometry underlying mirror symmetry, alg-geom/9608006.
[11] Strominger, A., Yau, S.-T., and Zaslow, E., Mirror symmetry is T-duality, Nucl. Phys.

Preprint, 1996.

B479 (1996), 243–259.

7

