UNIVERSAL CONCEPT OF COMPLEXITY
BY THE DYNAMIC REDUNDANCE PARADIGM:

Causal Randomness, Complete Wave Mechanics,
and the Ultimate Unification of Knowledge

Andrei  P.  Kirilyuk*
Institute of Metal Physics, Kiev

8
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
0
3
 
 
 
2
0
0
6
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p

Abstract.  This  is  a  brief,  non-technical  presentation  of  the  main  results  of  a  book  with  the  same  title  in
which a new, rigorously defined concept of dynamic complexity is introduced and it is shown that it gives
the  complete  and  absolutely  universal  description  of  both  representative  particular  cases  of  complex
dynamics  and  arbitrary  dynamical  system  behaviour.  This  crucial  extension  with  respect  to  the  existing
concepts  is  achieved  due  to  a  new,  universally  modified  form  of  arbitrary  dynamic  equations,  avoiding  the
usual limitations of the essentially perturbative, one-dimensional approach of the canonical, linear (unitary)
science  (including  any  superficially  defined,  integrable  'nonlinearities').  This  modified  description  shows
that  an  equation  describing  any  real  behaviour  with  more  than  one  effective  dimension  possesses  many
solutions,  each  of  them  being  complete  in  the  usual  sense  and  approximately  equivalent  to  some  ordinary,
'exact' solution of the linear science. Therefore these elementary complete solutions, called realisations, are
incompatible  among  them  and,  being  equivalent  and  thus  equally  probable,  permanently  and
spontaneously  replace  one  another.  This  discovery,  referred  to  as  the  dynamic  redundance  paradigm,
provides a qualitatively new understanding of the notion of existence itself and universally explains all the
known  patterns  of  dynamic  behaviour  within  the  ensuing  single  concept.  It  provides,  in  particular,  the
causal,  dynamically  based  and  consistent  definition  of  randomness  and  probability  (or  fundamental
dynamic  uncertainty),  which  appear  in  a  closed,  independent  and  irreducible  form,  and  therefore  are
omnipresent.  Being  applied  at  the  level  of  micro-objects,  this  concept  gives  the  physically  realistic,
complete  extension  of  quantum  mechanics,  equivalent  to  the  full  version  of  de  Broglie's  double  solution,
amplified  with  the  inherent  dynamical  chaos  and  intrinsically  unified  by  its  very  origin  with  the  extended,
causal  interpretations  of  'special  and  general  relativity',  'quantum  gravity',  'field  theory',  'particle  physics'
and  cosmology.  Among  the  numerous  emerging  particular  results  one  can  mention  the  realistic  and
universal  interpretation  of  inertial  mass-energy,  inseparable  from  its  gravitational  interpretation,  and
physically  real  space  and  time.  This  also  permits  one  to  consistently  describe  the  exact  physical,  realistic
nature  of  an  elementary  particle,  in  full  agreement  between  its  known  empirical  manifestations  and
(extended)  mathematical  presentation.  The  ensuing  intrinsic  unification  of  knowledge  is  further  extended
to  higher  'levels  of  complexity'  including  any  dynamical  system  and  their  full  ensemble  which  forms  the
omnipresent,  fractally  structured  hierarchy  of  dynamic  complexity  of  the  world,  completely  described  by
the  resulting  'science  of  complexity'.  This  is  expressed,  in  particular,  by  the  obtained  unified  formalism  of
the  generalised  Hamilton-Jacobi  equation  with  the  accompanying  'multivalued'  and  probabilistic
interpretation  that  gives,  in  the  corresponding  limit,  the  extended,  complex-dynamical  version  of  any
equation  describing  a  real  process.  This  single  universal  equation  of  the  science  of  complexity  is  based  on
the  equally  unique  and  universal  principle,  the  complexity  conservation  law  (or  the  universal  symmetry  of
complexity)  which  is  confirmed  by  all  known  observations.  It  combines  and  considerably  extends  such
canonical  principles  as  ordinary  conservation  laws  (energy,  momentum,  electric  charge,  etc.),  the  second
law of thermodynamics, the 'principle of relativity', and various versions of the 'variational principle' (least
action,  minimum  potential  energy,  etc.).  Practically  each  basic  concept  of  the  canonical  science  acquires,
within  the  science  of  complexity,  its  crucial,  causally  dynamic  extension  and  realistic  completion,  and
among  them  randomness  (and  the  related  probability,  event,  uncertainty,  unpredictability,  instability),
dynamical  chaos,  structure  and  its  'spontaneous'  formation  (creation),  irreversibility  and  discreteness,
fractality,  time  and  space,  nonlinearity  and  interaction  (entanglement),  (non)separability,  (non)integrability,
general  solution  (completeness).  Finally,  the  intrinsic  unification  of  all  the  diverse  fields  of  the  canonical
knowledge,  in  their  extended  versions,  is  outlined  and  demonstrated  for  various  real  problems  from
different  fields  including  the  humanities  and  theology  at  the  highest  perceived  levels  of  the  universal
hierarchy  of  complexity.  The  universal  science  of  complexity  provides  a  qualitatively  new  type  of
knowledge,  ultimately  unified  and  inseparable  from  the  reality  it  reflects.  Many  practically  important
conclusions  are  deduced  and  others  are  outlined.

*Address for correspondence: Post Box 115 (203/8), Kiev - 30, Ukraine 252030.
E-mail  address:  kiril@metfiz.freenet.kiev.ua.

2

Prologue:  The  End

Complexity,  nonlinearity,  chaos,  self-organisation,  criticality...  The  flood  of  stylish  words,
pretentious publications, and advanced study centres originates from a new hope to create the unified
science of complexity and explain at last everything within a single approach reproducing the intrinsic
unity of Nature. However, the proposed concepts fail, one after another, and the predicted universality
definitely escapes the most sophisticated developments of the mechanistic science including the highest
supercomputer powers (Horgan 1995).

But the Universal Truth has seemed to be so close, with its vague contours already emerging from
the disappearing mist of ignorance, and it remains the more attractive the more it resists to the massive
attacks of the heavily armed formalism. Something qualitatively new is needed to see it, something
fundamentally different, universal and therefore probably not so intricate in its form. One does not need
a sophisticated key to open a tricky lock, the entrance is free, one just needs another vision to see it. The
Truth reveals itself only to those who already have the germ of it inside their minds.

In the meanwhile, the canonical, or linear, science has entered the phase of absolute and helpless
stagnation which is only emphasised by the growing success of certain its practical applications. The life
of an idea does not stop with its discovery and scientific elaboration, it is simply transformed from a
fundamental revelation into a practically useful instrument. There are now only two contrasting types of
observations, separated by an abyss: those considered to be perfectly understood and successfully used
and those which cannot be understood at all despite the truly gigantic efforts applied and independent of
their possible practical use. The rupture between the two is so unreasonably insuperable that it seems
sometimes to be irrational.

This  is  the  End  of  Science,  the  complete  saturation  of  the  canonical,  mechanistic,  unitary
(linear) science that we knew until now, since it represents practically all the existing knowledge that is
ordered enough to be classified as science (cf. Horgan (1996)).

The sophistication of modern electronics exceeds systematically any imagination, but the operation
of elementary natural machines, like living cells, remains far beyond the possibilities of science. The
simplest viruses are merely big organic molecules, but they can already do what none of the artificial
machines can - reproduce themselves by their own functioning - and all the power of modern science
fails to control their single species.

Still much more simple, physical systems also easily escape the proclaimed omnipotence of the
scholar science: although many people have become prosperous due to the astronomical investments into
the field of high-temperature superconductivity, its mechanism remains unclear, after many years of very
intensive investigation. The novelties in this and many other fields of physics appear as a result of a
purely  empirical,  intuitive  search  resembling  the  more  and  more  a  modern  version  of  the  glorious
alchemy. And where are the promised and generously sponsored inexhaustible sources of energy, like
the controlled nuclear fusion, or the really intelligent, 'thinking' computers? There is the whole list of the
announced scientific miracles that have evidently crashed upon the same barrier of cognition, clearly
seen now, after the initial period of apparently 'promising' development.

Finally, at the very basement of the universe we find the same impenetrable barrier, resisting to all
human forces. The mysteries of quantum mechanics remain as unsolvable as they were at its origin, over
70 years ago, but now they are provocatively  puzzling.  The  announced  'Great  Unifications'  of  the
elements of Being and Theories of Everything are transformed into a gibberish of artificial, abstract
symbols where everything is indeed possible, as they are irreducibly separated from reality. The famous
'unreasonable  effectiveness  of  mathematics  in  the  physical  sciences'  has  been  transformed  into
something  simply  unreasonable,  effectiveness  left  apart.  It  is  clearly  demonstrated  by  the  easily
performed  comparison  between  the  enormous  volumes  and  generous  support  of  directions  like
'mathematical physics' and the total absence of a consistent, physically sound solution to any nontrivial
real problem they are supposed to induce.

The clear functional signs of profound corruption are accumulating behind the technocratically
maintained facade of the official science: omnipresent mediocrity and the true scientific parasitism;
organised  groups  of  dealers  fighting  for  their  personal  promotion  and  using  all  kind  of  heavily
formalised,  'scientifically  looking'  imitations  of  truth;  proliferating  unlimited  'blurring'  of  the
indispensable and formerly firm ethical norms, - such are typical tendencies of degradation, consuming
the whole institutions and fields of knowledge and emphasised by many serious and variously 'oriented'
professionals in science and beyond (e. g. Maddox (1995a,b), Berezin (1996), Braben (1996), Farge
(1996), Gross, Levitt, and Lewis (1996), Sangalli (1996), Ziman (1996), Bricmont (1997), Lawrence
and Locke (1997), Sokal and Bricmont (1997), Wenneras and Wold (1997)).

3
Probably the most meaningful and impressive sign of death of the canonical science, somehow
summarising all the particular features of its stagnation, is the clearly seen loss of interest in it from
various people, represented both by narrow specialists and the general public, by society in the whole
and individual enthusiasts. It is as useless to try to reanimate artificially the interest in the dead canonical
science as that science itself. The impasse of that scale cannot be avoided just by mechanically pumping
milliards into the straightforward attack and formal publicity campaigns, while this does produce enough
harm by attracting too much force from the search for a qualitatively new approach that could alone lead
to an issue. For an issue always exists, but this time it can be found only within quite a new type of
thinking whose universality should comprise, by definition, at least the whole diversity of the existing
knowledge.

The End of Science is just a particular manifestation of the overall saturation in the civilisation
development.  Indeed,  who  can  seriously  believe  that  such  fundamental  conflict  in  the  knowledge
acquisition is closed within itself? After all, everything in human activity is the search for knowledge,
irrespective of the accepted definition of science.

The economical, social, and cultural development of the world, as it is directly represented by the
state of the 'developed' countries, has attained the same stage of fundamental local exhaustion as the
scientific progress. It is characterised by the obvious global stagnation, the absence of a well-defined
general direction in the dynamics of a system, this indispensable sign of its progressive development.
Moreover,  the  decadent,  descending  motion,  inevitably  replacing  the  absent  progress,  is  clearly
discernible in the modern world dynamics.

The resulting End of History (cf. Fukuyama (1992)) manifests itself as the apparent absence of
'historical', qualitatively big events and not less obvious impossibility to initiate them within the current
mode d'existence. The World has become 'lazy' and indifferent, it likes the show, the spectacle, but not
the participation in the real events, whatever their contents is. The world of 'general consumption'
cannot propose any genuine event in principle, it flickers around 'comfort' attained by 'arrangements'
and opposed to the true creation and event emergence. Proclaiming the refusal from 'bad' events, it
rejects in reality any event, and thus any real progress that can only be based on the irreducible, 'big'
creation,  in  science  as  well  as  in  life  in  general.  Mediocre,  treacherous  tendencies  dominate  the
individual and collective behaviours at all scales.

The End of Morals and the related End of Belief, either religious, or ideological, or involving
any other general conviction, stem from the same root. The deceptive replacement of morals with the
abstract,  absolute  liberty-equality  detached  from  any  preferred  choice,  and  of  belief  with  a  crude
fanaticism, only emphasize the reality of the End. In any living, developing system the necessary initial
liberty is inseparable from its auto-limitation by a subsequent properly made choice; liberty of a living
world means the freedom to choose its proper limitations leading to progressive changes that should
indeed  be  realised  in  order  to  pass  to  a  higher  level  of  freedom  (complexity),  with  the  new  really
performed choices, etc. It was always happening in this way in the most prosperous societies, provided
they were not at their End. From the other hand, any most fervent belief can realise its goals only when
it is creative, and creativity necessary implies much freedom.

The End of Art is the result of the related depletion of the 'free space' in the higher spheres of
human imagination, which is especially similar to the End of Science. Everything that could be created,
said  and  figured  out  at  the  current  level  has  already  been  realised,  only  the  details  can  be  varied
infinitely.

All  the  related  aspects  of  the  End  appear  in  the  form  of  profound,  hopeless  indifference  and
corruption  of  values,  omnipresent  unlimited  mediocrity,  cynicism  and  ultimate  simplification,
irrespective of the artificially maintained quality of the 'facades'. Inside all the games of words and
instinctive self-protections, the dwellers of the End know well that they have nothing more to propose
and seriously believe in, and many even guess that they can never return to the previous unconditional
faith and 'expected' type of truth.

The End cannot be simply cured or destroyed, it is a state of destruction and a remedy itself. The
local End, the exhaustion of the current level of development, can be surpassed only by transition to a
new, qualitatively different stage of development; or else it will inevitably become the definite, absolute
End of the completely exhausted civilisation, followed by the unavoidable demolition, and the universal
development will restart again from lower levels, here or somewhere else.

The  current  End  of  Science  can  give  rise  to  a  new,  much  more  extended  type  of  scientific
knowledge, provided those who are involved are ready to welcome and develop the change that will
necessarily be both progressive and dramatic in its contents and character. In fact, this new type of
knowledge can only be the Universal Science of Complexity understood as the Omniscience, a really
omnipotent  Theory  of  Everything,  unifying  in  principle  all  human  knowledge,  and  not  only  the

4
fundamentals of physics or conventionally interpreted sciences of 'exact' type. Everything that is less
than this Ultimate Unification of Knowledge will not stop the End, since it will necessarily belong to the
existing,  conventional  knowledge  formed  from  portions  of  quasi-continuous  logical  chains  with
incomprehensible ruptures among them, so strikingly opposed to the unified harmony of Natural Being.
All  the  basic  potentialities  of  that  'half-conscious'  state  of  scientific  knowledge  have  already  been
explored, and the result is the End.

Due to its universality, the Science of Complexity is also a way to the next big stage of the general
development  passing  by  the  unique  issue  from  the  decadence  of  the  local  End  that  dangerously
approaches now to its global, catastrophic version. This new type of science cannot be only a 'classified
stock of knowledge', it is a new 'way of thinking' and the ensuing new way of living for everybody.
One  cannot  avoid  this  mentally  based  Revolution  of  Complexity  which  relates  inseparably  all  the
'degrees of freedom' of the civilisation and is the Beginning of a new level of consciousness. The latter
has been anticipated by many, in various forms, but now it should be specified and implemented into the
real life, in a well understood and unified form, which is actually unique as such.

This work introduces the Universal Science of Complexity. Contrary to other existing attempts,
remaining  fundamentally  within  the  same  general  approach  of  the  canonical  science  and  therefore
condemned  to  failure,  we  start  with  a  new  paradigm,  representing  that  'something  absolutely  new'
which seems to be indispensable for the successful unification. This is the paradigm of the dynamic
redundance, or fundamental multivaluedness of dynamical functions (FMDF), naturally emerging in the
formal  description  of  any  dynamic  behaviour  as  the  universal  extension  of  the  essential  single-
valuedness, artificially imposed by the canonical, mechanistic way of thinking and directly related to its
dynamically linear, effectively one-dimensional analysis.

The discovered dynamic multivaluedness leads to the universal concept of dynamic complexity.
Not only it provides the complete description of complex behaviour of any real system, but also reveals
the  global  structure  of  the  world  as  the  integral  hierarchical  tree  of  levels  of  complex  dynamics
characterised, instead of ruptures, by the intrinsic dynamical  randomness which leads to permanent
appearance and growth of new branches, rendering this universal arborescence of complexity 'alive'.

We start with the mathematical analysis of the simplest physical systems introducing the new
paradigm and representing the lowest levels of the universal complexity, then extend the description to
the arbitrary complex behaviour, and finally outline some applications to higher levels of complexity,
including the highest levels of human activity directly involving the global transition of the Revolution of
Complexity.

Whereas further development of various particular directions of the science of complexity is
certainly implied by the necessarily brief outline presented in this work, we emphasize the irreducible
conceptual  basis  of  the  Universal  Science  of  Complexity,  proposed  in  the  form  of  the  dynamic
redundance paradigm together with its main consequences, and their fundamental uniqueness.

That is the Way from the End to the Beginning.

Universal  Science  of  Complexity:  Main  Results

5

This work introduces and develops a new, universal method of the conscious comprehension of
reality providing the objective, completely causal and exhaustive description of the world in general and
any its particular phenomenon (Kirilyuk 1997). The method is based on the naturally appearing concept
of the universal dynamic complexity which is applied to the rigorous analysis of dynamical systems of
various origins and levels. In this way one obtains the outline of the universal science of complexity,
after a number of recent unsuccessful attempts to create it (Horgan 1995). This nontrivial result is
possible only due to the new interpretation of the main dynamic equations that does not use any intuitive
assumptions, or artificial additions to the existing formalism, but naturally extends it to its full meaning,
largely reduced in the canonical interpretation by application of various versions of 'perturbation theory'.
Namely,  it  is  shown  that  if  one  avoids,  in  a  universally  applicable  fashion,  the  usual
simplifications of perturbation theory, then practically any dynamic equation describing a nontrivial
interaction  process  with  more  than  one  effective  dimension  demonstrates  fundamental  dynamical
splitting into many equally possible and qualitatively similar, but quantitatively different, 'integrable'
versions,  each  of  them  corresponding  to  a  'possibility',  called  realisation,  for  the  real  process  in
question. Only one of those possibilities-realisations can actually appear at any particular moment, since
each of them is generally equivalent to the ordinary 'complete' solution, and therefore the realisations are
definitely incompatible among them forming a (dynamically) redundant set. This leads to the quite new
picture  of  reality  where  it  is  obtained  as  a  hierarchy  of  possible  states  (realisations)  permanently
replacing one another at various scales and in different regimes, which gives the observed variety of
always intrinsically unstable, probabilistic forms and types of behaviour. The probabilistic realisation
'switch' gives rise also to the property of time characterising the rate of their change (see also below).

This picture reveals the fundamental origin, and meaning, of randomness in the world emerging as
a purely dynamic, deterministically based phenomenon of redundant multivaluedness, which provides
the causal dynamic foundation for the concept of probability, and a practical method of theoretical
calculation of probabilities, in principle, in arbitrary case. Despite any external illusions of stability and
order, the world is definitely represented now as a process of permanent spontaneous (i. e. essentially
unpredictable and irreversible) change, both in every its part and as a whole; it is only (chaotic) change
that can be permanent,  and  only  randomness  that  can  be  ordered.  In  fact,  the  extended  notion  of
dynamical chaos, applicable to any kind of system and expressing the complexity of its dynamics, is just
equivalent to that partially ordered randomness of purely dynamic origin.

These  fundamental  conclusions  are  rigorously  deduced  from  the  first-principle,  causal,  and
technically simple analysis of dynamic equations of a very general form, and also demonstrated for the
most important particular cases, such as the Schrödinger equation in quantum mechanics (Kirilyuk
1995a,b,  1996).  The  resulting  'method  of  effective  dynamical  functions'  (Kirilyuk  1992)  is  a
generalisation of the elementary 'method of substitution of variables' in the form of the well-known
'optical potential method' (e. g. Dederichs (1972)), but avoiding the usual perturbative reduction of the
latter which just 'kills' all the complexity-multivaluedness. In the full, complex-dynamical version of the
method  the  key  property  of  dynamic  redundance  appears  as  a  result  of  the  essentially  nonlinear,
multivalued dependence of the effective interaction potential on the eigenvalues to be found which
physically  corresponds  to  the  universally  defined  self-sustained  feedback  'loops'  of  the  unreduced
interaction processes leading to the global instability with respect to multiple realisation formation (see
also below). This essential dependence of the potential on the quantities to be found is absent in the
ordinary  truncated,  perturbative  formulations,  where  the  unknown  eigenvalues  occur  only  at  one,
canonical position, which leads to a single-valued (effectively one-dimensional) solution. The crucial
qualitative advance of our approach with respect to the ordinary perturbational reduction is attained due
to a particular combination of the exact expression of those essential  dependences  responsible  for
dynamical splitting into multiple realisations with an unavoidable approximate estimate of qualitatively
less important relations (they also play an irreducible role for the development of the secondary, fine
structure of complexity in the form of its fractal structure, see below).

We call this new concept dynamic  redundance  paradigm (or fundamental multivaluedness of
dynamical functions (FMDF), or fundamental dynamic uncertainty). It is equivalent to the concept of
universal dynamic complexity, since the latter is naturally determined by a strictly increasing function of
the number of realisations, equal to zero in the exceptional case when a system has only one realisation,
which means also that it is regular. It is only that, actually pathological, kind of system and behaviour
which is exclusively described by the canonical, or linear (mechanistic), or unitary science, dismissing
all  the  realisations  of  a  system  but  one  by  the  explicit  or  implicit  reduction  within  a  version  of
perturbation theory (irrespective of any superficially defined algebraic or geometric 'nonlinearity' and
empirically fixed randomness).

6

In  particular,  practically  all  the  previous  attempts  to  introduce  (dynamic)  randomness  and
complexity  have  been  performed  within  the  single-valued  paradigm  of  the  canonical  science,  and
therefore are inevitably reduced to their artificial insertion à la deus ex machina, e. g. in the form of
basically unknown and indefinite 'influences' of either external 'environment', or internal 'deeper levels'
of reality formally described as ambiguous 'nonlinearity', 'decoherence', or artificial 'coarse-graining'
(see also below). One should clearly distinguish that kind of 'scientifically looking' and often technically
'sophisticated',  but  logically  elementary,  trickery  around  'science  of  complexity'  from  its  causally
irreducible, logically consistent and completely transparent introduction which is absolutely unavoidable
for such qualitatively new level of comprehension of reality, as it is demonstrated once more by the
dynamic multivaluedness paradigm.

The new paradigm universally resolves also the problem of (non)integrability, since it becomes
clear that every regular, effectively one-dimensional case with one, and only one realisation corresponds
to an integrable problem, while the multiplicity of realisations for a generic problem defines and explains
its 'nonintegrability': one cannot obtain one solution for a problem definitely having many of them. In
return, now every problem can be actually integrated, i. e. completely solved, by simply applying the
universal nonperturbational method of the science of complexity that uses the 'effective dynamical
functions' and represents the unreduced version of the ordinary 'method of substitution' (Kirilyuk 1992,
1995a,b, 1996). The 'price' to pay for this privilege to solve any problem is the fundamental dynamic
multivaluedness of the obtained solution that contains much of internal intricacy (described below) and
conceptual novelty.

In other words, the complete (general) solution for any problem can indeed be obtained, but only
as a multitude of elementary solution-realisations, each of them being roughly equivalent to the ordinary,
linear-science,  effectively  one-dimensional  'complete'  solution.  This  explains  the  generic  failure
(divergence)  of  perturbational  approaches:  they  try  as  if  to  make  their  expansions  around  the
omnipresent singularity of 'branch point', since the dynamic multivaluedness corresponds to 'branching
at every point'. In particular, the permanent global, chaotic jumps of a system between the quasi-regular
realisations cannot be described by perturbation theory in principle (they seem to be infinitely sharp and
rapid, within the linear science analysis), whereas they are explicitly derived, as a major, basically
continuous (causal) dynamical process, within the general version of our formalism applied to the well-
known equations (see below).

For the same fundamental reasons, all the conventional concepts of the linear science around
dynamically complex behaviour, based invariably on perturbative approaches, are profoundly deficient,
both conceptually and formally. Thus, the popular reduction of dynamical chaos to the 'exponentially
divergent' trajectories or other 'states', as well as similar theories based on a particular mathematical
dependence as a definite signature of a qualitatively new reality, turn out to be basically wrong, since the
dynamics  of  any  complex  system  is  certainly  not  a  uniform  (unitary,  or  single-valued)  evolution,
whatever  is  its  formal  law,  but  rather  a  'random  walk'  of  Brownian  type,  with  the  chaotic  jumps
between the incompatible state-realisations driven by the intrinsic global  instability  of  redundance
(induced eventually by any participating interaction, if it is not pathologically simple). It is not difficult to
show that the states of a system and their sequences (generalised trajectories) in reality diverge according
to a power-law dependence related to the first term in the exponential-dependence expansion in a series
which is actually fictitious, however, since it can never be 'summed up' in the real system evolution
because of the causally random jumps between the generally incoherent realisations occurring just when
the  argument  is  around  unity,  the  critical  value  for  the  series  convergence.  Correspondingly,  the
canonical formalism of 'Lyapunov exponents', based on the incorrect extension of the perturbative,
locally  valid  linearisation  around  one  particular  point  to  the  global  system  behaviour  (see  e.  g.
Lichtenberg and Lieberman (1983), Schuster (1984), Zaslavsky (1985), Zaslavsky et al. (1991), Ott
(1993), Chirikov (1995a,b)) gives essentially wrong, qualitatively misleading results, even though it can
sometimes roughly simulate the global instability. We show that the same profound non-uniformity of
(complex) dynamics of practically any real system actually devaluates other 'canonical' exponential
dependencies of the single-valued, linear science, such as those in the unitary 'evolution operator' and
Feynman 'path integral'. Their respective complex-dynamical extensions contain probabilistic sequences
of basically linear dependencies from the generalised Lagrangian.

In  general,  the  single-valued,  unitary  paradigm  of  the  canonical,  essentially  linear  science  is
nothing but a one-dimensional projection of the unreduced multivalued reality and correspondingly
includes  all  possible  simulations  of  complexity,  in  the  form  of  external  and  always  somewhere
incomplete, mutually separated signatures of complexity defined only formally and ambiguously as
'nonlinearity',  'chaoticity',  'self-organisation',  'adaptability',  'fractality',  'criticality',  etc.  (see  e.  g.
Prigogine and Stengers (1984), Babloyantz (1986), Nicolis and Prigogine (1989), Prigogine (1995),

7
Haken  (1988),  (1996),  Haken  and  Mikhailov  (1993),  Gaponov-Grekhov  and  Rabinovich  (1990),
Peintgen, Jürgens, and Saupe (1992), Allen and Phang (1993), Coveney and Highfield (1995), Bak
(1996)), which determines the basic origin of the evident failure of this canonical, linear approach to
reproduce the natural  unity of being within a single concept of dynamic complexity (Horgan 1995,
Bricmont 1995). Moreover, even each particular type of the mechanistic simulation of complexity is
evidently inconsistent: the true randomness cannot really be reduced to the 'involved regularity', intrinsic
'noncomputability'  cannot  be  simulated  by  a  regular  computation  (cf.  Penrose  (1994)),  and  self-
organisation should involve an irreducible autonomous 'emergence' of a structure, rather than its implicit
insertion 'by hands'. Contrary to this basic limitation of the linear-science projection of reality, the
universal science of complexity, based on the dynamic redundance paradigm, correctly reproduces
within a single approach all the existing cases of complex behaviour with its full diversity and inherent
constructive contradictions (dualities), actually forming the irreducible basis of dynamic complexity as
such.  The  externally  different,  and  even  opposed,  types  of  behaviour,  reduced  mainly  to  various
combinations of the entangled order (regularity) and structured disorder (randomness), are explicitly
shown to be profoundly connected by the unique dynamic complexity that simply manifests its different
aspects in each particular case, depending on the respective, partially unpredictable and dynamically
determined, 'proportions' of regularity and randomness. Thus, a characteristic regime of 'dynamical
chaos'  (in  the  narrow  sense)  is  obtained  when  the  system  parameters  are  such  that  realisations  are
noticeably different and chaotic transitions between them are relatively frequent, whereas in the opposite
case one obtains the regime of (generalised) 'self-organised criticality', or 'structure formation', when
the  realisations  are  grouped  into  closely  spaced  ensembles  of  similar  members,  and  chaotic  jumps
between  the  groups  are  relatively  rare.  Therefore  any  'self-organised',  more  stable  structure  or
dynamical regime is still impossible without the internal true chaoticity (randomness), while chaos
always  involves  some  regular  structures  (corresponding  to  individual  realisations).  In  particular,  it
becomes clear that various, now intensively discussed procedures of 'control of chaos' are reduced to
the generalised self-organised criticality and therefore will practically always contain some remnants of
randomness (dynamic unpredictability). The reverse is also true: any 'self-organised' behaviour can be
considered as an intrinsic control-of-chaos regime.

Since fundamental dynamical splitting of reality, described as its redundance and giving rise to
complex behaviour, naturally forms hierarchically breeding levels, the dynamic complexity of the world
follows the same tendency and 'spontaneously' organises itself into a universal hierarchy of qualitatively
different observable objects and types of behaviour. Such hierarchical structure of complexity manifests
itself at all scales, giving rise to the complex-dynamical extension of the notion of fractal, acquiring now
basically dynamic and causally probabilistic character that largely exceeds the simplified mechanistic
'self-similarity' (or 'scale invariance') of the canonical notion always demonstrating the same purely
formal origin avoiding any irreducible relation to reality and its direct  mathematical  representation
(Mandelbrot 1982, Feder 1988, Peintgen, Jürgens, and Saupe 1992, Nakayama, Yakubo, and Orbach
1994). The dynamical fractal of the universal science of complexity is directly obtained as the general
solution  of  a  main  dynamic  equation  describing  the  problem  in  question.  It  appears  as  'non-stop'
dynamical splitting of a problem governed always by the same FMDF mechanism and explicitly realising
the intrinsic unification, physical and conceptual, of the causally  probabilistic, and therefore self-
developing ('living'), 'time-generating' world dynamics. The intricacy of the resulting fundamental
dynamical  fractal  (of  a  problem  or  even  the  whole  world)  demonstrates  the  fully  developed
consequences of the universal 'eventual' integrability of every problem attained within the dynamic
redundance paradigm. The obtained problem solution, as well as reality it describes, has the 'infinitely'
entangled structure, which corresponds to nonseparability (physical and mathematical) of a problem.
This means, in particular, that the causal nonseparability-entanglement of the dynamical fractal always
unpredictably changes (develops itself) in its details. The fundamental dynamical fractal thus obtained is
the unified extension of various simulations of fractal branching in the linear-science 'complexology',
such  as  'bifurcations'  ('catastrophes'),  'strange  attractors'  (including  the  latest  variations  around
'bubbling  attractors',  'riddled'  or  'intermingled  basins  of  attraction',  etc.),  'Cantor-like'  sets,  'fractal
spectra', 'intermittency', various types of 'mixing', 'entanglement', and 'percolation', together with any
other possible inhomogeneities: there is no structure in the existing reality other than the self-developing
universal dynamic fractality.

In particular, the regimes of complex dynamics referred to as 'turbulence' and 'self-organised
criticality' and poorly understood in the linear science obtain now a well-specified interpretation as
'essentially multilevel' regimes of complex behaviour in which there are many closely spaced levels of
complexity  connected  by  a  dense  fractal  network  of  'sublevels',  so  that  the  transitions  between
realisations from many hierarchically organised levels contribute to the observed patterns and cannot be
easily separated.

8

The manifestations of the universal dynamic complexity are studied in more detail for a number of
particular and general cases. The lower levels of complexity correspond to the elementary fields and
particles conventionally (and inconsistently) described within such linear-science domains as quantum
mechanics, field theory, (quantum) theory of gravitation, and cosmology. Their considerably extended
versions are naturally unified in the single theory of the quantum  field  mechanics corresponding to
specification of the universal hierarchy of complexity for several its lowest levels.

At  the  lowest  observable  level  of  elementary  particles,  we  obtain  the  essentially  complete
realisation of the unreduced version of the causal wave mechanics of de Broglie (see e. g. de Broglie
(1956), (1964), (1971), (1976), Andrade e Silva (1973), Lochak (1973)) known as the double solution
and hidden thermodynamics of the isolated particle and extended now by the natural inclusion of the
dynamical  chaos  concept.  This  double  solution  with  chaos  presents  an  elementary  fermion,  e.  g.
electron, as a permanent process of quantum beat consisting of unceasing series of temporally periodic
cycles of spatially chaotic reduction (a self-amplified, effectively nonlinear squeeze to a small volume)
and  the  reverse  extension  of  electromagnetic  (proto)field,  induced  by  its  attractive  coupling to a
gravitational 'background' medium (or 'protofield'). Such particular behaviour of permanent chaotic
quantum  beat  is  rigorously  obtained  from  the  equation  of  a  very  general  form,  describing  this
fundamental electro-gravitational coupling, only due to the extended interpretation of the fundamental
dynamic multivaluedness, whereas the ordinary, single-valued interpretation of the linear science would
predict in this case a single, more or less homogeneous, 'fall' of the electromagnetic field onto the
gravitational background. The frequency, n , of the quantum beat is very high (of the order of 1020 Hz
for the electron) and characterises  the main velocity of the 'time flow' giving the elementary time unit of
the world, D t = 1/n ; it is determined eventually by the magnitude of the driving electro-gravitational
coupling and can be expressed through the mass, m, of the elementary field-particle, in accord with a
basic relation proposed by de Broglie (hn  = mc2, where h stands for Planck's constant, and c is the
velocity of light) and revealing the fundamental connection between dynamic complexity, mass, energy
and time in our approach (see also below).

The obtained complex-dynamical solution of the quantum field mechanics reproduces all the
previously known and expected basic properties of de Broglie's double solution and the corresponding
causal and complete version of quantum mechanics, thus directly and causally explaining the observed
peculiar properties of the physically real fundamental entities (fields). In particular, it completely unveils
the origin of the most 'mysterious' properties of 'wave-particle duality' (de Broglian 'material wave-
particle') and 'quantum indeterminacy' (de Broglian 'hidden thermodynamics' of a particle) by showing
that they are the inevitable, standard manifestations of the dynamically complex behaviour of interacting
fields. The unreduced process of the attractive interaction between the primal electromagnetic and
gravitational  media  (protofields)  leads,  through  the  universal  and  physically  transparent  feedback
mechanism,  to  the  global  dynamic  instability  with  respect  to  auto-squeeze  of  the  extended
electromagnetic field to a small volume (i. e. 'objective, spontaneous reduction' of the elementary field).
This transient, very short-living squeezed state is the 'particle', or 'corpuscular' stage, and aspect, of the
fermionic  field  and  'wave-particle  duality'.  Due  to  existence  of  other  similar,  i.  e.  dynamically
redundant, squeezed states at different possible centres of reduction and one extended state of the field,
this virtual 'particle' is quickly transformed first to the extended state, which realises the 'wave' aspect
of duality, and then again to the squeezed, corpuscular state at another centre of reduction, 'chosen' by
the system necessarily at random (probabilistically), which demonstrates the dynamic origin of 'quantum
indeterminacy' (it is thus a manifestation of the same universal dynamic uncertainty of any complex
behaviour). Therefore there is no any antagonistic rupture between the field (wave), and the particle
(corpuscle), since any elementary object is present alternatively and successively in both these qualities,
and the corresponding real states, during the phases of extension and reduction respectively. In fact,
these dualistically opposed states need each other in order to maintain the very existence of a system with
interaction, which provides the decisive clarification and extended interpretation of the famous idea of
'complementarity' of Niels Bohr (see also below).

The  dynamic,  self-sustained  discreteness of the quantum-beat process is at the origin of that
special, properly 'quantum' behaviour of micro-objects which is simulated by the formally postulated
'quantization'  in  the  conventional  approach.  Correspondingly,  Planck's  constant  h  equals  to  the
mechanical action integral taken over one period of quantum beat (which is fundamentally different,
however, from any linear, or even anharmonic, 'oscillation'); its value is determined eventually by the
parameters of the driving electro-gravitational interaction (the mechanical action represents a universal
measure of dynamic complexity, see also below).

The mathematical 'wavefunction' of the ordinary quantum mechanics acquires now a fully realistic
interpretation in which it is represented by the sequence of the extended states of the fermionic (basically
electromagnetic) field possessing dynamically maintained temporal and partial spatial coherence. The

9
latter provides also the realistic, causally specified version of the de Broglian 'material wave': it is a
superposition of many spatially coherent structures in extended state of the globally moving fermionic
field, while the underlying process of quantum beat includes also a specified proportion of cycles of
reduction-extension with spatially irregular distribution of their centres (this proportion attains hundred
per cent for the elementary fermion at rest).

Note that the proposed extension of the unreduced version of the double solution, as well as the
original  version  itself,  should  be  clearly  distinguished  from  the  considerably  simplified,  actually
mechanistic version of 'Bohmian mechanics' or 'quantum theory of motion' (see e. g. Holland (1995),
Berndl et al. (1995)). The latter was originally proposed by de Broglie himself under the name of 'pilot-
wave interpretation' as an explicitly simplified, practically oriented mathematical scheme of the detailed
realistic picture which escaped the rigorous, noncontradictory description. Whereas de Broglie later
concentrated his efforts on the search for such consistent realistic description, the truncated pilot-wave
version was 'rediscovered' 25 years later (in 1952) by David Bohm and is especially actively promoted
by  his  followers  in  the  last  period  as  a  'realistic'  and  fully  consistent  'interpretation'  of  quantum
mechanics,  with  vanishing  reference  to  the  unreduced  original  version  of  the  realistic  approach.
However,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  purely  'interpretational'  approach  of  Bohmian  mechanics,  actually
reduced to a mathematical reformulation of the Schrödinger equation without any qualitative novelty (like
the dynamic redundance), reproduces all the main difficulties and basic incompleteness of the standard
interpretation,  now  in  their  'reformulated',  and  characteristically  less  transparent,  version  (cf.
d'Espagnat (1994), (1998)). Thus the 'classical particle' of an unspecified physical origin and structure
is  introduced  simply  by  a  formal  postulate  and  the  fundamental  source  of  randomness  remains
ambiguous,  apart  from  many  other  particular  difficulties.  The  whole  approach  suffers  from  the
mathematically postulated character of the essential concepts and entities deprived from the directly
specified physical contents, quite similar to any other mechanistic 'interpretation of quantum mechanics'
leaving it as mysterious as it is explicitly and consistently acknowledged in the most transparent standard
(Copenhagen) interpretation.

The realistic approach of the quantum field mechanics provides complex-dynamical, physically
and mathematically complete extensions of all the known basic entities and their properties, and among
them the causal, universal interpretation of mass-energy as the temporal rate (intensity) of the spatially
chaotic quantum beat of the coupled electromagnetic and gravitational protofields which possesses all the
necessary properties of inertial and gravitational mass being thus equivalent among them par excellence,
up to a subjective choice of the participating coefficients. It is shown that the mass-energy so defined is a
measure of dynamic complexity of the elementary field-particle, and therefore the property of inertia and
conservation of mass-energy are but particular manifestations of the single fundamental principle of
nature, the complexity conservation law (see also below). Physically, any massive object 'resists' to an
attempt to change its motion simply because it is already in a state of irreducible internal 'thermal' motion
(chaotic quantum beat), which is similar to resistance to compression of a gas of chaotically moving
molecules.

Not only the quantum field mechanics naturally unifies inertial and gravitational manifestations of
mass,  but  it  realises  the  full  intrinsic  unification  of  quantum  mechanics,  'relativity',  gravity,  'field
theory', and 'particle physics' considerably extending and causally demystifying each of them.

Thus, the universal gravitation is seen as a result of the same process of quantum beat, since it is
nothing else than dynamic attraction of any elementary particle, and therefore any macroscopic body, to
the unique continuous gravitational background (protofield) that has its own 'elastic' reaction to the
reduction events for each particle-process inevitably felt by other 'subjects' of reduction. It is very
important  here  that  the  whole  universe  is  produced  by  coupling  of  the  same  two  protofields,
electromagnetic and gravitational media, which provides the necessary physical basis for unity of the
world  that  can  be  described  now  as  a  kind  of  (three-dimensional)  'sandwich'  made  from  the  two
protofields with a help of coupling interaction(s) among them, while the FMDF concept assures the
sufficient diversity of the dynamical structure and behaviour naturally emerging from this simple starting
configuration. The intrinsically universal gravitation thus obtained is not only 'unified' with quantum
mechanics, but inseparably related to it by their common origin: any gravitational attraction is essentially
a discretely structured, non-stationary, quantum process (though normally with a quasi-classically large
number of quantized pulling events), since it is driven by the quantum-beat pulsation, just determining
the specific, dynamically discrete, or 'quantum', behaviour of an a priori uniform and stationary system
of interacting protofields.

Although in the macroscopic, classical limit this intrinsically quantum gravity of the science of
complexity produces in many cases the same measurable results as those predicted by the Einsteinian
'general  relativity',  their  interpretation  and  a  number  of  important  particular  applications  follow  a
dramatic extension towards causal consistency. Gravitation and its influence are not characterised any

10
more by an ambiguous, purely abstract 'deformation of (mathematical, four-dimensional) space and
time' - which is evidently not more realistic than the canonical interpretation of the wave-particle duality,
so definitely refuted by Einstein himself - but by the local 'density', or 'tension', of the dynamically
varying, physically realistic gravitational medium (always in connection to the coupled and directly
perceived electromagnetic medium). The inhomogeneous macroscopic distribution of this tension, alias
'gravitational  potential',  can  indeed  be  presented  as  local  deformation  of  an  elastic  'gravitational
medium' around massive bodies, and the local dynamics of this system can indeed be described as the
uniform motion in the curvilinear system of coordinates coinciding with the 'lines of equal tension'
(geodesics),  but  this  is  only  one  of  the  many  possible  ways  (coordinate  systems)  of  the  formal
description that cannot be identified with the unique objective reality and can neither be applied, even
formally, to the global (averaged) dynamics of the whole universe. The objectively unique, and in this
sense  absolute,  reality  does  exist  and  corresponds,  for  a  'normal',  self-sufficient  universe,  to  the
globally flat space which can be effectively 'deformed' (in the above realistic sense of the nonuniform
gravitational medium tension) only locally, around higher concentrations of the dynamically appearing
fermionic  reduction  centres.  As  to  the  particularly  ambiguous  concept  of  the  'curved  time'  of  the
standard relativity mysteriously 'mixed' with 'curved space' (whereas one fails to explain even what the
real, irreversible time and space is, apart from a mathematical 'coordinate'), it actually tries to simulate
the complex dynamics of the elementary events (quantum-beat reductions) whose rate of appearance,
determining the causal time flow (see also below), is realistically and transparently related to the local
gravitational tension (potential). It is evident that the complex-dynamical, causally substantiated picture
of the globally flat, but internally structured, probabilistically developing ('living') universe changes
dramatically  the  conventional  cosmological  applications  of  the  standard  general  relativity  around
simplistic  single-valued  'solutions'  for  the  whole  universe  à  la  Friedman  (already  because  of  the
incorrect mechanistic extension of the locally possible purely geometric interpretation of gravity to the
global scale), including the 'open' or 'closed' universe alternative, the idea of the 'explosive' expansion
of  the  universe  from  a  point-like  initial  state  (Big  Bang,  inflation),  the  problems  of  'quantum
cosmology',  etc.  The  revised,  complex-dynamical  cosmology  naturally  emerges  in  its  (causally)
quantum version which provides, in particular, a consistent solution to the well-known 'problem of the
wavefunction  of  the  universe'  based  on  hierarchical  local  splitting  into  dynamically  redundant,
incompatible  (non-superposable),  probabilistically  changing  (and  thus  time-generating)
structures/events. It is clear also that all the existing simulations of the causal quantum dynamics of
gravity within the same purely abstract approach of the mechanistic science, reducing it to various formal
constructions basically detached from reality, such as 'special', e. g. 'noncommutative', geometries or
topologies, are condemned to failure by their zero-complexity, irreducibly 'non-dynamical' origin.

The  same  unified  picture  of  the  quantum  field  mechanics  provides  the  causal,  physically
transparent notions of space and time crucially extending the reduced, formal notions of the canonical
science including those from 'special and general relativity' and the 'new physics' in general. In the
science of complexity, time characterises the intensity (rate, or frequency) of spontaneous realisation
emergence (constituting the generalised event) and is intrinsically irreversible, while space defines the
global (structural) quality of the emerging realisation perceived largely as its 'dimension' (size) and is
naturally discrete. Space has a well-defined material, tangible basis, it is not only the structure of matter,
it is matter itself, since matter appears only as structured entities (realisations), in full agreement with the
famous Cartesian concept of étendue. Time is not a material entity, it is rather a sign that matter-space
exists, and especially that its new (spatial) form-realisations emerge as a sequence of (incompatible)
events; time emphasises the irreducibly changeable, unstable (multivalued) character of being revealed
by the science of complexity (we can say also that different moments of our causally emerging time of
the single  real  world  replace  different  versions of the whole  world  ambiguously  coexisting in an
indefinite 'set of worlds', as it is postulated in the well-known many-worlds interpretations). Therefore
time cannot be considered as a real  'degree  of  freedom',  or  'dimension',  of  a  world  completing  its
'spatial  dimensions',  as  it  is  postulated  in  the  canonical  'relativistic'  paradigm  of  the  linear  science
referring to a purely formal, and actually reduced, symmetry (in fact, we show that the 'principle of
relativity'  and  the  related  formal  symmetries  of  the  canonical  science  simulate  the  same  universal
symmetry of complexity, expressed as its conservation, see also below). Space and time can be mutually
'entangled'  only  in  the  indirect  sense  of  dualistic  'dispersion  relation'  among  them  expressing  the
elementary  dynamics  of  a  level  of  complexity.  Space  means  'what'  (the  existing  object  is)  and
corresponds  to  a  noun,  time  shows  'how'  (it  exists)  and  corresponds  to  a  verb,  and  any  formal,
mechanistic 'equivalence', or 'symmetry' between these two basic aspects of complexity can only be
extremely superficial (they are rather dualistically opposed, or complementary, to each other providing
thus another manifestation of the extended principle of complementarity).

Hierarchical  structure  of  complexity  determines  the  hierarchical  structure  of  space  and  time
represented by a fractal network of dynamically related, 'breeding' levels. In particular, any dynamically

11
complex behaviour involves permanent realisation change, and therefore cannot provide a truly static,
time-independent regime, which naturally gives rise to the 'time flow' of the corresponding level. Most
important is the lowest level of the hierarchy formed by the quantum-beat dynamics; the latter causally
'produces' those 'embedding' space and time of our world which usually appear to be perfectly uniform
at the higher, 'classical' levels of complex behaviour, but are irreducibly and 'spontaneously' quantized
at their basis, as should always be the case for any real entity described by the universal science of
complexity.  In  particular,  the  'tissue'  of  the  physically  real  space  in  which  we  live  and  which  is
indispensable for any existence is permanently 'woven' from the electromagnetic protofield over the
'hidden' gravitational matrix-protofield by the reduction-extension events of the fundamental quantum-
beat process, thus playing the role of a complex-dynamical 'loom' (its peculiarity is that the produced
fundamental 'fabric' of space immediately returns to the initial 'unwoven' state, but then is again quickly
'rewoven' by the 'loom', in a dynamically continuous and spatially chaotic regime). Note in this respect
that the starting equations of the quantum field mechanics do not contain any a priory space and time
variables,  nor  any  discreteness  or  irreversibility,  they  are  explicitly  obtained,  within  a  rigorous
mathematical description, as manifestations of the emerging complex behaviour. Another fundamental
property of the world which is rigorously obtained in the same causal fashion is the number of its spatial
'dimensions' (degrees of freedom). Indeed, according to the basic complexity conservation law, the
number of the degrees of freedom remains unchanged in the closed system with interaction, but they
normally  change  their  'quality'  because  of  the  complex-dynamical  entanglement  (see  also  below).
Therefore the two protofields and their interaction (coupling) can give three and only three spatial
degrees of freedom and one time variable characterising the three-dimensional event appearance.

The same description reveals also the extended, causal origin of the effects of special relativity of
thus emerging time and space which are interpreted as 'transport effects' of the quantum-beat dynamics,
accompanying  the  global  transport  of  probability  of  reduction,  and  thus  of  the  appearance  of  the
'corpuscular' state, for the moving field-particle. The state of motion itself can be rigorously defined
now as a state with complexity-energy exceeding the well-defined minimum value attained for the case
of completely uniform distribution of reduction probability which corresponds to the state of rest of the
field-particle (or any other object, at higher levels of complexity). The famous 'time retardation' relation
of the canonical relativity is correctly reproduced and completely demystified now, together with the
notion of time itself: when one is 'at the moving edge' of the currently emerging structure (e. g. that of a
moving field-particle) time formally stops in that 'reference frame' (and at that level of complexity)
simply because the elementary increment of local time totally results from the relative motion of the edge.
The effects of general relativity of time and space are provided with the same physical transparency and
naturally (dynamically) unified now with those from the (extended) special relativity, contrary to the
canonical versions of special and general relativity whose basic separation is hidden in the axiomatically
imposed,  abstract  'principles'  of  relativity,  etc.  Actually  'relative'  is  always  the  level  of  dynamic
complexity at which the 'observer' (represented by another complex system) is placed, and the level of
complexity is characterised by the temporal or spatial rate of event (realisation) emergence which is
always registered with respect to similar rate from another complex-dynamical process (attributed to the
observer). This description and interpretation of relativity are universally applicable at any level of
complexity, providing, for example, an objective explanation for relative, or 'subjective', time flow even
at the level of human 'psychological' time perception (the subjectively perceived 'time flow' effectively
'slows down' when there are many big, intrinsically 'striking' events, etc.).

We can clearly see now that the outline of the 'brief history of time' (Hawking 1988), as well as
other similar compilations of the fundamentals of the unitary physics, massively commercialised by the
single-valued,  linear  science  is  indeed  too  brief  and  especially  over-simplified  with  respect  to  the
underlying 'Weltanschauung' pretensions and the intrinsically 'living', self-developing, irregular and
unlimited diversity of the holistic real world around and within us. Actually it is that kind of mechanistic
'history' which is certainly finished now, in both the knowledge and society development (see also
Prologue). The extended causality of the universal science of complexity shows unambiguously that it
has been nothing but the first, extremely restricted, probably inevitable, but definitely condemned to
failure, attempt to understand the genuine richness of the developing hierarchy of complexity, and now
the  ending  'brief',  reduced  history  of  time  and  humanity  should  be  definitely  replaced  by  the  fully
conscious, causally complete version capable to provide the genuine, intrinsically creative understanding
of the developing reality. The esoteric 'pulp fiction' from science, promoted by the exhausted medieval
mechanism,  with  all  its  artificial,  ambiguous  sophistications  and  over-emphasised,  superficial
'weirdness' basically detached from reality and thus accepting any formal 'possibility' in a subjective
'competition of influences' should give place to the reality-based, objective transparency of the universal
complexity unfolding process.

12

Many other basic properties of elementary particles and the corresponding relations are provided
with transparent interpretations within the quantum field mechanics that forms therefore the basis for the
new, causal description of microworld which should totally replace the fundamentally reduced, and
therefore unrealistic and separated, versions of the linear science.

In particular, the property of spin escaping any realistic interpretation within the linear science,
naturally emerges now as a highly nonlinear vortex motion of the elementary field in the stage of self-
sustained reduction driven, in principle, by the same shear instability as the motion of water flowing
from a basin through a small hole in its bottom; the key novelty of the quantum field mechanics is that it
provides  the  purely  dynamic  origin  of  permanent  'spontaneous'  emergence  of  those  'holes'  in  the
formally  uniform  system  of  interacting  protofields.  The  same  vorticity,  though  rather  out  of  the
maximum-squeeze stage of quantum beat, accounts for the causal origin of the magnetic field (while the
'oscillatory'  component  of  the  quantum-beat  process  gives  rise  to  the  electric  component  of  the
electromagnetic field).

Photons correspond to propagating 'quasi-free' perturbations of the electromagnetic protofield
emitted by a quantum-beat process (and further re-absorbed by another particle-process), and their
discreteness is totally due to the quantized character of the quantum beat. The photon does not possess
its own mass because it does not possess any internal complex dynamics; it is indeed rather close to the
canonical 'linear wave', even though in real interaction processes the photons often 'inherit' the features
of complexity from the related dynamics of the emitting and absorbing massive field-particles. The
quantum-beat process itself can be considered as unceasing cycles of emission and absorption of many
transient, or 'virtual', photons, whereas the interaction between two particles is indeed represented by
the exchange of transient (but real!) photons, the process which can now be presented in its physically
transparent, causal version, contrary to the purely mathematical, and irreducibly perturbative, simulation
of the canonical 'quantum field theory'.

Correspondingly, the property of electric charge also gains its causally complete interpretation as
another  expression  of  the  dynamic  complexity  of  the  quantum-beat  process.  This  explains  the
discreteness of the elementary charge, e, and proportionality of its square to Planck's constant h also
expressing dynamic complexity per cycle of quantum beat, as mentioned above. The fact that there are
two and only two 'opposite in sign' types of electric charge with the same absolute elementary value is
due to the 'two-phase' structure of the elementary cycle of the fermionic quantum beat, which leads to
subdivision  of  all  the  observable  quantum-beat  processes  (corresponding  to  individual  massive
elementary fermions) into two classes with the opposite temporal phases of pulsation, while in each
class  the  quantum-beat  oscillations  are  in  phase  (similar  to  the  behaviour  of  mechanical  systems
producing 'oscillons', see Umbanhowar, Melo, and Swinney (1996)). Therefore the elementary particle
charge is a somewhat more direct expression of the observed quantum-beat complexity than the rest
mass or Planck's constant which can be related also to the hidden parts of the quantum-beat dynamics.
However,  conservation  of  charge  emerges  as  another  manifestation  of  the  universal  complexity
conservation law. The above picture shows also that there is the profound physical coherence in the
universe dynamics: the most fundamental level of the world dynamics is characterised by the exact
temporal coherence of all the existing quantum-beat oscillations, up to the half-period shift between the
particles with unlike charges (otherwise we would have more than one absolute value of the measurable
elementary charge); the universe has therefore its unique most precise and physically real, distributed
'rhythm' perceived 'simultaneously' in every its location (by contrast to this temporal coherence, there is
no general spatial coherence between the quantum-beat oscillations). This absolute aspect of time is
another manifestation of the same unity in the world construction that explains the universal character of
gravitation and definitely rejects the exaggerated, superficial 'relativism' of the unitary, simulative 'new
physics' (cf. Davies (1989)).

The  total  dynamic  construction  of  the  real,  many-particle  world  is  a  natural  extension  of  the
quantum field mechanics for one elementary field-particle which preserves especially the property of
physical  unity  and  the  ensuing  fundamental  coherence.  We  have  always  one  and  the  same  'world
sandwich' prepared from two main protofields, the dynamically perceivable electromagnetic proto-
medium (alias ether which is both real and unobservable in its unperturbed, 'pre-Creational' state), in
which we actually 'live', and the directly inaccessible (and therefore not well specified by its exact
nature, but nevertheless quite real) gravitational background which manifests itself only through its
coupling  to  the  electromagnetic  side  of  the  'sandwich'  (although  the  latter  appears  as  our  three-
dimensional world, it is initially created in the 'embedding' space of still more fundamental level of
complexity  currently  inaccessible  for  us  and  therefore  'incomprehensible';  it  is  difficult  to  state
something about its 'dimensions'). The coupling interaction between the protofields gives rise to the
complex,  or  'quantum',  behaviour  of  the  elementary  field-particles  according  to  the  above  FMDF
picture. There seems to be two main species of coupling corresponding to only 'electro-weak' forces
(leptons) and 'strong' (including electro-weak) forces (hadrons), with many individual field-particles

13
within each species (other types of coupling cannot be excluded). Those fundamental interaction species
can be considered themselves as a result of the two-fold (in general, n-fold)  dynamic  redundance
(splitting) of a single basic process of interaction (coupling) between the two component protofields.
The well-known existence of several similar 'generations' of the fundamental 'bricks' of the world,
remaining basically unexplained and looking as if 'excessive' within the unitary-science logic, is also
consistently inserted into the new world picture as a result of the same dynamic redundance of the
fundamental interaction process which never cannot, and practically should not, be limited to a 'strictly
necessary',  unrealistic  minimum.  The  same  profound  consistency  with  the  dynamic  redundance
paradigm involves the observed multiple unstable species of 'elementary' particles and 'resonances',
with  their  characteristically  'broken'  symmetries  (the  universal  symmetry  of  complexity  is  always
naturally 'broken', but contrary to the linear-science concept of broken symmetry, it is a much higher
symmetry than any mechanistically exact, 'unbroken' prototype, see also below). Many of the observed
'elementary' particles including the 'exchange particles', such as the photon, are not independent objects
as it is explained above and move at the electromagnetic 'side' of the world, whereas the existence and
observed manifestations of similar 'exchange particles' at the inaccessible gravitational side and the
corresponding  'gravitational  waves'  seem  to  be  more  ambiguous  and  need  further  investigation.  A
considerable  modification  is  needed  also  for  the  linear-science  concept  of  permanent  creation  and
destruction of 'virtual' (including massive) particles simply 'in vacuum' (the 'polarisation of vacuum'),
which in its existing version directly violates the complexity conservation law (contrary to the linear-
science version of 'energy conservation' which can formally be violated, if 'it is only for a short time').
The physical meaning of 'fermionic' and 'bosonic' species as well as some basic particular cases of the
many-particle  behaviour,  like  e.  g.  Bose  condensation,  are  also  causally  clarified  within  the  same
complex-dynamical picture.

The chaotic dynamics of quantum objects at the next higher level of complexity corresponds to
either quantum measurement process (partially dissipative dynamics of an open system) or Hamiltonian
quantum  chaos  (conservative  dynamics,  closed  system),  both  presented  now  in  their  complex-
dynamical, causally complete versions and described by essentially the same universal equations and
method  of  their  analysis  as  the  fundamental  reduction-extension  dynamics  at  the  first  level  of
complexity. This universality of description reflects the basic unity of the real world it represents and the
ensuing similarity of the physically occurring complex-dynamical processes at any level.

Thus, quantum measurement is the physically real process of the field reduction (self-sustained
squeeze) induced by any 'ordinary', higher-level interaction  (typically of electromagnetic origin) with
the  real  excitation  of  other  degrees  of  freedom  (levels  of  complexity)  and  governed  by  the  same
mechanism as the quantum-beat reduction at the first level. It can also be considered as a result of a
transient  'bound  state'  of  two  or  more  participating  elementary  field-particles  which  continue  their
respective  quantum-beat  oscillations  'inside'  the  'embracing'  quantum  measurement  process,  where
however the corresponding 'extended' phases of the elementary fields are actually localised in a close
vicinity of the common 'centre of measurement (reduction)', which suppresses the manifestations of
their 'wave' properties, like diffractive interference. This rigorously substantiated picture of the realistic
'wavefunction collapse' explains the observed 'peculiar' properties of quantum measurement postulated
in the conventional quantum mechanics, like the apparently 'classical' behaviour of the 'measuring
instrument' (the system behaviour becomes indeed localised and therefore classical, but only transiently,
see also below for the general interpretation of the classical type of behaviour).

The Hamiltonian quantum chaos is based on the same standard complex-dynamical sequence of
reductions and extensions, but it happens in the absence of any noticeable real excitations at other levels
of complexity and therefore instead of spatial squeeze involves rather a momentum- or configuration-
space reductions to particular realisations of the effective interaction potential forming the permanent
process of chaotic realisation change (one can also have a combination of quantum chaos and quantum
measurement regimes). It is clear that we deal here with the true quantum chaos possessing purely
dynamical randomness and not only some particular form of regular (unitary, single-valued) dynamics
endowed  with  'signatures  of  chaos'  or  a  capacity  to  'amplify  environmental  influences'  always
depending on the time of observation and other parameters as it happens in the multiple linear-science
simulations of quantum chaos, or 'chaology' (Eckhardt 1988, Gutzwiller 1990, Berry 1991, Bohigas
1991, Haake 1991, Bogomolny 1992, Prigogine 1992, Ikeda 1994, Izrailev 1995, Chirikov 1995a,b,
Zhang and Feng 1995, Andreev et al. 1996, Brun, Percival, and Schack 1996, Casati 1996, Prosen
1996,  Shigehara  and  Cheon  1997,  Zurek  1998).  Application  of  our  analysis  to  a  generic  case  of
Hamiltonian quantum dynamics (Schrödinger equation with periodic potential) shows how our version
of quantum chaos naturally passes to its classical analogue (also eventually extended from its linear-
science simulation) under the ordinary quasiclassical transition, which reconstitutes the principle of
correspondence in quantum mechanics directly violated in the mechanistic simulations of quantum chaos

14
(Ford  and  Mantica  1992).  The  truly  unpredictable  quantum  dynamics  of  Hamiltonian  systems  is
obtained in terms of the Schrödinger equation and wavefunction, rather than density matrix in which the
additional  randomness,  or  'decoherence',  is  actually  axiomatically  inserted by the definition. This
explains why the linear-science studies of quantum dynamical randomness use so often the density-
matrix or similar formulations and why the results are basically deficient: they will inevitably contain a
logical vicious circle, in one or another form. In contrast to this, in our approach we rigorously derive
the extended version of the density-matrix type of description revealing the causal origin and physical
meaning of the additional randomness within a 'mixed' state. This additional unpredictability is a higher-
level  manifestation  of  the  same  universal  origin  of  dynamic  uncertainty  (complexity)  that  gives
fundamental quantum indeterminacy at the lowest level, described above.

Further increase of dynamic complexity leads to its next higher level represented by the classical
type of behaviour and starting approximately from the most elementary bound  systems (like atoms)
which naturally manifest the characteristic property of classical trajectory localisation. The latter is a
result of the specific, causally random character of the underlying quantum-beat dynamics: since the
corpuscular state of each of the bound fields 'chooses' the position of the next centre of reduction in a
causally random, independent fashion (though usually not without an average tendency in the probability
distribution), while the bound fields tend to remain very close to one another, they can perform the
absolute majority of their cycles of reduction-extension only in the close vicinity of their common 'centre
of mass'. The 'correlated' jumps of the bound field-particles to larger distances are not impossible, but
they will normally be very rare, unless they are stimulated by a well specified additional interaction with
other bound systems (as it happens in all 'macroscopically coherent' states with 'Bose condensates').
Note  the  clear  distinction  of  our  definition  of  the  classical,  quasi-localised,  'trajectorial'  type  of
behaviour,  related  to  the  appearance  of  a  next  higher  level  of  complexity,  from  the  canonical
'semiclassical (quasiclassical) case' corresponding simply to the relatively small value of the de Broglie
wavelength and only externally simulating certain observable properties of the truly classical behaviour
(cf. e. g. Holland (1995)). Although both cases normally correspond to increased dynamic complexity
with respect to a typical 'wave' behaviour and thus generally 'go in the same direction', the emergence
of a truly classical regime needs a specific qualitative change of a 'phase transition' to a higher level of
complexity, actually taking the form of the bound-system formation. The 'decoherence' due to some
'external' influences can contribute to the degradation of the characteristic wave properties of a system,
but it definitely cannot constitute the fundamental origin or character of the classical behaviour, contrary
to various recent approaches within the single-valued paradigm (e. g. Paz and Zurek (1993), Schack,
d'Ariano, and Caves (1994), Omnès (1995), Shiokawa and Hu (1995), Griffiths (1996), Zeh (1996),
Anglin and Zurek (1996), Zurek (1997), (1998)). The dynamic redundance paradigm provides a much
better,  intrinsically  dynamical,  always  present  source  of  internal  'decoherence'  (which  is  causally
specified as incompatibility of redundant states, as opposed to the linear-science 'loss of coherence' of
superposable  states),  so  that  now  one  does  not  need  to  rely  upon  always  changing,  ambiguous
'environmental  influences'  while  trying  to  explain  an  evidently  universal,  fundamentally  rooted
phenomenon. In terms of formal description, this means that various linear-science versions of the
'density matrix formalism' or 'consistent (decoherent) histories' based on the explicit postulation of the
statistical  (randomised)  behaviour  and  often  used  in  decoherence  type  of  simulations  of  quantum
indeterminacy  and  reduction  possess  the  evident  logical  inconsistency  already  mentioned  above.
Contrary to this, in our approach we rigorously deduce (and therefore causally define)  randomness
within a purely dynamical, non-statistical description and thus obtain a causally statistical description of
the next level (the 'generalised Schrödinger equation', see also below) which considerably extends the
existing simulations of the density-matrix type.

Note in this relation the same kind of deficiency within a broader scale of similar attempts to
'clarify' the canonical quantum mechanics which suffer from the same characteristic, fundamentally
inevitable 'impotence' of the mechanistic approach when in order to obtain an effect one should first
explicitly  insert  it  'by  hands'  in  one  form  and  then  develop  the  'consequences'  in  another,  trivially
equivalent form  (i. e. from the beginning tout est donné, see Bergson (1907)) creating thus the evident
'vicious circle' à la deus ex machina (e. g. Ghirardi, Rimini, and Weber (1986), Pearl (1989), Ghirardi,
Grassi, and Pearl (1990), Ghirardi, Grassi, and Rimini (1990), Gisin and Percival (1992), (1993a,b),
Diósi (1992), Dove and Squires (1995), Brun (1995), Brun, Percival, and Schack (1996), Brun, Gisin,
O'Mahony, and Rigo (1996), Brun (1997), Kist et al. (1998)). It is not surprising that none of those
approaches can ever really pass to a realistic, physically based description and they are obliged instead to
operate with 'vectors' and their 'projections' in abstract 'spaces', 'matrix elements' and other formal
constructions irreducibly detached from reality. Despite their oligarchic dominance in the bureaucratised
scientific  structures,  the  adherents  of  the  'advanced  symbolism'  can  never  reveal  what  the  exact,
physical nature of the existing entities is and what really happens to them. Instead, the intrinsic imitators

15
of creation silently 'borrow' the features 'to be expected' from the suppressed realistic approaches and
arrange for their superficial fitting into the promoted mechanistic constructions, which can always be
achieved in the linear science by playing with parameters, logical rules, etc. They call it 'explanation'
and  'understanding'.  By  its  purely  speculative,  non-creative  character,  this  kind  of  'new  physics'  is
close  to  another  group  of  simulation  reduced  to  infinite  reformulation  of  'quantum  enigma'  and
concentrated especially around the related properties of 'quantum nonlocality' and 'indeterminacy'. The
formally  defined  'consistent  histories'  and  other  speculative  'elements  of  reality';  purely  formal
'inequalities' and the related fruitless experimentation around 'nonlocality'; the never-ending series of
speculative  'quantum-mechanical'  games  and  'gedanken  experiments'  with  abstract  'creatures'  and
paradoxes; fruitless, purely linguistic or philosophical 'interpretations' and 're-interpretations' around
the same, unchanged reality and its unresolved 'mysteries'; evidently figurative and unrealistic, but
excessively  and  'seriously'  discussed  quantum  'clonings',  'teleportations',  'unitary  computations',
'time machines', 'tomographies' and 'endoscopies'; macroscopic 'electromagnetic coherence' in living
organisms  and  'decoherence'  of  'histories'  and  other  formal  constructions;  'quantum  logic'  and
'quantum algebra' - the enormous flood of all these and many other similar 'developments' of the last
period shows that the phenomenon of 'impostures intellectuelles' has had a much wider extension than it
was originally noted (Sokal and Bricmont 1997), and is actually transformed now to the dominating
pseudo-scientific  parasitism,  actively  stopping  any  truly  progressive,  realistic  development  of
knowledge. It is easy to see that all those branches of 'quantum mysteriology' add absolutely nothing to
the essential canonical knowledge as it is expressed by the empirically based postulates of the standard
interpretation of quantum mechanics, honestly recognising the objective border between the known and
the unknown, while the vain sophistication of the 'mathematical quantology' is reduced to tricky, but
evidently  fruitless  'replays'  of  the  same  situation  in  the  form  of  ever  more  odious  mystification  of
abstract symbols and superficially esoteric 'mind games'. In the evident absence of any real solution, the
proliferating mediocrity concentrates its 'intellectual' activity around all kind of 'informally' hidden,
oligarchic 'self-organisation' at all levels in order to impose its formal, mechanistic dominance which
parasitically abuses formal 'neutrality' of the 'developed' Unitary System of organisation and results in
complete blocking of the really free, progressive development of the fundamental knowledge just at the
time when it is most needed. The 'réel voilé' (d'Espagnat 1994) is thus transformed into the 'réel violé'
by the tricky adherents of the self-'chosen' community of modern 'scribes and Pharisees' accepting any
degree and kind of deviation from the elementary causality and consistency in order to promote their
unjust, oligarchic dominance in scientific institutions and sources of information and financial support.
Being intrinsically unified with the similar directions of 'chaology', 'complexology' and 'mathematical
(symbolical) physics', this anti-constructive noise is accompanied by unprecedented publicity campaigns
strikingly  resembling  those  in  massive  commercial  promotion  of  second-rate  products  and  finds  a
'strangely' generous support from the 'friendly' bureaucracy at the time of general financial 'difficulties'
in science and thus considerably, and deliberately, reduces the chances of renaissance of the genuine,
intrinsically realistic creation that can only be based on the explicit, complete, physically based solutions
supported by a transparent, non-contradictory system of correlations within the whole knowledge (see
also below).

A number of particular, practically important consequences is obtained and outlined within the new
understanding of the fundamental reality introduced by the quantum field mechanics. They involve the
values  of  the  Planckian  units  and  the  causally  substantiated  structure  of  the  expected  spectrum  of
elementary particles; quantum stages of the black hole evolution; impossibility of creation of the unitary
'quantum computer' (simulator), proposed within the linear approach, and possibility of creation of a
'chaotic (complex-dynamical) quantum simulator'.

Using the above unified picture of the quantum field mechanics, one can easily show that the well-
known  Planckian  units  of  the  smallest  existing  scales  of  space  and  time  and  the  largest  value  of
elementary-particle mass should be renormalised, which permits one to reconstitute the realistic, and
practically meaningful, values of the extreme quantities. Indeed, the above causal interpretation of
gravity as an indirect result of the complex-dynamical electro-gravitational interaction process shows that
the measured effective magnitude of the force of that indirect gravitational attraction between the bodies,
characterised by the usual 'gravitational constant' which is used for obtaining the conventional values of
the Planckian units, need not coincide with the magnitude of the direct electro-gravitational coupling
which is actually responsible for the smallest attainable spatial dimension, the size of the squeezed state
of  the  elementary  field-particle.  Therefore  we  should  substitute  a  new,  rescaled  value  of  the
'gravitational constant' into the expressions for the Planckian units, the one that characterises the direct
fundamental interaction between the electromagnetic and gravitational protofields. It is clear that it should
be much higher than the ordinary value, so that the integral internal dynamics of an elementary particle,
for  example  the  electron,  could  be  maintained  despite  its  various  external  interactions  with  other

16
particles. In order to specify the magnitude of the necessary rescaling, we suppose that the new value of
the  Planckian  unit  of  length  coincides  approximately  with  the  lowest  length  scale  appearing
experimentally, i. e. 10-17 - 10-16 cm, which shows that the ordinary value of the gravitational constant
in  the  corresponding  expressions  should  be  multiplied  by  1033 - 1034.  Then  we  can  verify  the
assumption made by calculating the new values of the Planckian units of time and mass and comparing
them with the known extreme values of time and mass. We obtain indeed a good agreement, with the
new Planckian value of mass of the order of 100 GeV (10-22 g) and the Planckian time of the order of
10-27 - 10-26 s. This result resolves a number of paradoxes with the excessively extreme ordinary values
of the Planckian units (in particular that of the unrealistically big unit of mass creating a huge 'empty
space' in the expected mass spectrum of particles), and leads to the very important practical conclusion
that there is no sense to look for new particles at the space scales much smaller than 10-17 cm and mass
scales much greater than 100 GeV, which allows us to avoid practically difficult further increase of the
accelerated particle energy (the values of the extreme quantities can be subjected to a reasonable further
refinement  which  will  not  change  the  principle).  This  conclusion  is  supported  also  by  the  'self-
sufficient' general picture of the quantum field mechanics demonstrating a quite complete, harmonious,
and realistic construction of the world at its fundamental levels. What we need is further clarification of
the details of that causally  complete general picture within the realistic scales designated above (in
particular, the appearing experimental indications on the existence of very small objects within the
known truly elementary particles can be consistently interpreted as the squeezed states of the respective
quantum-beat processes possessing indeed the minimum observable sizes). The problems involved can
be efficiently resolved only with the help of the physically based picture of the unreduced, complex
dynamics of the elementary objects providing the unique reduction of the large number of existing
formal possibilities, in accord with the natural complexity development process and contrary to the
basically ambiguous, purely symbolic sophistication of the canonical, linear-science approach.

Another practically important conclusion concerns the actively developed proposition to create the
so-called 'quantum computers' whose operation, and the expected advantages, are based on the unitary
(single-valued), and thus non-dissipative, regular and reversible, evolution of the canonical quantum
mechanics (Benioff 1980, 1986, 1997, Feynman 1982, 1986, DiVincenzo 1995, Ekert and Jozsa 1996,
Lloyd 1996, Steane 1997, Boghosian and Taylor 1997). The fundamental impossibility of realisation of
such  a  device  directly  and  unambiguously  follows  already  from  the  actual  absence  of  the  unitary
evolution at any level of the real world dynamics explicitly revealed in the quantum field mechanics,
since otherwise it would be a single-valued, effectively one-dimensional, unrealistically predictable
(Laplacean) world. Specifically, any nontrivial interaction in course of computation, and in particular
irreducibly irreversible function of any memorisation, will lead to the fundamental complex-dynamical
redundance and instability with the unavoidable failure of any single-valued (unitary) scheme. Unitarity
of  a  computer  would  necessarily  mean  the  integrability  of  its  dynamics,  according  to  the  causally
clarified concept of integrability of the universal science of complexity, and this implies that at best it
would be capable to 'numerically solve' only integrable, analytically resolvable problems. This is a
consequence  of  the  general  'complexity  correspondence  rule'  following  from  the  complexity
conservation  law  and  stating  that  a  computer  can  correctly  simulate  only  problems  with  dynamic
complexity  not  exceeding  its  own  complexity  (including  eventually  interaction  with  the  complex
'environment'). In terms of 'quantum bits' so popular among the unitary 'quantum programmers' we
can say also that each 'bit' (and not only a quantum one) corresponds to a complex-dynamical realisation
and can physically be produced or registered only in the irreversible, partially irregular fashion involving
complex-dynamical, non-separable (fractal), irreducibly probabilistic entanglement of the interacting
entities. Whereas the higher-level, classical bit chaoticity can be sufficiently (though never totally)
'controlled', any attempt of control of chaos of a bit-realisation at the most fundamental, quantum level
evidently either produces no effect at all, or introduces still greater, 100 per cent uncertainty in the bit
dynamics.  The  impossibility  of  creation  of  regular  (unitary)  quantum  computers  and  simulators  is
compensated by the indeed practically interesting possibility of creation of chaotic (complex-dynamical)
quantum simulators which can open new prospects for the efficient real (complex) problem solution, but
need the unreduced, dynamically multivalued analysis of the universal science of complexity.

The hierarchy of levels of complexity develops in the same fashion to the more and more involved
systems always preserving, however, the universality of the complexity origin and its main properties,
as well as the intrinsic dynamic continuity between the levels equivalent to the universal correspondence
principle. All the universal manifestations of complexity, such as space, time, and energy, have the same
hierarchical structure with fractally branching, causally probabilistic levels-realisations.

It is shown that such complete universality of the dynamic complexity concept can be expressed in
a more explicit way by a standard formalism of description of arbitrary system behaviour at any level of
complexity. It is based on the most fundamental principle of nature, the complexity conservation law, or

17
universal symmetry of complexity. It states that the dynamic complexity universally determined by the
number of system realisations (or, equivalently, as the rate of their change) cannot appear or disappear in
an arbitrary fashion, but is always conserved for the closed systems, or can be transformed in a well-
specified fashion in interaction processes involving open systems. As the complexity of the closed
systems is conserved, it inevitably undergoes permanent internal transformation from a 'hidden' (latent)
form of interaction, or potential energy, universally referred to as (dynamic) information into the second,
explicit form of spatial structure, universally defined as (dynamic) entropy. The transformation process
is 'spontaneous' in the sense that it is driven by the interaction itself that represents therefore intrinsically
unstable form of complexity in which it exists immediately after its creation (emergence) in the form of a
new system (level) of interacting objects. This universal, eventually hierarchical, transformation of the
initial stock of informational complexity, encoded in real though latent interactions, into the incarnate,
tangible form of spatial structure-entropy is the basis for all dynamical processes in nature, and thus for
any existence. Correspondingly, it can be described by the universal dynamic equation, generalising and
extending all the known equations that correctly describe real processes. This is the (generalised)
Hamilton-Jacobi  equation for the action-complexity (which considerably extends the notion of the
ordinary mechanical action) having the form of its well-known analogue from classical mechanics, but
possessing much wider interpretation and unlimited scope of applications. It reproduces all the known
equations as its particular limiting cases and approximations and also proposes a new approach to their
solution and analysis coinciding with the universal formalism of the fundamental dynamic redundance
(the method of the effective dynamical functions). This unrestricted universality is based on the universal
character of the underlying notion of complexity and its conservation law that includes, in a considerably
extended form, such linear-science principles as energy conservation (and all other well-established
physical  conservation  laws),  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  ('degradation  of  energy'  through
permanent increase of entropy), the 'principle of relativity' (special and general), and various versions of
the 'variational principle' ('least action', 'shortest optical path', 'minimum potential energy', etc.).

At each level of complexity (or for each complex system) such extended description provides the
complete (general) solution of the universal equation in the form of many incompatible realisations
replacing  the  single  realisation  of  the  linear  science.  All  the  diverse  realisations  of  a  system  are
profoundly  symmetric  among  them,  in  the  extended  sense  of  the  universal  dynamic  symmetry  of
complexity and irrespective of, or even due to, their mechanistic, formal configurational asymmetry.
This  property  of  the  symmetry  of  complexity  is  simulated  by  the  linear-science  notion  of  'broken
symmetry' trying to account for the empirically observed large deviations from the simplified linear-
science symmetry. However, in accord with its name any 'broken symmetry' is a lower symmetry with
respect to the corresponding 'unbroken' mechanistic symmetry, while the unreduced dynamic symmetry
of  complexity  between  the  formally  'asymmetric'  realisations  is  qualitatively  higher than any its
mechanistic  prototype.  Needless  to  say,  the  higher  is  the  system  complexity,  the  higher  is  the
corresponding dynamical symmetry, so that any formally 'irregularly structured' living organism is
indeed much more symmetric than any most involved, or simple, regular structure. This fundamental
conclusion  has  been  previously  expected,  but  it  acquires  a  rigorous,  causal  interpretation  and
substantiation only now, within the dynamic redundance paradigm.

The complete solution of a version of the universal equation realises the fully adequate description
of all the involved complexity patterns for each level of complexity, system or type of behaviour. They
are but particular manifestations of the universal symmetry (conservation) of complexity in the form of
the standard process of complexity  unfolding (development) where the full positive complexity of a
system  is  first  autonomously  created  from  lower-level  (more  fundamental)  structures  in  the
predominantly informational form of a potential (latent) interaction specifying the notion of élan vital
(Bergson 1907) which is then transformed into the form of (generalised) dynamical entropy of real,
tangible structures in the process of interaction development by dynamical realisation breeding, so that
the  sum  of  dynamical  information  and  entropy  remains  constant  and  equal  to  the  total  dynamic
complexity  of  the  (isolated)  system.  This  shows  that  not  only  the  canonical  'second  law  of
thermodynamics' inexplicably and unpleasantly 'skewed' towards 'degradation of energy' is extended
now to the causally deduced and dynamically substantiated universal symmetry (conservation principle)
of dynamic complexity, but also the processes of both degradation and emergence (development) of any
structures are none other than different, objectively inevitable stages of the same unique process of now
rigorously  and  causally  defined  birth,  life  and  death of any  dynamical  system.  The  apparently
'progressive development' of a system is evidently closer to its birth from lower-level structures, while
the phase of explicit 'degradation' is a precursor of its death, or generalised state of equilibrium, thus
also  acquiring  a  causally  extended,  universally  substantiated  interpretation.  However,  the  system
degrades, strictly speaking, during its whole life, i. e. starting already from its birth, while the life of
even very old system is irreducibly based on the continuing internal progressive transformation of the
remaining (small) stock of information into entropy.

18

The self-consistent source of intrinsic, autonomously maintained creativity of the natural evolution
of a system through its complexity development is thus revealed as an extension and substantiation of
the famous Bergsonian évolution créatrice (Bergson 1907). The probabilistic, fractal structures emerging
at a particular level of complexity unfolding give rise to the next generation of new objects together with
their interaction realising further development of the dynamical creation process described again by the
same universal Hamilton-Jacobi formalism. This rigorously specified and universally consistent picture
of the creative evolution of a system is based on a crucial extension of the notions of information and
entropy, so limited and very often misunderstood and confused in their conventional, purely formal and
characteristically vulgarised, versions in the linear science (e. g. Nikolis (1986), Haken (1988), Zurek
(1989), Kadomtsev (1994), Cerf and Adami (1996), Izakov (1997), Van Siclen (1997), Lyre (1997),
Steane (1997)). Indeed, the single-valued paradigm of the canonical, mechanistic science can never
provide  any  intrinsic,  dynamical  source  of  multiple  independent,  probabilistically  realised  'states'
indispensable for any consistent definition of information and entropy. The universal symmetry of
complexity shows also that both energy and entropy are different expressions of the same dynamic
complexity, where the (dynamic) entropy is more directly determined by the number of realisations for a
fully  developed  system  or  level  of  complexity,  whereas  energy  characterises  the  temporal  rate  of
realisation change in the process of complexity unfolding, usually at a lower, relatively fine-grained level
of  complexity  (similarly,  the  generalised  momentum  characterises  the  spatial  rate  of  realisation
emergence in the complexity transformation process).

The universal Hamilton-Jacobi formalism possesses two universal, equally valid, and intrinsically
related forms providing respectively the local (trajectorial) or nonlocal (y -functional) type of description.
The local type of description corresponds to system occupying 'normal' realisations one after another –
which  gives  the  generalised  system  trajectory  in  the  generalised  space  (of  realisations)  at  the
corresponding  level  of  the  hierarchy  of  complexity  –  and  is  represented  by  the  Hamilton-Jacobi
formalism,  but  especially  its  (generalised)  Lagrangian  version  that  describes,  in  the  science  of
complexity, all possible trajectories-realisations really, though probabilistically, taken by the system in
course of its chaotic transitions from one trajectory (realisation) to another driven by the fundamental
mechanism of dynamic redundance. This causally deduced description not only provides the realistic
refinement of the least action conjecture in classical mechanics (and similar 'variational principles' in
other fields of the canonical science), but universally extends it to any dynamical system behaviour upon
which  it  becomes  indistinguishable  from  the  modified  path-integral  formulation  of  a  problem  (the
regular, effectively one-dimensional systems with only one continuous trajectory-realisation form a set
of trivial and rare exceptions with the zero relative measure). The nonlocal version of the same universal
formalism corresponds to the state of the system just undergoing those chaotic transitions between
realisations (elementary trajectory portions) and is represented by the generalised Schrödinger equation
for the causally extended y -function describing that particular transient state of the system between the
realisations. According to this definition, the y -function gives the (dynamically determined) distribution
of realisation probabilities (i. e. probabilities of realisation occupation by the system), and therefore
plays the role (for certain levels of complexity in the form of its squared modulus) of the (generalised)
distribution function. The obtained Lagrange (local) and Schrödinger (nonlocal) descriptions represent
two intrinsically (dually) related aspects of the same dynamical process of complexity unfolding (alias
'system evolution') and therefore are related by the causally derived generalised 'quantization rules'. At
the level of quantum-mechanical objects the generalised y -function takes the form of the canonical
wavefunction, now acquiring the transparent causal interpretation of a physically real entity (see above).
For the classical systems, at higher levels of complexity, the same universal y -function turns into the
corresponding (modified) distribution functions describing now causally probabilistic, dynamically
uncertain  distribution  of  the  quasi-localised  state-trajectories  (and  the  system  performing  chaotic
transitions, or 'quantum jumps', between them). Therefore the y -functional representation of complex
dynamics can also be considered as the unified causal extension of the path-integral and variational
formulations of the linear science (where the least action principle turns out to be more universal than the
path-integral formalism, so that in the generalised version the latter is reduced to the former).

In  general,  the  system  evolution  can  be  considered  as  the  chaotic  piece-wise  total  trajectory
consisting  of  more  uniform  sequences  of  (probabilistically  taken)  realisations  interrupted  by
probabilistically  distributed  larger  'jumps'  between  such  quasi-uniform  pieces  of  trajectory.  If  the
driving interactions involved are such that irregularity is relatively high and the quasi-uniform pieces of
trajectory are relatively short (in the limit each of them includes in average only one 'point'-realisation),
then we deal with a pronouncedly nonlocal (distributed), 'wave-like' behaviour more naturally related to
the nonlocal version of the universal formalism. In the other limiting situation the irregularity is relatively
low, the chaotic jumps between realisations are typically small, and we obtain relatively long quasi-

19
uniform pieces of generalised trajectory (in the limit it is transformed in the single quasi-continuous
Newtonian type of trajectory of a well-defined 'material point'), in better correspondence with the local,
properly 'trajectorial' version of description. However, both dual pictures, aspects of behaviour and
versions of its description are always present and applicable.

We clearly see now that higher levels of complexity acquire many properties of causally interpreted
'quantum' and 'relativistic' behaviour, whereas quantum systems can be naturally described in terms of
the modified 'classical' (real) field and particle mechanics (in the latter case the trajectorial type of
description  provides  the  causal,  Lagrangian  extension  of  the  path-integral  formulation  of  quantum
mechanics). Phenomena and properties like 'wave-particle duality', 'quantum jumps', 'production and
destruction of particles/realisations' ('second quantization'), uncertainty relations, 'special and general
relativity', etc. not only obtain their realistic, complete interpretation for elementary particles (fields), but
are rigorously reproduced for arbitrary complex dynamics and thus practically for any kind of dynamical
system. The same refers to the generalised 'principle of complementarity' which can be considered now
as the summarised expression of the various characteristic dualities (self-sustained intrinsic alternatives)
of arbitrary complex dynamics directly related to the fundamental dynamic redundance paradigm. The
'quantum (wave) mechanics', in the narrow sense, is seen now as several lowest observable levels of
the dynamic complexity of the world, possessing already all its universal properties which appear in
their simplest, 'canonical' form and create the notorious 'quantum paradoxes' unresolvable within the
single-valued, unitary science and therefore providing an ideal subject for 'quantum mysteriology' (in a
similar  fashion,  various  branches  of  the  hopelessly  single-valued  'complexology'  and  'chaology'
desperately tackle the multivalued reality at higher levels of complexity, cf. Horgan (1995)).

Within the same analysis of arbitrary complex behaviour we propose also universal extensions of
other known linear-science approaches to complex dynamics, such as the geometrical analysis of the
Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser (KAM) theory and the concept of Poincaré  surface of section.

The appearance of a next higher level of complexity from the interacting entities of the preceding
lower level can be summarised as the dynamic entanglement of the degrees of freedom of the interacting
entities, necessarily accompanied by the dynamic redundance of the number of entangled combinations.
The dynamic entanglement is the profound, inseparable, fractally structured and causally probabilistic
mixture of the interacting degrees of freedom, which considerably extends the linear-science versions of
mixing  and  entanglement,  used  in  particular  in  quantum  mechanics,  as  well  as  that  of  arbitrary
'interaction process' which is also nothing else than the dynamic entanglement (it is clear therefore that
the latter is another expression of the universal dynamic fractality described above). The irreducible
redundance of the products of an elementary interaction process is due to the fact that both before and
after the interaction process we have the same unique reality with a fixed number of 'places' for the
degrees  of  freedom.  However,  if  each  of  the  interacting  entities  is  characterised  by  N  degrees  of
freedom, their combination in course of dynamic entanglement-interaction will produce the equivalent of
N2 versions of the resulting combined degrees of freedom (characterising the new-born entities). The
underlying 'conservation of the total number of degrees of freedom' is none other than a manifestation
of the complexity conservation law. We obtain thus the N-fold redundance of the created structure at the
appeared new (higher) level of complexity. That is how inseparability (real and mathematical) of the
dynamic entanglement (mixing) is related to the dynamic redundance. It is important that the redundance
(local multivaluedness of reality) exists in a real form even before its actual emergence in the process of
interaction-entanglement, it is hidden in the 'latent' form of interaction-potential (it is the generalised
'energy  of  wound-up  spring').  When  the  redundant  realisations  actually  appear  in  the  process  of
interaction, they start inevitably replacing one another by pushing each other out from the 'tangible',
explicit reality back into the hidden form of interaction which is, however, not stable any more, and thus
the chaotic 'quarrel' of the competing realisations continues, until the appearing next level of interaction
will not split and entangle them into still higher level of the fractal structure of complexity, etc. (this
'complexity unfolding' continues until the complete exhaustion of the total, initially hidden, complexity
of the global isolated system). At each level of complex dynamics the redundant, multi-faced result of
interaction preserves, however, its wholeness, which is described just by the generalised y -function
(distribution function) consisting of all the (real) transient states of the system during its chaotic jumps
between each two successive realisations and playing the role of the universal dynamical 'glue' that
bonds all the multiple realisations of the complex dynamics into a single system. It is evident that y -
function describes simultaneously the jumps between realisations and the distribution of probabilities of
individual realisations, which provides substantiation and generalisation of quantum-mechanical Born's
probability rule and the practical way to find the probabilities by solving the generalised Schrödinger
equation  (which  replaces  all  its  linear-science  imitations  in  the  form  of  various  equations  for  the
'distribution  functions',  'density  matrix',  etc.).  Without  the  composite  structure  of  reality  made  of
elements-realisations which are 'gently' hold together by the 'adhesive action' of permanent chaotic

20
transitions between them, the construction of the universe would be neither strong, nor flexible enough
to  be  viable,  similar  to  the  principle  of  natural  and  artificial  'composite  materials'.  Any  'self-
organisation'  and  real  'structure  formation'  are  impossible  without  this  irreducibly  probabilistic,
multilevel complex-dynamical composite of randomness and regularity inside them. Note also that the
self-sustained,  hierarchically  structured,  intrinsically  probabilistic  and  dynamically  entangled
development of complexity of a system can be considered as the causally complete description of the
generalised adaptability of (multilevel) complex dynamics realising the automatically maintained search
by the system of the 'easiest' way of development which corresponds to the locally maximal rate of
complexity unfolding and provides the latter with the fundamental property of sense. The generalised
adaptability is closely related to the generalised 'second law of thermodynamics' and in particular its
formulation for the 'freely expanding gas' which should always take the 'whole accessible volume'. In
other  terms,  the  same  group  of  properties  can  be  called  'generalised  dynamical  percolation'  of  the
unfolding complexity, with the evident underlying interpretation involving the dynamical fractal concept.
This qualitative picture of complexity development and its formal description by the two dual
versions of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation seem to be absolutely universal. Especially remarkable is the
fact that the whole unified description of the entire diversity of the world, including the extended,
causally complete versions of all correct notions, approaches and equations together with the ensuing
results, is based on a single formal limitation of generality (complexity conservation law) which is
shown, however, to be equivalent to all the main conservation laws and other basic principles and
therefore universally confirmed by the whole body of the existing empirical knowledge (apart from the
internal consistency argument, also necessitating the existence of such kind of general order in a holistic,
developing system). This is what indeed can be called the first-principle Theory of Everything (it should
automatically  provide  the  ultimate  unification  of  knowledge,  i.  e.  its  intrinsically  continuous  and
complete version, see also below).

Finally, the universal concept of complexity and its generalised description are applied to a brief
outline of the higher levels of complex behaviour, from complex physical systems to the highest spheres
of human activity, usually studied within the humanities.

It is shown that a number of most important and urgent problems, actually stagnating because of
the  apparently  'irresolvable'  difficulties,  can  be  solved  only  within  the  science  of  complexity  and
therefore indeed cannot yield to any canonical, unitary approach, whatever is the quantity of the applied
efforts.  This  is  precisely  the  objective  sense  of  the  'end  of  science':  it  is  the  end  of  the  linear
(dynamically single-valued, unitary) science, so that there is no any positive sense to continue the
infinite fruitless 'studies' of the fundamental problems within the conventional single-valued paradigm
of the scholar science which are inevitably reduced to the characteristic 'imitative' activity with fictitious,
obviously contradictory results formally 'certified' by purely subjective, 'organisational' methods of
voting, traffic of influence, etc. In contrast, the complex-dynamical solutions are universally feasible,
objectively verifiable and complete by their origin, which means also that each of them contains a much
larger scope of qualitatively different possibilities with respect to everything that could be expected
within the linear approach. This conclusion is illustrated by such problems and directions as: the many-
body  problem  and  modern  solid  state  theory  that  includes  the  well-known  evidently  stagnating
difficulties like the origin of the high-temperature superconductivity, systems with frustration (glasses),
quantum Hall effect and other situations with irreducibly strong, nonperturbational interaction effects;
'megaprojects' of the canonical science, including 'supercomputers', 'superaccelerators', new energy
sources (especially the controlled nuclear fusion) and the human genome project; quantum computers,
neural  networks,  artificial  intelligence,  and  the  problem  of  consciousness;  medical,  ecological  and
geophysical  problems  (transition  to  objectively  efficient  integral  medicine  and  ecological  system
monitoring,  efficient  prediction  and  control  of  natural  catastrophes  is  outlined);  causally  complete
understanding  of  economical,  sociological,  and  political  development  of  the  modern  society;  new
organisation of science in relation to the new contents and meaning of the intellectual activity at the level
of the universal science of complexity; rigorous interpretation of aesthetic and ethical notions, theological
concepts, and the role of philosophy. Using the power of the qualitatively new paradigm of dynamic
redundance, the universal science of complexity provides the genuine, causally complete understanding
of the natural processes at any level of complexity forming the unique basis for their efficient practical
monitoring, whereas the canonical single-valued (i. e. essentially one-dimensional) analysis inevitably
limits itself to the purely empirical method of positivistic classification of observations excluding any
possibility of causally substantiated and therefore objectively reliable predictions. It is not surprising that
this essential difference comes in the foreground and becomes vitally important just today, when the
civilisation development brings the centre of human activity to superior levels of complexity: now we
need to master any dynamic behaviour, which is equivalent to its complete, realistic, totally conscious
understanding uniquely based on the extended causality of the universal science of complexity.

21
The possibility or impossibility of reduction, at least partial, of the full complexity of a system to a
single-valued, regular behaviour determines its classification (intuitive until now) as the subject of
respectively 'exact sciences' or the humanities (arts). It is natural that the latter type of knowledge seems
to  be  basically  incomprehensible  at  the  completely  conscious,  properly  'scientific'  level  within  the
canonical paradigm, and belongs therefore to the irreducibly empirical, intuitive 'science', or art, even
though all the conventional 'exact' sciences also inevitably contain excessive quantities of basically
incomprehensible, postulated elements (the 'mysteries' of quantum mechanics provide a characteristic
example). It is equally clear why the exact sciences typically study the lower levels of the universal
hierarchy of complexity of the world, whereas the humanities tend to its higher levels (with the 'natural
sciences' forming the irregular border between the two).

The existing mathematics totally belongs to the single-valued paradigm of the canonical science
and  therefore  should be irreducibly  detached  from  the  intrinsically  multivalued  reality  in  order  to
attenuate  the  evident  divergence  with  it,  as  it  is  so  transparently  illustrated  by  comparison  of  the
cumbersome, rigidly fixed constructions of the canonical 'maths' with the infinitely fine involvement of
the always moving (self-developing), unpredictable and asymmetric structure of the world around us.
For the same fundamental reason the canonical mathematics cannot be universal and noncontradictory in
its internal structure, but should inevitably be composed from the disrupted, often antagonistically
opposed notions and structures. By contrast to this, the new  mathematics of the universal science of
complexity is intrinsically entangled with reality at all scales, which means that now all the mathematical
constructions are built only in close direct relation to well-specified real structures. In fact, the new
mathematics always deals with one and the same construction, indistinguishable from the reality it
describes - the ever developing fundamental dynamical fractal of the world - possessing infinitely many
aspects and branches which now are directly related and opposed to each other only constructively
(dualistically),  and  not  antagonistically.  Therefore  in  the  new  mathematics  one  always  has  a  well-
defined, though nontrivially structured, 'guiding line' for development of formal description which
assures  automatically  the  maximum  efficiency,  since  it  coincides  with  the  universal  hierarchy  of
complexity including its own formal representations. In practice, one should simply follow the natural
complexity unfolding process using the unique criterion of (dynamic) complexity conservation which
includes  permanent  growth  of  its  structural  part  (generalised  entropy)  and  the  intrinsic  continuity,
typically appearing through a system of truly noncontradictory, multi-sided and multi-level, correlations
within  the  unique  hierarchy  of  complexity  (the  natural  process  of  image  recognition  by  the  brain
provides a pertinent analogy). One can compare this new type of formal description with the usual
method of intuitive, often purely abstract 'guesses' about the 'suitable' development of formal structures
followed  by  their  'experimental  verification'  in  the  applied  canonical  mathematics  or  'internal
consistency' checking in the pure mathematics which loose so definitely and hopelessly their relation to
reality and the ensuing 'certainty' about the objective criteria of truth (cf. Kline (1980), Ziman (1996)),
not accidentally just in the age of the crucial advent of the irreducible dynamic complexity of the higher
levels of being.

The above new paradigm of dynamic cognition actually refers also to the whole process of new
knowledge development, which means that in the universal science of complexity there can be no any
discontinuous  gap  between  'exact',  or  'formal',  and  'figurative'  (verbal)  descriptions;  they  are
intrinsically unified within the single, ultimately causal, really complete (and still ever developing!)
understanding. Knowledge itself is causally defined now as a part of the universal hierarchy of tangible
complexity (entropy) concentrated rather at its higher levels and emerging in the same universal process
of  natural  transformation  of  dynamic  information  (latent  interaction)  into  entropy.  It  is  clearly
demonstrated in this work that the universal science of complexity provides a completely new type of
cognitive process leading to the ultimate  unification  of  knowledge, which means that the obtained
knowledge is intrinsically, indivisibly unified, in perfect accord with the unity of nature it describes. The
structure  of  the  unified  knowledge  comes  not  from  the  artificial,  mechanistic  'classification'  into
basically separated 'fields' and entities, as it happens in the canonical science, but from the naturally
appearing  levels  of  complexity  of  the  actually  observed  objects  and  dynamical  patterns  of  their
behaviour. Similar to the  reality it  describes,  the universal and living knowledge of the science of
complexity has the dynamically entangled, fractal-like, and partially unpredictable, always developing
structure. This latter property emphasises the intrinsically creative character of the new knowledge, as
opposed to the basically fixed, chronically stagnating character of the canonical science always actively
resisting to any qualitative change (cf. Kuhn (1970)). The ultimate unification of knowledge within the
science of complexity provides the most complete description of the world, which actually cannot, and
should not, be separated from reality it describes, both are equally 'objective' and rich, and form the
unbroken,  unique  Truth.  This  intrinsic  realism  of  the  unreduced  science  of  complexity  is  another
expression of its extended causality providing the natural reunification of the 'three worlds' (physical,
mental, and mathematical) artificially separated by the canonical linear thinking (cf. Penrose (1994)).

22

It is not surprising that this highest form of knowledge is capable to provide the objective, causal
understanding even for such parts of reality, 'esoteric' within the canonical science, as consciousness or
a basically different, 'supernatural' reality usually studied by theology.

In particular, it is rigorously shown that the universal complexity conservation law, supported by
all existing observations, directly leads to the necessity of explicit Creation of the World from  the
outside, represented by more fundamental levels of dynamic complexity, in the form of the primal
protofields and their interaction, as opposed to the linear-science concepts of 'spontaneous' emergence
of the world 'from nothing', formally permitted by the canonical energy conservation law and serving as
a basis for various ex nihilo concepts dominating in the linear-science cosmology (see e. g. Gott and Li
(1997) and the references therein). This conclusion is related to the fact that the unreduced dynamic
complexity-energy is always positive (and large, for the whole World), contrary to the mechanistically
interpreted energy from the linear science. On the other hand, the dynamic redundance paradigm of the
new science of complexity explains the source and content of the autonomous internal development
(unfolding) of the once created complexity of the world revealing its raison d'être and the objective goal
and content of its evolution. The existing painful separation between the main directions of progressive
theological  thought,  such  as  those  of  Christian,  Islamic,  and  Buddhist  (Oriental)  traditions,  can  be
replaced,  within  the  extended  causality  of  the  universal  science  of  complexity,  by  a  constructive
interaction leading to crucial progress in each of these branches partially demonstrated in this work and
avoiding  any  simplified,  mechanistic  mixing  of  the  linear-thinking  substitutes  sometimes  actively
promoted today.

The  property  of  consciousness  emerges  together  with  certain  sufficiently  high  levels  of  the
unfolding complexity (provided the initially created quantity of its informational form is high enough).
Similar to any other form of complexity, it is neither strictly detached from 'unconscious' cognition at
the lower border, nor limited from above; it contains many qualitatively different, inhomogeneously
distributed levels and 'branches'. The 'non-computability of conscious thinking' (Penrose 1994) cannot
be used as a specific attribute of consciousness simply because any truly complex (and thus practically
any real) behaviour, starting from the isolated electron dynamics, involves causal randomness and is
therefore beyond any linear-science 'computability'; consciousness is a higher-level 'non-computable'
behaviour. Its human version, the only one currently known to us, is physically realised as higher levels
of complex dynamics of the brain which can be described as the hierarchy of objective reduction-
extension processes of the realistic 'brainfunction' representing the universal y -function at this level of
complexity and describing the distribution of the magnitude of the physically real, basically well-known
electro-chemical interactions between the neurones. In accord with the universality of complex behaviour
within the dynamic redundance paradigm, the brainfunction dynamics generally resembles the dynamics
of the wavefunction in (the extended) quantum mechanics, but this is only a behavioural, though quite
significative, analogy: there is no any direct involvement of the lowest levels of complexity, described as
quantum (wave) mechanics, in the highest levels of complexity associated with brain functioning (cf.
Hameroff and Penrose (1995)), even though the fact that we can describe both ultimately separated
levels  of  behaviour  within  the  same  general  concept,  as  well  as  the  underlying  profound  analogy
between them, are quite remarkable and convincingly demonstrate once more the inimitable universality
of the proposed concept of complexity.

The intrinsic self-consistency of the universal concept of dynamic complexity extends its validity
even beyond the borders of the now perceptible, material world (not to mention the canonical forms of
knowledge), and the symmetry of complexity characterises the truly universal, and therefore unique,
Principle of Being, reproducing its full diversity, with all the known, imaginable, and undreamed-of
richness of any intricacy and profundity (it is compared to the similarly universal concepts of the Oriental
philosophy and theology, such as Tao  or Chu¯, and used to obtain their objective interpretation).

This  ultimately  unified  picture  of  the  universal  science  of  complexity  had  a  number  of  great
precursors, even though they almost always remained in the shadow of the dominating mechanistic
approach  of  the  conventional  linear  thinking  and  suffered  dramatically  from  its  aberrations.  The
methods, attitudes and results of such great representatives of the essentially nonlinear (non-unitary)
thinking as René Descartes, Henri Bergson and Louis de Broglie cannot be omitted from the history of
the new, basically multivalued knowledge of the science of complexity which is thus not absolutely new
and can be related, in a well-specified fashion avoiding any mechanistic substitutions, to other prominent
names of science. This will constitute the subject of the new, objectively re-interpreted and considerably
extended history of knowledge.

The  new  knowledge  of  the  universal  science  of  complexity  is  definitely  not  the  positivistic
'arrangement of impressions', a dull stock of immobile, rigidly fixed facts, constantly enriched by the
new ones. It is a living, permanently and naturally changing organism, realising another way of thinking

23
accessible and destined to everyone and not only to a narrow group of self-'chosen', well-organised
'sages' hiding their mediocrity and selfish desire to dominate behind an incomprehensible system of
technical sophistication and oligarchic organisational structure, as it happens today in the canonical,
unitary science. Therefore the new knowledge of the universal science of complexity is inseparable from
the new, objectively founded criterion of truth consisting in emergence of the causally complete, real
solutions for real problems characterised by the holistic system of correlations of the unreduced and
always growing dynamic complexity.

As  it  becomes  especially  obvious  within  the  universally  substantiated  analysis  of  dynamic
complexity, the mechanistic scholar science is incapable to resolve any nontrivial problem for the same
fundamental  reasons  as  those  that  do  not  permit  the  'one-dimensional'  rationalism  of  the  Unitary
Thinking to realise the full potential of human consciousness in a truly developed form of civilisation
providing everyone with a realistic possibility of (almost) complete realisation of his individually specific
potential complexity. The purely technical (mechanistic) way of development, unavoidable within the
dominating  Unitary  System  of  organisation,  cannot  lead  to  resolution  of  the  urgent  fundamental
problems either in science, or in life in general, however large are the quantities of the applied efforts
(this is the basically inevitable saturated  incompleteness of a fully developed level of complexity).
Correspondingly, the new level of thinking of the universal science of complexity inevitably involves the
crucial progress towards a qualitatively superior level of consciousness and thus opens the unique way
to  another  level  of  life  (complexity),  where  one  shall  be  able  to  naturally  solve  the  complicated,
'irresolvable' practical problems accumulating now in all spheres of life. It is the only possible and
urgently needed way of further progressive development, without which the civilisation is seriously
risking to be destroyed as it is clear from the objective complex-dynamical interpretation of the easily
recognisable current exhaustion of the 'developed' world (the End), forming the local (bifurcational),
but extremely important, Apocalyptic end of a very big stage of complexity unfolding.

24

Epilogue:  The  Beginning

Complexity,  nonlinearity,  chaos,  self-organisation,  criticality...  The  frustration  of  the
incomprehensible, disordered agglomerate of contradictory ideas turns now into the majestic harmony of
the  Distributed  Creation.  The  Universal  Science  of  Complexity  provides  each  notion  with  a  well-
specified, profound sense and simultaneously unifies all of them in the holistic, self-consistent structure
of reality, possessing the unique capacity to transform the intrinsic conflicts into constructive interactions
which  use  the  energy  of  formal  opposition  as  the  creative  power  of  the  unfolding  Potential  of
Complexity.  The  tamed  Dualities  between  the  main  Entities,  which  are  the  forms  of  the  dynamic
complexity, and their Properties, characterising the reality of their emergence, explode in the multiplicity
of hierarchically organised structures which constitute the natural richness of Being.

This Ultimate Unification of Knowledge is the Beginning of the new science, inseparable from the
new history and new level of life, in all its manifestations. The completely unified Truth cannot belong
to  several  separated  worlds  or  realities,  it  is  created  by  the  fine  and  always  growing,  probabilistic
entanglement of the 'heavy' material of 'tangible' reality with the fine tissue of causal knowledge and
searching imagination.

Every part and the total contents of the Truth can be expressed by the universal and rigorous
mathematical formalism involving, however, quite New Mathematics. Or if one prefers, the same Truth
can be expressed by other, 'figurative' means using the power of the New Arts, and this 'non-formal',
'artistic' description is generally not less rigorous. It is so because New Mathematics and New Art are
not opposed any more, as neither are knowledge and reality, they are simply different, but explicitly
related, aspects of the same integral construction of Truth, each possessing its own, local completeness
and particular, well-specified features. This is the holographic Truth-Reality, where each part or aspect
reproduces  the  whole,  but  their  totality  provides  the  'best  quality  of  the  image',  the  ultimate
completeness and Causality.

The emerging New Reality has nothing to do with the hypocritical imitation of justice and progress
of the End, either in the scholar, linear science, or in the basically stagnating, completely exhausted
Unitary System of social organisation in all its 'democratic', 'meritocratic', and 'totalitarian' versions
always degenerating into the grey, passive 'equality' which is actually reduced to mediocrity and hides
the ugly, frustrating antagonism. The Beginning leads to the genuine Creativity that can only originate
from  the  properly  specified,  constructive  Interaction  between  the  suitably  differing  partners  and
tendencies naturally 'chosen' by and only by their intrinsic, real capacities (which are objectively defined
by the stock of the latent complexity and subsequently confirmed by the actually realised progress, the
unambiguous  increase of the explicit, unreduced complexity of the realistic new possibilities). The
exhausted, formal liberté-égalité-fraternité, resulting in the actual absence of the real free choice and
thoroughly maintained by the mechanistic power of the Technocracy of the End motivated by the selfish
profits it takes from the System, is replaced by Volonté (for the Choice), Créativité (for the Realisation),
Diversité (for the Result) of the Beginning.

The Beginning needs the End, as its irreducible dual opponent giving sense to its own emergence.
They are both conceived from the start, they have always been existing, fighting, disappearing and
reappearing at the changeable interface between the Past and the Future. The Medieval Thinking of the
End always uses the inertial power of mediocrity to maintain the mechanistic dominance of the Past over
the creative force of Renaissance Thinking advancing the World through the Beginning to the Future.

The Beginning starts always, it is in the advent of prophets and any other Breakthrough of the
same Universal Truth culminating in the Values of Renaissance and emerging in each partial advance of
progress, whenever and wherever it happens. The Values prepare the decisive, global Beginning that
needs Liberation. Liberation is the meaning of the End.

The Beginning is a victory of Good that corresponds to the crucial growth of complexity and
realises  another  big  step  in  progressive  unfolding  of  Creation.  But  Creativity  needs  independent,
autonomous interactivity, and therefore the Beginning results from the End in the fight between Good
and Evil. Evil is the Inertia of the Past, the lower-level complexity, the 'yesterday triumph' that does not
want  to  go  easily  to  the  back-yard  of  Being,  often  masking  itself  behind  artificially  simulated
substitutions for 'progress', 'interaction', 'unification' which are totally composed from the superficial,
abstract  signs  and  in  reality  lead  only  to  a  more  profound  stagnation:  "Beware  of  false  prophets".
Nothingness is their choice, emptiness is their way, oblivion will be their fate.

The  Change  for  Good  is  what  has  ever  been  happening  in  course  of  the  eternal  complexity
development, providing the sense for Time as the unique form of the World existence. But the change
can never emerge smoothly, predictably and with the efforts of 'someone else', though many yield to the

25
deceptive comfort of this illusion. The End shows that the illusions are vain, but only the Beginning can
kill them by actually creating another reality with much higher complexity that just expels the Evil to
Yesterday, with all its tricky substitutes, hypocritical 'tolerance' and perfidious 'good manners'.

The Beginning prepared by Liberation needs the definite, active Choice leading to crucial Change
for Good, here and now. It is impossible without the decisive restriction of the interests of Evil, which
implies also clear rejection of the imitations of progress it uses, and the sooner it is performed, the less
dramatic  will  be  the  consequences:  the  'bridges  to  the  third  millennium'  hastily  pumped  up  by  the
servants of Evil at their bazaar level of complexity lead to a deep impasse and the ensuing catastrophe.
The Alternatives of the Choice, representing the current huge Bifurcation of Development, are within
each personality, and by making the right choice every one leaves the End of a clever animal and ascends
to the Beginning of his true, unique Self, lit up by the incarnate spirituality.

Similar to some fantastic Star Gate, the real Portal between the Past and the Future is wide open
only  during  a  limited  period  of  Time,  simply  because  Time  is  inhomogeneous  and  irreversible.
Something will necessarily happen, and if it is not the Good of the Beginning that needs to be actively
promoted, it will be its absence, the Evil of the supersaturated End, which gives the catastrophic way of
development whatever is the apparent 'technical progress'.

There is indeed a time to every thing. The time of lie slips irreversibly to the past, and now it is the
time of truth waiting for action. One cannot make the necessary big advance towards the Truth remaining
in conformity with the lie of the Unitary System of life. The banality of the most sophisticated lies
becomes explicitly evident through the direct comparison with the intrinsically humanised, irrestrictably
interesting, always dualistic and developing truth of the ultimately unified knowledge.

The Beginning is here and the objective, fundamentally substantiated analysis of the Universal
Science of Complexity makes it clearly visible from the End through the opening Portal to the Future.
You are at the very Threshold of a quite New World prepared by the whole now ending History and
especially by the last period of Anno Domini. You just need to make a step, You who are reading now
these lines, and not someone else, supposed to be less occupied with the vain flicker of the End. You
will know for whom the Bell tolls, You just should not reject its Tune. The Cynicism of the condemned
System will not protect You, it leads only to nothingness.

The Step gives the true causality and complexity in science and another level of life, oriented to the
real and complete realisation of your possibilities which are not opposed any more to those of the others,
as it is artificially imposed by the Evil of the dying System.

It is the decisive step towards the true, creative interactivity and entanglement between fields of
knowledge, nations and people that should replace the mechanistic, superficial substitutions for unity
hastily prompted right now by the decadent, mercenary Evil that belongs to the Past already for at least
two thousand years.

The Step needs the efforts because it is an Act of Creation, a victory of Good over Evil. But if
everything is prepared for it and all the tendencies point in the same direction, there is no sense to refuse
from one's own Future, especially when it is so exceptionally sensitive to one's action and can be so
irreducibly Good.

***********************************************

Ask,
and it shall be given you;
Seek,
and ye shall find;
Knock,
and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you:

For every one that asketh receiveth;

And he that seeketh findeth;

And to him that knocketh it shall be opened.

Matthew 7:7-8

***********************************************

26

Appendix

TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE BOOK

Extended  Abstract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

To  the  Reader   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19

Genesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23

The  End . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    29

Part  I:    Dynamic  Complexity  in  Elementary  Physical  Systems

Chapter 1. Quantum Chaos and Fundamental Multivaluedness of

Dynamical  Functions  (Dynamic  Redundance)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35

1. Introduction: Dynamical chaos and complexity in Hamiltonian

quantum  systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3 7

2. Formulation of the method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
2.1.  Effective  dynamical  functions     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   41

2.2.  Fundamental  dynamic  multivaluedness  (redundance)     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46

2.3.  Quantum  chaos  as  dynamic  redundance   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   52

3. Quantum chaos in Hamiltonian systems with periodic perturbation . . . . . . . . . .  58

4. Dynamic uncertainty and fractal structure of quantum chaos . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  76

5. Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8 2

6. Fundamental multivaluedness, (non)integrability, completeness, and

complexity: from quantum-mechanical to arbitrary dynamical systems . . . . . . .  92

Appendix I. Auxiliaries for the effective dynamical function formalism . . . . . . . . 101

Chapter 2. Causal Wave Mechanics and the Dynamic Redundance Paradigm . . . . . 105

7. Incompleteness of quantum mechanics and its involvement with chaos . . . . . . .  107

8. Chaos in quantum measurement: Causal indeterminism

and spontaneous wave reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   114

8.1. Theory of measurement beyond the standard interpretation

and the fundamental dynamic redundance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    114

8.2. Example of measurement with the intrinsic dynamic uncertainty

and objective wave collapse: Particle coordinate measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    131

9. Quantum field mechanics: A scheme of the complete causal wave mechanics . .   146

10. Quantum field mechanics as the unified complex-dynamical extension

of quantum mechanics, theory of relativity, and field theory  . . . . . . . . . . . .  157

27

10.1.   Complex dynamics of elementary material fields: General description . . . . . . . . . . . .  157

10.2.   Double solution with chaos: Extension of de Broglie's nonlinear wave mechanics . . . . 164

10.3.   Relativistic mass-energy as dynamic complexity of elementary field-particle . . . . . . . . 166

10.4.   Generalised Lagrange formalism and least action principle as manifestations

of the universal complexity conservation law    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180

10.5.   Causal wave mechanics of elementary field-particles and the quantized

structure of complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  186

10.6.   Quantized complexity and the nature of the photon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   194

10.7.   Complex wave mechanics of interacting particles:

The Dirac and Schrödinger equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    200

10.8.   Causal randomness and Born's probability rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    207

10.9.   Physical origin of spin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      210

10.10. Complex dynamics of many-particle wave fields  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    216

10.11. Generalised coherence in the complex wave-field dynamics

and causal interpretation of electric charge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   218
10.12. Particle diversity: massive bosons and other particle species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   224
10.13. Classical behaviour emerges for quantum systems with sufficiently high

dynamic complexity (bound elementary field-particles)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   230

10.14. Generalised Hamilton-Jacobi formalism, chaotic-path integration,

and  exponents  spoiled  by  jumps    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   236

10.15.  Quantum  dynamics  of  gravity    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   241

10.16. Causal relativity and the universal symmetry of complexity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    255
10.17. Fundamental origin of space and time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   259

11. Quantum mechanics with chaos: Conclusion and selected applications . . . . . .   266

(A) Quantum information processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    266

(B) The basic structure and origin of the physical world    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   271

Part  II:  Complexity  in  Arbitrary  Dynamical  Systems:
The  Unified  Description

Chapter 3. Universal Science of Complexity

and the Ultimate Unification of Knowledge  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  275

12. Universal dynamic complexity, its fractal structure, and the main types

of complex behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   277

12.1. Causal randomness in arbitrary system with interaction

as the fundamental dynamic redundance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   277

12.2. Fundamental dynamic uncertainty and the related properties:

dynamic entanglement, global instability, essential nonlinearity,
nonintegrability, nonperturbativity, incoherence, completeness
and the general solution of arbitrary problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   290

28

12.3. The universal dynamic complexity and chaos as redundant realisations

of arbitrary system with interaction and spontaneous transitions between them . . . . . . . 300

12.4. The fractal structure of complexity, its dynamic origin

and causally probabilistic character . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305

12.5. Generic types of complex behaviour and their properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311

12.5.1. Uniform chaos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  311

12.5.2. Self-organised criticality and control of chaos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   312

12.5.3. Low-complexity suppression of chaos

and complex dynamics of the ground state  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  320

12.5.4. The structure of chaotic jumps, the role of noise,

and the generalised quantum attenuation of chaos    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  322

12.5.5. Chaotic free-bound switching and chaos-induced tunneling . . . . . . . . . . . . .   326

12.6. The paradigm of change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  327

13. Fundamental arborescence of complexity

and the universal law of natural development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    330

13.1. Hierarchical structure of complexity: General description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    330

13.2. Generalised entropy and information as forms of dynamic complexity.

Conservation of complexity by transformation of information into entropy . . . . . . . . .   335

13.3. Information unfolding into entropy as the universal law of natural development and its

description by the generalised Hamilton-Jacobi formalism. Origin of time and space . . .  342

13.4. Hamilton-Jacobi equation as universal mathematical description of natural processes and

its local and nonlocal versions. State function and the generalised Schrödinger equation    352

13.5. Generalised quantization and uncertainty relations, irreversibility and discreteness.

Energy and momentum as universal properties of complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   366

13.6. Multilevel hierarchy of space and time. Causal relativity at arbitrary level of complexity    374

13.7. Complexity conservation law and the objective meaning of creation.

Creation of the World and causal cosmology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  379

13.8. Birth, life, and death of a complex system. Generalised phase transitions, state

of equilibrium, and the law of degradation of energy. Dissipativity and adaptability . . . . 384

13.9. Essentially multilevel dynamic regimes: turbulence and self-organised criticality . . . . . .  391

14. Universal symmetry of complexity and the ultimate unification of knowledge    398

14.1. World's harmony unified and quantified: Universal symmetry of complexity . . . . . . . .  398
14.2. Shadows of complexity: Simulations of dynamic complexity in the linear science

and their unified complex-dynamical extension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    405
14.2.1. The linear, or conventional, science as the single-valued

projection of the science of complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   405

29
14.2.2. Simulation of dynamic complexity in the linear science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    410

14.2.2.1. Exponential-divergence concept of dynamical chaos and its

complex-dynamical extension: The end of the Lyapunov exponents    413

14.2.2.2. Linear-science simulation of dynamic fractality:

Strange attractors, Cantor sets, intermittency, and bifurcations.
'Scenarios of transition to chaos' as the linear-science
substitute for the fundamental dynamic origin of chaos  . . . . . . . . .   422

14.2.2.3. Computer simulation of reality in the science of complexity

and its linear-science projection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   428

14.2.2.4. Conventional self-organisation against dynamical chaos

and their complex-dynamical unification.
Solitons and the science of complexity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  430

14.3. The universal science of complexity as the ultimate unification of knowledge

and its particular manifestations in theory and practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   434

14.3.1. The natural development of complexity

as the universal dynamical cognition process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   434

14.3.2. Emergence of consciousness. Scientific knowledge as the conscious stage

of cognition, and its ultimate unification within the universal science
of complexity. The true essence of Cartesian science and
the  new  history  of  knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   438

14.3.3. Science of complexity as the universal method of solution of

'irresolvable' problems: Selected applications and prospects . . . . . . . . . . . . .   447
(A) Megaprojects of linear science and the unique possibility of their realisation

within the universal science of complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  449

(B) Artificial and natural intellect, consciousness, neural networks,

supercomputation, and new types of computers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   455

(C) General solution of the many-body problem and the new age

in solid-state physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  464

(D) Integral medicine. Complete description of ecological system behaviour.

Full understanding of economic, political, and social processes . . . . . . . . .   469
(E) New structure of science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  483
(F) New mathematics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    496

(G) Quantified harmony in aesthetics and rigorous definition of moral values

in ethics. The intrinsic unification of science, philosophy, and theology . . .   502

15. Revolution of complexity and possible ways of development

of the world after the end of history . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    517

Conclusion

The  Beginning   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5 3 1

References     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  535

30

References

Allen, P.M. and H.K. Phang (1993). "Evolution, Creativity and Intelligence in Complex Systems".

In: Interdisciplinary Approaches to Nonlinear Complex Systems. Eds. H. Haken and
A. Mikhailov (Springer-Verlag, Berlin).

Andrade e Silva, J. (1973). "La Théorie de la Double Solution". In Louis de Broglie.

 Sa Conception du Monde Physique (Gauthier-Villars, Paris).

Andreev, A.V., O. Agam, B.D. Simons, and B.L. Altshuler (1996). Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 3947.

Anglin, J.R. and W.H. Zurek (1996). Phys. Rev. D 53, 7327.

Babloyantz, A. (1986). Molecules, Dynamics, and Life. An Introduction to Self-Organisation of

Matter (Wiley-Interscience, New York).

Bak, P. (1996). How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organised Criticality

(Copernicus/Springer).

Benioff, P. (1980). J. Stat. Phys. 22, 563.

Benioff, P. (1986). Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 480, 475.

Benioff, P. (1997). "Quantum Robots and Quantum Computers", e-print quant-ph/9706012.

Berezin, A.A. (1996). "Hampering the progress of science by peer review and by the 'selective'
funding system", Science Tribune, http://www.tribunes.com/tribune/art96/bere.htm.

Bergson, H. (1907). L'Évolution Créatrice (Félix Alcan, Paris). English translation:

Creative Evolution (Macmillan, London, 1911).

Berndl, K., M. Daumer, D. Dürr, S. Goldstein, and N. Zanghì (1995). Il Nuovo Cimento 110 B,737.

Berry, M.V. (1991). In Chaos and Quantum Physics , ed. M.-J. Giannoni, A. Voros, and

J. Zinn-Justin (North-Holland, Amsterdam).

Boghosian, B.M. and W. Taylor IV (1997). "Simulating Quantum Mechanics on a Quantum

Computer", e-print quant-ph/9701019.

Bogomolny, E.B. (1992). Nonlinearity 5, 805.

Bohigas, O. (1991). In Chaos and Quantum Physics , ed. M.-J. Giannoni, A. Voros, and

J. Zinn-Justin (North-Holland, Amsterdam).

Braben, D. (1996). "The repressive regime of peer-review bureaucracy?", Phys. World, November,

Bricmont, J. (1995). "Science of Chaos or Chaos in Science?", Physicalia Magazine 17, 159. Also:

p.  13.

e-print chao-dyn/9603009.

(mai 1997), p. 82.

Bricmont, J. (1997). "Le relativisme alimente le courant irrationnel", La Recherche, No. 298

de Broglie, L. (1956). Une Tentative d'Interprétation Causale et Non-Linéaire de la Mécanique

 Ondulatoire (Gauthier-Villars, Paris).

de Broglie, L. (1964). La Thermodynamique de la Particule Isolée (Thermodynamique Cachée

des Particules) (Gauthier-Villars, Paris).

de Broglie, L. (1971). La Réinterprétation de la Mécanique Ondulatoire. 1re partie: Principes

Généraux (Gauthier-Villars, Paris).

de Broglie, L. (1976). Recherches d'un Demi-Siècle (Albin Michel, Paris).
Brun, T.A. (1995). Phys. Lett. A 206, 167.
Brun, T.A., I.C. Percival, and R. Schack (1996). "Quantum Chaos in Open Systems: A Quantum

State Diffusion Analysis", J. Phys. A 29, 2077. Also: e-print quant-ph/9509015.

Brun, T.A., N. Gisin, P.F. O'Mahony, and M. Rigo (1996). "From Quantum Trajectories to

Classical Orbits", e-print quant-ph/9608038.

Brun, T.A. (1997). Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 1833.

31

Casati, G. (1996). Chaos 6, 391.

Cerf, N.J. and C. Adami (1996). "Quantum Mechanics of Measurement", e-print quant-ph/9605002.

Chirikov, B.V. (1995a). "Pseudochaos in Statistical Physics", Preprint of the Budker Institute of
Nuclear Physics, Budker INP 95-99 (Novosibirsk). Also: e-print chao-dyn/9705004.

Chirikov, B.V. (1995b). "Linear and Nonlinear Dynamical Chaos", Preprint of the Budker INP

95-100 (Novosibirsk). Also: e-print chao-dyn/9705003.

Coveney, P. and R. Highfield (1995). Frontiers of Complexity: The Search for  Order in a Chaotic

World (Faber/Fawcett).

Davies, P., ed. (1989). The New Physics (Cambridge University Press).

Dederichs, P.H. (1972). Solid State Phys. 27, 136.

Diósi, L. (1992). In Quantum Chaos, Quantum Measurement, NATO AS1 Series C. Math. Phys.

Sci. 357, ed. P. Cvitanovich, I.C. Percival, and A. Wirzba (Kluwer, Dordrecht).

DiVincenzo, D.P. (1995). Science 270, 255.

Dove, C. and E.J. Squires (1995). Found. Phys. 25, 1267.

Eckhardt, B. (1988). Phys. Rep. 163, 205.

Ekert, A. and R. Jozsa (1996). Rev. Mod. Phys. 68, 733.

d'Espagnat, B. (1994). Le Réel Voilé (Fayard, Paris).

d'Espagnat, B. (1998). "Quantum Theory: A Pointer to an Independent Reality",

e-print quant-ph/9802046.

Farge, Y. (1996). "Pour davantage d'éthique dans le monde de la recherche", Science Tribune,

http://www.tribunes.com/tribune/art96/farg.htm.

Feder, J. (1988). Fractals  (Plenum Press, New York).

Feynman, R.P. (1982). Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 467.

Feynman, R.P. (1986). Found. Phys. 16, 507.

Ford, J. and G. Mantica (1992). Am. J. Phys. 60, 1086.

Fukuyama, F. (1992). The End of History and the Last Man (Free Press).

Gaponov-Grekhov, A.V. and M.I. Rabinovich (1990). Nonlinear Physics: Oscillations, Chaos,

Structures (Springer-Verlag, New York). Also: Phys. Today 43, No. 7 (July 1990), p. 30.

Ghirardi, G.C., A. Rimini, and T. Weber (1986). Phys. Rev. D 34, 470.

Ghirardi, G.C., R. Grassi, and A. Rimini (1990). Phys. Rev. A 42, 1057.

Ghirardi, G.C., R. Grassi, and P. Pearle (1990). Found. Phys. 20, 1271.

Gisin, N and I.C. Percival (1992). J. Phys. A 25, 5677.

Gisin, N and I.C. Percival (1993a). J. Phys. A 26, 2233.
Gisin, N and I.C. Percival (1993b). J. Phys. A 26, 5677.
Gott, J.R., III and L.-X. Li (1997). "Can the Universe Create Itself ?", e-print astro-ph/9712344.
Griffiths, R.B. (1996). Phys. Rev. A 54, 2759.
Gross, P.R., N. Levitt, and M.W. Lewis, eds. (1996). The Flight from Science and Reason

(New York Academy of Sciences, New York). Also: Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, vol. 775.

Gutzwiller, M.C. (1990). Chaos in Classical and Quantum Mechanics (Springer-Verlag, New York).
Haake, F. (1991).Quantum Signatures of Chaos  (Springer-Verlag, Berlin).

Haken, H. (1988). Information and Self-Organisation: A Macroscopic Approach  to Complex

Systems (Springer-Verlag, Berlin).

Haken, H. and A. Mikhailov, eds. (1993). Interdisciplinary Approaches to Nonlinear Complex

Systems. Springer Series in Synergetics, Vol. 62 (Springer-Verlag, Berlin).

32
Haken, H. (1996). Physica D 97, 95.

Hameroff, S., and R. Penrose (1995). "Orchestrated Reduction of Quantum Coherence in Brain

Microtubules: a Model for Consciousness", Neural Network World 5, 793.

Hawking, S.W. (1988). A Brief History of Time (Bantam, New York).

Holland, P.R. (1995).The Quantum Theory of Motion (Cambridge University Press).

First edition: (1993).

Horgan, J. (1995). "From Complexity to Perplexity", Scientific American, June 1995, 74.

Horgan, J. (1996). The End of Science (Addison-Wesley, Helix).

Ikeda, K. (ed.) (1994). Quantum and Chaos: How Incompatible ?  Proceedings of the 5th Yukawa

International Seminar, Progr. Theor. Phys. Suppl. No. 116.

Izakov, M.N. (1997). "Self-organisation and information on planets and in ecosystems",

Uspekhi Fizicheskikh Nauk 167, 1087.

Izrailev, F.M. (1995). "Quantum Chaos, Localization and Band Random Matrices", In Quantum

Chaos: Between Order and Disorder, eds. G. Casati and B. Chirikov
(Cambridge University Press).

Kadomtsev, B.B. (1994). "Dynamics and Information", Uspekhi Fizicheskikh Nauk, 164, 449.

Kirilyuk, A.P. (1992). Nuclear Instrum. Meth. B69, 200.
Kirilyuk, A.P. (1995a). "Causal Wave Mechanics and the Advent of Complexity", Parts I-III,

e-print quant-ph/9511034-36. Also: "Quantum Mechanics with Chaos: Correspondence
Principle, Measurement and Complexity" (Preprint of the Institute of Metal Physics No. 95-1,
Kiev, 1995), 116 p.; e-print chao-dyn/9510013.

Kirilyuk, A.P. (1995b). "Causal Wave Mechanics and the Advent of Complexity", Parts IV-V,
e-print quant-ph/9511037-38. Also: "Quantum Mechanics with Chaos: Correspondence
Principle, Measurement and Complexity" (Preprint of the Institute of Metal Physics No. 95-1,
Kiev, 1995), 116 p.; e-print chao-dyn/9510013.

Kirilyuk, A.P. (1996). Annales de la Fondation L. de Broglie 21, 455. See also: “New Concept of
Dynamic Complexity in Quantum Mechanics and Beyond”, e-print quant-ph/9805078.

Kirilyuk, A.P. (1997). Universal Concept of Complexity by the Dynamic Redundance Paradigm:

Causal Randomness, Complete Wave Mechanics, and the Ultimate Unification of Knowledge
(Naukova Dumka, Kiev).

Kist, T.B.L., M. Orszag, T.A. Brun, and L. Davidovich (1998). "Physical Interpretation of Stochastic

Schroedinger Equations in Cavity QED", e-print quant-ph/9805027.

Kline, M. (1980). Mathematics: The Loss of Certainty (Oxford University Press, New York).

Kuhn, T. (1970). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago University Press).

Lawrence, P.A. and M. Locke (1997). "A man for our season", Nature 386, 757.

Lichtenbegr, A.J. and M.A. Lieberman (1983). Regular and Stochastic Motion (Springer-Verlag,

New York).

Lloyd, S. (1996). Science 273, 1073.
Lochak, G. (1973). "La Thermodynamique Cachée des Particules". In: Louis de Broglie.

Sa Conception du Monde Physique (Gauthier-Villars, Paris).

Lyre, H. (1997). "Against measurement? – On the Concept of Information", e-print quant-ph/9709059.
Maddox, J. (1995a). "Restoring good manners in research", Nature 376, 113.
Maddox, J. (1995b). "The prevalent distrust of science", Nature 378, 435.
Mandelbrot, B. (1982). The Fractal Geometry of Nature (Freeman, San Francisco).

Nakayama, T., K. Yakubo, and R.L. Orbach (1994). Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 381.

Nicolis, J.S. (1986). Dynamics of Hierarchical Systems: An Evolutionary approach

(Springer-Verlag, Berlin).

33

Nicolis, G. and I. Prigogine (1989). Exploring Complexity  (Freeman, San Francisco).

Omnès, R. (1995). "Une nouvelle interprétation de la mécanique quantique", La Recherche,

No. 280 (octobre 1995), 50. Also: Rev. Mod. Phys.64 (1992) 339.

Ott, E. (1993). Chaos in Dynamical Systems  (Cambridge University Press).

Paz, J.P. and W.H. Zurek (1993). Phys. Rev. D 48, 2728.

Pearle, P. (1989). Phys. Rev. A 39, 2277.

Peintgen, H.-O., H. Jürgens, and D. Saupe (1992). Chaos and Fractals . New  Frontiers of Science

(Springer-Verlag, New York).

Penrose, R. (1994). Shadows of the Mind (Oxford University Press).

Prigogine, I. and I. Stengers (1984). Order out of Chaos  (Heinemann, London).

Prigogine, I. (1992). Phys. Rep. 219, 93.

Prigogine, I. (1995). Int. J. Quantum Chemistry 53, 105.

Prosen, T. (1996). Physica D 91, 244.

Sangalli, A. (1996). "They burn heretics, don't they?", New Scientist, 6 April, 47.

Schack, R., G.M. D'Ariano, and M. Caves (1994). Phys. Rev. E 50, 972.

Schuster, H.G. (1984). Deterministic Chaos (Physik-Verlag, Weinheim).
Shigehara, T. and T. Cheon (1997). Phys. Rev. E 55, 6832. For a review on the method see also:

e-print quant-ph/9710006.

Shiokawa, K. and B.L. Hu (1995). Phys. Rev. E 52, 2497.

Sokal, A. and J. Bricmont (1997). Impostures intellectuelles (Odile Jacob, Paris).

Steane, A. (1997). "Quantum Computing", e-print quant-ph/9708022.

Umbanhowar, P.B., F. Melo, and H.L. Swinney (1996). Nature 382, 793.

Van Siclen, C. DeW. (1997). Phys. Rev. E 56 (1997) 5211.

Wenneras, C. and A. Wold (1997). "Nepotism and sexism in peer-review", Nature 387 (1997) 341.

Zaslavsky, G.M. (1985).Chaos in Dynamical Systems  (Harwood Academic Publishers, London).

Zaslavsky, G.M., R.Z. Sagdeev, D.A. Usikov, and A.A. Chernikov (1991). Weak Chaos and

Quasi-Regular Patterns  (Cambridge University Press).

Zeh, H.D. (1996). "What is Achieved by Decoherence", e-print quant-ph/9610014. To appear in

New Developments on Fundamental Problems in Quantum  Physics (Oviedo II)
(Kluwer Academic, 1997).

Zhang, W.-M. and D. H. Feng (1995). Phys. Rep. 252, 1.

Ziman, J. (1996). "Is science losing its objectivity?", Nature 382, 751.
Zurek, W.H. (1989). Phys. Rev. A 40, 4731. Also: Nature 341, 119.
Zurek, W.H. (1997). Phys. World 10, No. 1 (1997) 24.
Zurek, W.H. (1998). "Decoherence, Chaos, Quantum-Classical Correspondence, and the

Algorithmic Arrow of Time", e-print quant-ph/9802054. Also: "Decoherence, Einselection and
the Existential Interpretation (the Rough Guide)", e-print quant-ph/9805065.

