Multi-cell  RF  Injectors  Driven  by  Thermoionic  Cathodes

N. Piovella,     L. Serafini   , University of Milan and INFN, Milan, Italy
M. Ferrario, INFN-LNF, Frascati, Italy

Abstract

We present the anticipated performances of  a  multi-cell
RF injector operated either with  a  thermoionic  cathode or
with  a  gated  photo-cathode.  By  means  of  a  magnetic
compression  and  a  Coherent  Spontaneous  Emission
seeded  FEL  radiating  at  100  to  200  m m,  the  system
produces a beam fully bunched with a 200  A  peak current
at 2 mm.mrad rms emittance. The electron bunch is  a  few
FEL buckets long and phase-locked to the RF  so  to  make
this device an  ideal  injector for  second generation plasma
acceleration experiments.

1  LASERLESS  MULTI-CELL  RF
INJECTORS

The basic requirements concerning the electron beam to
be  injected  into  a  plasma  acceleration  experiment  of
second generation can be summarized as follows [1]:

i)  injection  must  be  performed  at  about  10  MeV  of
beam  energy  to  preserve  beam  quality  (bunching  and
emittance) and the beam must be pre-bunched on the scale
of  the  plasma  wavelength, which  ranges between  100  to
300 m m, depending on the  type  of  acceleration scheme to
be  applied  (wake  field  or  beat  wave).  This  implies  the
need to generate a train of bunchlets  50-100  fs  long,  each
one carrying 108 electrons, spaced 0.3 to 1 ps far apart.

ii) the bunching structure in the electron  pulse  must  be
phase locked to the laser driving the plasma  wave in  order
to  guarantee a  definite synchronous acceleration phase  in
the plasma wave.  This  implies  that  the  phase jitter  must
be smaller than a fraction of  the  plasma  wave period,  i.e.
no larger than 50-100 fs.

iii) the rms normalized emittance must  be  smaller  than
a  few  mm.mrad to  guarantee a  matching  of  the  beam  at
injection  into  the  plasma  wave, whose transverse size  is
about 50-100 m m.

RF  Laser-driven  Photo-Injectors  are  unfortunately
unable,  to  the  present  state  of  the  art,  to  comply  with
requirement i)  due to  the  tight  phase  jitter  requested  [1],
though  the  minimum  bunch  length  achievable  in  single
bunch  mode  can  be  as  low  as  100  fs  [2].  On  the  other
hand,  even  Free  Electron  Lasers,  who  are  excellent
candidates  for  the  generation  of  bunching  in  the  sub-
millimiter  range,  suffer  from  non-uniformity  of  the
bunching  over  the  electron  pulse  because  of  slippage

effects  (especially  when  they  are  operated  in  the  single
pass high gain regime in steady state) [3].

In  order  to  join  the  benefits  of  both  devices  (high
brightness capability  of  RF  guns  and bunching  action  of
FELs) we  propose to  use  a  multi-cell  RF  injector driven
either  by  a 
thermoionic  cathode  or  by  a  gated
photocathode,  coupled  to  a  magnetic  compressor  and  a
FEL  which  is  seeded  by  the  Coherent  Spontaneous
Emission (CSE) driven by the  initial  bunching  associated
to the sharp current profile in the electron pulse  head. The
electron emission at a thermoionic  cathode  takes place all
over the RF period:  this  is  possible  also  by  illuminating
a  photocathode  with  a  laser  pulse  longer  than  the  RF
period (which does  not  need,  in  this  case,  to  be  phase-
locked to the RF as in  the  usual  operation of  laser  driven
photoinjectors).  In  both  cases  the  phase  jitter  of  the
electron bunch at  the  gun  exit  is  no  longer dependent on
the  launching  phase  jitter  at  the  cathode,  which  is  the
main source of phase fluctuation in the beam.

d2g /d(kz)2

0.1

0.

-0.1

0

10

20

30

40

z [mm]

Figure 1: Energy as  a  function  of  position  in  a quarter
of  RF  period long  bunch  extracted  from  a  multi-cell  RF
gun. Its second derivative is also plotted.

18

16

14

12

19.5

19.0

18.5

120

125

130

135

z [mm]

Figure 2: Longitudinal phase space density distribution  at
the  gun  exit  before  magnetic  compression:  only  the  20
RF deg at the bunch head are plotted.

g
g
g
When  electrons  are  emitted  from  the  cathode  surface
(located in the first half cell of a RF gun  cavity) all  along
the  RF  period,  only  those  who  are  emitted  between  the
null-point  of  the  RF  electric field  (the 0(cid:176)   RF  phase) and
the peak field  phase (90(cid:176)   RF)  are  actually trapped by  the
accelerating field  and accelerated up  to  the  gun  exit.  The
exit beam has in this case a huge energy spread, as  shown
in fig.1, which reports a 1D  (no space charge) calculation
of the energy-phase relationship at the exit of a 6+1/2  cell
gun working at 1.3 GHz with 25 MV/m  peak RF  field at
the cathode.

A 2D C.I.C. self-consistent  simulation  performed  with
the  code ITACA shows  a  similar  behavior  in  the  bunch
head,  with  some  energy  modulations  induced  by  the
longitudinal space charge at the emission from the cathode
surface, as shown in fig.2.

The interesting  property of  such  a  beam is  the  highly
linear behavior of  the  energy-phase relation in  the  bunch
head (the first 20(cid:176)   RF, i.e. between  z=38  and z=49  mm),
as  indicated  by  the  second  derivative  null-point  at  z=48
mm.  A  magnetic  compression  applied  downstream,  e.g.
by means of a chicane compressor (or a wiggler) will give
rise  to  a  relevant  current enhancement in  that  part of  the
beam, while it will dilute  the  tail  of  the  beam which  has
an anti-correlated energy-phase correlation [2].

We simulated the magnetic compression occurring in  a
wiggler 5 period long, with a 11 cm  wiggler period and 9
the  phase  space
kG  applied  peak  field,  obtaining 
distribution  and  current  profile  reported  in  fig.3,  which
shows the output of a 2D ITACA run through the wiggler
(a  similar  simulation  has  been  repeated  with  the  code
Parmela to check 3D effects, obtaining similar results).

The peak current has increased from a 20 A,  almost  flat
distribution  along  the  bunch  (as in  fig.2)  up  to  150  A,
with a sharp current peak in the region of  the  bunch  head.
This  naturally suggests  the  presence of  a  non  negligible
bunching on the scale of sub-millimiter range  in  this  part
of  the  bunch,  so  to  conceive  the  application  of  a  FEL
interaction to enhance further this bunching.

To  this  purpose  we  modelled,  using  the  new  code
SPECTRE  developed  to  study  CSE  processes  [4],  the
FEL interaction occuring when the beam is injected into a
2 m undulator,  whose  period is  2  cm  long,  with  wiggler
parameter  aw=1.5.  The  code  is  able  to  model  time
dependent  FEL  processes  in  1D  with  a  multi-frequency
analysis.

Figure  4:  Longitudinal  phase  space  density  distribution
after 8  periods of  the  FEL  undulator (upper diagram) and
corresponding FEL radiation spectrum (lower diagram).

Figure  3:  Longitudinal  phase  space  density  distribution
after  magnetic  compression 
and
corresponding current profile (lower diagram).

(upper  diagram) 

The  beam  distribution  after  8  undulator  periods  is
plotted in  fig.4  (upper diagram). The FEL  interaction   is
clearly started by  a  strong  CSE  effect due  to  the  current

distribution in the bunch head: the few FEL  buckets  there
m m
located  are  already  strongly  radiating  at  100 
wavelength, as  shown  by  the  FEL  radiation spectrum  in
the lower diagram.

While the FEL  interaction  proceeds, these buckets tend
to split from the rest of the beam, which is still in  a  FEL
lethargy regime,  and  they  decrease  in  energy  due  to  the
radiation  emission  process.  Figure  5  clearly  shows  the
onset  of  such  a  process,  together with  the  corresponding
frequency  sweep  of  the  FEL  radiation,  moving  toward
longer wavelengths as these FEL buckets loose energy.

pulse  has  been  used  to  produce  the  beam!),  the  only
source  of  phase  jitter  is  given  by  the  FEL  interaction,
which is anyway stabilized by the  seed produced by  CSE.
The final phase jitter at injection into  the  plasma  wave is
anticipated to  be  small,  though  further  analysis  on  this
issue has to be carried out in the future.

Transverse dynamics in  the  FEL  will  also  have  to  be
analyzed, in order to assess the possible emittance dilution
occurring in the undulator: though the requirements of  the
plasma  acceleration  experiments  [1]  are  typically  for
emittances  not  larger  than  5  mm.mrad,  and  the  beam
emittance in the bunch head at the  exit  of  the  compressor
(fig.3) is about 3 mm.mrad, this issue  has  certainly to  be
checked.

Figure  5:  Longitudinal  phase  space  density  distribution
after 33 periods of the FEL undulator (upper diagram) and
corresponding FEL radiation spectrum (lower diagram).

Eventually,  after 1.5  m  of  undulator length  (see figure
6), the bunch has split into two separate  parts:  the  former
bunch head, which  is  now  slipping  backward and exiting
through  the  beam  tail,  and  the  beam  core  (the  former
bunch tail) which is now radiating at the original  100  m m
resonant FEL wavelength.

The very appealing property of  the  split  bunch  is  the
uniformity  of  the  bunching  on  the  scale  of  250  m m  (5
buckets are present) ad the possibility to  easily  separate it
from  the  rest  of  the  beam,  due  to  the  relevant  energy
difference.

CONCLUSIONS
Since the absolute phase of  these buckets is  determined
only  by  the  RF  phase in  the  gun  (no  phase  locked  laser

Figure  6:  Longitudinal  phase  space  density  distribution
after  75  periods  (1.5  m)  of  the  FEL  undulator  (upper
diagram) and corresponding FEL radiation spectrum (lower
diagram).

REFERENCES
[1] C.  Clayton  and L.Serafini,  IEEE  Trans.  on  Plasma

Science 24 (1996) 400.

[2] L.Serafini,  IEEE  Trans.  on  Plasma  Science  2 4

[3] C. Pellegrini  et  al.,  IEEE Trans.  on  Plasma  Science

(1996) 421.

24 (1996) 537.

[4] N. Piovella, AIP CP 413 (1997) 95.

