A Proposal to Revise the Macroscopic Electromagnetic Theory 

Jacob Neufeld

1.  Introduction

The discussion which follows deals with a current widely used theory on wave

propagation in dispersive and absorbing media.

The theory does not always lead to scientifically meaningful results. 

Inconsistencies and contradictions have been encountered.  In fact, there are instances in

which the theory becomes entirely useless.  In those instances the widely used theory

has broken down completely.  It is unable to deal with simple observations in physics.  

Documentary evidence is submitted in this discussion pointing out the

seriousness of the situation.

A revised formulation is proposed in which the difficulties currently encountered

do not occur.  The proposed theory is based on the recognition that a distinction is made

between an event which represents a cause and an event which represents the effect

produced by the cause.  As a consequence of the cause-effect relationship, a certain non-

Maxwellian quantity which has been overlooked in the current widely used theory is

introduced in the new formulation. The inclusion of such a non-Maxwellian quantity

is essential in order to provide a meaningful physical system.

Effects of energy absorption have been analyzed in some of the referenced

publications which appeared more than two decades ago [Neufeld 1969, 1970a,b].   In

these accounts, absorption was treated as perturbation. In a different approach [Neufeld

1960], the effects of absorption are accounted for by certain non-Maxwellian quantities

which have been referred to above.

It has been observed recently that the perturbation treatment needs to be

reformulated.  A study is now being made of the distinctive features of the perturbation

theory as compared to the theory in which the non-Maxwellian quantities are

introduced.

2.  Revolutionary Findings by Ginzburg

2

  

Credit is due to Ginzburg [1964a] for certain revolutionary findings concerning

the widely used theory on wave propagation in dispersive media. Ginzburg observed

that “Despite the fact that the problem of the conservation law and the expression for

the energy density in electrodynamics is a fundamental one, there are certain aspects of

it which have not yet been elucidated, in particular for the case of an absorbing

dispersive medium.”  Thus, according to Ginzburg, such a fundamental quantity as the

mean electromagnetic energy density has been shown to be negative [Ginzburg 1964b]. 

Furthermore, he pointed out that  “... when absorption is present, it is not in general

possible to introduce phenomenologically the concept of the mean electromagnetic

energy density” [Ginzburg 1964c]. 

The concept of energy density is not the only one discussed in the Ginzburg

disclosure.  He also considered the inadequacy of the current theory to account for the

relationship between group velocity and the velocity of energy propagation in space. 
According to him, “When absorption is present, vgr = dw /dk is in general no longer
meaningful and may, for example, give values exceeding the velocity of light in vacuum

c...” [Ginzburg 1964d].  

Ginzburg was fully aware of the seriousness of the situation.  He admitted “...

the author is aware that others besides himself have long been unclear concerning these

matters” [Ginzburg 1964b].  Ginzburg did not suggest a solution to the perplexing

It should be noted that the ideas of Ginzburg or related ideas 

of others deal with macroscopic as opposed to microscopic point of 

problems.

view.  

3.  Other Unrecognized Issues Apart from The  

Ginzburg Findings

3

The observations of Ginzburg are fully supported by certain findings of others. 

Some of these have been discussed in the above mentioned publications [Neufeld

1970a,b].  The following comments illustrate the current situation.

Comment 1.  In the current theory the energy density of a system is not a

uniquely defined quantity.  There is considerable ambiguity on that account. 

According to the current theory, the energy of a system depends on the manner

in which one arrives at a given state.  In other words, energy density may have

any value depending on the previous history of the system [Neufeld 1970c]. 

This is not acceptable, as flaws in logic should not be tolerated in a widely used

theory.

Comment 2.  There is a curious situation regarding the relationship

between the expression for the energy density in an absorbing medium and the

parameter which defines the process of absorption.  It is generally understood

in elementary mechanics that the energy of a system in which there is
absorption does not depend on the parameter g  which represents absorption.

For instance, the kinetic energy of a moving body is always mv2/2 whether the

body moves in a viscous medium or whether there is no viscosity.   Viscosity is a

parameter which represents energy dissipation and the velocity v represents the state of

the system.  On the other hand, in the current theory this energy density depends on the
parameter g  [Neufeld 1970c].  

Comment 3.  Brillouin [1960] has shown that the equality of group

velocity and the velocity of energy propagation is valid when the medium is

non-absorbing.  He was unable to extend his theory when there is absorption. 

He observed a “curious anomaly” in the absorption band.  A difficulty appeared

in an effort to establish a meaningful interpretation of c/U where c is the velocity

of light and U is the velocity of energy propagation.  According to his findings,

“c/U can become less than 1, and even less than zero.”  Brillouin [1960]

4

observed that in the region of absorption “... the group velocity no longer

represents the velocity of a signal or of energy transport.”   Brillouin did not

provide an adequate explanation for the occurrence of the “curious anomaly.”

It is also of interest to point out that the failure of the current theory

reported by Brillouin has been independently pointed out by Ginzburg and

reported above in this presentation.

Comment 4.  A closely related problem has been discussed In the

International Journal of Electronics [Neufeld 1969].   It has been shown that

when using the Maxwellian macroscopic approach and analyzing the dielectric

constant, the concept of energy has not been properly incorporated in the

kinetic plasma theory.  The difficulties are due to the Boltzmann collisional term

which accounts for a change in the velocity distribution due to collisions alone. 

If one attempts to replace the Boltzmann theory by the Maxwellian macroscopic

formulation, one obtains an expression of energy density which is explicitly

dependent on the collisional effect.  A difficulty arises similar to the one pointed

out in comment 2.

4.  Unrecognized Urgency in Physical Sciences

There are reasons to believe that the current difficulties have not been

sufficiently recognized by others.  Nevertheless, we are confronted with very

critical and urgent issues.  These issues became urgent many years ago when

Ginzburg introduced his revolutionary findings in electromagnetic theory.  They

have remained urgent for several decades and are still urgent today.

 

 

5.  A Dilemma To Be Resolved

As illustrated above, there are instances in which the current theory is

not even equipped to cope with the most fundamental problems in physics. 

The scientific community  faces a dilemma on how to respond in a difficult

situation.  Scientific prudence and plain common sense suggest that we have

5

no choice.  We have valid and well-supported reasons to reach a decision

which, to our best knowledge, has never been suggested before.  According to

our best understanding, the standard theory which has been with us a number

of years should be abandoned as it is inaccurate and misleading.  A new

approach should be explored.  This is a drastic decision.  However, it is the only

scientifically based decision one can make.

The logic of this decision is unavoidable.  Customarily, one example is

sufficient to invalidate a theory if the example shows that the theory leads to

physically unacceptable results.  In our case, more than one example has been

submitted by others.

As responsible scientists, we all wish to stress  the importance of

scientific prudence and of plain common sense as guiding principles in our

undertakings.  We find it extremely difficult to accept a theory with the

understanding that the theory which we accept leads to meaningless results.

6.  Supplementary Information On 

Electromagnetic Theory

The Maxwell equations per se do not always provide sufficient

information when it comes to an analysis of dispersive media.  In many

instances, no information is provided regarding the structure of an atomic or

molecular medium or plasma.  To complete the information, supplementary

relationships have been provided.  A structural model is adopted in which the

medium is represented by an assembly of electrons immersed in a continuously

distributed positive charge and exposed to an incident wave.  The response of

a single electron in such an environment provides the necessary information. 

The supplementary relationships are combined with the Maxwell equation per

se to provide a single self-construed and logical system for further exploration

of the problem.  A frame of reference is obtained which is then used to

determine the dielectric constant and conductivity of the medium.

6

(1)

(2)

(3)

Consider the effects of energy absorption on wave propagation in

dispersive media.  If there is no absorption, the  supplementary relationship can

be expressed as follows:

m¨r ł m72

br (cid:246) F1 ,

where

F1

(cid:246) eE .

On the other hand, if the medium is absorbing, one has

m¨r ł mı 3r ł m72

br (cid:246) F2 .

In the above relationships m is the mass of an electron, e is the charge of an

electron, E is the electric intensity, r is the departure of an electron from its position of
equilibrium, w

b  is the binding frequency, g   is a parameter which represents
absorption, F1 is a driving force where there is no absorption, and F2 is the
driving force where there is absorption.  An important quantity in the above
expressions is represented by a frictional term mg r, which represents

absorption.

7.  An Ambiguity in the Interpretation of

The Driving Force F2

The supplementary relationships (1), (2), and (3) do not provide certain

pertinent information regarding the driving force F2.  One needs to know
whether or not the mechanism of energy absorption represented by mg r has

7

(4)

(5)

any effect on F2.  If it has no effect, then the driving force is the same whether
there is absorption or not.  In such case one has

F1

(cid:246) F2.

On the other hand, if the mechanism of energy absorption has an

effect on F2, one has

                      F1 g F2. 

There is a fundamental difference between the assumption 

that  F1 = F2  and the assumption that F1 

g F2.

The assumption (4) provides a framework for a theory which is widely

accepted and widely used in our scientific undertakings.  
         The inequality  F1 g F2  provides a framework for a formulation which is
now proposed.

8.  A Far Reaching Assumption Introduced 

By Lorentz

Reconsider the assumption that  F1 = F2   and explore the consequences of

this assumption.  Having observed the inconsistencies reported by Ginzburg and

others, the next step is to determine the roots of the difficulties.  Consider an important

happening which occurred about a century ago.  At that time Lorentz [1916]

introduced quite arbitrarily and without adequate justification certain assumptions

8

which became a source of considerable difficulties in our scientific undertaking.  A

situation was created which is of unique significance in the history of physics.

A considerable amount of scientific effort is now applied to ideas which are

misguided.  Many scientific results which are considered as valid are based on a

misleading theory.  It is surprising that critical appraisal of the Lorentz ideas are

limited to the referenced publications.  

Apparently, Lorentz overlooked an important aspect of the problem.  He did

not observe that when there is absorption there must be a cause to be accounted for in

making such an observation.  An entity which represents such a cause should be

included in a meaningful formulation.

9.  A Cause and The Effect Produced

By the Cause

The analysis leading to the new formulation is based on a strict observance of a

principle dealing with a cause and the effect produced by the cause.  The cause-effect

principle provides a logical link which connects an entity A which is the cause with an

entity B which is the effect produced by the cause.  

A simple example from elementary mechanics illustrates the situation.  When

the speed of a moving body increases, the acceleration is the effect which is observed

[entity B].  One then assumes that there exists a force which was applied to the body

[entity A] which accounts for the observation.

There is a clear analogy between the effect associated with a moving body and

the effect described in this presentation.  The application of the cause-effect principle

gives a valuable insight which cannot be obtained otherwise.  By observing the cause-

effect relationship, a logical link is provided which connects certain quantities to the

exclusion of others.  In this analysis the application of the cause-effect principle has

revealed that there are some essential quantities which have been overlooked in a

complete description of the system.

10.  A Non-Maxwellian Quantity Which Has Been 

Overlooked by Lorentz

Consider two fundamental processes or events which occur in the system.  One

of these deals with the storage of energy in space.  
The relevant term is mr + m72r.  It is used in the formulation of the dielectric

constant of the medium interacting with the wave.  The other process or event
deals with energy dissipation.  The relevant term is mg r.  It is used in the

determination of the conductivity.

Assume that there are two distinctive causes which account for the

occurrence of these two fundamental, different events.  One cause accounts

for the storage of energy in space.  The other cause deals with energy

absorption.  The cause of energy storage is expressed as eE.  The relevant

cause effect relationship is expressed as

eE (cid:246) m¨r ł m72

br.

In order to establish the cause-effect relationship for the process of energy

absorption, a non-Maxwellian quantity is introduced which is designated as
“impressed” force and represented symbolically as eE(e).  The impressed force eE(e)

is the cause of energy absorption.  The relevant cause-effect relationship is expressed

as 

eE(e) (cid:246) mı3r .

9

(6)

(7)

10

(8)

The relationship previously pointed out that F1

g F2 can now be established more
precisely.  It appears that the quantity eF2 has two components.  One of these deals
with the energy storage in space.  The other deals with energy absorption.  One has

F2

(cid:246) eE ł eE(e) .

11.  Comments by Abraham and by Becker

The ideas involving the cause-effect principle and the need for considering the

non-Maxwellian impressed quantity have been clearly pointed out by Abraham [1930]

and by Becker [1964].  Abraham observed that  “...intensity E is not the only cause of

the occurrence of current.  There must also be other forces present, which tend to send

a current through the conductor.  We shall take account of these forces by introducing
a vector E(e), and extending Ohm’s law to the form i = s (E + E(e)).  For brevity we
call E(e) the         impressed  force’, or  applied force’... .”  Furthermore,
Abraham [1930] pointed out that “...the field of the impressed forces E(e) being

simply regarded as given, it will help to engender a more vivid apprehension

of the subject if we consider briefly how that field arises in some special

cases.”

A similar statement supporting the significance of E(e) has been made

by Becker [1964].  According to Becker, “...we always started with the idea

that the motion of charge carriers in conductors, and thus the flow of electric

current, was produced solely by electrical field E. Now there are, however,

other non-electrical causes by which a current can be made to flow through a

conductor.  We  call such a cause an impressed force.  If  formally, this is
expressed as the product  eE(e)  of the carrier charge e  involved and an
impressed field strength E(e) herewith defined, we can take this field strength
into account in Ohm’s law, for example, through the expression g = s (E +
E(e)).”

Both Abraham and Becker dealt with certain investigations in which

non-electrical energy (chemical or mechanical) was transformed into electrical

energy.  In the current analysis the opposite effect is dealt with.  Nevertheless,

the problems are similar.  The impressed forces used by Abraham and by

Becker are analogous to the impressed forces in the current investigation.

12.  Dielectric Constant and Conductivity According

to Two Conflicting Theories

In summarizing, the supplementary relationships are arranged one

beside the other as follows.  According to Lorentz , if g =  0 one has

m¨r ł m72

br (cid:246) eE .

       (9)

On the other hand, if g  g 0, one has 

m¨r ł mı 3r ł m72

br (cid:246) eE .

 

The supplementary relationships are different in the proposed formulation.   In

the new formulation, one has 

and

m¨r ł m72

br (cid:246) eE

mı 3r (cid:246) eE(e) .

11

(10)

(11)

(12)

12

The equality (11) is obtained by combining (3), (7), and (8).

In the proposed formulation there is a clear distinction between two

fundamental processes in dispersive media.  There is a process which leads

to the formulation of the dielectric constant.  It is expressed by (11).  There is

also the process which leads to the formulation of conductivity.  It is

expressed in (12).  In the proposed formulation these two processes are

independent.  This means that any change in the mechanism which controls

one of these processes does not affect the mechanism which controls the

other process.  On the other hand, according to Lorentz these processes are

interdependent, as they appear in an expression such as (10).

Using supplementary relationships as a frame of reference, an

expression for the dielectric constant and conductivity is obtained according to

the two conflicting theories.  Proceed at first with the theory of Lorentz.

Using the standard procedure and assuming that there is no absorption

(g  = 0), one obtains an expression for the dielectric constant which is as

follows:

æ (cid:246) 1 ł

72
0
(cid:247) 72

,

72
b

(13)

where w

0 = 4p Ne2/n and N is the number of electrons per unit volume. 

On the other hand, if there is absorption, one obtains

æ (cid:246) 1 ł

72
0
(cid:247) 72 (cid:247) iı7

72
b

(cid:246) æ

łiæ
1

2 .

(14)

Thus, according to Lorentz [1916], the dielectric constant of an absorbing medium
is a complex quantity which is dependent on the absorption parameter g .  In some

instances it has been found convenient to assign to æ

1 and to  

2 a particular

æ

physical meaning.  It was assumed that æ

1 represents an “effective” dielectric constant

such that 

and that the conductivity s

 can be expressed as

 

æ

eff

(cid:246) æ

1 ,

) (cid:246)

7 æ

2
4%

.

A rationale supporting the validity of (16) has not been disclosed.

The next step is to determine the corresponding quantity according to

the suggested formulation.

Using the standard procedure, one obtains from the supplementary

relationship (11) an expression for the dielectric constant, as follows

æ (cid:246) 1 ł

72
0
(cid:247) 72

.

72
b

In order to obtain an expression for conductivity in the new interpretation, one

must determine the average rate of energy absorption in an oscillatory field
having frequency 7, as follows

Q (cid:246) NeE e3r .

13

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

14

(19)

The bar above expression (18) represents an averaging process.  The
averaging extends over a time interval which is large when compared to 1/7. 

The quantity Q can also be expressed in terms of Ohm’s law, i.e., one has

Q = s E2 .

Using the equalities (11), (12), (18), and (19), one obtains an expression for

conductivity.

The results obtained according to two conflicting theories can be used

as examples of very fundamental differences between the proposed

formulation and that of Lorentz.  According to the proposed formulation, the
dielectric constant is always independent of the absorption parameter g.   In

other words, the dielectric constant is always a real quantity whether there is

absorption or not.  Furthermore, a complex dielectric constant is not a valid

scientific concept.  It has no place in any physically acceptable scientific

theory.

13.  Concluding Remarks

Scientific undertakings during the last several decades were so

outstanding and the achievements were so great, a situation developed in

which certain problems in physics did not receive the attention which they

deserved.  It appears that an assumption was made that the electromagnetic

theory as a branch of physics and technology was complete and no

fundamental principle deserved further exploration.  Such  an assumption is

not acceptable.  There are serious flaws in the traditional well-accepted theory

and therefore fundamental changes are required.  The proposed formulation

offers a valid alternative solution.

References

15

Abraham Max, The Classical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism,

[revised by Richard Becker (New York, NY: Hafner 

Publishing Co., II Edition, 1930) pp. 116-117].

Becker Richard, Electromagnetic Fields and Interactions; Vol.  I,

Electromagnetic Theory and Relativity, [edited by Fritz Sauter 

(New York, NY: Blaisdel Publishing Co., 1964)  p.  149].

Brillouin Leon, Wave Propagation and Group Velocity (New York, NY: 

Academic Press, 1960) p. 122.

Ginzburg, V L,  The Propagation of Electromagnetic Waves in Plasmas 

(Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1964a). 

Ginzburg V L, The Propagation of Electromagnetic Waves in Plasmas 

(Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1964b) p.  477.     

Ginzburg V L, The Propagation of Electromagnetic Waves in Plasmas 

(Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1964c) p. 244.

Ginzburg V L, The Propagation of Electromagnetic Waves in Plasmas 

(Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1964d) p. 249.

Lorentz H A , The Theory of Electrons and Its Application to the Phenomena 

of Light and Radiant Heat, A course of lectures delivered at Columbia 

University, New York, NY, March-April 1906 (Leipzig, Germany: II 

Edition, 1916) p.  132.

Neufeld Jacob, Phys. Rev. 152, No.  2, 708-717 (1960).

Neufeld Jacob, Int.  J.  Electronics 27 301-317 (1969).

Neufeld Jacob, Il Nuovo Cimento X65B 33-69 (1970a).

Neufeld Jacob, Il Nuovo Cimento X66B 51-76 (1970b). 

Neufeld Jacob, Il Nuovo Cimento X65B 55 (1970c).

