9
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
1
1
 
 
 
1
1
0
1
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p

Gravitational Anomalies by HTC superconductors: a 1999
Theoretical Status Report.

G. Modanese

The Gravity Society - www.gravity.org

Abstract - In this report we summarize in an informal way the main advances made in the last 3
years  and  give  a  unified  scheme  of  our  theoretical  work.  This  scheme  aims  at  connecting  in  a
consistent physical picture (by the introduction of some working hypotheses when necessary) the
technical work published in several single articles. The part of our model concerning the purely
gravitational aspects of the weak shielding phenomenon is almost complete; the part concerning
the density distribution of the superconducting carriers in the HTC disks is still qualitative, also
due to the very non-standard character of the experimental setup. The main points of our analysis
are  the  following:  coherent  coupling  between  gravity  and  a  Bose  condensate;  induced
gravitational  instability  and  "runaway"  of  the  field,  with  modification  of  the  static  potential;
density distribution of the superconducting charge carriers; energetic balance; effective equations
for the field; existence of a threshold density.

Copyright  1999 Giovanni Modanese. All rights reserved. The author’s biographical data recorded in Marquis’ “Who
is Who in the World, 1999”. The “critical density model” for gravity anomalies first published in Europhys. Lett. 35,
413 (1996) and in subsequent papers (see references below); first public presentation by the author at the 1997 I.A.F.
World Congress.

Main points of the research project

References

(1) Relevance and innovation of the effect. Impossibility of an
explanation within General Relativity..

(2) Logical core of our model:

(a) Peculiar coupling betw. gravity and a Bose condensate ﬁ

SHI, LCC

(b) ﬁ

 Induced instability and "runaway" of the zero modes ﬁ

ISS; earlier in SHI, LCC

(c) ﬁ

 Constraint on the gravitational field and "tunneling".

GAU; earlier in SHI, LCC

(3) Density pattern of the superconducting carriers in the disk.

(4) Energetic balance and effective equations for the gravitational
field

(5) Threshold density of the condensate

SHI

 

BOS

BOS

BOS

References

 

 

 

SHI

LCC

BOS

ISS

GAU

Theoretical analysis of a reported weak gravitational analysis effect, Europhys. Lett.
35 (1996) 413.

Role of a "local" cosmological term in Euclidean quantum gravity, Phys. Rev. D 54
(1996) 5002.

Possible quantum gravity effects in a charged Bose condensate under variable e.m.
field, report gr-qc/9612022.

Stability  issues  in  Euclidean  quantum  gravity,  report  gr-qc/9808037,  to  appear  in
Phys. Rev. D.

Tunneling of a massless field through a 3D gaussian barrier, report hep-th/9808009,
to appear in J. Math. Phys.

 

 

 

 

The  weak  gravitational  shielding  effect  by  HTC  superconductors  discovered  by  E.
Podkletnov and the transient gravitational anomalies observed by J. Schnurer open an incredibly
wide research field, at the boundary between condensed matter physics and gravitation.

All the observed phenomenology strongly supports our proposed theoretical model, based
on the idea that an instability of the gravitational field arises in the so-called "critical regions" of
the superconducting charge carriers condensate.

The  task  of  summarizing  and  connecting  in  a  logical  way  all  the  conceptual  and

theoretical implications of these effects is hard, for two reasons at least.

(i)  Up  till  now,  we  do  not  have  any  consistent  theory  which,  starting  from  well  known
paradigms, leads in a purely technical way to an explanation of the experiments. It is impossible
to  "prove  theoretically"  the  existence  of  the  anomalies.  Even  though  the  starting  point  of  our
proposed model is entirely orthodox (quantum mechanics + general relativity + Ginzburg-Landau
theory  of  superconductors),  simplifications  and  unproven  hypotheses  are  needed  at  several
points.

This  situation  is  not  unusual  in  physics,  particularly  not  for  very  complex  systems.  It
happens  quite  often  that  subsequent  developments  justify  "a  posteriori"  previous  assumptions.
The art of the theoretician consists also in making reasonable assumptions, which do not hurt any
fundamental principle or prior knowledge and fit well with the experimental intuition.

(ii)  There  is  a  wide  interest  towards  these  new  results,  but  specialists  of  different  areas
have  different  attitudes  and  questions.  Some  wonder  how  the  effect  is  connected  to  the
perturbative or non-perturbative dynamics of quantum gravity or its generalizations; others take
for  granted  that  there  is  an  exotic  effect  at  the  basis  of  the  anomalous  coupling,  and  focus  on
phenomenological  issues.  We  tried  to  address  several  "frequently  asked  questions"  throughout
the paper and the reader may notice by himself the variety of the question spectrum.

 

The organization of this article is a direct consequence of the two points above. On one
hand, the fundamental logical structure of the theoretical model is stressed, with reference to the
specific articles for more details; new assumptions and obscure points are discussed. On the other
hand, the various issues are also listed as single items, like in a handbook, with some redundant
repetitions or logical simplifications when necessary.

The main points of our analysis are the following.

(1)  Relevance  and  innovation  of  the  effect.  Impossibility  to  explain  it  within

classical General Relativity.

This is a necessary premise for any serious analysis of these effects. One should realize
that  the  gravitational  "anomalies"  claimed  by  Podkletnov  et  al.  are  at  least  10  orders  of
magnitude  larger  than  those  predicted  by  the  General  Relativity  theory.  For  this  reason,  these
results are hard to be accepted and understood. The scientific community reacted to these claims
with a mixture of interest and scepticism.

It  is  important  to  notice,  however,  that  no  basic  physical  principles  (like  for  instance
symmetry  or  conservation  laws)  are  contradicted  by  the  claimed  effects.  The  latter  can  be  just
ascribed to a peculiar dynamical behaviour of the gravitational field in certain circumstances. We
do not see in the results of Podkletnov et al. any "revolutionary" content, such to justify a strong
preconceived opposition. Furthermore, the effects have precise energetical limitations and can be
observed only under certain conditions. See also on this point Section 4 and the remarks on the
Equivalence Principle.

The following Points (2a), (2b), (2c) are the "logical core" of our theoretical model.

 

 

(2a) Peculiar "coherent" coupling between gravity and a Bose condensate.

A Bose condensate has the property to be macroscopically coherent and is thus described
by a classical field f 0(x) - also called "order parameter" - whose squared module |f 0(x)|2 is related
to the condensate density.

This coherence property implies that the condensate contributes not only to the linear part
of  the  gravitational  lagrangian  L,  with  standard  coupling  d L(1)=8p hm
n (f 0),  but  also  to  the
quadratic  part.  The  contribution  to  the  quadratic  part  affects  locally  the  "potential"  of  the
gravitational field, that is, that part of L which does not depend on the field derivatives.

n Tm

More  precisely,  the  coherent  coupling  term  is  d LCoherent

(2)=  {(cid:214) det[g(x)]}(2)m 2(x),  where

m 2(x) is a positive definite quantity defined as

(1) 

m 2(x) = ¶

f 0

*(x) ¶

f 0

*(x) + m2|f 0(x)|2

and {(cid:214) det[g(x)]}(2) denotes the quadratic part of (cid:214) det[gm
field hm
"-h2".

n (x)], which in  terms  of  the
n (x) is negative definite and thus will be symbolically denoted in the following simply as

n (x)=d

n +hm

there 

is  already  a 

In  the  gravitational  lagrangian 
/8p G),  where  L

this  kind,  namely
{(cid:214) det[g(x)]}(2)(L
  is  the  very  small  negative  intrinsic  cosmological  constant  of
spacetime.  We  define  as  "critical  regions"  those  where  m 2(x)>|L
|/8p G,  that  is,  those  where  the
coherent coupling term is  larger  than  the  "threshold"  term.  Since  the  absolute  value  of  f 0(x)  is
related to the density of the Bose condensate, the critical regions are defined through eq. (1) by
the  condition  that  either  the  density  of  superconducting  charge  carriers  or  the  gradient  of  this
density are particularly large.

term  of 

m
n
m
(2b) Induced instability.

There exists a class of unstable modes of the pure Einstein action, called "zero modes",
which  have  the  same  probability  to  occur  as  the  h=0  configuration  (flat  space)  and  a  higher
probability 
to
exp(iS[g]/hPlanck), and for the zero-modes one has S=0, like for flat space; see the Discussion of
Point 2a, "Quantum nature of the effect".)

field  configurations. 

(The  probability 

than  all  other 

is  proportional 

Thus a gravitational field would always tend to "run away" towards these configurations
and  loose  memory  of  its  initial  state,  if  it  was  not  regulated  by  a  small  negative  cosmological
term,  intrinsically  present  in  nature.  This  term  has  the  form  d LCosm.
|h2,  so  it  favours  the
h=0 configuration.

(2)=+|L

The  coherent  coupling  d LCoherent

(2)=-m 2h2  of  the  gravitational  field  to  the  condensate
amounts  to  a  local  positive  cosmological  term  (note  that  unfortunately  the  actual  signs  are
opposite to the conventional denomination). This cancels the intrinsic stabilizing term d LCosm.
(2)
and leads to a local instability.

Therefore, while the regular coupling of gravity to incoherent matter produces a response
n  of the source, the coherent

- a gravitational field - approximately proportional to the strength Tm
coupling induces an instability of the field.

Things go as if a potential well for the field was suddenly opened. The field runs  away
towards  those  configurations  which  are  now  preferred  (compatibly  with  the  global  energetic
balance  -  compare  Section  4).  The  runaway  stops  at  some  finite  strength  of  the  field,  where
higher  order  terms  in  the  lagrangian,  which  usually  can  be  disregarded,  come  into  play.  This
strength is  not  known  since  it  depends  on  the  non  perturbative  dynamics  of  the  field,  but  very
little on the initial conditions.

It  is  important  to  stress  that  not  all  the  field  modes  become  unstable  and  undergo  this
runaway; only the so-called zero modes have a high probability x  to do so (compare Fig. 1) and
these modes are a little part of all possible configurations. Also for this reason (ratio of volumes
in probability space, or "phase space"), the total probability of the process is quite small.

 

Fig. 1

 

 

This figure represents, for illustration purposes, the behavior across a critical region of:

Bottom - The density of superconducting charge carriers (SCCC). By definition, the critical region begins
where the density of SCCC exceeds the threshold density r c. We are not interested at this stage into the causes of this
local density increase.

Middle - The potential part of the gravitational lagrangian L(h), that is, the part which does not contain the
field  derivatives.  This  well-like  shape  of  the  potential  is  due  to  the  coherent  coupling  and  is  responsible  for  the
instability. The dotted line means that higher order terms in the lagrangian come into play and stop the instability -
but  we  do  not  know  exactly  how  and  for  which  strength  of  h.  Note  that  the  instability  arises  quite  sharply  at  the
border of the critical region (we admit that a threshold value of L

 exists - see Section 5).

Top  -  The  static  field  produced  by  a  far  source,  supposed  to  be  on  the  left  of  the  critical  region.  In  the
i. This is a quantum process, and the
2 is actually

critical region the field "runs away" and takes strengths hi
strengths hi as well as their probabilities are non-observable parameters. Only the parameter g = S
observed, and must be inferred from the experimental data.

2 with probabilities x

i hi

i x

We did not represent in the graph the strength of h within the critical region, just because only probabilities

can be defined.

The computation in GAU allows us to conclude that the pre-existing static field is decreased in the critical
region by a % amount proportional to g  and to the thickness and width of the region (corresponding to a coherence
domain of the condensate or to a part of it).

The field strength is most affected just outside the critical region (see 2c), then the original value is almost

completely restored, apart from a little residual modification ("tail") which is the one actually observed.

(2c) Constraint on the gravitational field and "tunneling".

What is the effect of the instability induced by the peculiar coherent coupling on a pre-

existing static gravitational field, generated by a far source? Why does a weak shielding result?

This crucial point of our model was already studied qualitatively in Ref.s SHI, LCC, and

has been clarified through an explicit calculation in GAU.

Intuitively, it is clear that the static field is affected by the presence of the potential well.
As  we  mentioned  earlier  (compare  also  Fig.1)  the  field  is  forced  to  assume  within  the  critical
region,  with  certain  probabilities,  strengths  independent  of  its  original  strength.  Which  is  the
residual effect of this constraint outside the critical region?

One could try some analogy with a tunneling effect in ordinary quantum mechanics. After
doing  a  Fourier  decomposition  of  the  static  field  produced  by  the  far  source,  one  can  identify
those  modes  which  have  a  large  probability  to  be  stopped  by  the  potential  well.  It  turns  out,
however,  that  it  is  impossible  to  carry  on  this  qualitative  analysis  in  a  satisfying  way.  It  is
necessary to implement a rigorous "ab initio" calculation. This has been done in GAU, and the
positive results give us further confidence in our model.

 

 

 

Fig. 2 - Critical region with the shape of an ellipsoid.

In the special case of a massless field (like the gravitational field), we found that if the
field, denoted by f, is forced to assume the values fi within a given region, with probabilities x
i,
then  the  static  potential  of  the  interaction  mediated  by  f  between  two  sources  placed  at  the
opposite sides of that region (Fig. 2) is decreased by the factor

(2)

[1 - g abF(e ,r

,n)],

ix

where  g =S
distance  of  the  first  source  in  units  of  a,  r
source from the region, measured in units of a. Evaluating the function F(n) for e  and r
one obtains a decreasing exponential, with a non-zero asymptotic value (Fig. 3).

i  |fi|2,  a  and  b  represent  width  and  thickness  of  the  region,  e   is  the  inverse  of  the
  is  the  ratio  b/a  and  n  is  the  distance  of  the  second
 constant

Fig. 3 - Plot of the function F(n) for different values of r

.

This  predicted  behavior  corresponds  to  the  experimental  findings,  according  to  which

there is: (1) a cylindrical shielding region, (2) without diffraction at its border.

In fact, the coherence domains inside the disk are very small on a macroscopic scale and a
single critical region cannot be larger than one of these domains. Thus the total shielding factor is
given by the contribution of several domains. (See Fig. 4. Also note that the effect of different
domains can superpose over the thickness of the disk: Fig. 5.) The distance of the proof masses
from  the  superconducting  disk  corresponds  to  a  large  value  of  n,  such  that  F(n)  has  already
reached its constant asymptotic value. This explains the observed features (1) and (2) above.

 

Fig. 4

This graph shows, for purely illustrative purposes, the behaviorof the shielding factor produced by a single
critical region  (coherence  domain)  along  its  vertical  axis.  The  shielding  factor  is  proportional  to  the  adimensional
function F(n), where n is the distance from the critical region in units of the region's radius. The present graph is in
practice the same one as in Fig. 3, transformed into a bars diagram, rotated by 90 degrees and placed in space.

The  coherence  domain  corresponds  in  our  model  to  a  region  with  over-critical  density,  and  in  our
a >1).  It  lies  within  the

calculations  we  assumed  it  for  simplicity  to  have  the  form  a  squeezed  ellipsoid  (r
superconducting disk and is surrounded by similar domains.

The total macroscopic shielding factor is given by the sum of the effects of the single domains. Note that the
size of the domain depicted in the figure is exaggerated as compared to the size of the disk. Since the parameter n
represents  the  distance  in  units  of  the  disk  radius,  it  is  clear  that  the  exponential  decay  of  the  shielding  factor
predicted by our model actually takes place very close to the disk.

What  remains  at  macroscopic  distances,  and  gives  the  observed  effect,  is  the  constant  "tail"  of  the

exponential, which amounts to approx. the 10% of its value for n=1 and does not vary with increasing distance.

 

 

Fig. 5

The  effects  of  more  coherence  domains,  each  of  thickness  b,  are  summed  in  such  a  way  that  the  total
shielding factor is proportional to the thickness of the layer of the  disk  where  critical  density  can  be  reached.  We
recall  (arrow)  that  this  layer  is  quite  thin  compared  to  the  whole  disk  (see  Point  3:  "Density  pattern  of  the
superconducting carriers in the composite disk").

The shielding produced by a single domain is proportional also to its width a; thus the total shielding factor

is proportional to the average value of a but not to the radius of the disk.

(Actually, a larger disk radius enhances the effect in an indirect way, because it means a larger tangential

velocity during rotation andthis leads in turn to a thicker "critical layer" - see Point 3.)

(3) Density distribution of the superconducting carriers in the composite disk.

This  is  a  more  "phenomenological"  issue.  While  the  Points  1-3  above  were  mainly

concerned with the dynamics of the gravitational field, this point is concerned with the properties
of the superconducting material.

 It is important to know the density distribution of the condensate of the superconducting
charge  carriers in the ceramic disk, because this  distribution  defines  the  critical  regions,  where
the density or its gradient exceed the threshold value.

In our earliest work (SHI) we limited ourselves to state that the fast rotation of the disk
and the applied magnetic fields were probably responsible for strong variations in the condensate
density.  Here  we  push  our  analysis  a  bit  further.  It  is  not  necessary,  to  this  end,  to  make  any
special hypothesis about the microscopic mechanism of high-Tc superconductivity. It is sufficient
to consider an effective model, based upon an order parameter, like the Ginzburg-Landau (GL)
theory.

In  the  GL  theory  the  variations  of  the  order  parameter,  and  thus  the  variations  of  the
condensate  density,  are  always  such  that  this  density  vanishes  at  the  boundaries  between
superconducting and non superconducting regions. In our case, on the contrary, we are interested
into a local increase of the density. How is it possible to achieve this?

All the phenomenology of the experiment shows that: (i) the two-phases structure of the
superconducting  disk  is  essential  in  order  to  obtain  the  shielding  phenomenon;  (ii)  the  effect
takes place in conditions - fast rotation, high frequency fields applied - which are very far from
the static limit, and thus cannot be adequately described by the GL theory.

Therefore  it  seems  that  the  presence  of  an  interface  between  two  phases  of  the  disk
having different superconducting properties, combined with rapid rotation, is able to produce a
local increase in the density which is not predicted by the GL theory and as such quite rare.

We do not have any proper formalism to describe this situation yet, namely a composite

superconductor in rapid rotation. We can only resort at present to a qualitative model.

In our earlier work BOS we depicted the superconducting carriers in the upper part of the
disk as a perfect fluid which flows, during rotation, close to a "border" represented by the lower
part of the disk, which is non superconducting at the operation temperature. The relative sliding
velocity, due to the fast rotation of the disk, is very large in comparison to the average velocities
typical of the superconducting charge carriers in stationary conditions. This - we hypothesized -
would produce a density increase near the border.

This phenomenological model is probably incorrect at the microscopic level, because the
motion  of  the  superconducting  carriers  cannot  really  be  a  "viscous"  motion  exibiting  velocity
gradients;  moreover,  the  microscopic  structure  typical  of  any  Type  II  superconductor  must  be
taken into account. Nevertheless, the model has the merit to stress the importance of the interface
between  the  two  parts  of  the  disk,  and  is  also  supported  by  several  experimental  observations,
which give a clear feeling of a fluid-dynamical behavior of the system.

In particular, one observes  that the shielding effect is considerably  increased  during  the
disk braking phase, when the relative sliding velocity of the superfluid in the upper part of the
disk is much increased by virtue of the inertia of the fluid.

Furthermore, it has been observed since the very first experiments in 1992 that the effect
remains  even  when,  after  reaching  a  rotation  speed  of  4000-5000  rpm,  all  lateral  magnets  are
turned off and the disk rotates by inertia. As long as the disk rotates, the shielding effect persists.
This confirms the purely kinematical role of rotation.

See the "Discussion" below for a closer analysis; further work is in progress.

(4) Energetic balance and effective equations for the gravitational field.

Like for Point 3, also this point represents a wide phenomenological issue, which can be

studied independently from the microscopic gravitational mechanism.

Several  questions  arise  spontaneously  here,  also  for  the  non-specialist.  First  of  all,  it  is
clear that any physical mechanism which expels from a region the gravitational field - or a small
part  of  the  field  -  must  have  some  consequences  on  the  global  energetical  balance.  If  a
mechanical process inside the shielded region is affected, the total energy must be conserved.

The most frequent consequence of the shielding phenomenon seems to be an increase in
the  mechanical  energy  of  the  shielded  objects  (see  BOS).  This  energy  must  come  from  an
external "pumping" and if the latter is absent or inefficient, the shielding will be inhibited.

The  whole  phenomenology  of  Podkletnov's  experiment  indicates  that  the  pumping  is
done by the high-frequency components of the applied magnetic field. This kind of pumping is
familiar in atomic physics, for instance in lasers or in systems with magnetic resonance.

We believe that the high-frequency field allows the forming of regions with overcritical
density of superconducting carriers, or it "activates" these regions and triggers the runaway of the
field  as  described  in  Section  2b.  It  is  a  common  experience  that  the  runaway  of  an  unstable
system cannot take place unless a channel for the energetic exchange is available, in such a way
that the total energy balance is respected (compare for instance phase transition phenomena).

Fig. 6 - Some energy pumping process is needed, for gravitational shielding to arise.

When  in  a  region  of  the  superconducting  disk  (red  square  in  the  figure)  the  density  of  the  condensate
exceeds  the  critical  value,  the  gravitational  field  is  virtually  affected  in  that  region.  This  produces  a  shielding
cylinder: a proof mass placed above that region will become slightly lighter. However, this (still virtual) process can
in turn produce mechanical energy! For instance, if there is a counterweight, we can compress a spring in this way;
when the shielding ceases, the two masses will start to oscillate.

All  this  means  that  the  state  "region  in  the  disk  with  overcritical  density,  shielding  activated"  has  higher
energy than the "normal" state. A transition to this state is possible only if energy is supplied from the outside. In
Podkletnov's apparatus, this "activation" energy comes from the external high-frequency e.m. field.

This representation of the role of the high-frequency field is obviously approximated, and
a  complete  theory  should  eliminate  the  distinction,  useful  but  artful,  between  the  shielding
process, the pumping which activates it and its energetic consequences. From the causal point of
view, the three phases are in the following order:

Energy pumping from the outside ﬁ

 Runaway of the field in the critical regions and shielding ﬁ

 Changes in the mechanical energy of objects in the shielded region

ﬁ
ﬁ
We could also put an arrow, however, which from the last point goes up to the first one,
with  a  sort  of  feedback;  this  is  because  any  variation  in  the  mechanical  energy  of  the  objects
inside the shielded region requires an energy supply, and in the absence of this the runaway of the
field in the critical regions with subsequent shielding is inhibited.

Beside a direct interaction between the high frequency e.m. field and the superconducting
carriers, indirect interactions of several kinds could be present. The e.m. field might first excite
some  mode  peculiar  of  the  crystal  lattice  of  the  ceramic  material,  or  a  mode  belonging  to  the
spectrum  of  the  superconducting  state;  then  the  energy  would  be  released  for  the  shielding
process. This could explain the resonant behavior of the system at certain frequencies.

Given our poor knowledge of the details of the pumping process, Podkletnov's strategy to
send  on  the  disk  a  strong  and  wide  spectrum  AC  field  appears  to  be  drastic  but  somehow
effective - at least as long as the superconductor is not heated too much.

It was early realized that the observed clear-cut cylindrical form of the shielding region
and its vertical extension (at least a few meters) are very unusual and represent a puzzle from the
conceptual point of view. For comparison, a metal shield placed in an electrostatic field produces
in general a cone-like shielding region, with relevant border effects. On the other hand, if the SC
disk would emit an hypothetical secondary field, or some radiation, this would probably appear
like a divergent beam. (Also note that in this case one should expect some emission downwards,
which does not appear to be the case.)

Fig. 7 - Non-conservative character of the modified field.

The  observed  modified  field  pattern  is  clearly  non  conservative  (Fig.  7).  If  a  test  mass
makes  a  round  trip  going  up  inside  the  shielding  cylinder  and  coming  down  outside,  the
gravitational field exerts a net work on the mass. Formally this amounts to say that the observed
field is not the gradient of a gravitational potential. The Einstein equation for a weak static field
still holds, namely

divG

00 = 0, with a = G

00/m

(a is the acceleration of the test mass m, in the limit when the velocity of m is much smaller than
the light velocity); however, the associated equation

00 = grad h00

is not true.

The  non  conservative  character  of  the  observed  field  configuration  originates  from  the
peculiar coupling of the gravitational field to the pumping e.m. field - coupling mediated by the
condensate in the superconductor. The mechanical energy  gained  by  a  test  mass  along  a  round
trip is furnished by the e.m. field and of course there is no global gain.

G
G
G
G
An interesting experimental observation in support of our interpretation is the following.
If  the  energetic  pumping  is  inefficient  (that  means,  the  applied  e.m.  field  is  too  weak,  or  its
frequency too low, or the test mass too heavy) one observes a weak "expulsive" force acting on
the  test  mass  at  the  border  of  the  shielding  cylinder.  This  force  tends  to  restore  the  zero-work
condition along a round trip.

(5) The threshold problem.

We  mentioned  earlier  the  condition  defining  a  critical  region  in  the  condensate  of  the
superconducting carriers: a certain function m 2(x) of the condensate density and gradient must be
larger  than  the  "natural"  cosmological  term  L
/8p G.  Therefore  this  term  represents  a  threshold
value for the density.

The  value  of  L

astronomical  observations,  but  also  some  indications  that  L
effective value is larger at small distances.

  is  not  known  a  priori.  There  are  some  upper  limits,  deduced  from
  scales  with  the  distance  and  its

Do  Podkletnov's  data  really  suggest  the  existence  of  a  threshold  density?  Or  does  the
shielding  effect  seems  rather  to  depend  in  a  continuum  way  on  the  density?  To  give  a  proper
answer, one must take into account the pumping process, because it could happen in some case
that the condensate density is well above the threshold value but the effect does not take place
due to absent or inefficient pumping.

This  issue  has  been  discussed  in  BOS.  In  order  to  conclude  that  a  threshold  exists,  we
must be in conditions of efficient pumping. If in these conditions the shielding effect is observed
only above a certain local condensate density or density gradient, this is a point in favour of the
treshold.

It  was  observed,  for  instance,  that  disks  without  two-layer  structure,  and  thus  without
density gradients, do not produce any shielding effect. This is a point in favour of the existence
of a treshold.

If a treshold exists and the pumping  is  efficient,  then  any  increase  or  diminution  in  the
strenght of the effect can be interpreted as following an increase or diminution of the number or
size of the critical regions.

Note that with absent or inefficient pumping even a condensate whose density exceeds by
far the threshold value fails to produce any gravitational anomaly. This is probably the case of
superfluid  helium,  which  is  much  more  dense  than  an  electronic  condensate:  since  it  is
electrically neutral and its temperature is extremely low, it cannot be subjected to any pumping of
reasonable efficiency.

(1)  Discussion  -  Relevance  and  innovation  of  the  effect.  Impossibility  of  an
explanation within General Relativity.

According to General Relativity - our best present theory of gravity - the dynamics of the
gravitational field and its coupling to the mass-energy-momentum density which generates it are
described by the (classical) Einstein equations. These are non-linear partial differential equations
involving  the  components  of  the  metric  tensor  and  its  first  and  second  derivatives.  They  are
similar, under several respects, to Maxwell equations, though more complicated and non-linear.

In very simplified terms, we can say that Einstein equations allow to find the gravitational
field as a response to a source - linear in a first approximation, or non-linear in the presence of
strong  mass-energy  densities.  The  proportionality  constant  between  field  and  source  is  of  the
order of the Newton constant G for linear responses and even smaller, of the order of G/cn, for
non-linear responses. There exist static fields and fields propagating like waves, but in any case
their strength is related to the mass of the source which has generated them.

The only sources close to us which are massive enough to generate a detectable field are
the earth, the moon, the sun and, to a smaller extent, the other planets of the solar system. Any
other  object  or  physical  system  available  on  a  laboratory  scale,  irrespective  of  its  chemical
composition  or  microscopic  structure,  generates  gravitational  fields  of  exceedingly  small
strength. These fields can be detected through very sensitive instruments, but they are typically of
the order of 10-9 g or less (g» 9.8 m/s2 is the field generated by the earth at its surface).

These  observations  are  well  known  and  lead  to  the  conclusion,  in  full  agreement  with
Einstein  equations,  that  the  gravitational  field  generated  by  a  very  massive  field  is  in  practice
unaffected by the presence of any other body whose mass is much smaller. In particular, is does
not  seem  possible  that  the  gravitational  acceleration  g  at  the  earth  surface  can  be  affected,
through any human-sized apparatus, by more than approx. 1 part in a billion.

The  conclusion  above  rests,  as  mentioned,  upon  the  hypothesis  that  the  equations  of

classical General Relativity are appropriate to the situation.

It is known that quantum mechanics brings in some very small corrections to the classical
equations of any field, including the gravitational field. In the quantum view, the field oscillates
in a approximately harmonic "potential"; these oscillations take place around a minimum value
corresponding to the classical field strength.

Usually  the  quantum  fluctuations  are  irrelevant  on  a  macroscopic  scale.  One  can  show,
however, that the presence in a region of space of coherent vacuum energy ("zero point energy")
modifies the potential in which the gravitational field oscillates. Zero point energy is present in
macroscopic systems - that means, systems well above the atomic scale - which are described as
a  whole  by  a  single  wave  function.  If  the  zero  point  energy  term  was  present  uniformly  in  all
space, it would not bring any consequence: the gravitational field of the entire space would react
exactly in such a way to reset the zero of energy. Things are different, however, if the zero point

energy  term  is  present  only  in  a  well-defined  small  region  of  space;  in  this  case  it  produces  a
localized instability (see Point 2).

(2a)  Discussion  -  Coherent  coupling  between  a  Bose  condensate  and  the
gravitational field.

Quantum nature of the effect. Differences with the classical case.

A  Bose  condensate  is  formally  described  by  a  classical  field  f 0(x),  like  a  sort  of  ideal
fluid. We assume that the lagrangian of this field has the standard scalar form and that external
conditions  define  the  field  density,  so  that  f 0  behaves  in  the  functional  integral  (or  "quantum
partition function") of the system like an external field and not like an integration variable.

At  the  classical  level,  in  order  to  find  the  gravitational  effects  of  f 0  we  take  the  first
variation  of  the  action  and  obtain  the  Einstein  equations  with  a  small  cosmological  term
originating  from  the  coupling  to  the  fluid.  This  gives  an  extremely  small  correction  to  the
vacuum Einstein equations.

Let  us  check  this  classical  result  formally.  The  energy-momentum  tensor  of  the

condensate is

The total lagrangian, including the so-called minimal coupling of the condensate with the

Tm

= ¶

=¶

 = ¶

f 0

* ¶

f 0 - gm

n L(f 0) =

f 0

* ¶

f 0 - gm

 (1/2 ¶

f 0

* ¶

f 0 + 1/2 m2|f 0|2) =

f 0

* ¶

f 0 - gm

 (1/2 m 2)

gravitational field, is

L = L(g) + 8p G Tm

 hm

;

Tm

 hm

 = hm

 ¶

f 0

* ¶

f 0 - (Tr h)(1/2 m 2)

and the corresponding Einstein equations are

d L/d hm

 = Rm

 - 1/2 R gm

 + 8p G Tm

= Rm

 - 1/2 R gm

 + 8p G (¶

f 0

* ¶

f 0 - 1/2 gm

m 2) = 0

The last term is of the form gm

, corresponding to a "local" cosmological constant. It is

also interesting to take the trace of these equations. We obtain

R = 8p G Tr T = 8p G(-¶

f 0

* ¶

f 0 - 2m2 |f 0|2)

where we see that the scalar curvature produced by the fluid is very small, due to the small value
of G (we work in units c=1).

In  conclusion,  the  fluid  generates  a  gravitational  field  which  is  approximately

n
m
n
m
n
n
a
a
m
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
m
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
m
n
n
n
L
m
m
proportional  to  its  mass-energy-momentum  density.  The  main  factor  is  the  mass  density
distribution  and  the  forces  leading  to  this  particular  distribution  do  not  play  an  important  role.
This  clearly holds, in General  Relativity,  for  any  fluid,  no  matter  if  coherent  or  not.  Equations
like  those  above  are  employed  in  cosmological  and  astrophysical  models,  to  study  the  internal
structure of the stars etc.

Our attitude must be different if we consider the quantum nature of the gravitational field.
In this case the field fluctuates and its dynamics is represented by a functional integral weighed
by the factor exp(iS[g]/hPlanck). This means that the field can assume any configuration g, with a
probability proportional to this factor.

Clearly  the  preferred  configurations  are  those  near  the  stationary  points  of  S,  i.e.  those
obeying the classical Einstein equations. We know that the action has the form S=(cid:242)
(cid:214) {detg}R and
a stationary point is given by h=0, R=0 (flat space). There are some configurations however, the
so-called  zero  modes,  for  which  h  and  R  are  not  zero,  but  the  integral  vanishes  and  S  is  zero.
Therefore these configurations are as likely as flat space.

Why does the field usually prefers to be in the flat space configuration and not in a zero
mode? Because there is in the action a small additional spacetime independent term, called the
negative  intrinsic  cosmological  term,  which  suppresses  them,  as  can  be  seen  by  expanding  the
action to second order.

The  existence  of  a  negative  intrinsic  cosmological  term  has  been  demostrated  by
numerical simulations of Euclidean quantum gravity near equilibrium. Also independently from
these simulations, we take it as one of the fundamental assumptions of our model (see Table II),
and there are several indirect evidences of it.

As  we  saw  above,  expanding  to  second  order  the  action  of  a  condensate  coupled  to
gravity  one  finds  a  positive  cosmological  term  which  cancels  the  intrinsic  negative  term  and
leads to an instability.

It is important to stress that in a quantum mechanical context the quantum coherence of
the fluid described by f 0 is essential. An incoherent fluid is not represented by a field like f 0, but
by an ensemble of pointlike particles whose energy-momentum tensor is of the form

Tm

 = S

i (cid:242) dsi pi,m  pi,n  d (x-xi)

Thus an incoherent fluid is not able to cause any instability.

Finally we observe that also an electromagnetic field in a coherent state might play a role
comparable  to  that  of  f 0.  This  point  deserves  further  investigation,  even  though  a  magnitude
order estimate shows that a coherent e.m. field cannot achieve the mass-energy density present in
a Bose condensate.

n
Meaning of f

0.

In  the  works  where  the  coherent  coupling  is  discussed  (SHI,  LCC,  BOS)  the  classical
field  f 0(x)  is  introduced  as  the  mean  value  of  a  quantum  field:  f 0=<0|f (x)|0>.  This  definition
raises formal problems for the definition of the state |0>, because this should be at the same time
a relativistic invariant state, and the ground state of a condensate of massive particles.

It  is  therefore  more  convenient  to  work  just  with  the  functional  integral  of  the  system,
'(x), with f 0(x) a relativistic (this is

without mentioning the states. We assume that f (x)=f 0(x)+f
necessary for the gravitational coupling) classical field describing the condensate.

While  f

'  is  a  quantum  field,  f 0  is  an  external  classical  field,  and  not  an  integration
variable in the functional integral. We assume this to be a natural description of the condensate in
the present context. We shall identify better f 0 a posteriori; in particular, we are interested in its
relation to the density of superconducting charge carriers.

The relativistic hamiltonian, or energy density, of this field isequal to m 2(x) as given in eq.
(1). This hamiltonian does not take into account the external fields (mainly the magnetic field)
and  the  boundary  conditions  (normal  regions  of  the  superconductor)  which  let  f 0(x)  take  its
particular value at every point x. It just accounts for the mechanical energy of the fluid: the rest
energy + the term due to the 4-gradient (which reduces in practice to the spatial gradient, because
the time derivative is divided by c).

Since  in  natural  units  the  mass  of  the  charge  carriers  is  of  the  order  of  1010  cm-1  and
usually the spatial variations of f 0 take place on a scale much larger than 10-10 cm, we can at first
disregard  the  gradient  term.  Then,  consistently,  we  can  estimate  m 2» mN» m2V|f 0|2  (compare
BOS), from which we get the relation between f 0 and the energy density. If the coherence length
of the superconductor is very small, it may be necessary to introduce a small correction to  this
relation, but the magnitude order of  the total energy will be basically unaffected, and the same
holds for |f 0|.

(2b) Discussion - Induced instability and "runaway" of zero-modes.

"Pinning" or "runaway" of the field?

In  Ref.  BOS  we  mentioned  a  "pinning"  of  the  gravitational  field  within  the  critical
regions.  Here  we  speak  instead  of  a  "runaway"  of  the  field.  The  two  terms  are  basically
equivalent,  since  both  refer  to  the  behavior  of  the  field  in  a  potential  where  the  h=0  value  is
unstable and therefore the field runs away from this value and gets pinned - almost independently
from the initial conditions - at a strength h' different from zero. h' is determined by terms in the
potential higher than second order.

f
Fig. 8 -  Double-well potential for the field, localized to the critical regions (red).

The most typical example of  this kind of potential is the double well  potential (Fig.  8).
Actually, in the Ref. GAU we used a potential of this kind in order to compute the effects of a
local pinning on the field propagation in all space. That computation describes exactly the case of
a  scalar  massless  field  with  local  pinning.  We  recall  that  the  correction  to  the  propagator  is
proportional in that case to the parameter g =x f2, in turn proportional to m 2 - the local imaginary
mass term.

On the other hand in the gravitational case, even though we have a term m 2 (the "positive
cosmological term") in the lagrangian comparable to the imaginary mass term, it is not the value
of  m 2  which  enters  directly  in  the  correction  to  the  propagator.  In  other  words,  g   is  not
proportional  to  m 2.  If  it  was  so,  than  the  shielding  effect  would  be  irrelevant,  because  m 2  is
extremely small.

We  are  not  able,  in  the  gravitational  case,  to  relate  directly  m 2  (which  depends  on  the
condensate  density  in  the  critical  regions)  to  g   (which  is  evaluated  experimentally,  through  eq.
(2), from the observed shielding strength). This is because the instability induced by the m 2 term
in the gravitational lagrangian cannot be compared with that due to a double well potential in the
scalar case; it it much worse, since there exist gravitational modes for which the kinetic term in

the action - usually stabilizing against local variations, as it contains a gradient squared - is not
effective.

For this reason we believe that the exact value of m 2 is not important, as long as it is larger
|/8p G  and  can  thus  trigger  the  instability.  It  follows  that  the
than  the  threshold  value  |L
computation  in  Ref.  GAU,  exactly  valid  for  a  scalar  field,  represents  in  the  gravitational  case
only a useful model for a pinning of the field following an instability, while the parameter g  must
be fitted from the experimental data. As explained in Section 2b, g  is the sum of the products of
the unknown runaway probabilities x

i by the unknown strengths hi

2.

In which sense it is possible to use the Euclidean formalism.

It is known that the Euclidean Einstein action is not bounded from below due to the so-
called  "conformal  modes".  The  use  of  the  Euclidean  formalism  to  study  the  stability  of  our
system may therefore appear quite arbitrary. Consider, however, the following points.

(i)  The  phenomenon  under  investigation  is  essentially  macroscopic.  Its  typical  distance
and  momentum  scale  is  such  that  terms  in  the  action  of  the  order  of  d R  can  be  disregarded.
Equivalently, it is possible to insert in the action a cut-off on the momenta which eliminates the
conformal modes.

(ii) The Euclidean formalism is employed only in a perturbative context, as the analytical
continuation of Minkowski space + small fluctuations. We use the Euclidean formalism in order
to  ensure  the  positivity  of  the  function  m 2(x)  (see  2a)  and  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  some
known techniques for the computation of the static potential (see 2c).

Furthermore, we use the Euclidean formulation in order to exhibit the stabilizing effect of
a  negative  cosmological  term  and  the  de-stabilizing  effect  of  a  positive  comological  term,  but
still  in  the  context  of  a  weak  field  approximation.  The  same  results  can  be  obtained  in  the
Minkowskian theory, where a positive comological term corresponds to an imaginary mass.

After realizing that an instability arises, we do not try to describe the behavior of the field
through the Euclidean formalism; we just suppose that the runaway process stops at some field
strength, in such a way that the strengths hi have certain unknown probabilities x

i (see 2b).

(2c) Discussion - Constraint on the gravitational field and "tunneling".

Why the shielding region has a cylindrical shape.

Intuitively, one would expect the shielding region above the superconducting disk to have
the shape of cone, instead of a cylinder (see also Fig. 9). The observed cylindrical shape implies
that:  (i)  the  source  of  the  field  of  the  earth  is  seen  as  pointlike;  (ii)  there  isn't  any  kind  of
"diffraction" at the disk border.

Fig. 9 - Why is the shielding region cylinder-like instead of cone-like?

This is not easy to explain. Intuition would suggest a cone-like shielding region above the superconducting
disk (the basis of the cone being on the disk), instead of the infinite cylinder-like region observed by Podkletnov. In
fact, when the elevation of the proof mass above the disk increases, the proof mass apparently "sees shielded" only a
part of the Earth. This geometrical factor can be computed exactly (see G. Modanese, supr-con/9601001).

Nevertheless,  it  turns  out  that  when  computing  the  shielding  factor  for  the  Newtonian  part  of  the
gravitational  force  (that  with  dependence  1/r2),  the  mass  of  the  Earth  can  still  be  regarded,  as  usual  in  gravity
problems, as concentrated in the center.

Condition (ii)  is consistent with our theoretical  model,  as  shown  by  the  computation  in
GAU, under the reasonable hypothesis that the coherence domains in the superconducting  disk
are very small in comparison to the disk size.

Condition (i) is a general consequence of our theory, too. In fact, in order to compute the
static  potential  energy  of  the  interaction  of  two  bodies  with  masses  M  and  m  one  adds  to  the
gravitational action Sg the actions SM and Sm of the two bodies and then computes the quantum
average  <exp(SM+Sm>g.  For  pointlike  bodies,  the  action  is  simply  given  by  (cid:242) ds,  where  the
invariant interval ds computed along the trajectory of the body, which is a geodesic line in any
field configuration g.

For  an  extended  body,  the  center  of  mass  (CM)  still  follows  a  geodesic  line,  but  in
addition to the line integral we must also insert a volume integration over the parts of the body:
S=(cid:242) dVr (x)(cid:242) ds(x). This implies in practice that in addition to the minimal gravitational coupling,
n vCM,m vCM,n ), there is a coupling with the derivatives of h and quadrupole, octupole
of the form (hm
etc. terms of the form (¶

), etc.

n Qa

b hm

These terms do give some contributions to the static interaction potential, when inserted
into the quantum average <exp(SM+Sm>g, but these contributions depend on the distance r as r-2,
r-3,  etc.  So  if  we  keep  the  multipole  terms  into  account  when  computing  the  "shielding
correction",  we  find  that  the  correction  to  the  Newtonian  term  U» r-1  depends  only  on  the
coordinates of the center of mass. In other words we can regard the two bodies as pointlike, as
long as we are interested only in the Newtonian potential, which is usually by far the dominant
part of the interaction.

What is the analogue of fi in the gravitational case?

For a scalar  field f one can impose a local constraint (see  GAU)  through  a  double  well
2]. (More precisely, the r.h.s. is multiplied by a function fW (x)
.)  In  the  gravitational  case  we  could  write  instead
2], but in principle h00,i cannot be a constant, because the zero-mode, which is

potential of the form U(f)» [f2(x)-fi
which  has  support  in  the  critical  region  W
U(h)» [h00
the new minimum of the action in the presence of instability, depends on x.

2(x)-h00,i

Since there are several zero-modes close to the minimum of the action, we could take an
average  of  these  modes  with  respect  to  x  and  obtain  a  constant  field.  It  is  better,  however,  to
consider the field at one single point: here the field takes values hi, with probabilities x
i, and the
same holds for any point, with the same hi's and x
i's; the only difference is that for points close to
the border of the critical region W
i, fW (x) is not equal to 1, but goes gradually to zero. Thus we
have a constraint of the form

i x

i (cid:242) idx fW (x) [h00

2(x)-h00,i

2]2

Actually,  it  would  be  impossible  to  assign  different  probabilities  to  different  points,

except for those at the border of the critical region.

One  easily  checks  that  the  effect  of  the  change  above  on  the  final  formula  for  the

shielding factor is just to replace the parameter g  with another unknown factor.

Table II - Unproved assumptions of our model.

(i) The Euclidean theory near equilibrium can be applied to quantum gravity.

(ii) The instability leads to a constraint, with probability x

i for the field strength hi.

(iii) There exists a small intrinsic negative L

 and thus a threshold.

a
¶
b
m
n
(cid:229)
(3) Discussion - Density distribution of the superconducting carriers in the
composite disk.

In our earlier work we hypothesized that a local increase in the superconducting carriers
density could be obtained in the composite disk in non-static conditions, due to the very fast flow
of  the  "superfluid"  in  the  upper  part  of  the  disk  near  the  border  of  the  lower  (non
superconducting) part. (Fig. 10)

Fig. 10 - Fluid dynamical model for the composite disk.

In fact, admitting that the relative drift velocity goes to zero at the border, one concludes
from simple fluid dynamical  arguments that the fluid  density  must  increase  at  the  border  -  the
opposite  of  what  usually  happens  in  static  conditions  at  any  normal/superconducting  interface.
More precisely, the carriers density would reach a peak near the interface and then go rapidly to
zero at the interface.

A  velocity  gradient  near  a  flow  boundary  is  the  typical  signature  of  a  viscous  fluid
however, and this cannot be the case of the supercurrents. How could it then be possible to justify
a velocity gradient?

We could regard the velocity as a mean velocity, and keep into account the "strong Type
II" nature of the ceramic superconductor as well as the role of defects and impurities. These are
much more frequent near the interface, and the latter is not clear-cut, being obtained through  a
thermal process which melts the upper part of the disk.

The mean free path of the superconducting carriers could be very long in the upper part of
the disk and become gradually shorter towards the bottom of the disk. Therefore the superfluid
would slow  down  at  the  interface  -  in  the  sense  of  the  average  motion  -  due  to  the  interaction
with obstacles and impurities in the lattice.

This could also explain why the disk tends to heat up just when the largest values of the
shielding  factor  are  observed:  the  reason  would  be  that  the  almost-resistive  behavior  depicted
above is just what is needed to achieve a local increase in the density of superconducting carriers.

Or  perhaps  the  causes  of  the  heat  production  are  different  (for  instance,  related  to  the
pumping  process),  and  a  "mean  path"  of  the  superconducting  carriers  is  meaningless  in  this
context?  All  these  questions  are  still  unsolved;  as  we  pointed  out  above,  a  proper  theoretical
treatment  of  composite  Type  II  superconductors  (not  mentioning  the  peculiar  properties  of
HTCs...) subjected to fast rotation and high-frequency e.m. fields is not available yet.

Another useful observation could be the following. We can say that the composite disk
exhibits, in a certain sense, a "Tc gradient", from the top to the bottom, from 92 K to approx. 60
K. The shielding effect was observed by Podkletnov slightly below 70 K.

Remember  that  the  distance  between  the  vortex  cores  in  Type  II  material  tends  to  zero
when the temperature approaches Tc (Fig. 11). It is then clear that if a supercurrent flowing in the
"good" part of the disk in deviated to the lower part, where there is less space available for the
superconducting  carriers,  the  density  of  the  latter  can  increase  even  if  their  velocity  keeps
constant. The deviation can be caused by the external variable magnetic field, or by fluctuations
and defects in the lattice. The density increase would in any case also be connected to the relative
drift velocity of the carriers with respect to the rotating lattice.

This possibility is currently under investigation.

Fig. 11 - Size of the flux cores in dependence on the temperature.

(4) Discussion - Energetic balance, non conservative character of the field and
equation ¶

i=0.

iG

As  we  saw  in  the  first  part,  it  is  possible  to  keep  into  account  the  non  conservative
character  of  the  gravitational  field  in  the  context  of  a  phenomenological  theory,  in  which  the
external energy source has been included and therefore we do not expect that the static force field
is still equal to the gradient of the potential h00.

We  still  expect,  however,  that  the  minimum  of  the  action  outside  the  superconductor
corresponds  to  the  Einstein  equations;  it  follows,  for  weak  fields,  the  equation  ¶
i=0,  plus
suitable  boundary  conditions.  This  admits  as  a  solution  the  observed  cylinder-like  shielding
region.

iG 00

¶
G
It is natural for a general-relativist to ask, at this point: what happens to a light ray when it
crosses  the  shielding  region?  Is  it  deviated?  And  will  a  precision  clock  show  any  gravitational
slow-down when it is first placed into the shielding region and then pulled out?

These  phenomena  are  typically  studied  using  the  metric  tensor.  We  know  that  in  the
presence of shielding the relation between the static force G
i and the gradient of h00 is spoiled.
The question is: is it still possible to  use the metric tensor to predict the trajectory of a light ray
or the relation between the proper time of a frequency standard and the coordinate time?

These effects could also be tested experimentally, at least in principle. Light propagation
across the shielding region could be studied, for instance, through interference measurements on
a laser beam after several reflections at both sides of the region. It can also be shown (details will
appear elsewhere) that the modification of the metric tensor inside the shielding region may lead
to a shift in the frequency of a clock of about 1 part in 1011 - approx. 2 orders of magnitude larger
than the precision of atomic clocks.

But apart from the several practical difficulties connected to these measurements, it is not
clear  yet  on  the  theoretical  side  whether  the  gravity  anomaly  affects  in  the  same  way  all  the
components of the metric, and whether it affects in the same way the static behavior of the field
and its variations on a short time scale. Much work is on the way in this direction.

Another important issue is the compatibility between the shielding phenomenon and the

equivalence principle (see Fig. 12).

Fig. 12 - A "flying machine" based upon the gravity shielding effect would violate the
equivalence principle.

Imagine  a  box  divided  in  two  sections  1  and  2.  Suppose  that  the  lower  part  of  the  box,  with  mass  m2,
contains a shielding apparatus, complete with power supply generator and everything. Now let the box be in free fall.
If "the shielding is OFF", the acceleration of the box is equal to g.

Then you "turn ON" the shielding, say with efficiency a

; this means that the gravitational force felt by the
mass m1 over the apparatus is multiplied by a factor a <1 (for instance, a =0.98). Let us admit that the weight of m2
itself is not affected.

It  is  easy  to  see  that  in  this  case  the  acceleration  of  the  box  becomes  less  than  g.  This  is  actually  what
desired, if we aim at building a flying machine. It means, however, that the gravitational mass and the inertial mass
of the box are not equal, any more. And this represents a violation of the equivalence principle.

Note that the box is supposed to be isolated from the enviroment: it does not expel any jet of air or gas, nor
it interacts with any external electric field, etc. In these conditions of free fall, one observer inside the box should
experience total absence of gravity. He doesn't, however, if the shielding is ON. He feels some gravity, because its
acceleration is lower than g. This, again, shows that the equivalence principle is violated.

If we do not accept the possibility of such a violation, we must admit that the shielding effect does not work
like this. We must admit that if the shielding apparatus is rigidly connected to the Earth, then there is effective weight
reduction  of  the  samples  suspended  over  the  apparatus;  but  if  the  whole  shielding  apparatus  is  in  free  fall,  then  a
reaction force from the samples on the apparatus arises, which makes the total weight variation vanish.

This means of course that it is impossible to build a flying machine using the gravity shielding effect. It is

still possible however, in principle, to build a "lift".

Frequency spectrum of the transient effect.

It  has  been  reported  that  the  amplitude  of  the  transient  effect  described  by  J.  Schnurer
appears to depend much on the method employed for its detection. This led us to the following
conclusion.

(1) Probably the transient weight variation at the superconducting transition has its own
characteristic frequency spectrum. This is because it is short-lasting, which brings in a frequency
spectrum of course, and also because there could be some kind of temporal spikes in the effect.

(2)  The  frequency  spectrum  of  the  effect  should  match  well  the  proper  frequency  (or
frequencies) of the detector, in order to cause a good response in the detector. Things go like in a
resonance effect.

So,  roughly  speaking,  one  should  not  figure  the  measurement  as  "the  effect  comes,  the
detector  feels  a  transient  weight  diminution  and  displays  this,  then  the  effect  goes  and  the
detector ceases to display the weight diminution". It could  be really so, only if the duration of the
effect was of 30 seconds or more, and without any spikes.

The correct picture would be: the effect comes and acts like a force which perturbates the
proof mass with a certain frequency spectrum. If the proper frequency of the mechanical system
holding the mass is close to the typical frequencies of the effect, then an oscillation starts; if not,
almost nothing happens, because the mechanical system holding the mass is either to rigid or too
loose (compare also Fig. 6).

Probably the wooden arm used by Schnurer in his measurements or some other element in
the  arrangement  has  a  certain  vibration  frequency  which  resonates  with  the  effect.  It  would  be
very important to clarify this point.

While doing this hypothesis, we are figuring that in fact no pure weight diminutions were
seen, but weight oscillations in both directions, due to this kind of resonance. Several balances
take a few seconds to give an accurate response, and are therefore not suitable for measuring a
weight which is supposed to vary quickly - or they start oscillating if the weight oscillates, but in
some  strange  and  unpredictable  way.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  people  who  build  balances  never
consider  the  possibility  that  weight  can  vary  with  high  frequency,  due  to  some  little  "kicks"
coming from the bottom...

