188

Biophysical Journal Volume 76 January 1999 188 –197

Unbinding of Retinoic Acid from its Receptor Studied by Steered
Molecular Dynamics

Dorina Kosztin, Sergei Izrailev, and Klaus Schulten
Departments of Chemistry and Physics, Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801 USA

ABSTRACT Retinoic acid receptor (RAR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that regulates the expression of genes
involved in cell growth, differentiation, and development. Binding of the retinoic acid hormone to RAR is accompanied by
conformational changes in the protein which induce transactivation or transrepression of the target genes. In this paper we
present a study of the hormone binding/unbinding process in order to clarify the role of some of the amino acid contacts and
identify possible pathways of the all-trans retinoic acid binding/unbinding to/from human retinoic acid receptor (hRAR)-g.
Three possible pathways were explored using steered molecular dynamics simulations. Unbinding was induced on a time
scale of 1 ns by applying external forces to the hormone. The simulations suggest that the hormone may employ one pathway
for binding and an alternative “back door” pathway for unbinding.

INTRODUCTION

Retinoic acid (RA) is an important regulator of cellular
proliferation and differentiation in higher eukaryotes. The
action of RA is mediated by two types of nuclear hormone
receptors: the retinoic acid receptor (RAR) and the retinoid
X receptor (RXR). They act as transcriptional enhancers
that bind to specific sequences of DNA and activate tran-
scription after the ligand bound to the receptor induces
conformational changes. Both RAR and RXR are members
of the nuclear hormone receptor family and share a modular
structure composed of several domains, each performing a
specific function (Krust et al., 1986; Kumar et al., 1987;
Freedman and Luisi, 1993). The C-terminal domain, also
called the ligand binding domain (LBD), is responsible for
recognizing and binding the hormone as well as for con-
trolling multiple receptor functions such as transactivation
and transrepression (Wagner et al., 1995; Bourguet et al.,
1995; Renaud et al., 1995; Judelson and Privalsky, 1996).
Crystal structures of the ligand binding domain of the apo
human retinoid-X receptor RXR-a (Bourguet et al., 1995),
the human retinoic acid receptor hRAR-gbound to all-trans
retinoic acid (Renaud et al., 1995) and to 9-cis retinoic acid
(Klaholz et al., 1998), the rat a
1 thyroid hormone receptor
(TR) bound to a thyroid hormone agonist (Wagner et al.,
1995), the estrogen receptor (ER) bound to agonist and
antagonist (Brzozowski et al., 1997; Tanenbaum et al.,
1998), and progesterone complexed to its receptor (PR)
(Williams and Sigler, 1998) have been resolved recently and
have provided insight into the mechanism of hormone binding.
A comparison of the available crystal structures of the
LBD of different members of the nuclear hormone receptor

Received for publication 27 July 1998 and in final form 7 October 1998.

Address reprint requests to Dr. Klaus Schulten, Dept. of Physics, Beckman
Institute 3147, University of Illinois, 405 N. Matthews Ave., Urbana, IL
61801. Tel.: 217-244-2212; Fax: 217-244-6078; E-mail: kschulte@ks.
uiuc.edu.

© 1999 by the Biophysical Society

0006-3495/99/01/188/10

$2.00

family indicates that a conformational change in the recep-
tor accompanies the transition between the liganded and the
unliganded forms. This conformational change, also antic-
ipated by a variety of indirect experiments involving alter-
ation in receptor hydrophobicity, heat shock protein bind-
ing, thermal stability, and protease sensitivity (Driscoll et
al., 1996), enables the hormone-receptor complex to bind to
specific sequences of DNA as well as to other transcrip-
tional co-activator or co-repressor proteins (Brent et al.,
1989; Damm et al., 1989; Andersson et al., 1992). Elucida-
tion of the mechanism by which hormone binding induces
conformational changes is critical for understanding the
functional role of the hormone.

Unfortunately, no crystal structures of the same receptor
with bound and unbound ligand are presently available, and
comparison of the LBD structures of different receptors
may not reveal the conformational changes induced by
ligand binding for a single receptor. It is still uncertain how
large the conformational changes induced by hormone bind-
ing are, and what they entail. The two C-terminal helices,
H11 and H12, were experimentally proven to be involved in
hormone binding (Lee et al., 1995; Martinez et al., 1997;
Vombaur et al., 1998). However, it is still not clear what
role helix H12 plays during the hormone binding. Renaud et
al. (1995) proposed that when t-RA binds to the receptor,
helix H12 changes its conformation from extended into
solvent for the structure of hRXR-a (Fig. 1 b), to a confor-
mation closing the entrance to the binding pocket for
hRAR-g(Fig. 1 a). It has also been proposed (Renaud et al.,
1995)
the hormone attracted by residue Lys-264
“drags” helix H12 in the folded conformation on its way
toward the binding pocket, and that the salt bridge between
residues Glu-414 and Lys-264 is responsible for locking
helix H12 in this position. However, the crystal structure of
the estrogen receptor bound to agonist also shows helix H12
in the extended conformation, but this positioning is an
artefact of the crystal packing (Tanenbaum et al., 1998).
Since the continuous a-helix H12 in the RXR structure has

that

Kosztin et al.

SMD of RA Unbinding

189

FIGURE 1
(a) Crystal structure of the human retinoic acid receptor
(hRAR)-gbound to all-trans retinoic acid (Renaud et al., 1995); (b) crystal
structure of the human retinoid-X receptor RXR-a (Bourguet et al., 1995)
showing an extended conformation of helices H11 and H12, as well as the
V-loop. The LBD, in both structures, forms an antiparallel a-helical
sandwich with a three layer structure: helices H4, H5, H6, H8, and H9
enclosed by helix H1 and H3 on one side and helices H7, H10, and H11 on
the other side [for the topology diagram of the secondary structure see
Renaud et al. (1995)]. (c) Simulated hRAR-g–t-RA system; all a-carbon
atoms that were restrained during the forced unbinding are represented as
small spheres.

a rather low helical propensity for the corresponding se-
quence, the positioning of this helix may also be a result of
crystal packing. The structures mentioned reveal that the
receptors undergo a reorganization of the tertiary structure
upon hormone binding (Renaud et al., 1995; Wagner et al.,
1995; Brzozowski et al., 1997); however, this reorganiza-
tion varies for each protein and the differences among the
crystal structures may or may not be related to hormone
binding. Hence, in addition to the structural analysis, inves-
tigation of
ligand-receptor binding/unbinding dynamics
may contribute to understanding of the system’s function.
In this paper we present a study of the hormone receptor
binding/unbinding dynamics by steered molecular dynamics
in order to clarify the role of some of the amino acid
contacts that were identified in previous reports (Renaud et
al., 1995; Ostrowski et al., 1998), and to identify the bind-
ing/unbinding pathways of the all-trans RA to/from its
receptor.

Three possible unbinding pathways, shown in Fig. 2,
were chosen based on an inspection of the liganded hRAR-g
structure. Given the importance of helices H11 and H12 in
the binding process, as mentioned above, and the relative
positioning of helix H12 in the available crystal structures,
path 1 and path 2 for the unbinding of the hormone were
chosen in the proximity of these helices. Selecting unbind-
ing path 1 between helices H11 and H12 also allowed us to
test the necessity of a displacement of helix H12 for bind-
ing. Following the same reasoning, unbinding path 2 was
selected beneath helices H11 and H12. The third pathway,
path 3, was chosen after examining the molecular surface of

FIGURE 2 The unbinding of the t-RA hormone (initial position shown
as transparent vdW spheres) was enforced along three pathways. Path 1:
the hormone is pulled out between helices H11 and H12 (represented as
cylinders); path 2: the hormone is pulled out beneath helices H11 and H12;
path 3: the hormone is pulled out through the only discernible opening in
the protein surface.

the protein. In the crystal structure of liganded hRAR-g
residue Lys-236 has two alternative conformations, one
toward the interior, where it makes a salt bridge to the
carboxylate end of t-RA, and one where the side chain
points toward the exterior of the protein. The structure of the
protein with Lys-236 in the latter conformation exhibits a
“window” in the molecular surface that allows the carbox-
ylate end of the hormone to be seen from the outside. Path
3 was chosen to study the unbinding of the hormone through
this “window.”

Which residues are most involved in the process of bind-
ing/unbinding? How large are the conformational changes
induced in the protein by the binding/unbinding process?
Can the hormone use one pathway for binding and another
pathway for unbinding? These questions will be addressed
in the present study using steered molecular dynamics
(SMD) simulations (Leech et al., 1996; Grubmu¨ller et al.,
1996; Izrailev et al., 1997, 1998; Balsera et al., 1997;
Isralewitz et al., 1997; Lu¨demann et al., 1997; Stepaniants et
al., 1997; Marrink et al., 1998; Wriggers and Schulten,
1998; Lu et al., 1998; Hermans et al., 1998) for unbinding
t-RA from hRAR-g. The time scale of the natural binding
and unbinding of the hormone, of the order of milliseconds
or longer, is unreachable for conventional molecular dy-
namics simulations which are limited to nanosecond time
scales. In many cases, energy barriers involved in the bind-
ing or unbinding of a ligand to a receptor are too high for the
ligand to cross the barrier spontaneously on a nanosecond
time scale. SMD provides a means of accelerating the
unbinding processes through application of external forces
that lower the energy barriers and drive the ligand along its
unbinding path on nanosecond time scales. By monitoring
the forces applied and the response of the ligand, one can
characterize the pathway and its intermediate states.

In the next section the methods used to simulate the
unbinding of t-RA from hRAR-g via different pathways are
described. The Results section presents the response of the

190

Biophysical Journal

Volume 76 January 1999

protein and of the hormone to the external forces during
induced unbinding, and the Conclusions section summa-
rizes arguments for the binding and unbinding pathways
emerging from our study.

METHODS

Simulations

The simulations carried out were based on the x-ray crystallographic
structure of the LBD of RAR bound to all-trans RA at 2 Å resolution
(Renaud et al., 1995). All simulations were performed using the molecular
dynamics program NAMD (Nelson et al., 1996) and version 22 of the
CHARMM force field (Brooks et al., 1983; MacKerell, Jr. et al., 1992,
1998). For the charge distribution of the all-trans retinoic acid, Mulliken
charges obtained using GAUSSIAN-94 (Frisch et al., 1995) at the Hartree-
Fock level with a 6-31G* basis set, using the coordinates of heavy atoms
from the crystal structure [entry 2lbd in the Protein Data Bank (Bernstein
et al., 1977)] with hydrogens generated by the program QUANTA (MSI,
1994), were used. The equilibrium bond length, angles, torsional angles,
and force constants for t-RA were derived from t-RA coordinates, follow-
ing the treatment of retinal in bacteriorhodopsin as outlined in Humphrey
et al. (1994) and force field parameters of molecules with similar chemical
structure available in the CHARMM22 force field.

In all simulations we assumed a dielectric constant e 5 1 and a cutoff
of Coulomb forces with a switching function starting at 12 Å and reaching
zero at a distance of 14 Å. All atoms, including hydrogens, were described
explicitly. The hydrogen atom coordinates of both RAR and t-RA were
generated using the HBUILD routine of X-PLOR (Bru¨nger, 1992). An
integration time step of 1 fs was employed.

The crystal structure of the LBD of RAR bound to all-trans RA (Renaud
et al., 1995) contains 238 protein residues, the t-RA hormone, and 119
water molecules. To eliminate bad contacts and constraints due to crystal
packing, the complex was energy-minimized for 500 steps of Powell
algorithm in the presence of strong harmonic constraints on the a-carbon
atoms, followed by an additional 1500 steps without constraints. The
protein-ligand complex was then immersed in the center of a 45-Å sphere
of water molecules. Water for the solvation of the ligand-receptor complex
was prepared as described in previous studies (Bishop et al., 1997; Kosztin
et al., 1997). All water molecules that had one of the atoms closer than 1.8
Å to the protein or crystal water atoms were removed. Finally, only a 15-Å
layer of water molecules around the protein was retained and all the other
water molecules were deleted, resulting in a system of 14,574 atoms. The
solvated protein-ligand system was equilibrated for 50 ps with velocity
rescaling every 2.5 ps, followed by 60 ps of equilibration without rescaling.
After equilibration, five separate simulation runs were conducted: two
“free dynamics” simulations of 600 ps each with residue Lys-236 in both
alternative positions and three SMD simulations. All simulations were
carried out on 64 processors of a Cray T3E using 15 s of wall clock time
per picosecond of simulation. The coordinates were saved every half a
picosecond.

Preliminary simulation runs indicated that the part of the protein that
does not contain the binding pocket, does not change its conformation
during the unbinding of the hormone. Accordingly, during both stages of
the equilibration and further simulations, soft harmonic constraints with a
force constant of 0.5 kcal/mol Å2 were applied to all the a-carbon atoms in
the top part of the protein (see Fig. 1 c). These constraints also served to
prevent lateral movement of the protein during the simulated unbinding.
To induce unbinding of t-RA from the protein, the SMD approach was
employed, i.e., an external force was applied to the hormone in a direction
chosen along the selected unbinding path. Three different unbinding path-
ways, shown in Fig. 2, were explored, as outlined in the Introduction. The
force was applied to the C3 atom of the b-ionone ring (see Fig. 8) in the
simulations of hormone unbinding along path 1 and path 2, and to the C15
atom of the isoprene tail in simulations of unbinding along path 3. These
atoms were harmonically restrained to a point moving with a constant
velocity v in a chosen direction. The hormone was thus pulled out of the

protein. The external force exerted on the ligand was FW 5 k(vWt 2 xW), where
xW is the displacement of the restrained atom with respect to its original
position, and t is time elapsed from the beginning of the simulation. We
chose a value of k 5 4 kcal/mol Å2 that is sufficiently small to render
fluctuations of the applied force (due to thermal motion of the position xW of
the restrained atom) small relative to the magnitude of FW . At the same time,
k had to be sufficiently large so that the contraction of the harmonic
“spring” due to the advancement of the ligand along the unbinding path by
more than 1–2 Å resulted in a noticeable drop in the force (Izrailev et al.,
1997; Balsera et al., 1997).

The strength of the adhesion of the ligand to the binding pocket depends
on the velocity of pulling (Evans and Ritchie, 1997; Izrailev et al., 1997).
The external force applied to the ligand lowers the energy barriers that the
ligand has to surmount in order to unbind. Smaller velocities generally
result in longer times and smaller forces required to induce unbinding
because of the higher probability for the ligand to overcome the lowered
energy barrier due to thermal fluctuations. Longer simulation times also
lead to better sampling of the possible conformations and, therefore, to
finding less resistive unbinding pathways. For each pathway suggested
above a series of simulations with different pulling velocities v and slightly
different directions of the external force were carried out. In the analysis,
however, only the simulations with the lowest velocity v 5 0.032 Å/ps and
the direction of the external force that resulted in the smallest distortion of
the protein were included.

Analysis

The atom selection commands and energy calculation routines available in
X-PLOR were used to calculate nonbonded protein-ligand interaction
energies as well as the magnitude of the external force exerted on the
ligand. The structural deviations of the protein from the initial x-ray crystal
structure were assessed on the basis of root mean square deviations
(RMSD) and the analysis of the secondary structure. In computing the
RMSD, the overall translational and rotational motions have been removed
by superimposing the backbone of the protein in each configuration in all
trajectories onto the backbone of the protein in the crystal structure using
a least-square fitting algorithm (Kabsch, 1976).

The Debye-Waller factors, or B-factors, provide another important basis
for comparing molecular dynamics trajectories with experimental results of
x-ray crystallography. The theoretical temperature factors for the free
dynamics of the ligand-protein system were computed according to

B 5

^~Dr!2&,

8p2
3

(1)

where ^(Dr)2& is the mean square of the atomic displacement averaged over
the trajectories after a rigid body alignment against the coordinates of the
initial structure. The average was taken over all non-hydrogen atoms in a
given amino acid.

Direct, salt bridges, and water-mediated hydrogen bond interactions
between the ligand and the protein residues were analyzed using the
following conventions: two atoms were considered to form a hydrogen
bond (A. . .H-D) if the acceptor-donor distance was ,3.5 Å and if the
A-H-D angle was between 120° and 180°; a salt bridge was considered to
be formed by two residues with oppositely charged side chains within
hydrogen bonding distance of each other.

RESULTS

This section demonstrates the stability of the simulated
protein-ligand systems, describes the response of the protein
to the extraction of the hormone, and presents the measured
adhesion force profiles as well as the interaction energies
between the hormone and distinct residues along the un-
binding pathways.

SMD of RA Unbinding

191

Kosztin et al.

Free dynamics

The ligand bound system of hRAR-gwas simulated for 600
ps with residue Lys-236 in both alternative conformations,
as described in Methods. The RMSD of the protein atoms
from their crystal structure positions are presented in Fig. 3.
The results suggest that the overall structure of the system
was well preserved in both simulations. RMSD values were
normally below 3 Å, only the C-terminal end of H11 ex-
hibited RMSD values between 3 and 3.5 Å (data not
shown).

Fig. 4 compares observed (Renaud et al., 1995) and
simulated crystallographic B-factors. The atomic fluctua-
tions in both simulations match the experimental B factor
pattern relatively well. Differences occurred in the segments
205:240, 295:313, 390:420, where the calculated fluctua-
tions significantly exceed the experimental ones. The 205:
240 stretch corresponds to a coil region and the N-terminal
end of helix H3. The 295:313 region corresponds to one of
the b-sheets and helix H6 and the 390:420 region corre-
sponds to the C-terminal end of helix H11 and the coil that
connects it to helix H12. All three regions lie at the surface
of the protein and exhibit strong interactions with the sol-
vent, which may explain a higher mobility than in the
crystal.

The binding pocket did not deform during the free dy-
namics simulations and the ligand maintained its position
and orientation, fluctuating around its equilibrium position.
This is expected because the packing around t-RA is rela-
tively tight. Analysis of the hydrogen bonding network
between the hormone and the protein residues confirmed
that the hydrogen bonding network observed in the crystal
structure was well maintained during the simulations.

The t-RA ligand is completely buried in the protein
interior. There are no openings in the molecular surface of
the protein to connect the active site to the protein surface,
except when residue Lys-236 is oriented toward the outside
of the protein. As shown in Fig. 5, after 600 ps of dynamics
this opening became larger and allowed a better view of the
ligand inside the binding pocket. Large fluctuations of res-

FIGURE 3 Top: RMS deviation for all heavy atoms of (hRAR)-gin both
free dynamics simulations; bottom: RMS deviation for all heavy atoms of
(hRAR)-g in the bottom part of the protein where no a-carbon atoms were
restrained. In both graphs the continuous line represents the system with
residue Lys-236 making contact with the t-RA hormone (i.e., oriented
inward), and the dotted line represents the system with Lys-236 residue
oriented toward the solvent.

FIGURE 4 Fluctuations of protein side chains computed, as described in
Methods, from free dynamics simulations (dashed line corresponding to
Lys-236 oriented inward and dotted line corresponding to Lys-236 oriented
outward) and from crystallographic data (Renaud et al., 1995) (solid line).

idue Lys-236 in both simulations allowed water molecules
to enter the binding pocket and cluster around the carbox-
ylate end of the hormone. Some of these water molecules
moved between residues Arg-278, Arg-274, Ser-289, Lys-
236, and the carboxylate end of the hormone. This suggests
that water may destabilize salt bridges between the hormone
and the residues lining the opening, leading to a widening of
the opening in the molecular surface. Interestingly, in the
simulation with Lys-236 oriented toward the binding pocket
and making a contact to the carboxylate group of the hor-
mone, no opening was discernible at the beginning of the
simulation; nevertheless, a “window” in the molecular sur-
face of the protein developed as the simulation proceeded.
Even though in this case residue Lys-236 was hydrogen-
bonded to the carboxylate end of t-RA, its fluctuations
around the equilibrium position were still large.

Unbinding along path 1

The force required to extract the hormone from the binding
pocket (see Methods) along path 1 is shown in Fig. 6. The
simulation revealed distinct features of the unbinding pro-
cess. Throughout
the course of the unbinding, residues
altered their interactions with the ligand. For example, anal-
ysis of the hydrogen bonds showed a sequence of contacts
between ligand and side groups lining the pathway that are
made and broken during unbinding. The interaction ener-
gies between the ligand and the protein were calculated
separately for the b-ionone ring and for the isoprene tail.
The isoprene tail contribution is mainly electrostatic,
whereas the largest contribution to the total
interaction
energy for the b-ionone ring arose from many small vdW
interactions.

During the first 170 ps of unbinding along path 1 a steady
increase of the applied force was observed, as shown in Fig.
6. After 170 ps, the hydrogen bond made by the tail of the
hormone to one of the amino nitrogens of Arg-278 was
broken, while the bond made to the other amino nitrogen of
Arg-278 was weakened. This event was manifested by a
sharp increase of the interaction energy of the hormone with
Arg-278, as shown in Fig. 7, and by a decrease of the
applied force by ;70 pN.

Between 170 and 270 ps of path 1 unbinding, the hor-
mone had to overcome vdW interactions with residues
obstructing the exit and electrostatic interactions of the
in the binding
isoprene tail with residues anchoring it

192

Biophysical Journal

Volume 76 January 1999

FIGURE 5 Left: backbone representation of the bottom half of the protein showing the orientation of the hormone inside the binding pocket; center:
opening in the molecular surface of hRAR-g with Lys-236 oriented toward the solvent, i.e., outward; Right: the “window” present at the beginning of the
simulation becomes larger after 600 ps and allows a better view of the hormone inside the binding pocket. Figure created using GRASP (Nicholls et al.,
1991).

8) coming into close contact with Leu-400. At 445 ps the
19-methyl group slipped past this residue and the b-ionone
ring found itself almost completely outside the binding
pocket.

After ;450 ps the b-ionone ring had passed between
helices H11 and H12 and moved into the solvent. Passing of
the isoprene tail between the two helices required a force of
;170 pN. After 720 ps of simulation an increase in the
pulling force was observed for ;100 ps. Analysis of the
interaction energy between protein residues along the un-
binding pathway and the hormone revealed that the increase
in the applied force was due to the interaction between the
carboxylate end of the hormone and Arg-396 first, and then
Arg-413 (see Fig. 7). After 1 ns of simulation, the hormone,
completely out of the binding pocket, still maintains the
hydrogen bond to Arg-413.

The simulations showed that perturbation of the salt
bridge between residues Glu-414 and Lys-264 was not

pocket. Residues Gly-393, Ala-397, Leu-400, Met-408, and
Leu-416 were in close vdW contact with the b-ionone ring
of the hormone at the beginning of the simulation. The
hormone had to push past these residues to follow along
path 1. At 200 ps, the b-ionone ring of the hormone rotated
;35° around the C6-C7 bond (see Fig. 8) with respect to the
isoprene tail. X-ray crystallographic, NMR, and theoretical
studies of retinoids have shown that rotation around the
C6-C7 bond is one of the most interesting properties of
retinoids (van Aalten et al., 1996). We have monitored,
therefore, the evolution of the C1-C6-C7-C8 dihedral angle,
presented in Fig. 8. Rotation of the b-ionone ring brought
residues Gly-393, Leu-416, and Ile-412 in close contact
with the 5-methyl group of the ring and residues Ala-397,
Leu-400, and Met-408 in close contact with the geminal
methyl groups of the hormone. The force needed for ex-
traction remained nearly constant during this time, after
which there was a sharp increase in its magnitude by ;100
pN.

At 270 ps, the carboxylate end of the hormone was still
hydrogen-bonded to residues Lys-236, Ser-289, and Phe-
288. A sharp increase in the applied force to ;540 –580 pN
was necessary to break these bonds. The breaking of these
hydrogen bonds takes place between 270 and 320 ps of path
1 unbinding. At the same time, the 5-methyl group of the
b-ionone ring repositioned itself between the side chains of
Ile-412 and Leu-416, pushing both aside. The geminal
methyl groups were still behind residues Leu-400 and Met-
408. These residues were finally pushed aside at ;360 ps.
At this point, there were no more residues obstructing the
movement of the b-ionone ring of the hormone along path
1; consequently, the force decreased by ;150 pN. The
following increase in the force, between 400 and 430 ps,
was due to the 19-methyl group on the isoprene tail (see Fig.

FIGURE 6 Force required to extract the hormone along path 1.

FIGURE 7 Top: Snapshot, at 750 ps, showing the hormone leaving the
binding pocket along path 1 and the location of key amino acids; the initial
position of the hormone is represented by transparent vdW spheres; bot-
tom: time evolution of the interaction energies (in kcal/mol) between some
of the residues along the unbinding pathway and the t-RA hormone. The
electrostatic interaction of the carboxylate end of the hormone with resi-
dues Arg-278 and Ser-289 decreases as the interaction with residues
Arg-396 and Arg-413 increases.

Kosztin et al.

SMD of RA Unbinding

193

Despite the considerable rearrangement of protein side
groups, the force required to move the ligand along path 2,
shown in Fig. 9, did not exceed 460 pN. However, the force
decreased only after ;470 ps of simulated unbinding. Be-
fore this occurred the hormone experienced vdW interac-
tions with many of the residues along the unbinding path-
way. These vdW interactions were so strong that
the
breaking of the hydrogen bonding network between protein
residues and the hormone carboxylate end was not an event
that could be attributed to an increase or decrease in the
force. After ;500 ps many of the residues along the path-
way had reoriented, and the b-ionone ring emerged from the
interior of the protein. After 750 ps of simulation time, the
t-RA hormone was still partially inside the protein and
marked deformations of the protein were still present.

Unbinding along path 3

The t-RA binding site “window” mentioned above, as well
as the high temperature factors of the same region in the TR
LBD structure (Wagner et al., 1995), prompted us to extract
t-RA along path 3. Charged residues surrounding the car-
boxylate end of the ligand form a ring around the binding
site “window” (see Fig. 10) and act as an anchor for the
hormone. The force required to pull the hormone along path
3 is presented in Fig. 11.

Initially, the unbinding of the hormone proceeded slowly,
since the hormone remained tightly bound while the applied
force steadily increased. Forces of over 500 pN were re-
quired to surmount the high electrostatic barrier imposed by
residues around the carboxylate end of the hormone. The
first peak in the force, of 520 pN, at ;170 ps, corresponded
to the breaking of the salt bridge between the carboxylate
end of the hormone and Arg-274. The force decreased by
;180 pN during the following 20 ps before starting to
increase again at 190 ps, in order to break the hydrogen
bonds and salt bridges between the retinoic acid and resi-
dues Lys-229, Ser-289, and Phe-288. Consequently, another
peak of 530 pN occurred at 240 ps. Breaking of the salt
bridge between the hormone and Arg-278 at 260 ps required
a force of ;470 pN. The abrupt decrease of the interaction
energy between the hormone and residues Arg-274, Arg-
278, Lys-229, Lys-236, Ser-289, and Phe-288 correlated
with the changes of the applied force (see Fig. 11).

The b-ionone ring of the hormone was initially in close
contact with residues Met-272, Phe-304, Leu-268, Leu-271,
and Met-415. After 245 ps of path 3 unbinding, the move-

FIGURE 9 Force required to extract the hormone along path 2.

FIGURE 8 Top: crystal structure of the all-trans retinoic acid hormone.
The arrow indicates torsion around the C6-C7 bond rotating the b-ionone
ring. Bottom: time evolution of the C1-C6-C7-C8 dihedral angle of the
t-RA hormone during the forced unbinding along path 1 (top) and path 3
(bottom); change of the angle implies rotation of the hormone b-ionone
ring.

necessary for the unbinding of the hormone from the active
site. Relatively small and localized displacements and rota-
tions of protein side chains, involving an RMSD of 3– 4 Å
for the C-terminal end of helix H11 and the coil
that
connects it to helix H12, were sufficient to allow the t-RA
hormone to leave the binding pocket. These deformations
and displacements mainly affected the C-terminal end of
helix H11 and the coil that connects it to helix H12, whereas
the secondary structure of helix H12 was very well main-
tained. We note that during the free dynamics simulations
this region of the protein displayed high fluctuations, which
may account for some of the changes in the structure during
the forced unbinding. Movement of the hormone along path
1 led to inclusion of water molecules in the binding pocket
through the region surrounding the carboxylate end of the
hormone. One water molecule, hydrogen-bonded to the
carboxylate end of the hormone, follows the hormone along
the entire unbinding path 1.

Unbinding along path 2

Forced unbinding along path 2, depicted in Fig. 2, proved to
strongly affect protein conformation. Various directions for
the applied force were tried to avoid conformational
changes, but without success. Several residues had to be
dislodged in order for the hormone to leave the binding
pocket; residues Trp-227 and Phe-230 had to be completely
reoriented. The C-terminal end of helix 3 unraveled, some
of the residues in this region trailing the hormone.

194

Biophysical Journal

Volume 76 January 1999

FIGURE 10 Protein residues located within 5 Å of the carboxylate end
of t-RA are lining the “window” in the molecular surface.

ment of the hormone as well as the interaction with the
surrounding residues led to a slight rotation of the b-ionone
ring around the C6-C7 bond, as shown in Fig. 8. In the new
orientation, the bulky methyl groups of the b-ionone ring
were not occluded by any residue side chains for ;60 ps. At
320 ps the geminal methyl groups came in close contact
with residues Ala-234 and Leu-233, leading to an increase
in force of ;100 pN. At 410 ps, another rotation of the
b-ionone ring around the C6-C7 bond accompanied the
surmounting of this obstacle and the force dropped by ;200
pN. At this point the b-ionone ring was almost out of the
binding pocket with no residues obstructing the further
pathway. Residues still in close contact with the hormone
led to a slight increase of the force, between 425 and 475 ps.
At 475 ps the drop in force signaled the completed unbind-
ing of the hormone. From this point on, the entire hormone
moved in solvent; the simulations were stopped at 750 ps.
The secondary structure of the protein was well main-
tained during the unbinding along path 3. The applied force
affected only helix H3 around the Lys-236 residue, inducing
oscillations of residue Lys-236. However, this region also
exhibited strong fluctuations in the simulations of the pro-
tein-ligand system without external forces applied. Water
molecules, clustered around the carboxylate end of the
hormone, entered the binding pocket, and remained clus-
tered around the “window” mentioned above.

CONCLUSIONS

Three different pathways for the unbinding process of t-RA
from RAR were explored. Simulation results indicated that

FIGURE 11 Force required to extract the hormone along path 3.

FIGURE 12 Top: snapshot, at 600 ps, showing the hormone leaving the
binding pocket along path 3 and the location of key amino acids; the initial
position of the hormone is represented by transparent vdW spheres; bot-
tom: time evolution of the energies (in kcal/mol) of interaction between the
t-RA hormone and charged residues that line the “window.”

it is possible to unbind the hormone along path 1 and path
3 without greatly affecting the structure of the protein.
Particular characteristics of the simulated pathways dis-
cussed below suggest path 1 as the binding pathway for the
hormone and path 3 as the unbinding pathway.

The force profile for the unbinding of t-RA from its
receptor showed similar characteristics along paths 1 and 3.
The measured force gradually increased toward its maxi-
mum value after which it decreased as the hormone was
leaving the binding pocket. Even though in these two sim-
ulations the hormone was pulled out of the binding pocket
using a force applied to opposite ends of the hormone, two
important steps were observed in both simulations. One step
involved breaking of the salt bridges between the carboxy-
late end of the hormone and charged or polar residues that
surround it, the other step involved overcoming the van der
Waals interactions between protein residues and the b-ion-
one ring of the hormone. This two-step scenario can explain
why path 1 may be considered the binding pathway and path
3 the unbinding pathway of the hormone.

Let us briefly summarize, for this purpose, the character-
istics of path 1 unbinding. The b-ionone ring of the hor-
mone had to pass through the residues that close the en-
trance to the binding pocket, and the hydrogen bonding
network between the carboxylate end and protein residues
had to be broken. In case of path 1 these two events develop
almost simultaneously. When the hormone leaves the bind-
ing pocket, the electrostatic interaction between the hor-
mone and residues inside the binding pocket is replaced by
the interactions with charged residues on the surface of the
protein.

Now let us suppose that path 1 is the binding pathway for
the hormone and that helix H12 for the apo form of hRAR-g

Kosztin et al.

SMD of RA Unbinding

195

except after reordering of residue Lys-236 and after hydra-
tion events.

One may then consider path 3 as a possible unbinding
pathway, either as the sole unbinding pathway or an alter-
native to path 1. There is no experimental evidence that the
hormone leaves the binding pocket the same way it entered.
In fact, conformational changes of the RAR ligand binding
domain could easily render the binding of the hormone
along path 1 irreversible on relevant time scales. The dis-
sociation of the hormone along path 3 would be a slow
process, and thermal fluctuations that govern the unbinding
may cause a sufficient opening of the “window” for the
hormone to pass through. Presence of ions around that
region in the protein as well as intrusion of water molecules
in the binding pocket may help destabilize the hydrogen
bonding network between the carboxylate end of the hor-
mone and protein residues and, thus, lead to the opening of
the binding pocket.

One might criticize the simulations presented in this
paper for the choices made in modeling the ligand binding/
unbinding process: preselected direction for the applied
force, short simulation time, force field choice, and force
constant choice for the harmonic spring. However, it was
shown previously (Grubmu¨ller et al., 1996; Izrailev et al.,
1997; Isralewitz et al., 1997; Lu¨demann et al., 1997; Stepa-
niants et al., 1997; Marrink et al., 1998; Lu et al., 1998;
Hermans et al., 1998) that despite some shortcomings, re-
sults obtained from SMD simulations yield important qual-
itative insights into binding mechanisms and correlate well
with experimental data.

Variations in the choice of the force constant for the
harmonic spring as well as different pulling rates influence
the results, as outlined in Methods. Through model calcu-
lations it was shown that by using soft springs, one can
better measure the global properties of the system than
when using stiff springs (Izrailev et al., 1997; Balsera et al.,
1997). Simulations with different pulling velocities v
showed that forces required for the unbinding of hormone
are higher for larger values of v than for smaller ones. As v
decreases, the ligand has more time to sample the confor-
mational space and to search for a path of least resistance
along the chosen direction. In the simulations the sampling
times are limited to nanoseconds, which is not sufficient to
find the best possible path, and such a path must be prese-
lected. Nevertheless, the hormone can still adjust its con-
formation and position in such a way that crossing of very
large energy barriers is avoided.

It was observed in the simulations that the protein re-
sponse does not change significantly with the changes in the
velocity v. For example, the deformations induced in the
C-terminal end of helix H11 by the forced unbinding of the
hormone appear in simulations along path 1 with v 5 0.032
Å/ps as well as with v 5 0.08 Å/ps. These deformations
may be due to the inability of the protein to adequately
respond to the perturbation on the time scale of the simu-
lations even when small values of v are employed, as well
as due to the intrinsic flexibility of the protein in that region.

the superimposed binding/unbinding
FIGURE 13 Representation of
events (bound position of the hormone shown as transparent vdW spheres).
Residues lining the binding/unbinding windows, as shown in Figs. 7 and
12, are represented in licorice.

is folded in the same position as in the crystal structure of
the holo hRAR-g (Renaud et al., 1995). Then, using the
reversed order of events observed in the simulated unbind-
ing along path 1, one can describe the binding mechanism of
the hormone. First Arg-413, and then Arg-396, attract and
orient the carboxylate end of the hormone toward the bind-
ing pocket. When the hormone is within hydrogen bonding
distance of these two residues, it also experiences the influ-
ence of the charged and polar residues Arg-278, Lys-236,
Arg-274, and Ser-289 located at the opposite end of the
binding pocket. The two steps described above take place
almost simultaneously, i.e., the strong electrostatic attrac-
tion between the carboxylate end of the hormone and resi-
dues Arg-278, Lys-236, Ser-289, and Arg-274 helps the
b-ionone ring to pass between protein residues, thus leading
to the penetration of the hormone into the binding pocket.
The entrance of path 1 is surrounded by highly fluctuating
residues. These residues may become more ordered upon
binding of the hormone, making contacts with the hormone
or with other protein residues. Induced ordering of the
protein side chains may be favorable for the hormone entry
without requiring a motion of helix H12.

Study of the unbinding of the hormone along path 3 was
prompted by the existence of the “window” in the molecular
surface that allows access to the binding site, as shown in
Fig. 5. Interestingly, this “window” is lined with charged
and polar residues that clearly have an important role in
attracting and anchoring the hormone into the binding
pocket. There are approximately no changes in the structure
of the protein upon unbinding, the applied force is not larger
along path 3 than along path 1, and the two-step process is
discernible for path 3 as well.

There are two arguments that make path 3 an unlikely
candidate for a binding pathway. First, the carboxylate end
of the hormone should be the one to be attracted by the point
of entry into the protein since it furnishes stronger and more
specific interactions than the b-ionone ring. However, if
path 3 represented a binding path, the b-ionone ring had to
go through the “window” into the binding pocket first. The
“window” would need to be sufficiently large to let the
bulky ring pass through. However, the “window” explored
in our simulations was too small to allow ligand access,

196

Biophysical Journal

Volume 76 January 1999

Even though the magnitude of the measured forces is influ-
enced by the choice of force constant for the harmonic
spring or the pulling velocity, the qualitative features of the
unbinding process remain unchanged. Based on this, we
suggest that the results of our SMD simulations are quali-
tatively representative for the binding/unbinding process
and applicable to other members of the nuclear hormone
receptors family.

Retinoids, the natural and synthetic derivatives of vitamin
A, are crucial for cell differentiation and proliferation and
embryonic development. Each cell type manufactures its
own pool of retinoids, and these interact with retinoic acid
receptors in the cell nucleus to modulate gene transcription.
Because of their ability to stimulate normal cell differenti-
ation, retinoids have been used to treat cutaneous T-cell
lymphomas, leukoplakia, squamous cell carcinomas of the
skin, and basal cell carcinomas. One of the retinoids, all-
trans retinoic acid, has recently received FDA approval for
two separate uses: the topical treatment of photoaged skin
and the oral treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia.
Treatment of diseases with retinoic acid causes unwanted
side effects, such as fever, respiratory distress, and hypo-
tension. In order to eliminate these side effects, other li-
gands with high affinity to the receptor should be designed.
Knowledge of ligand binding pathways can provide addi-
tional information, such as whether a ligand is likely to be
able to enter the binding pocket, that helps ligand screening
and accelerate drug design. Also, as the unbinding of the
hormone represents the path of least resistance, studying the
early stages of the unbinding can reveal portions of the
receptor that are usually flexible. This flexibility may be
exploited in the design of novel ligands that open up new
pockets which may not be present in the absence of the
novel ligand.

The authors thank J. Katzenellenbogen for helpful discussions and sugges-
tions, R. Brunner and J. Phillips for help with NAMD, and F. Molnar for
a critical reading of the manuscript.

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant PHS 5 P41
RR05969-04, National Science Foundation Grants BIR-9318159 and BIR
94-23827 EQ, a grant from the Roy J. Carver Charitable Trust, and by the
MCA 93S028P computer time grant at Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center.

The figures in this paper were created with the molecular graphics program
VMD (Humphrey et al., 1996) (http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/VMD).

REFERENCES

Andersson, M. L., K. Nordstro¨m, S. Demczuck, M. Harbers, and B.
Vennstro¨m. 1992. Thyroid hormone alters the DNA binding properties
of chicken thyroid hormone receptors a and b. Nucleic Acids Res.
20:4803– 4810.

Balsera, M., S. Stepaniants, S. Izrailev, Y. Oono, and K. Schulten. 1997.
Reconstructing potential energy functions from simulated force-induced
unbinding processes. Biophys. J. 73:1281–1287.

Bernstein, F. C., T. F. Koetzle, G. J. Williams, E. F. Meyer, M. D. Brice,
J. R. Rogers, O. Kennard, T. Shimanouchi, and M. Tasumi. 1977. The
Protein Data Bank: a computer-based archival file for macromolecular
structures. J. Mol. Biol. 112:535–542.

Bishop, T. C., D. Kosztin, and K. Schulten. 1997. How hormone receptor-
DNA binding affects nucleosomal DNA: the role of symmetry. Biophys.
J. 72:2056 –2067.

Bourguet, W., M. Ruff, P. Chambon, H. Gronemeyer, and D. Moras. 1995.
Crystal structure of the ligand-binding domain of the human nuclear
receptor RXR-a. Nature. 375:377–382.

Brent, G. A., M. K. Dunn, J. W. Harney, T. Gulick, and P. R. Larsen. 1989.
Thyroid hormone aporeceptor represses T3 inducible promoters and
blocks activity of the retinoic acid receptor. New Biol. 1:329 –336.
Brooks, B. R., R. E. Bruccoleri, B. D. Olafson, D. J. States, S. Swami-
nathan, and M. Karplus. 1983. CHARMM: a program for macromolec-
ular energy, minimization, and dynamics calculations. J. Comp. Chem.
4:187–217.

Bru¨nger, A. T. 1992. X-PLOR, Version 3.1: A System for X-Ray Crys-
tallography and NMR. The Howard Hughes Medical Institute and De-
partment of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University.
Brzozowski, A. M., A. C. W. Pike, Z. Dauter, R. E. Hubbard, T. Bonn, O.
Engstro¨m, L. O¨ hman, G. L. Greene, J. A. Gustafsson, and M. Carlquist.
1997. Molecular basis of agonism and antagonism in the oestrogen
receptor. Nature. 389:753–758.

Damm, K., C. C. Thompson, and R. M. Evans. 1989. Protein encoded by
v-erbA functions as a thyroid-hormone receptor antagonist. Nature.
339:593–597.

Driscoll, J. E., C. L. Seachord, J. A. Lupisella, R. P. Darveau, and P. R.
Reczek. 1996. Ligand-induced conformational changes in the human
retinoic acid receptor g detected using monoclonal antibodies. J. Biol.
Chem. 271:22969 –22975.

Evans, E., and K. Ritchie. 1997. Dynamic strength of molecular adhesion

bonds. Biophys. J. 72:1541–1555.

Freedman, L. P., and B. F. Luisi. 1993. On the mechanism of DNA binding
by nuclear hormone receptors: a structural and functional perspective.
J. Cell. Biochem. 51:140 –150.

Frisch, M. J., G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, P. M. W. Gill, B. G. Johnson,
M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, T. Keith, G. A. Petersson, J. A. Mont-
gomery, K. Raghavachari, M. A. Al-Laham, V. G. Zakrzewski, J. V.
Ortiz, J. B. Foresman, C. Y. Peng, P. Y. Ayala, W. Chen, M. W. Wong,
J. L. Andres, E. S. Replogle, R. Gomperts, R. L. Martin, D. J. Fox, J. S.
Binkley, D. J. Defrees, J. Baker, J. P. Stewart, M. Head-Gordon, C.
Gonzalez, and J. A. Pople. 1995. Gaussian 94, Revision b.3. Gaussian
Inc., Pittsburgh, PA.

Grubmu¨ller, H., B. Heymann, and P. Tavan. 1996. Ligand binding and
molecular mechanics calculation of the streptavidin-biotin rupture force.
Science. 271:997–999.

Hermans, J., G. Mann, L. Wang, and L. Zhang. 1998. Simulation studies of
protein-ligand interactions. In Algorithms for Macromolecular Model-
ling. P. Deuflhard, J. Hermans, B. Leimkuhler, A. Mark, R. D. Skeel,
and S. Reich, editors. Lecture Notes in Computational Science and
Engineering. Springer-Verlag, New York. In press.

Humphrey, W. F., A. Dalke, and K. Schulten. 1996. VMD—visual mo-

lecular dynamics. J. Mol. Graphics. 14:33–38.

Humphrey, W., I. Logunov, K. Schulten, and M. Sheves. 1994. Molecular
dynamics study of bacteriorhodopsin and artificial pigments. Biochem-
istry. 33:3668 –3678.

Isralewitz, B., S. Izrailev, and K. Schulten. 1997. Binding pathway of
retinal to bacterio-opsin: a prediction by molecular dynamics simula-
tions. Biophys. J. 73:2972–2979.

Izrailev, S., S. Stepaniants, M. Balsera, Y. Oono, and K. Schulten. 1997.
Molecular dynamics study of unbinding of the avidin-biotin complex.
Biophys. J. 72:1568 –1581.

Izrailev, S., S. Stepaniants, B. Isralewitz, D. Kosztin, H. Lu, F. Molnar, W.
Wriggers, and K. Schulten. 1998. Steered molecular dynamics. In Al-
gorithms for Macromolecular Modelling. P. Deuflhard, J. Hermans, B.
Leimkuhler, A. Mark, R. D. Skeel, and S. Reich, editors. Lecture Notes
in Computational Science and Engineering. Springer-Verlag, New York.
In press.

Judelson, C., and M. L. Privalsky. 1996. DNA recognition by normal and
oncogenic thyroid hormone receptors— unexpected diversity in half-site
specificity controlled by non-zinc-finger determinants. J. Biol. Chem.
271:10800 –10805.

Kabsch, W. 1976. A solution for the best rotation to relate two sets of

vectors. Acta Crystallogr. A. 32:922–923.

Kosztin et al.

SMD of RA Unbinding

197

Klaholz, B. P., J. P. Renaud, A. Mitschler, C. Zusi, P. Chambon, H.
Gronemeyer, and D. Moras. 1998. Conformational adaptation of agonist
to the human nuclear receptor rarg. Nature Struct. Biol. 5:199 –202.
Kosztin, D., T. C. Bishop, and K. Schulten. 1997. Binding of the estrogen

receptor to DNA: the role of waters. Biophys. J. 73:557–570.

Krust, A., S. Green, P. Argos, V. Kumar, P. Walter, J. Bornert, and P.
Chambon. 1986. The chicken oestrogen receptor sequence: homology
with v-erbA and the human oestrogen and glucocorticoid receptors.
EMBO J. 5:891– 897.

Kumar, V., S. Green, G. Stack, M. Berry, J. R. Jin, and P. Chambon. 1987.
Functional domains of the human estrogen receptor. Cell. 51:941–951.
Lee, J. W., F. Ryan, J. C. Swaffield, S. A. Johnston, and D. D. Moore.
1995. Interaction of thyroid-hormone receptor with a conserved tran-
scriptional mediator. Nature. 374:91–94.

Leech, J., J. Prins, and J. Hermans. 1996. SMD: visual steering of molec-
ular dynamics for protein design. IEEE Comp. Sci. & Eng. 3:38 – 45.
Lu, H., B. Isralewitz, A. Krammer, V. Vogel, and K. Schulten. 1998.
Unfolding of titin immunoglobulin domains by steered molecular dy-
namics simulation. Biophys. J. 75:662– 671.

Lu¨demann, S. K., O. Carugo, and R. C. Wade. 1997. Substrate access to
cytochrome P450cam: a comparison of a thermal motion pathway anal-
ysis with molecular dynamics simulation data. J. Mol. Model.
3:369 –374.

MacKerell, Jr., A. D., D. Bashford, M. Bellott, R. L. Dunbrack, Jr., J.
Evanseck, M. J. Field, S. Fischer, J. Gao, H. Guo, S. Ha, D. Joseph, L.
Kuchnir, K. Kuczera, F. T. K. Lau, C. Mattos, S. Michnick, T. Ngo,
D. T. Nguyen, B. Prodhom, I. W. E. Reiher, B. Roux, M. Schlenkrich, J.
Smith, R. Stote, J. Straub, M. Watanabe, J. Wiorkiewicz-Kuczera, D.
Yin, and M. Karplus. 1998. All-hydrogen empirical potential for mo-
lecular modeling and dynamics studies of proteins using the
CHARMM22 force field. J. Phys. Chem. B. 102:3586 –3616.

MacKerell, Jr., A. D., D. Bashford, M. Bellott, R. L. Dunbrack, Jr., J.
Evanseck, M. J. Field, S. Fischer, J. Gao, H. Guo, S. Ha, D. Joseph, L.
Kuchnir, K. Kuczera, F. T. K. Lau, C. Mattos, S. Michnick, T. Ngo,
D. T. Nguyen, B. Prodhom, B. Roux, M. Schlenkrich, J. Smith, R. Stote,
J. Straub, M. Watanabe, J. Wiorkiewicz-Kuczera, D. Yin, and M. Kar-
plus. 1992. Self-consistent parametrization of biomolecules for molec-
ular modeling and condensed phase simulations. FASEB J. 6:143a.
(Abstr.).

Martinez, E., D. D. Moore, E. Keller, D. Pearce, V. Robinson, P. Mac-
donald, S. S. Simons, E. Sanchez, and M. Danielsen. 1997. The nuclear
receptor resource project. Nucleic Acids Res. 25:163–165.

MSI. 1994. Quanta 4.0. Molecular Simulations Inc., Burlington, Massa-

chusetts.

Nelson, M., W. Humphrey, A. Gursoy, A. Dalke, L. Kale´, R. D. Skeel, and
K. Schulten. 1996. NAMD—a parallel, object-oriented molecular dy-
namics program. J. Supercomputing App. 10:251–268.

Nicholls, A., K. A. Sharp, and B. Honig. 1991. Protein folding and
association: insights from the interfacial and thermodynamic properties
of hydrocarbons. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 11:281–296.

Ostrowski, J., T. Roalsvig, L. Hammer, A. Marinier, J. E. S. Jr., K. L. Yu,
and P. R. Reczek. 1998. Serine 232 and methionine 272 define the ligand
binding pocket in retinoic acid receptor subtypes. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
3490 –3495.

Renaud, J. P., N. Rochel, M. Ruff, V. Vivat, P. Chambon, H. Gronemeyer,
and D. Moras. 1995. Crystal structure of the RAR-g ligand-binding
domain bound to all-trans retinoic acid. Nature. 378:681– 689.

Stepaniants, S., S. Izrailev, and K. Schulten. 1997. Extraction of lipids
from phospholipid membranes by steered molecular dynamics. J. Mol.
Model. 3:473– 475.

Tanenbaum, D. M., Y. Wang, S. P. Williams, and P. B. Sigler. 1998.
Crystallographic comparison of the estrogen and progesterone receptor’s
ligand binding domains. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 95:5998 – 6003.

van Aalten, D. M. F., B. L. de Groot, H. Berendsen, and J. B. C. Findlay.
1996. Conformational analysis of retinoids and restriction of their dy-
namics by retinoid-binding proteins. Biochem. J. 319:543–550.

Vombaur, E., M. Harbers, S. J. Um, A. Benecke, P. Chambon, and R.
Losson. 1998. The yeast ADA complex mediates the ligand-dependent
activation function AF-2 of retinoid X and estrogen receptors. Genes
Dev. 12:1278 –1289.

Wagner, R., J. W. Apriletti, M. E. McGrath, B. L. West, J. D. Baxter, and
R. J. Fletterick. 1995. A structural role for hormone in the thyroid
hormone receptor. Nature. 378:690 – 697.

Williams, S. P., and P. B. Sigler. 1998. Atomic structure of progesterone

complexed with its receptor. Nature. 393:392–396.

Marrink, S.-J., O. Berger, P. Tieleman, and F. Ja¨hnig. 1998. Adhesion
forces of lipids in a phospholipid membrane studied by molecular
dynamics simulations. Biophys. J. 74:931–943.

Wriggers, W., and K. Schulten. 1998. Investigating a back door mechanism
of actin phosphate release by steered molecular dynamics. Proteins
Struct. Funct. Genet. (in press).

