On the Support that the Special and General
Theories of Relativity Provide for
Rock(cid:213)s Argument Concerning Induced Self-Motion

Douglas M. Snyder
Los Angeles, California

Abstract

Though Einstein and other physicists recognized  the  importance  of  an
observer being at  rest  in  an  inertial  reference  frame  for  the  special  theory  of
relativity, the supporting psychological structures were not discussed much by
physicists.    On  the  other  hand,  Rock  wrote  of  the  factors  involved  in  the
perception of motion, including one(cid:213)s own motion.   Rock thus came to  discuss
issues  of  significance  to  relativity  theory,  apparently  without  any  significant
understanding of how  his theory might be related to relativity theory.    In  this
paper,  connections  between  Rock(cid:213)s  theory  on  the  perception  of  one(cid:213)s  own
motion,  as  well  as  empirical  work  supporting  it,  and  relativity  theory  are
explored.

Text

Rock  (1975/1997),  following  Duncker  (1929/1938),  discussed  the
concept  of  induced  self-motion,  where  an  individual  experiences  himself
moving even though he is at rest.   Where he experiences himself moving, and
may indeed be moving as determined by an expenditure of energy (e.g., driving
in a car), Rock also argued that the experienced motion may be induced.  Rock
maintained that the experience of motion is tied to the presence of  sensory cues
in an observer(cid:213)s environment.  In the absence of these cues,  or in  their  being
discounted by an observer, the observer experiences himself at rest.  For  Rock,
an observer(cid:213)s perception of  his  own  motion  includes  cognitive  decisions.    It
will be shown that the special and general theories of relativity provide support
for Rock(cid:213)s thesis.   Also,  Rock(cid:213)s analysis of  the relativity  of  motion  provides
the basis for a central  concept  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity,  namely  that
observers are at rest in inertial  reference  frames  in  uniform  rectilinear  motion
relative to one another.  In the general theory of relativity, Einstein essentially
extended Rock(cid:213)s thesis on induced self-motion by discussing a situation where
proprioceptive  and  vestibular  cues  that  could  indicate  that  the  observer  is
accelerating are discounted.

- 1 -

On the Support

In  discussing  induced  self-motion,  Rock  (1968,  1975/1997)  did  not
make reference to the special and general theories of relativity, and  apparently
he  was  unaware  that  they  supported  his  argument  concerning  induced
movement of the self.1  Rock developed his argument purely on psychological
grounds,  based  on  earlier  work  by  Duncker  (1929/1938).    The  outline  of
Rock(cid:213)s argument will be presented, and experimental data that supports his line
of reasoning will be presented.  Then fundamental features of  the  special  and
general theories of relativity that support Rock(cid:213)s argument will be discussed.

ROCK(cid:213)S ARGUMENT ON INDUCED MOTION

Rock proposed that an observer(cid:213)s perception that an object is moving is
dependent  on  a  change  in  its  location  that  is  not  ascribed  to  the  observer(cid:213)s
movement.2  Wallach (1959)  and Rock (1975/1997) noted that  there  are  two
types of change in location that are tied to the experience of an object(cid:213)s motion:
1)  subject-relative  change  and  2)  object-relative  change.    In  subject-relative
change of location, the position of the observer relative to the object  changes.
This is often considered in terms of a change in  radial direction relative to  the
observer.   Figure 1 depicts the direction of motion of  a  single  small  circle  of
light against a black background.  Here there is a change in the location of the
circle  relative  to  an  observer,  who  could  be  the  reader  if  the  figure  was  the
actual experimental setting.

direction of motion
of the circle

Figure 1: Motion Based on Subject-Relative Change

                                    
1 In a paper on one of his experiments, Rock (1968) referred to the possibility  of deducing the
empirical results he obtained through  a  thought  experiment.    The term,  thought  experiment,
was  made  popular  by  Einstein  in  discussing  physical  theory,  including  relativity  theory.
Other physicists have used the  term  in  discussing physical  theory other than  that  concerning
relativity.
2  Throughout  this  discussion  of  motion,  it  is  important  to  realize  that  whether  or  not
something is moving is relative to what  is  called in  physics  a  reference  frame (i.e.,  a  spatial
coordinate system, or spacetime coordinate system in the case of relativity theory) from  which
the state of motion of the object is being judged.

- 2 -

On the Support

In  object-relative  change  of  location,  the  object  changes  its  locations
relative to another  object,  depicted  in  Figure  2  where  two  illuminated  circles
appear against a black background.  That object-relative change of location is a
distinct  factor  is  supported  by  evidence  that  the  threshold  for  object-relative
change is smaller than that for subject-relative change.  Where there is less than
the minimum change in location of an object relative to an observer to effect the
experience  that  the  object  is  moving,  an  observer  can  still  see  that  object  in
motion where this object(cid:213)s location changes relative to another object.

(cid:210)stationary(cid:211) circle

direction of motion
of the moving circle

Figure 2: Motion Based on Object-Relative Change

It is possible to produce induced motion for an object where the object
appears  to  move  but  does  not.    In  this  case,  the  motion  of  another  object
(determined for example by an expenditure of energy) relative to the object with
induced  motion  is  the  basis  for  this  apparent  motion.    It  is  possible  that  in
certain  experimental  circumstances  like  those  depicted  in  Figure  2, 
the
(cid:210)stationary(cid:211) circle as well as the moving circle could appear to the observer to
be  moving  in  opposite  directions,  depicted  in  Figure  3.    An  object  that  is
moving and that yet may appear stationary to an observer can induce motion in
another object that is not moving.

direction of motion of
(cid:210)stationary(cid:211) circle

direction of motion of the
moving circle

Figure 3: Induced Motion for a (cid:210)Stationary(cid:211) Circle

Duncker (1929/1938) and Rock (1975/1997)  wrote  that  an  object  that
serves as the basis for induced motion of another object is a reference frame for
this latter object.3  The former object acts as that from which the motion of an

                                    
3  The use  of  the  term  reference frame by  Duncker and Rock  is  different  than  that  found  in
physics.

- 3 -

On the Support

object  is  determined,  whether  or  not  its  motion  is  induced  or  (cid:210)actual.(cid:211)4,5
Duncker described this relationship between a frame of reference and an object
affected by it in terms of  (cid:210)localization(cid:211)  (p.  164).    A  reference  frame  may  be
large relative to the object in which motion is induced, and/or it may encompass
it.   Intensity and constancy of the object itself are  also  factors  contributing  to
whether an object serves as a reference frame for another object.6

Figure 4 depicts an example of induced motion, found in an experiment
by  Duncker  (1929/1938),  where  a  rectangle  moves  in  one  direction,  the
enclosed circle remains stationary and yet, for an observer, the circle appears to
be  moving  in  the  direction  opposite  to  that  of  the  rectangle(cid:213)s  motion.    The
rectangle remained stationary for the observer.

direction of motion of the
rectangle encompassing the
circle

direction of induced motion
of the circle

Figure 4: Induced Motion of Circle Based
on Motion of the Rectangle

Where an object, such as the rectangle, that is (cid:210)actually(cid:211) moving is perceived to
do  so,  the  experienced  velocity  of  the  circle  is  about  double  the  case  when
induced motion is absent (Duncker, 1929/1938).   Duncker  explained  that  this

                                    
4 The term actual is in quotes because in the special theory of relativity motion is relative to  a
particular inertial  reference  frame, a  reference  frame in  which  Newton(cid:213)s  law  of  inertia holds.
The term actual connotes an absolute or preferred reference frame.   As  will  be  discussed, if  an
absolute or preferred inertial reference frame existed, the special theory would not hold.
5 Rock (1975/1997) discussed the actual as opposed to only the perceived motion of an object.
Rock (1975/1997), and Duncker (1929/1938) in the condensed version of his paper as well, do
not  note  that  actual  movement  may  actually  only  be  motion  relative  to  the  observer(cid:213)s
reference frame, where reference frame is defined as  the  term  is  used in  physics.    Since  actual
motion  of  an  object  is  not  tied to  the  inertial  reference  frame  of  an  observer  for  Rock  and
Duncker, there is the implication that the reference frame, in the sense used  in  physics,  is  not
essential to the  object(cid:213)s motion.    This  circumstance approximates  the  concept in  physics  of
motion in absolute space, space that has an absolute reference frame.
6  Rock  cited  a  paper  by  Oppenheimer  that  discussed  factors  concerning  whether  an  object
served as a frame of reference.  The citation: Oppenheimer, F.  (1934).  Optische  Versuch  (cid:159)ber
Ruhe and Bewegung. Psychologische Forschung, 20, 1-46.

- 4 -

On the Support

phenomenon is due to each object existing relative to its own  reference frame.
Thus,  the  motion  of  the  circle(cid:213)s  reference  frame  (i.e.,  the  rectangle)  is
determined relative to its own  reference frame, and the motion of  the  circle  is
determined relative to the rectangular reference frame.

Induced Self-Motion

Rock argued that induced motion for an object can apply to the observer
himself.  That is,  induced self-motion can occur.   Induced self-motion  occurs
where some part of the environment serves as a reference frame relative to the
observer who is the object in which motion is induced.  An example of induced
self-motion may be found where an observer is sitting in  his  car  that  is  itself
stationary in an automatic car wash where the large washing brushes  pass  over
the car.   The observer feels himself and his car in motion as the brushes  pass
over the car.   Rock reports another example where an individual sitting near a
window on a train watches a train on a nearby track move by.  The individual(cid:213)s
visual field is taken up mostly by the passing train.  In this  circumstance,  his
own train may seem to be moving.  Rock also reported that a person sitting in a
car that is stopped at a traffic light and watching another car that is rolling may
experience his or her car also rolling.

Duncker reported on experiments where light patterns appeared upon a
screen in a dark room.  In one experiment, a rectangular light pattern (36 x 39
cm.)  and a circle (2  cm.  in  diameter)  were  the  light  shapes.    The  circle  was
enclosed by the rectangle.  The observer sat a distance of 30 to 100 cm.  from
the screen.7

Here the point or dot was  always at rest,  objectively, while the
rectangle was  given  objective  motion.    When  the  subject  now
fixated the point he experienced the feeling of being moved with
it  to  and  fro.    In  some  cases  this  was  so  strong  as  to  cause
dizziness.  The subject had himself become a part of the induced
motion system and was (phenomenally) (cid:210)carried along with it(cid:211).
When,  however,  something  of  the  room-environment  was
visible, the subject usually did not have this experience, for now
his own  phenomenal status of  rest  was  too  stable,  and  in  this
case  only 
(Duncker,
1929/1938, p. 165)

the  rectangle  was  seen 

to  move. 

                                    
7 In the  orignal  paper, the  distance is  stated (cid:210)100-30 cm.(cid:211)  (p.  165).    Fractional amounts  are
designated in the article by the use of a (cid:210).(cid:211).

- 5 -

On the Support

Rock (1968) conducted an experiment where an individual seated on a
stool on a wagon was moved in a straight line at a constant velocity parallel to a
wall  3  ft.  away  in  a  dark  room.8    As  the  subject  moved  on  the  wagon,
stationary  small  circles  of  light  2.5  in.  in  diameter  5  ft.  from  one  another
appeared  on  the  wall  about  at  eye-level  for  the  subject.    The  circles  became
visible one at  a  time  to  the  observer  because  cardboard  shields  extended  out
from the wall in front of each of the circles.  The subject experienced the circles
of light as moving and himself as stationary.  When a pattern of luminous lines
(88 in. long, 0.5 in. wide and 2 to 3 ft. from one another)  appeared on the wall
instead of the circles of light, the subject experienced himself as moving and the
pattern of luminous lines as stationary.  All of the lines  in  the  array  could  be
seen at the same time by the subject as he moved in the wagon, and the lines did
not illuminate the room in which the experiment  occurred.    Different  subjects
were used in the two stimulus conditions.  Rock expected  both  of  the  results
that were obtained.  With regard to the luminous lines, the columns essentially
formed  a  reference  frame  that  essentially  dominated  the  observer(cid:213)s  visual
perception.  The observer concluded that  the  reference  frame  was  at  rest  and
that the observer, really as an object, was moving.  

It  was  expected  that  the  displacement  of  this  array  of  lines,
which filled much of the visual field, would suffice to generate
induced movement of  the  self.    That  being  the  case  O  should
veridically  experience  himself  as  moving  and  perceive  the
stimulus-array as stationary. (Rock, 1968, p. 264)

Rock reasoned that in the absence of the luminous lines as a  reference
frame prominent in his visual perception and in the  absence  of  cues  from  his
body that he was moving, the observer would not perceive himself as moving.
He would perceive himself to be at rest.    Rock  concluded  this  motion  of  the
observer induced even though the observer is in motion.

From  this  [experiment]  it  follows  that  in  many  if  not  most
instances of transportation in a vehicle, perception of one(cid:213)s self
and vehicle as moving is a function of the inducing effect of the

                                    
8 The observer was not given information that he was moving.    Further,  he  was told that  the
bumpiness  he  felt  and  the  noise  he  heard  were  due  to  some  instruments.    Instead,  the
bumpiness  was  due to  the  wagon moving  and the  noise  was from  the  engine providing  the
power to move the wagon with the observer.  The results of the experiment support the  thesis
that an observer(cid:213)s perception of his  state  of  motion  depends on  his  interpretation of  sensory
cues.

- 6 -

On the Support

  This  is  a
displacing  field  that  surrounds  the  observer. 
the  reader—
to 
paradoxical  conclusion—possibly  confusing 
because the observer is in fact moving.  Yet, as the experiment
cited shows, he would not perceive this were it not for the sight
of the displacing environment. (p. 236)9

Now  it so  happens that the wagon traveling at a uniform  velocity  in  a
straight line (i.e., rectilinear) resembles an inertial reference frame.  An inertial
reference frame is a reference frame, as defined in physics, in which  the law of
inertia holds.  This law states that in the absence of an external force,  an object
is at rest or moves in a straight line.  The special theory requires an observer to
be at rest in an inertial reference frame (i.e., stationary).  Otherwise,  the special
theory  does  not  hold,  as  will  be  discussed  in  greater  detail.    Rock  also
theorized:

It is not beyond the  realm  of  plausibility  that  even  in  the  case
where the observer is more actively moving, as in  walking,  or
where  he  is  passively  moving  but  accelerating,  the  inducing
effect of the displacing environment plays a contributory role in
the  perception  of  the  self  as  moving  and  the  environment  as
stationary. (pp. 236-237)

It appears that Rock is arguing, in the case of  passive  acceleration,  vestibular
and proprioceptive effects need to  be  discounted  in  order  for  the  observer  to
maintain  that  he  is  not  moving.    General  relativity  supports  this  point
concerning  passive  acceleration.    It  is  interesting  that  Rock  came  to  this
conclusion given experimental evidence that such discounting might not  occur
when the observer accelerates.  In a third experimental scenario using a wagon

                                    
9  Rock  could  have  argued  differently,  though  not  as  convincingly.    Besides  citing  the
phenomenon of induced self-motion in the example of the passing trains, Rock  cited a  variant
of  this  circumstance  where  the  individual is  sitting  across the  aisle  from  the  window  he  is
looking  out  of  onto  the  passing  train.    Here,  the  individual(cid:213)s  own  train  compartment  fills
most  of  the  his  visual  field.    In  this  case,  Rock  noted  that  the  other  train  would  exhibit
induced movement.  Rock though did not  see this  latter circumstance as  fundamental, that  is
as  reflective  of  the  fundamental  experience  of  the  individual  as  regards  his  basic  state  of
motion.  As quoted above,  Rock  wrote  concerning his  experiment that  in  the  absence of  the
displacing pattern of luminous  lines,  the  individual does not  experience induced  self-motion.
This  means that  without  the  external  information,  the  individual sees  himself  at  rest,  even
though  he  is  riding  in  a  wagon.    How  Rock(cid:213)s  argument  supports  the  special  theory  of
relativity will  be  shown.    Also,  Rock(cid:213)s  basic notion  that  the  fundamental experience of  the
individual is that he is at rest is supported by the  empirical  evidence that  supports  the  special
and general theories of relativity.

- 7 -

On the Support

to transport an observer and where there were two illuminated circles on a black
background,  acceleration  of  the  observer  was  generally  experienced  by  the
observer as he himself accelerating and the circles that he passed as stationary
(Rock, 1968).

Rock(cid:213)s  scenario  for  acceleration,  though,  did  not  take  into  account  a
situation where the sensory cues factors due to acceleration could be discounted
by another interpretation of the entire experimental environment.  The principle
of  equivalence  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity  provides  this  method  of
discounting  and  is  the  basis  for  the  derivation  of  the  general  principle  of
relativity.    The  principle  of  equivalence,  to  be  discussed,  provides  the
theoretical basis for the discounting that is  critical  to  the  extension  of  Rock(cid:213)s
thesis  to  what  are  uniformly  accelerating  reference  frames.    In  the  general
theory  of  relativity,  an  observer(cid:213)s  being  at  rest  in  a  uniformly  accelerating
reference  frame  is  central  to  the  integrity  of  the  general  theory.    Special
relativity,  and  then  general  relativity,  will  be  discussed.    Before  doing  so,
further  discussion  is  warranted  on  how  the  relativity  of  motion  is  central  to
Rock(cid:213)s analysis.

The Relativity of Motion in Rock(cid:213)s Analysis

That an observer determines that he is  or  is  not  moving  (and  how  he
does so) is central to his perception that something is moving relative to him,  as
opposed to his moving relative to a stationary object (Rock,  1975/1997).   One
important  factor  that  frequently  underlies  the  change  in  location  central  to
perceiving motion is displacement of the object(cid:213)s retinal image.   Displacement
of the retinal image results in the observer(cid:213)s perception of the object as moving
if the observer, including his head and eyes, are basically stationary.  Yet if the
displacement of the retinal  image  is  due  to  the  observer  turning  his  head  for
example, the  object  is  perceived  as  stationary  because  the  observer  relies  on
cues  from  the  movement  of  his  head  to  discount  displacement  of  the  retinal
image of the object.

Rock argued that in the absence of the supporting cues from one(cid:213)s body
(i.e., from the  head,  eyes,  or the entire body) that he is moving and where an
object(cid:213)s retinal image is displaced, the object is seen to be moving.  In Rock(cid:213)s
analysis,  it  does  not  matter  whether  an  observer  is  actually  moving  with
uniform rectilinear velocity or is instead at rest.  As regards the perception of an
object(cid:213)s motion, he argued that induced motion has its foundation in the  relative
distance between the objects, thus  allowing  that  a  (cid:210)stationary(cid:211)  object  may  be

- 8 -

On the Support

seen as moving.  Rock (1975/1997) argued more generally that it  may  be  the
relative  displacement  of  one  object  from  another,  as  opposed  to  distance
between them, that is the basis for the perception of motion.

Consider an observer stationary on the earth seeing an object moving in
a direction opposite to the earth(cid:213)s rotation around its axis and with magnitude of
velocity  of  equal  to  that  of  the  earth(cid:213)s.    The  observer  actually  moves  very
quickly  (about  460  meters  per  second  at  the  equator)  in  the  earth(cid:213)s  rotation
about its axis.   The object,  though  moving  relative  to  the  earth,  is  stationary
relative  to  a  reference  frame  anchored  to  the  earth(cid:213)s  axis  of  rotation.    The
perception of motion as relative and dependent on sensory cues is supported by
physical analysis.

As will be shown, the relative nature of motion perception dependent on
sensory cues has distinct implications for the special theory of relativity.  This
point allows an observer to be at rest in an inertial frame of reference where in
the absence of external cues that he is moving, an observer sees himself at rest
and objects that are in motion  relative  to  him  in  motion.  If  this  were  not  the
case,  it would be  possible  for  an  individual  to  see  himself  as  moving  in  the
absence  of  cues  that  he  is  moving.    If  this  were  the  case,  there  could  be  a
preferred inertial reference frame.   The  significance  that  there  is  no  preferred
inertial reference frame will be discussed shortly.

THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

A fundamental principle of the special theory is that  the  description  of
physical phenomena must be the same from different inertial reference frames in
uniform translational motion  (i.e.,  rectilinear  and  without  rotation)  relative  to
one  another.    This  principle  depends  on  observers  being  at  rest  in  their
respective  inertial  reference  frames.    If  observers  were  not  at  rest  in  their
respective  inertial  reference  frames,  it  would  be  possible  to  determine  a
preferred inertial reference frame, and the special theory would not hold.   What
would  the  special 
laws  of
  Maxwell 
electromagnetism, for example, as well as mass-energy equivalence.

theory  be  unable 

to  explain? 

Feynman,  Leighton,  and  Sands  (1963)  exemplified  this  fundamental
principle of the special theory in terms of a light clock (i.e.,  a clock relying on
the periodic motion of light between two points to determine its beat) at rest in
one or another of two inertial reference frames in uniform translational motion
relative to one another.  Feynman et al. noted that other types of clocks besides
light clocks at rest in one or the other of the inertial reference frames would also

- 9 -

On the Support

have to keep the same time as the light clocks that are at rest in  the same inertial
reference frame as a particular non-light clock.  Why?  Because if this were not
the case, one could then possibly distinguish between the two inertial reference
frames as regards description of the physical world.

Feynman et al.(cid:213)s Thought Experiment

Feynman  et  al.  described  a  hypothetical  situation  where  a  space  ship
moving at a uniform translational velocity is one inertial reference frame and an
observer outside the space ship is in another inertial reference frame.10  Besides
light clocks, there are also human observers at rest in one  or  the  other  of  the
two inertial reference frames.

First,  regarding  light  and  non-light  clocks  that  are  moving  with  a
uniform  translational  velocity  relative  to  one  another,  Feynman  et  al.  (1963)
wrote:

Not only does this particular kind of clock [i.e.,  the light clock]
run  more  slowly,  but  if  the  theory  of  [special]  relativity  is
correct, any other clock, operating on any principle whatsoever,
would also appear to run slower,  and in  the  same  proportion-
we can say this without further analysis.  Why is this so?

Then Feynman et al. discussed light clocks and non-light clocks in their thought
experiment.

To answer the above question, suppose we had two other clocks
made exactly alike with wheels and gears,  or perhaps based on
radioactive  decay,  or  something  else.    Then  we  adjust  these
clocks so  they  both  run  in  precise  synchronism  with  our  first
[light]  clocks  [which  are  originally  all  at  rest  in  the  inertial
reference frame outside the space ship].  When light goes up and
back in the first [light] clocks and announces its arrival [back at
the light source] with a click,  the  new  [non-light]  models  also
complete  some  sort  of  cycle,  which  they  simultaneously
announce by some  doubly  coincident  flash,  or  bong,  or  other
signal.    One  of  these  clocks  is  taken  into  the  space  ship  [the
(cid:210)moving(cid:211) inertial reference frame] along with the first kind [i.e.,
the light clock].  Perhaps this clock will not run slower,  but will

                                    
10  Strictly  speaking,  without  setting  other conditions,  neither the  space  ship  or  outside  the
space ship are inertial reference frames.

- 10 -

On the Support

continue to keep the same time as its stationary counterpart, and
thus disagree with the other moving clock [the light  clock].  Ah
no,  if  that  should  happen,  the  man  in  the  ship  could  use  this
mismatch between his two clocks to determine the speed of his
ship, which  we have been supposing is impossible [because of
the principle of relativity].  We  need  not  know  anything  about
the machinery of the new clock that might cause  the  effect-we
simply  know  that  whatever  the  reason,  it  will  appear  to  run
slow, just like the first one.

Now  if  all  moving  clocks  run  slower,  if  no  way  of
measuring time gives anything but a slower  rate,  we  shall  just
have  to  say,  in  a  certain  sense,  that  time  itself  appears  to  be
slower  in  a  space  ship.    All  the  phenomena  there-the  man(cid:213)s
pulse  rate,  his  thought  processes,  the  time  he  takes  to  light  a
cigar, how long it takes to grow  up and get old-all these things
must be slowed down in the same proportion, because he cannot
tell  he  is  moving  [italics  added].    The  biologists  and  medical
men sometimes say it is not quite certain that the time it takes for
a cancer to develop will be longer in a space ship,  but from the
viewpoint of a modern  physicist  it  is  nearly  certain;  otherwise
one could use the rate  of  cancer  development  to  determine  the
speed of the ship! (p. 15-6)11

                                    
11  Essentially,  Feynman  et  al.  invoked  the  postulate  of  special  relativity  that  the  laws  of
physics  are  the  same in  inertial  reference  frames in  uniform  translational  motion  relative  to
one  another  to  account for the  lack of  difference  between  light  clocks  and  no-light  clocks.
Feynman et al. wrote:

The principle of relativity was first stated by Newton, in one of his corollaries  to  the
laws  of  motion:  (cid:210)The  motions  of  bodies  included  in  a  given  space  are  the  same
among  themselves,  whether that  space is  at  rest  or  moves  uniformly  forward  in  a
straight  line.(cid:211)    This  means,  for example  that  if  a  space ship  is  drifting  along  at  a
uniform speed, all experiments performed in the space ship and all the  phenomena  in
the  space ship  will  appear the  same as  if  the  ship  were  not  moving,  provided,  of
course, that one does not look outside. (p. 15-1)
Feynman  et  al.  noted  that  the  change  in  the  principle  of  relativity  found  in  the
special theory, as opposed to its formulation in Newtonian mechanics, is:
all physical  laws [including those  for electromagnetism]  should  be  of  such  a  kind
that  they  remain  unchanged  under  a  Lorentz  transformation  [instead  of  a  Galilean
transformation].  In other words, we should change, not the  laws  of  electrodynamics,
but the laws of mechanics. (p. 15-3)

- 11 -

On the Support

At  the  beginning  of  this  experiment,  Feynman  et  al.  implied  that  the
principle of relativity states that an observer can only  be  at  rest  in  his  inertial
reference frame.  Concerning a light clock, they wrote:  

Before the man took it [a light clock] aboard,  he  agreed  that  it
was a nice, standard clock, and when he goes along in the space
ship  he  will  not  see  anything  peculiar.    If  he  did,  he  would
know he was moving-if anything at all changed because of the
motion [of the space ship],  he could tell he  was  moving.    But
the principle of  relativity says  this is impossible in a  uniformly
moving system, so nothing has changed [italics added] (15-6)

If periodic phenomena (that make up the timing mechanism of clocks) in
an inertial reference frame other than those in the light clock mechanism did not
follow  the  time  maintained  by  the  light  clock,  it  is  possible  there  would  be
temporal  differences  in  these  inertial  reference  frames  such  that  the  laws  of
physics would not hold in all such frames.  It is central to the special theory to
maintain  the  integrity  of  this  postulate  of  relativity.    There  is  no  identifiable
physical basis for this phenomenon of other periodic occurrences holding to the
concept  of  time  rooted  fundamentally  in  the  relativity  of  simultaneity  that
Einstein developed using the motion of light.

THE  GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

Though we have been exploring the special theory, the general theory of
relativity  also  provides  evidence  that  an  observer  is  at  rest  in  his  reference
frame, that an observer in principle does not move  in  a  reference  frame  from
which he measures the motion of objects.  The general theory is supported by
empirical  data  and  is  considered  a  central  theory  in  modern  physics.    The
general theory is based on the  premise  that  a  uniformly  accelerating  observer
can  also  be  seen  as  in  an  inertial  reference  frame  experiencing  a  uniform
gravitational field.  The description of physical phenomena from  the uniformly
accelerating reference frame associated with  the  observer  is  equivalent  to  that
for  the  inertial  reference  frame  in  a  uniform  gravitational  field  (Einstein,
1916/1952; 1922/1956; 1917/1961) and Einstein and Infeld (1938/1966).   It is
also  possible  that  an  observer  in  free  fall  in  an  inertial  reference  frame
experiencing  a  uniform  gravitational  field  can  be  seen  to  be  in  a  local
gravitation-free inertial reference frame.  The following example from Einstein
illustrates this last possibility.

- 12 -

On the Support

Consider  a  small  area  of  the  earth  an  inertial  reference  frame  in  a
uniform gravitational field.  For  an elevator freely falling to the earth and thus
accelerating  in  a  uniform  manner,  one  can  consider  the  inside  of  the  freely
falling elevator to be a local (i.e.,  over a small area) inertial reference frame in
which  the  laws  of  physics  hold.    For  an  observer  in  the  elevator,  all  of
Newton(cid:213)s  laws  of  motion  would  hold  so  long  as  objects  did  not  come  into
contact with the walls of the elevator (Einstein & Infeld, 1938/1966).  Thus, the
supposedly  absolute  character  of  the  uniformly  accelerated  motion  of  the
elevator does not affect the validity of  Newton(cid:213)s  laws  for  the  man  inside  the
elevator.  Importantly, in terms of Newton(cid:213)s laws of motion, an observer inside
the elevator is affected by these laws no differently than an observer outside the
elevator at rest on earth for the elevator and the observer in it are moving at the
same velocity as they are accelerating at the same rate.

As an example of an inertial reference frame in a uniform  gravitational
field  being  equivalent  with  regard  to  the  motion  of  bodies  to  a  uniformly
accelerating frame of reference, Einstein (1917/1961) discussed a man in a large
chest  resembling  a  room  and  without  windows  deep  in  outer  space  that  is
accelerating uniformly due to its being towed by a rope connected to one end of
the chest.  According to Einstein, the man in the chest would consider himself
in an inertial reference frame in a uniform gravitational field.  The  man  in  the
chest would feel the same pull toward the floor that he would in such an inertial
reference frame.  Also, if he dropped an object, it would fall to the floor of the
chest in the same manner as if the chest were in an inertial reference frame in a
uniform  gravitational  field.    It  would  accelerate  in  a  uniform  manner.
Essentially, Einstein asked,  (cid:210)What is so  special about inertial reference frames
when one cannot even distinguish them in certain instances from other reference
frames?(cid:211)  His  answer  was,  (cid:210)Nothing,(cid:211)  and  thus  the  laws  of  physics  should
hold for all frames of reference, not just inertial ones.

Consider Einstein(cid:213)s own description  of  the  experience  of  an  observer
who is at first in an inertial reference frame and then in an accelerating reference
frame, one that in principle need not be uniformly accelerating.    The  example
concerns  a  train  traveling  with  uniform  translational  velocity  along  an
embankment and then  experiencing  a  non-uniform  motion,  the  application  of
the brakes.  Einstein wrote:

It  is  certainly  true  that  the  observer  in  the  railway  carriage
experiences a jerk forwards as a result of the application of the
brake,  and that he recognises in this  non-uniformity  of  motion

- 13 -

On the Support

(retardation) of the carriage.  But he is compelled by nobody to
refer  this  jerk  to  a  (cid:210)real(cid:211)  acceleration  (retardation)  of  the
carriage.  He might also interpret his experience thus: (cid:210)My  body
of  reference  (the  carriage)  remains  permanently  at  rest.    With
reference  to  it,  however,  there  exists  (during  the  period  of
application of  the brakes) a gravitational field which  is  directed
forwards and which is variable with  respect to time.   Under the
influence of  this field,  the embankment  together  with  the  earth
moves  non-uniformly  in  such  a  manner  that  their  original
velocity  in  the  backwards  direction  is  continuously  reduced.(cid:211)
[italics added] (Einstein, 1917/1961, pp. 69-70)12

Einstein  had  a  way  to  develop  a  system  to  measure  space  and  time,
really space-time, in accelerating reference frames and inertial reference frames
experiencing  gravitational  fields.    What  Einstein  did  was  to  break  up  a
uniformly accelerating reference frame  into  a  sequence  of  very  tiny  reference
frames.  These tiny reference frames are moving in uniform translational motion
relative to  one  another.    Then  the  space-time  relationship  between  these  tiny
reference frames is the same as that between inertial reference frames moving in
uniform  translational  motion  relative  to  one  another  in  special  relativity.
Einstein could develop a space-time metric for an accelerating  reference  frame
or an inertial reference frame experiencing a gravitational  field  by  considering
the pattern of space-time relationships of these tiny reference frames in relation
to one another in terms of the special theory  These tiny reference frames would
then  be  described  by  a  new  non-Euclidean  metric.    Some  other  well-known
physicists  commented  on  the  importance  of  special  relativity  to  general
relativity.  They wrote:

General relativity is built on special relativity. (Misner, Thorne,
& Wheeler, 1973, p. 164)

Elaborating on this statement, they said:

A tourist in a powered interplanetary rocket feels (cid:210)gravity.(cid:211)  Can
a physicist by  local  effects  convince  him  that  this  (cid:210)gravity(cid:211)  is
bogus?    Never,  says  Einstein(cid:213)s  principle  of  the  local  [over  a
small area] equivalence of gravity  and  accelerations.    But  then
the physicist  will  make  no  errors  if  he  deludes  [italics  added]

                                    
12 One can see the extent to which Einstein maintained an observer would discount cues  in  the
environment (i.e., external cues) and see himself at rest.

- 14 -

On the Support

himself into treating  true  gravity  as  a  local  illusion  caused  by
acceleration.  Under this delusion, he barges ahead and solves
gravitational problems by using special relativity: if he is clever
enough  to  divide  every  problem  into  a  network  of  local
questions,  each  solvable  under  such  a  delusion,  then  he  can
work  out  all  influences  of  any  gravitational  field.    Only  three
basic  principles  are  invoked:  special  relativity  physics,  the
equivalence principle, and the local nature of physics.   They are
simple and clear.  To apply them,  however,  imposes  a  double
task: (1) take space-time apart into locally flat pieces (where the
principles  [of  the  special  theory]  are  valid),  and  (2)  put  these
  To
pieces  together  again  into  a  comprehensible  picture. 
undertake  this  dissection  and  reconstitution,  to  see  curved
dynamic  space-time  inescapably  take  form,  and  to  see  the
consequences for physics: that is general relativity. (p. 164)

Einstein  proceeded  to  develop  physical  law  so  that  it  would  also
encompass  accelerating  reference  frames  and  reference  frames  experiencing
gravitational fields.  He also knew that he could provide a physical basis for an
object(cid:213)s gravitational mass being essentially equal to the resistance of this object
to acceleration by a force.   This equality is important since Galileo  found  that
the  acceleration  of  objects  in  the  earth(cid:213)s  gravitational  field  was  the  same,
regardless of the type of object or its gravitational mass.   That the man  in  the
room accelerating in deep space could describe  the  physical  world  as  well  as
someone outside watching the room accelerating requires that this equality hold.
The  equivalence  of  their  descriptions  forms  the  foundation  for  the  general
principle  of  relativity  and  the  across-the-board  application  of  the  laws  of
physics in different types of reference frames.

It has been shown that relativity theory supports Rock(cid:213)s thesis  that even
given proprioceptive and vestibular cues associated with an observer(cid:213)s passive
acceleration, the observer can discount them and see himself as stationary and
his environment as moving.  It is very interesting that Einstein relied on what he
implicitly  formulated  as  a  law  of  psychological  phenomena  to  develop  the
general  theory,  namely  that  an  observer  considers  his  fundamental  state  of
motion to be at rest and that various external cues are used by  an  observer  to
conclude that he is in motion.

- 15 -

On the Support

Pais (1982) provided a quote from an unpublished paper of  Einstein(cid:213)s
in which he discussed how he came to believe that there should be no preferred
reference frame for the description of physical phenomena.

Then there occurred to me the...happiest  thought of my life, in
the following form.   The gravitational  field  has  only  a  relative
existence  in  a  way  similar  to  the  electric  field  generated  by
magnetoelectric  induction.    Because  for  an  observer  falling
freely  from  the  roof  of  a  house  there  exists—at  least  in  his
immediate  surroundings—no  gravitational  field  [his  italics].
Indeed,  if  the  observer  drops  some  bodies  then  these  remain
relative  to  him  in  a  state  of  rest  or  of  uniform  motion,
independent  of  their  particular  chemical  or  physical  nature  (in
this consideration the air resistance is, of course,  ignored).  The
observer therefore has the right to interpret his state as (cid:212)at rest.(cid:213)

Because of this idea, the uncommonly peculiar experimental
law that in  the  gravitational  field  all  bodies  fall  with  the  same
acceleration attained at once a deep physical meaning.  Namely,
if  there  were  to  exist  just  one  single  object  that  falls  in  the
gravitational field in a way different from all others, then with its
help  the  observer  could  realize  [italics  added]  that  he  is  in  a
gravitational field and is falling in it.  If such an object does not
exist,  however—as experience  has  shown  with  great  accuracy—
then  the  observer  lacks  any  objective  means  of  perceiving
himself as falling in a gravitational field.  Rather he has the right
[italics  added]  to  consider  his  state  as  one  of  rest  and  his
environment as field-free relative to gravitation.

the
The  experimentally  know  matter  independence  of 
acceleration of fall is therefore a powerful argument for the fact
that  the  relativity  postulate  has  to  be  extended  to  coordinate
systems  which,  relative  to  each  other,  are  in  non-uniform
motion. (Pais, 1982, p. 178).13,14

One  can  see  in  the  above  quote  that  Einstein  maintained  that  the
observer(cid:213)s perceiving that he is in motion is cognitive in nature  and  based  on

                                    
13 The text (cid:210)[his italics](cid:211) is in the original quote from Pais.
14  The unpublished paper was written  in  1919  and/or  1920  and  is  in  the  Pierpont  Morgan
Library in New York City.

- 16 -

On the Support

the interpretation of sensory  cues.   In the absence of those cues,  the  observer
considers himself at rest, even if he is in an accelerating reference frame.  One
surmises  that  Einstein(cid:213)s  law  concerning  an  observer(cid:213)s  being  at  rest  in  the
absence  of  cues  that  he  is  moving  is  very  broad,  even  including  where  the
observer is active.  It is difficult to believe that the special or general theory of
relativity  depends  on  a  psychological  distinction  concerning  whether  an
observer is actively or passively moving.  Both the special and general theories
depend on an observer concluding that he is at rest either in the absence of cues
that he is moving or in his interpretation of sensory cues.

CONCLUSION

The  existence  of  induced  self-motion  is  supported  the  special  and
general theories of relativity.  In particular, where the observer  is  moving,  as
determined by an expenditure of energy, the observer(cid:213)s experience that he is in
motion  may  be  induced.    Also,  Rock(cid:213)s  analysis  of  the  relativity  of  motion
provides the basis for the central concept of the special  theory of relativity that
observers are at rest in inertial  reference  frames  in  uniform  rectilinear  motion
relative to one another.

Einstein essentially extended Rock(cid:213)s thesis  on  induced  self-motion  by
discussing  a  situation  where  proprioceptive  and  vestibular  cues  that  could
indicate that the  observer  is  accelerating  are  discounted.    This  discounting  is
implicit in the principle of equivalence of the general theory  of  relativity.    By
limiting the observer(cid:213)s visual perception to those objects accelerating with him,
Einstein concluded the observer would see himself at rest,  just as observers at
rest on the earth see themselves at rest.

Though Einstein and other physicists recognized  the  importance  of  an
observer being at  rest  in  an  inertial  reference  frame  for  the  special  theory  of
relativity, the supporting psychological structures were not discussed much by
physicists.    On  the  other  hand,  Rock  wrote  of  the  factors  involved  in  the
perception of motion, including one(cid:213)s own.   Rock thus came to discuss issues
of  significance  to  relativity  theory,  apparently  without  any  significant
understanding of how  his theory might be related to relativity theory.    In  this
paper,  connections  between  Rock(cid:213)s  theory  on  the  perception  of  one(cid:213)s  own
motion, as well as empirical work supporting it, and relativity theory have  been
explored.

- 17 -

On the Support

REFERENCES

Duncker,  K.  (1938).  Induced  Motion.  In  W.  D.  Ellis,  Ed.,  A  Source  Book  of  Gestalt
Psychology  (ps.  161-172).  New  York:  The  Humanities  Press.  (Original  work
published in  expanded  form  as  (cid:210)(cid:134)ber  induzierte  Bewegung  [Ein  Beitrag  zur  Theorie
optisch  wahrgenommener Bewegung](cid:211)  in  Psychologische  Forshung,  1929,  12,  180-
259).

Einstein,  A.  (1952).  The foundation of  the  general  theory  of  relativity.  In  H.  Lorentz,  A.
Einstein, H. Minkowski, and  H.  Weyl (Eds.), The  principle of  relativity,  a collection
of  original  memoirs  on  the  special  and  general  theories  of  relativity  (pp.  109-164)
(W.  Perrett and G.  B.  Jeffrey,  Trans.).  New  York:  Dover.  (Original  work  published
1916)

Einstein, A. (1956). The meaning of relativity (5th ed.)   (E. Adams, Trans.).  Princeton,  New

Jersey: Princeton  University Press. (Original work published 1922)

Einstein,  A.  (1961).  Relativity,  the  special  and  the  general  theory  (R.  Lawson,  Trans.).

New York: Bonanza. (Original work published 1917)

Einstein, A., and Infeld, L. (1966). The evolution of physics from early  concepts to  relativity

and quanta. New York: Simon and Schuster. (Original work published 1938)

Feynman, R. P., Leighton, R. B., and Sands,  M.  (1963).  The  Feynman  lectures on  physics:
Mainly mechanics, radiation, and heat (Vol. 1). Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Misner, C. W., Thorne, K. S., and Wheeler, J. A. (1973). Gravitation. San  Francisco: W.  H.

Freeman.

Oxford University Press.

Pais, A. (1982). (cid:212)Subtle is the Lord...(cid:213): The Science  and the  Life of  Albert Einstein.  Oxford:

Rock,  I.  (1968).  The basis  of  position-constancy during  passive  movement.  The  American

Journal of Psychology, 81, 262-265.

Rock, I. (1997). The Perception of Movement.  In I. Rock, Ed.,  Indirect Perception (ps.  209-
247).  Cambridge,  Massachusetts:  The  MIT  Press.    (Slightly  modified  version  of
original  work published as  chapter  5  of  An  Introduction  to  Perception  by  I.  Rock,
1975, New York, Macmillan.)

Wallach, H. (July, 1959). The Perception of Motion. Scientific American, 201(1), 56-60.

- 18 -

