Dark Matter

Douglas M. Snyder
Los Angeles, California1

Dark matter has been an issue of concern for some time.  The evidence
for dark matter has over the years become increasingly strong and the problem
appears in a variety of contexts (e.g.,  on the level of  a  single  galaxy,  a  large
cluster, the universe).(1,2,3,4)  For example, Carr wrote:

The  evidence  for  dark  matter,  on  all  scales  from  star  clusters
(106 solar masses) to the Universe itself (1022 solar masses), has
built up steadily over the past 50 years...Although  the  strength
of the evidence on  different  scales  varies  considerably,  thre  is
now  little  doubt  that  only  a  small  fraction  of  the  mass  of  the
Universe is in visible form. (Carr, 1994, 531)2

There is a particular approach to the problem of dark matter that has  not  been
explored, one  which  from  the  point  of  view  of  general  relativity  is  logically
valid.

The Dark Halo

In this paper, this alternative approach to the problem of dark matter will
be discussed  in  terms  of  the  dark  halo  for  a  single  galaxy.    Yet  the  general
argument  to  be  made  may  be  applicable  to  other  contexts  where  significant
evidence  exists for dark matter.  It is known  that a galaxy is often associated
with a large rotating body of cold hydrogen gas that often reaches beyond the
galaxy(cid:213)s visible limit.  The rotational velocity of this gas circling the core of the
galaxy can  be  used  to  derive  the  the  galaxy(cid:213)s  attractive  gravitational  field.  (3)
From the derived gravitational field, an estimate of the mass associated with this
field can be found easily and the gravitational masss is reasonably considered to
be the gravitational mass of the galaxy.  The dark halo of a single galaxy can be
determined  by  using  the  following  relation  that  is  derived  in  Newtonian
mechanics:

GM/R (cid:181) v2  .

(1)

where G is the gravitational constant, M is the mass of the attracting object ,  R
is the radial distance from the center of mass of the attracting object, and v is the
magnitude  of  the  tangential  velocity  of  the  attracted  rotating  hydrogen  gas.(1)
The proportionality holds because GMm/R2 is the attractive gravitational  force

- 1 -

Dark Matter

on the hydrogen gas and v2/R  represents the centripetal acceleration of the gas
due to this gravitational force, where m is the gravitational mass of the attracted
object.

A dark halo is indicated  because  the  gravitational  field  derived  in  this
manner indicates the presence of much more mass than is visible.  In the case of
single galaxies, in particular spiral galaxies, as R  increases  it  has  been  found
that the tangential velocity v of the rotating hydrogen gas remains the same.(1,3)
Thus  M  must  increase  as  well  according  to  the  proportionality  noted  above.
The visible mass of a galaxy does not  match  the  amount  of  mass  determined
with this proportionality.  Indeed, it is many times less, generally considered to
be about 10% of the mass determined using the proportionality noted above.(1)
Wyse and Gilmore wrote:

The mass of a galaxy appears to be distributed very  differently
to the starlight, and to  be  located  in  a  more  spatially  extended
(cid:210)dark halo(cid:211).  The total dark halo mass is perhaps 10 times larger
than that associated with all the stars in the galaxy, together with
the identified gas. (p. 40)

Various  theories  have  been  put  forward  to  account  for  this  missing
mass.  Generally, these theories either propose that the dark matter is baryonic
in nature or is a type of exotic elementary particle.  The baryonic alternatives for
the dark halo of a galaxy include smaller low-intensity galaxies or black holes.

An Earlier Situation

A situation confronting physicists from an earlier time might be helpful
in  dealing  with  dark  matter.    The  resolution  of  the  earlier  problem  involved
accepting  the  empircal  results  as  they  were  and  adopting  a  straightforward
theoretical model that was  consistent with them, instead of holding to a model
to which significant alterations had to be made to predict the empirical results.

In the  late  1800s  and  early  1900s,  physicists  looked  for  the  medium
through  which  light  traveled.    They  knew  that  light  was  electromagnetic
raidation and thus wave-like in nature.  But physicists could find no  evidence
for a medium, the ether, through which the  light  traveled.    Chief  among  this
evidence was  that the velocity of light was  independent  of  the  velocity  of  the
body emitting the light.  Physicists,  though,  interpreted their  empirical  results
so  that  they  could  continue  to  maintain  that  the  ether  existed.(5)    These
interpretations  essentially  involved  considering  the  velocity  of  light  to  be
dependent on the velocity of the emitting body and changing other parameters to

- 2 -

Dark Matter

account for the empirical result that the velocity of light is invariant.

In 1905, Einstein proposed that the invariant velocity of light in inertial
reference  frames  traveling  at  uniform  translational  velocities  relative  to  one
another be accepted as such and, further,  that the ether did not exist.   On these
premises and the additional one that the laws of physics are the same in inertial
reference frames in uniform translational motion relative to one another, he built
the special theory of relativity.

Is  it  possible  that  physicists  face  a  similar  situation  in  that  they  are
looking for dark matter and it does not exist?  It is specifically gravitation that
physicists believe indicates the presence of dark matter that they need to account
for.    Conceptually  there  is  another  way  to  account  for  the  (cid:210)extra(cid:211)  gravity
without introducing mass to account for it.

Reference Frames and Gravitation

In 1916, when Einstein proposed the general theory of relativity, he did
so precisely because he could not find evidence for the privileged role granted
to  inertial  reference  frames  in  the  special  theory.    Einstein  also  came  to
understand that an inertial reference frame experiencing a uniform gravitational
field is equivalent  to  a  uniformly  accelerating  reference  frame.    Einstein  was
able  to  develop  a  metric  for  spacetime  for  an  inertial  reference  frame
experiencing  a  uniform  gravitational  field  by  considering  the  uniformly
accelerating reference frame as a series of local Lorentz reference  frames  with
adjacent  frames  moving  at  slightly  different  uniform  translational  velocities
relative to one another.  For these Lorentz reference frames, the spatiotemporal
relationships  developed  for  inertial  reference  frames  in  uniform  translational
motion relative to one another developed in special relativity held.    Generally,
the gravitational field associated with  an  inertial  reference  frame  is  associated
with mass, and Einstein thus arrived at a new understanding of gravitation.

A second way to account for the gravity indicating the presence of (cid:210)dark
matter(cid:211)  is  in  terms  of  the  pattern  of  reference  frames  alone  that  are  used  to
develop  the  spacetime  structure  that  in  the  general  theory  constitutes  the
gravitational  field.    The  gravitational  mass  that  in  Newtonian  mechanics  is
unavoidably associated with gravitation is in the general theory not central to the
development of spacetime curvature.

Though  an  unusual  suggestion,  the  thesis  that  the  gravitational  field
generally  associated  with  dark  matter  is  actually  due  to  the  reference  frames
themselves  used  to  develop  spacetime  curvature  is  just  an  extension  of

- 3 -

Dark Matter

Einstein(cid:213)s  own  principle  of  equivalence  concerning  uniformly  accelerating
reference  frames  and  inertial  reference  frames  experiencing  a  uniform
gravitational  field.    Einstein  wrote  of  situations  where  an  observer  would
maintain that he was  in an inertial reference frame experiencing a  gravitational
field whereas to an observer (cid:210)outside(cid:211) the former observer(cid:213)s  reference  frame,
the former observer would be seen to be in an accelerating reference frame.(4,5)
For  example, he discussed a man in a windowless room in  deep  space.    The
room is towed by a rope attached to one end so  that the room accelerates  at  a
uniform rate.  What does the man inside the room experience?  He feels as if he
is in a gravitational field.  For  example, if the man in  the  room  hangs  a  rope
from the ceiling and attaches an object to the bottom, the rope hangs toward the
floor.  What does the man in the room think?  He thinks, (cid:210)The suspended body
experiences a downward force in the gravitational field, and this is neutralised
by  the  tension  of  the  rope(cid:211)  (Einstein,  1917/1961,  p.  68).    What  does  an
observer outside the  room  deep  in  space  think?    He  thinks,  (cid:210)The  rope  must
perforce  take  part  in  the  accelerated  motion  of  the  chest  [the  room],  and  it
transmits this motion to the body(cid:211) (Einstein, 1917/1961, p. 68).(4)

A passage from Misner, Thorne,  & Wheeler, 1973  can  help  make  the

present suggestion more explicit.

A tourist in a powered interplanetary rocket feels (cid:210)gravity.(cid:211)  Can
a physicist by  local  effects  convince  him  that  this  (cid:210)gravity(cid:211)  is
bogus?    Never,  says  Einstein(cid:213)s  principle  of  the  local  [over  a
small area] equivalence of gravity  and  accelerations.    But  then
the physicist  will  make  no  errors  if  he  deludes  [italics  added]
himself into treating  true  gravity  as  a  local  illusion  caused  by
acceleration.  Under this delusion, he barges ahead and solves
gravitational problems by using special relativity: if he is clever
enough  to  divide  every  problem  into  a  network  of  local
questions,  each  solvable  under  such  a  delusion,  then  he  can
work out all influences of any gravitational field. (p. 164)

In the suggested theory, the physicist is not deluding himself by treating (cid:210)true(cid:211)
gravity in terms of accelerating reference frames.  This is the meaning of (cid:210)true(cid:211)
gravity.

Gravitational force manifested in its affect on rotational velocity is what
indicates the presence of dark matter in individual galaxies.  On the one hand,

Conclusion

- 4 -

Dark Matter

mass  is  associated  with  gravitation  in  Newtonian  mechanics.    On  the  other
hand,  we have a  situation  concerning  a  galaxy  where  there  is  gravitation  for
which there is no readily  apparent  gravitational  mass  associated.    We  have  a
theory, the general theory of relativity, that encompasses Newtonian mechanics
and that indicates that reference frames provide the means to develop spacetime
curvature that expresses the gravitational field.  It is resonable to conclude that
because of the more fundamental character of  the  general  theory  of  relativity,
reference frames form the basis for understanding gravitation and not mass.

1
Email: dsnyder@earthlink.net

Endnotes

2The term (cid:210)solar masses(cid:211) is used in the quote whereas in the article by

Carr the graphic symbol for this term was used.

References

1.

2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.

V. Trimble, Existence and Nature of Dark Matter in the Universe, Annu.  Rev.  Astron.
Astrophys., 25, 425 (1987).
B. Carr, Baryonic Dark Matter, Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 32, 531 (1994).
R. Wyse & G. Gilmore, What(cid:213)s the Matter?, Physics World, 8(6), June, 1995, p. 39.
Bothun, G. D., The Ghostliest Galaxies, Scientific American, 276(2), February (1997),
p.56.
R. Resnick, Introduction to Special Relativity. (John Wiley & Sons, 1961) p.??????.
C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne, and J.  A.  Wheeler,  Gravitation (W.  H.  Freeman,  1973),
p.  164.
A. Einstein, "On the  electrodynamics of  moving  bodies," in  H.  Lorentz, A.  Einstein,
H.  Minkowski,  and H.  Weyl  (editors),  The  Principle  of  Relativity,  a  Collection  of
Original  Memoirs  on  the  Special  and  General  Theories  of  Relativity  (Dover,  1952,
originally 1905), p. 53.
A. Einstein, Relativity, the Special and the General Theory (Bonanza,  1961,  originally
1917), p. 44.
A.  Einstein,  "The foundation of  the  general theory  of  relativity,"  in  H.  Lorentz,  A.
Einstein,  H.  Minkowski,  and  H.  Weyl  (editors),  The  Principle  of  Relativity,  a
Collection  of  Original  Memoirs  on  the  Special  and  General  Theories  of  Relativity
(Dover, 1952, originally 1916), p. 113.

10. A. Einstein, The Meaning  of  Relativity  (Princeton University  Press,  1956,  originally

1922), p. 57.

- 5 -

