Beam extraction studies at 900 GeV using a channeling crystal
R.A. Carrigan, Jr.,1 D. Chen,*1 G. Jackson,1 N. Mokhov,1 C.T. Murphy,1 S. Baker,2
A. Bogacz,†3 D. Cline,3 S. Ramachandran,‡3 J. Rhoades,‡‡3 J. Rosenzweig,3 A. Asseev,4
V. Biryukov,4 A. Taratin,5 J. A. Ellison,6 A. Khanzadeev,7 T. Prokofieva,7
V. Samsonov,7 G. Solodov,7 B. Newberger,§8 E. Tsyganov,9 H.-J. Shih,||10 W. Gabella,11
B. Cox,12 V. Golovatyuk,12 and A. McManus**12
1Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois 60510
2Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439
3University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90024
4Institute for High Energy Physics, Serpukhov, Russia
5Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, Russia
6The University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131
7Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina, Russia
8The University of Texas, Austin, Texas 78712
9Southwestern Medical Center, University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75235
10Superconducting Super Collider, Dallas, Texas 75237
11Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37235
12The University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22901
*Present address: AT&T, Middletown, NJ 07748.
†Present address: Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, Newport News, VA 23606.
‡Present address: University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204.
‡‡Present address: Fermilab, P. O. Box 500, Batavia, IL 60510
§Present address: Winstead Sechrest & Minick, P.C., Austin TX 78701.
||Present address: Affiliated Computer Services, Inc., Dallas TX 75204.
¶Present address: University and INFN of Lecce, Lecce, Italy.
**Present address: AT&T, West Long Branch, NJ 07764.

Luminosity-driven channeling extraction has been observed for the first time in a 900 GeV study at the

Fermilab Tevatron. This experiment, Fermilab E853, demonstrated that useful TeV level beams can be
extracted from a superconducting accelerator during high luminosity collider operations without unduly
affecting the background at the collider detectors. Multi-turn extraction was found to increase significantly
the efficiency of the process. The beam extraction efficiency was about 25%. Studies of time dependent
effects found that the turn-to-turn structure was governed mainly by accelerator beam dynamics. An
investigation of a pre-scatterer using the accelerator flying wire system showed that a fiber could produce a
significant extracted flux, consistent with expectations. Based on these results, it is feasible to construct a
parasitic 5-10 MHz proton beam from the Tevatron collider.

PACS Codes: PACS numbers: 29.27.Ac, 41.85.Ar

I. INTRODUCTION

for 

In the early 1990’s a fixed target experiment was
proposed 
the  Superconducting  Super
Collider1  to  study  heavy-flavor  physics  using  a
tiny  fraction  of  the  20  TeV  circulating  beam
channeling.
extracted  with 
Conventional  methods  of  beam  extraction  at
such  high  energies  pose  problems  with  no

crystal 

bent 

obvious  cost-effective  solutions.  For  example,
electrostatic  septa  cannot  easily  provide  the
larger  momentum  kicks  required  for  future
trans-TeV accelerators. Since the new extraction
scheme  proposed  for  the  SSC  was  not  a  proven
technique,  E853  at  Fermilab  was  designed  to
study the feasibility of this approach.

The goals of E853 were to extract one million

12

to 

in 

to  study 

investigate 

900  GeV/c  protons/second  with  10
  protons
circulating 
the
the  Tevatron, 
extraction efficiency, to show that the luminosity
the  circulating  beam  was  not
lifetime  of 
the
adversely  affected,  and 
backgrounds created at the two Tevatron collider
experiments.  Losses  at  these  major  collider
experiments,  CDF  (one  sixth  of 
the  ring
upstream  for  protons  -  see  Fig.  1)  and  D0  (one
sixth of the ring downstream), had to be kept to a
tolerable  level.  A  central  concern  for  E853
operation  was  that  losses  be  minimized  so  that
the  superconducting  Tevatron  magnets  were  not
quenched.

There are significant constraints on where an
inexpensive,  parasitic  extraction  test  can  be
lattice.  Any
the  Tevatron 
placed  within 
modification  of  the  Tevatron  vacuum  system  is
expensive  and  requires  rigorous  attention  to
maintaining  a  very  high  vacuum.  The  C0  long
straight  section  was  chosen  for  E853  because  it
contained an existing 900 GeV abort system with
an associated extraction  line  and  dump  that  was
not  to  be  used  in  the  1994-1996  running  period
except at 150 GeV during collider injection tests.
In  addition  there  was  free  space  along  the  abort
beam  line  for  instrumentation  and  cabling  to  a
portakamp complex above ground for electronics
and data acquisition.

required 

Reliable 

to
simulations  were 
interpret  the  experiment  and  explore  ideas  for
halo  generation  and  future  applications.  A
simulation  needs  to  cover  all  of  the  accelerator
physics  issues  involved  as  well  as  the  physics
processes  associated  with  channeling  and
multiple  scattering  in  the  crystal.  Simulations
created  for  the  experiment  have  been  discussed
elsewhere by Bogacz et al.2 and Biryukov3.

the 

experimental 

The  following  sections  describe  the  E853
apparatus,
experiment, 
channeling  behavior,  measurements  of 
the
extraction  rate  and  efficiency,  time  dependent
and  beam  halo  effects,  RF,  fiber-driven,  and
luminosity-driven extraction, as well as potential
applications.  Earlier  presentations  of  the  E853
in  Murphy  et  al.4,
results  have  appeared 
Ramachandran's thesis5, and Carrigan et al.6

II. EXPERIMENT

The apparatus for E853 was placed at C0 where

2

in  Fig.  2.  Protons  from 

there  was  an  existing  Tevatron  abort  line  (see
Fig. 1). The experimental layout at  C0 is shown
schematically 
the
circulating  beam  were  kicked  or  diffused
outward  to  a  bent  crystal  that  deflected  the
particles upward. From there they traveled along
a simple beam line through a quadrupole doublet
that  was  part  of  the  Tevatron  lattice  to  two
diagnostic 
stations.  Measurements
consisted  of  determining  the  count  rate  in  the
extracted  beam  line  as  a  function  of  crystal
alignment,  strength  of  the  beam  halo  excitation,
and other parameters.

counter 

The bent crystal was installed 60 m upstream
of the C0 straight section center at the location of
one  of  the  kicker  magnets  for  the  900  GeV  C0
abort  system  (B48).  Because  the  proton  beam
was on the outside of the centerline of the ring at
B48, the crystal was placed on the outside of the
ring  (antiprotons  were  on  the  inside).  The
geometry is shown in Fig. 3(a).

The  existing  abort  lattice  was  designed  to
provide  an  extraction  system  that  would  be  fast
(one  turn)  and  clean  so  that  it  does  not  pose  a
problem  for 
the  string  of  superconducting
magnets  in  the  Tevatron7.  The  abort  magnet
string  replaced  by  the  E853  crystal  consisted  of
four 1.8 m long kicker modules with peak fields
of  3.7  kG  and  a  rise-time  of  1.5  µsec  giving  a
total vertical deflection of 640 µrad. Removal of
the  most  upstream  kicker  module  provided
sufficient space for the crystal goniometer.

Extraction  consists  of  two  parts:  a  vertical
kick  into  the  field-free  region  of  a  string  of
Lambertson magnets, as shown in Fig. 3(b), and
horizontal  separation  of  the  circulating  beam
from the extracted beam by the Lambertsons. In
the Tevatron lattice missing half-dipoles at B48-3
and  at  C11  establish  a  three-bend  magnetic
dogleg  and  thereby  provide  an  effective  four
mrad horizontal kick at B48 so that the abort line
can clear the  magnets at  the  downstream  end  of
the  straight  section.  The  missing  bend  in  the
accelerator ring resulting from the removal of the
half-dipole is supplied by the warm  Lambertson
magnets  and  C-magnets  in  the  straight  section
itself.  The  field-free  and  field  regions  of  the
Lambertsons  then  provide  the  initial  horizontal
separation between the  extracted  and  circulating
beams.  For  E853  the  640  µrad  crystal  bend

deflected the beam incident on the crystal up into
the field-free region of the Lambertson magnets.

Since  E853  was  carried  out  parasitically  to
the  collider  program,  it  was  not  possible  to
optimize  the  accelerator  lattice  for  channeling
extraction.  For  example,  it  would  have  been
desirable  to  have  more  dispersion  at  the  crystal
so  that  longitudinal  noise  excitation  could  have
been carried out. The accelerator parameters are
given  in  Table  I  for  the  two  types  of  stores  in
which  E853  had  a  study  session:  low-intensity
proton-only  stores  of  about  four  hours  duration
in  which  E853  was  the  only  user,  and  high-
intensity  pp  stores  in  which  E853  took  data
parasitically  during  the  last  few  hours.  There
were a total of 30 sessions in E853.

TABLE  I.  Accelerator  pararameters  for  the  two
types of stores in which E853 took data. D is the
horizontal  dispersion,  ε  is  the  one-σ  emittance,
β=and  α  are  the  standard  parameters  describing
the shape of the emittance ellipse, and νx and νy
are  the  horizontal  and  vertical  tunes  of  the
accelerator.  x-p  and  y-p  are  the  horizontal  and
vertical  positions  of  the  protons  at  the  crystal
relative to the central orbit of the Tevatron.

Parameter

Proton-only
3.33
100.

Units

pp
6.66 π mm-mrad
104. m
23. m

29.
-0.04
0.01
1.926
0.75
0.33
6.1
11.3
20.585
20.574
0

0

0.13
0.10
1.887
0.91 mm
0.41 mm
8.5 µrad
18.0 µrad

20.585
20.574

1.99 mm
-1.99 mm
-0.75 mm
0.75 mm

ε
β
x
β
y
α
x
α
y

D
σ
x
σ
y
σΘx
σΘy
νx
νy
x-p
x- p 
y-p
y- p 

two 

traversed 

After  the  Lambertson  magnets  the  extracted
beam 
instrumented  air  gaps
approximately  100  meters  downstream  of  the
crystal  and  then  entered  a  beam  dump.  The  air
gaps,  separated  by  40  meters,  were  each
instrumented  with 
scintillators.  A
fluorescent  screen  coupled  to  a  CCD  camera  in
the first air gap also provided a digital readout of

several 

3

the beam-profile  for run-time diagnostics. There
was  already  a  segmented-wire  ion  chamber
(SWIC) in the second air gap as well as a toroid
to measure beam current.

In  the  collider  mode,  the  Tevatron  typically
operated  with  six  bunches  of  protons  and  six
bunches  of  antiprotons  circulating  so  that  a
proton bunch passed the crystal every 3.49 µsec.
The proton and antiproton orbits  were  separated
at  most  points  in  the  ring  by  an  electrostatic
separator  system.  A  typical  bunch  length  was  2
ns.  Characteristically  the  beam  circulated  in  the
Tevatron for 10 to 20 hours as  the  beam  slowly
decayed because of such  factors  as  losses  at  the
collision points, gas scattering, and scraping.

Under  most  circumstances  the  Main  Ring
Accelerator located just above the Tevatron  was
also operating to build an antiproton stack during
collider  operations.  It  cycled  once  every  several
seconds  and  produced  large  backgrounds  in  the
E853  detectors,  so  it  was  necessary  to  gate  off
the  electronics  when  protons  were  in  the  Main
Ring. However magnetic effects of bus work and
the  magnet  ramping  affected  Tevatron  orbits
throughout the Main Ring cycle.

Two  techniques  were  used  for  extracting  the
beam  in  E853.  In  one  approach  a  fast  kicker
magnet was used to induce a betatron oscillation
in one of the six bunches. The edge of this bunch
then spilled out on the crystal over the next 50 -
100 turns. This mode of operation is called “kick
mode”.  The  nominal  value  used  for  the  kicker
voltage  was  10 KV,  creating  a  maximum  step
size at the crystal of 0.5 mm.

The  principal  purpose  of  kick  mode  was  to
get beam incident deep in the crystal so that the
beam  was  beyond  any  surface  irregularities  of
the crystal edge (which can be of the order of  a
micron)  and  beyond  the  effective  surface  layer
created  by  the  horizontal  angular  alignment
error,  which  was  of  the  order  of  0.3  mrad.
Irregularities  on  the  surface  of  the  crystal  and
crystal  plane  misalignment  had  the  same  effect
as that of electrostatic septa wires, scattering the
beam  as  the  beam  encountered  an  irregular  and
possibly  amorphous  layer  instead  of  uniform
planes.

The  disadvantage  of  kick  mode  was  that  the
beam  intensity  and  emittance  degraded  at  a  rate

that made it unacceptable for parasitic extraction
during  collider  operations.  Kick  mode  was  used
only in proton-only stores.

Kick  mode  was  employed  in  the  initial
sessions  of  E853.  The  basic  technique  was  to
move the crystal in to a predetermined horizontal
location close to the beam (4.5 to 6 σ
x from the
then  kicked
beam  center).  The  beam  was 
horizontally a number of times by a fast kicker at
E17  (see  Fig. 1).  At  this  distance  from  the
crystal,  the  beam  density  was  so  small  that  no
beam was observed to interact with the crystal on
the first few kicks.

after 

However, 

several  hundred 

turns
following a kick, the beam had grown in size as
non-linearities  in  the  machine  gradually  spread
the beam to fill much of the phase space mapped
out  by  the  betatron  oscillation.  After  about  six
such kicks, the beam size had grown by a factor
1.7  in  the  horizontal  plane  and  a  factor  1.2  in
the 
the
horizontal/vertical  coupling  in  the  Tevatron).  In
the  kicks  which  followed,  an  equilibrium  state
the
persisted  in  which 
Gaussian  beam  distribution  led  to  a  nearly
9  protons/kick,  and
constant  loss  of  about  2(cid:127)10
extraction by the crystal was observed.

the  rising  edge  of 

(resulting 

vertical 

plane 

from 

to 

The  second  extraction  technique  was  called
“diffusion  mode”,  relying  on  either  natural  or
stimulated  diffusion  during  proton-only  stores
and  pp 
collider
collisions  parasitic 
operations.  This  diffusion  was  due  to  such
effects  as  beam-gas  scattering,  beam-beam
scattering  and  tune  shift  effects,  magnetic  field
ripple, and imposed  RF  noise.  In  this  mode,  the
crystal  was  slowly  moved  into  the  tail  of  the
beam  halo.  As the crystal approached the beam,
the  extraction  rate  rose  rapidly,  as  illustrated  in
Fig. 4. Movement of the crystal was halted when
an  extraction  rate  adequate  for  the  studies  had
been  achieved.  When  operating  parasitic  to
collider  operations,  this  mode  did  not  seriously
affect the circulating proton beam lifetime.

Protons  were  steadily  resupplied  onto  the
crystal  either  by  natural  diffusion,  artificially
applied RF noise, or pp collisions. Beam which
did  not  channel  on  the  first  encounter  with  the
crystal  underwent  multiple  scattering  and  got
another chance to enter the crystal on successive

4

effective 

turns,  if  it  did  not  interact  in  the  crystal.  The
most 
for  beam
measurement  in  this  mode  was  the  scintillation
counter  system  set  at  voltage  levels  appropriate
for single-particle identification.

instrumentation 

A horizontal damper located at F11  was also
used in two E853 sessions to introduce RF noise
in  transverse  phase  space  and  thereby  stimulate
diffusion  and  increase  the  extraction  rate.  This
characteristically  decreased  the  beam  lifetime
substantially  although  it  was  still  long  enough
for  a  typical  study  session.  Significantly  higher
extraction rates were observed with the noise on.
This  approach  could  not  be  used  for  parasitic
extraction  owing  to  its  destructive  effect  on  the
circulating beam.

III. APPARATUS

This  section  reviews  the  main  components  of
E853. The operation of the Tevatron, which was
at  the  heart  of  the  experiment  has  already  been
described. The other principal components of the
apparatus  were  the  channeling  crystal  with  its
associated  goniometer  and 
the  diagnostic
instrumentation  to  carry  out  the  experiment.
Both  special  instrumentation  and  the  existing
Tevatron  diagnostics  were  required  to  study  the
circulating  and  extracted  beams.  Finally,  data
collection  was  provided  by  an  on-line  computer
system  as  well  as  the  extensive  accelerator
ACNET control utility.

A. Bent crystal operation

Channeling requires a well-characterized crystal,
a device to bend the crystal, and a precise and
flexible goniometer. These systems are discussed
in the following paragraphs.

1. Crystal

from 

several 

The  “dislocation-free”  silicon  crystal  used  for
E853  was  obtained  from  Wacker  Corporation
after  crystals 
sources  were
evaluated  for  dislocation  density  using  a  two
crystal  x-ray  diffraction  spectrometer  discussed
in  Baublis  et  al.8  The  crystal  had  a  diffraction
line  width  of  (4.5±0.5)  µrad  which  confirmed
that  it  was  dislocation-free.  For  the  experiment
several  39  mm  long,  3  mm  high,  9  mm  wide
crystals  were  prepared  with  different  planar
orientations.

The crystal used in the experiment was cut so
that  a  (111)  plane  was  aligned  to  within  1000
µrad of  the  crystal  face.  A  more  comprehensive
view  of  the  planar  alignment  for  one  of  the
crystals is shown in Fig. 6 of  Baublis  et  al.  The
side facing the beam was polished to be optically
flat within half a wavelength. The results of this
process are illustrated in Fig. 7 of Baublis et al.

2. Bender

A  4-point  bender  was  chosen  for  E853  to
produce  a  uniform  bend.  A  drawing  of  the
bender  with  the  crystal  and  alignment  mirror  is
shown in Fig. 5. Note that the crystal had straight
overhangs of 7.5 mm beyond the outer points of
support for the bend. More details on the design
aspect of the bender can be found elsewhere9.

The crystal was pre-bent up through an angle
of 642 µrad. The bend angle was set to within 5
µrad  using  two  independent  techniques:  laser
interferometry  and  auto  collimation.  A  small
mirror was carefully aligned with the top surface
of  the  upstream  end  of  the  crystal  prior  to
installation.  The  crystal  was  positioned  in  the
Tevatron using survey monuments on the outside
of  the  goniometer.  That  alignment  was  checked
by auto-collimation using the upstream reference
mirror. The upstream top face  orientation  of  the
crystal  was  estimated  to  be  within  150  µrad  of
the  Tevatron  beam  based  on  the  effect  of
refraction  in  the  viewing  window,  10  µrad
surveying errors, and other factors.

Both  the  horizontal  and  vertical  angle  initial
alignments  in  the  accelerator  were  assisted
greatly by relating the upstream and downstream
ends  of  the  two  crystal  surfaces  (only  40  mm
long) to the survey monuments external to the 1-
m  long  goniometer  tube  using  the  Coordinate
Measuring  Machine  of  the  Fermilab  Silicon
Detector Facility. This device has an accuracy of
2 µm globally, leading to an uncertainty of about
100 µrad in the angles of the crystal with respect
to 
the  external  monuments.  The  optical
techniques  for  measuring  the  external  fiducials
during installation in the accelerator are accurate
only 
implying  an  additional
uncertainty of 100 µrad over the 1 m length.

to  100  µm, 

3. Goniometer

For  channeling  to  occur,  the  vertical  angular
orientation  of  the  channeling  crystal  must  be

5

aligned with the beam angle. Since the Tevatron
beam  has  a  vertical  angular  divergence  of  11
µrad  in  proton-only  stores  and  the  critical  angle
of the crystal at 900 GeV is 5.2 µrad, the crystal
alignment  must  be  within  of  order  20  µrad  for
channeling  to  occur.  A  special  goniometer  was
designed  for  E853  to  position  and  align  the
crystal  quickly  inside  the  vacuum  system  of  the
Tevatron.  Precision  stepping  motors  outside  the
pipe  at  each  end  of  the  vacuum  pipe  allowed
alignment  of  the  crystal  with  four  degrees  of
freedom (x, Θh, y, Θv ).

The crystal was mounted at the upstream end
of  a  1  m  long  beam  pipe  with  articulating
bellows  at  the  ends.  Because  of  the  upstream
location  of  the  crystal  the  angular  motion  was
provided  solely  by  the  downstream  motors  and
the  crystal  turned  around  its  own  center.  The
motors  produced  step  sizes  of  2.5  µm  which
translated to 2.5 µrad in angle with the 1 m lever
arm  of  the  goniometer.  The  accelerator  control
system  was  used  to  control  the  goniometer.  A
schematic  of  the  goniometer  is  shown  in  Fig.
6(a).

A  horizontal  retractor  controlled  by  a  fifth
motor was used to move the crystal holder in and
out  of  the  beam.  The  crystal  was  completely
outside of the Tevatron aperture when not in use.
The 
the  crystal
orientation  over  many  excursions  of  the  crystal
holder  out  of 
the  beam  pipe  with  a
reproducibility  of  15  µrad.  The  retraction
arrangement is shown in Fig. 6(b).

retractor  also  preserved 

Extensive 

reproducibility  studies  of 

the
goniometer  motions  were  carried  out.  These
were  done  for  different  load  conditions  to
simulate  the  real  conditions  with  the  meter-long
insert  attached 
tables.  The
minimum  step  size  on  the  x,  y  motion  stepping
motors  and  on  the  motor  used  by  the  retraction
mechanism were verified using a high resolution
(1  µm)  optical  encoder.  The  backlash  error  was
of the order of 3 to 4 µm.

the  motion 

to 

B. Extraction line instrumentation

The  instrumentation  for  beam  detection  and
measurement  was  placed  in  two  air  gaps  along
the abort line. Eight plastic scintillation counters
of various shapes and sizes were used to monitor
the beam  flux  close  to  the  crystal  and  along  the

extraction line. The operating voltages for single
particle  counting  were  determined  with  cosmic
rays and beam coincidence studies. For diffusion
mode  the  counters  were  operated  as  single
particle  counters.  Count  rates  were  limited  to
somewhat less than the bunch passage frequency
(300 Khz for 6 bunches).

For  kick  mode  a  significant  fraction  of  the
circulating  beam  was  extracted  down  the  abort
line  in  the  first  few  turns  so  that  it  was  not
possible  to  count  individual  particles.  Typically
2(cid:127)109  protons  were  lost  per  kick.  Assuming  an
extraction efficiency of 30% on the order of 109
protons could come down the extraction line in a
single  RF  bucket.  This  flux  could  saturate  the
counter  itself  or  the  analog  to  digital  converter
(ADC)  used  for  charge  integration.  Kick  mode
voltages were set lower to avoid these problems.
The  scintillators  acted  as  calorimeters,  and  their
pulse heights were recorded.

Three  principal  counter  combinations  were
used.  Interaction  counters  below  and  slightly
downstream  of  the  crystal  were  employed  to
monitor interactions of the beam with the crystal.
Two  counters  in  the  first  air  gap  formed  a
coincidence  called  AG1.  This  was  often  placed
in  coincidence  with  a  counter  in  the  second  air
gap such as one referred to as CAL.

In  kick  mode  ADC  readings  for  the  various
counters were taken for the second revolution of
the proton bunch around the ring after the beam
was kicked (the beam was on the far side on the
first  turn  after  the  kick).  Typically  several
scintillator  signals  were  also  recorded  for  many
turns with digital oscilloscopes.

Because the C0 abort line was routinely used
for 150 GeV extraction of the entire beam during
collider setup periods, the counters at the air gaps
were mounted on horizontal linear motion stages
in  order  to  allow  them  to  be  removed  remotely
when not in use. A vertical finger counter (width
= 1.6 mm) on the second air gap stage was used
to  study  the  horizontal  beam  width  while  a
horizontal finger counter (height = 0.8 mm) was
independently  mounted  on  a  vertical  motion  in
the  first  air  gap  to  measure  the  vertical  profile.
The ACNET control system was used to operate
the stages.

The extracted beam  was also monitored  with
a  chromox  fluorescent  screen  (from  Morgan
Matroc  Co.)  at  the  first  air  gap.  A  conventional
segmented wire ion chamber (SWIC) with 1 mm
wire  spacing  in  x  and  y  already  existed  in  the
second  air  gap.  In  kick  mode  both  of  these
devices  provided  information  on  the  beam  size
and  position.  The  fluorescent  screen  and  the
SWIC  were  not  useful  in  the  diffusion  mode
because  there  was  not  a  high  enough  flux  of
beam  particles 
signals.  The
fluorescent  screen  was  viewed  with  a  CCD
camera  connected  to  a  video  monitor  and  tape
recorder.  Video  tapes  were  used  to  look  at  time
dependent effects with scales greater than 15 ms
in the kick mode.

to  produce 

The  screen  image  of  the  beam  was  also
captured  and  stored  with  the  help  of  a  “frame
grabber”.  The  images  were  analyzed  later  to
determine  the  beam  distribution  in  both  the
horizontal and vertical projections. Fig. 7 shows
typical  “frame  grabber”  views  of  the  beam  spot
for  the  kick  mode.  Despite  problems  with
saturation and calibration, the  screen  provided  a
useful visual tool to guide  one  during  the  initial
setup  for  crystal  alignment.  The  fluorescent
screen  was  also  useful 
the
extracted  beam  position  with  respect  to  the
aperture of the Lambertson magnets.

in  determining 

C. Accelerator instrumentation

The  characteristics  of  the  circulating  beam  and
the  loss  rates  at  the  collider  detectors  were
measured  using  existing  Tevatron  diagnostics.
Electromagnetic beam position monitors (BPMs)
in  the  accelerator  ring  continuously  tracked  the
position of each bunch of the circulating beam at
many  points  around  the  accelerator  and  were
used  to  determine  the  distance  of  the  proton
beam  from  the  crystal.  Resistive  wall  monitors
and  DC  current  transducers  tracked  the  total
circulating  intensity.  These  signals,  averaged
over  several  turns,  were  used  to  determine  the
total  loss  rate  from  the  beam,  not  just  that
resulting from the crystal. They were also useful
quantities  for  normalizing  the  extraction  rate  in
the diffusion mode.

Beam  profile  measurements  in  the  Tevatron
were done with a system of three “flying wires”
at  E11  and  E17.  A  flying  wire  is  a  30  µm
diameter  carbon  fiber  that  moves  through  the

6

beam with a speed of  ≈ 5 m/sec. The secondary
particles  from  the  interaction  of  the  beam  with
the  filament  are  detected  as  a  function  of  time
using  a  scintillator  telescope.  This  gives  the
beam intensity profile directly.

Vertical  and  horizontal  beam  profiles  were
taken in  kick  mode  with the  flying  wires  before
and  after  beam  growth  with  the  first  six  kicks.
With  the  emittances  determined  at  one  location,
it  was  straight-forward  to  calculate  the  beam
divergences  at  the  crystal  knowing  all  the
relevant lattice Twiss functions.

Loss  rates  at  the  collider  detectors  were
measured  using  permanent  counters  located  at
B0  (CDF)  and  D0.  For  ordinary  Tevatron
collider  operations  the  circulating  beam  was
scraped  until  these  count  rates  were  below
standard  operating  upper  limits.  Data  from  all
these systems were available at E853 through the
accelerator ACNET system.

IV. CHANNELING BEHAVIOR

at 

channeling 

extraction,  not 

While  E853  was  the  highest  energy  channeling
measurement yet performed, it was undertaken to
look 
the
fundamentals of the channeling process. Because
the  energy  was  high,  the  channeling  critical
angle  was  small,  5.2  µrad  at  900  GeV.  As  a
consequence, it was difficult to measure the size
of  this  angle  directly.  Nevertheless,  information
from E853 confirms that the channeling  process
continues  to  behave  consistently  in  the  TeV
range.

A. Crystal angular alignment

1. Vertical angle alignment

For successful extraction the channeling plane of
the  crystal  must  be  aligned  with  the  circulating
accelerator  beam.  The  angular  width  of  the  Θv
scan (varying the vertical angle of the crystal) is
determined  by 
the
channeling  critical  angle,  another  is  the  angular
divergence of the accelerator beam, σΘv
, and the
third is the impact of multiple passes through the
crystal  on  the  angular  divergence  of  the  beam
halo.

factors.  One 

three 

is 

At  the  crystal  σΘv

  was  typically  18  µrad

during  collider-mode  stores.  The  rms  multiple

scattering  for  one  pass  through  the  crystal  was
10.8 µrad.  Characteristically  in  the  diffusion
mode a proton passed through the crystal several
times  before 
for
channeling.  The  effective  multiple  scattering
angle  was  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the
number of passes through the crystal.

it  was  properly  aligned 

The  lower  panel  of  Fig.  8  shows  a  typical
crystal  Θv  extraction  curve  in  diffusion  mode
during a collider store. The simulation3 predicts
σΘv  to  be  21  to  24  µrad  compared  to  32 µrad
measured  in  Fig.  8.  Fitted  values  for  various
sessions  ranged  from  28  to  37  µrad.  The
discrepancy  between 
and
experiment  arises  because  the  simulation  took
the  beam  divergence  to  be  11.5 µrad,  whereas
the  beam  divergence  in  collider  mode  was  18
µrad (see Table I).

simulation 

the 

In kick mode, data was taken for the Θv scan
and  other  scans  only  on  the  first  pass  of  the
kicked  bunch  through  the  crystal  (the  second
turn  after  the  kick  -  see  Section  VII  below).
Therefore, the Θv curve should be narrower than
in diffusion mode because there was no multiple
scattering.  The  upper  panel  of  Fig.  8  shows  a
kick mode vertical scan gated on the second turn
for which σΘv = 18 µrad, clearly illustrating the
suppression  of  multi-pass  multiple  scattering.
Because  of  the  beam  growth  resulting  from  the
kicks,  this  width  was  expected  to  be  somewhat
greater than 15 µrad.

2. Horizontal angle alignment

Before  the  experiment  began  there  was  concern
that  the  horizontal  angle  of  the  crystal  might
have  to  be  aligned  very  accurately  in  the
diffusion  mode  so  that  the  edge  was  quite
parallel  to  the  beam.  Fortunately,  multi-turn
extraction  in  the  diffusion  mode  obviates  this
problem,  since  multiple  scattering  from  the
portion  of  the  crystal  projecting  out  into  the
beam scatters particles out to larger radii on later
turns.

Beyond 

this  concern 

there  were  several
impacts  of  horizontal  angular  scans.  As  the
crystal rotated in Θh starting from a well-aligned
angle  (Θh  =  0),  either  the  downstream  or  the
upstream  end  moved  closer  to  the  beam.  For
example,  a  10  mrad  change  in  Θh  moved  both

7

ends  of  the  crystal  by  200  µm  in  opposite
directions. As a result of the end moving into the
beam  the  interaction  counter  rate  rose.  This
behavior  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  9.  The  time  order
of  the  data  was  from  right  to  left.  As  Θh
decreased  from  its  starting  value  of  8  mrad,  the
interaction  rate  is  observed  to  decrease  because
as the upstream end of the crystal  moved out of
the beam it was intercepting a region from which
most  of  the  particles  had  been  removed  at  the
previous  angular  setting,  and  diffusion  had  not
yet  had  a  long  enough  time  to  repopulate  the
void.

This  effect  was  anticipated,  for  it  had  been
observed  that  when  the  whole  crystal  was
translated  away  from  the  beam  by  200  µm,  it
to
took  some  minutes  for  diffusing  beam 
reestablish a constant  interaction  rate.  When  the
goniometer reached Θh = 0, the downstream end
of  the  crystal  began  to  move  into  the  beam  and
intercept increasingly repopulated regions as the
angle  continued 
the
interaction rate rose steadily.

to  change; 

therefore, 

We take the interaction rate to be proportional
to  the  amount  of  beam  incident  on  the  crystal,
and the quantity of interest to plot  as  a  function
of  Θh  is  the  beam  extracted  divided  by  the
background-subtracted  (see  Section  VI  below)
interaction  counter  rate,  as  shown  in  Fig.  10.
When  the  upstream  end  of  the  crystal  was
protruding  into  the  beam  (positive  Θh),  some
initially  channeled  portion  of  the  beam  should
have  escaped  through  the  side  facing  the  beam
before 
the
downstream  end  pointed  in  (negative  Θh),  the
unaligned portion of the crystal (the downstream
end,  which  was  bent  upwards)  intercepted  the
beam  first  so  that  less  beam  should  have  been
deflected. Both effects are observed in Fig. 10.

fully  deflected.  When 

it  was 

Biryukov3  studied  the  horizontal  alignment
with his simulation program in some detail  with
the  hope  that  the  horizontal  alignment  curve
could be used to probe questions of the diffusion
rate  and  imperfections  on  the  beam  facing
surface. For comparison the Biryukov simulation
for the E853 crystal and bender is also shown on
Fig. 10. The simulation took into account the real
geometry  of 
including  straight
sections and variable curvature plus an  assumed

the  crystal 

10 µm thick amorphous layer on the surface. The
two distributions are in fairly good agreement.

For  kick  mode  a  uniform  20  µrad  change  in
Θv  was  observed  with  the  CCD  camera  over  a
20  mrad  change  in  Θh  around  Θh  =  0.  This
change was in line with the change predicted for
crystal  distortions  resulting  from  the  bender.  As
the  downstream  crystal  end  moved  away  from
the beam to angles beyond 10 mrad there  was a
slight 
the  deflection  was
decreasing. For a 0.5 mm kick this effect should
have become significant for Θh > 20 mrad.

indication 

that 

B. Extracted beam size

The  beam  optics  in  the  vertical  plane  of  the
extracted  beam  was  point  to  parallel  from  the
crystal  to  the  air  gap  region  so  that  the  beam
height  was  directly  related  to  the  critical  angle.
Because  of  the  optics,  the  accelerator  beam
height  contributed  little  to  the  extracted  beam
height.  The  vertical  beam  profile  was  measured
with a 0.8 mm high finger counter in the first air
gap.  The  smearing  of  the  vertical  beam  height
distribution  because  of  the  finite  counter  width
was 0.8 mm/√8.5. Fig. 11 shows the distribution
for the most carefully measured finger scan. The
vertical  beam  distribution  gave  a  raw  width  of
σ
v  =  0.32  mm.  Factoring  out  the  finite  counter
width gives σ
v = 0.25  mm.  The  expected  width
based  on  the  beam  optics  and  the  critical  angle
was σ

v = 0.23 mm.

Alternatively,  one  can  calculate  a  value  for
the  critical  angle  directly  by  noting 
that
σ
v ≈ M12 Ψc where Ψc is the critical angle, and
M12, the beam transfer matrix element from the
crystal to air gap 1, was 41.3 m. Substituting the
measured extracted beam height  gives  Ψc  =  6.0
µrad, compared to the expected value of 5 µrad.
The apparent good agreement may be fortuitous.
While  no  error  has  been  assigned,  it  would  be
dominated  in  part  by  uncertainty  in  the  finger
counter  angular  alignment,  which  would  make
the effective counter width greater than 0.8 mm.
Rather,  the  point  is  that  the  vertical  distribution
was consistent with the magnitude of the critical
angle.

Because  of  the  optics,  the  horizontal  beam
distribution in the air gaps was dominated by the

8

halo angular distribution that reached the crystal.
The  horizontal  size  of  the  source  at  the  crystal
was  also  quite  small  in  the  diffusion  mode  so
h  ≈  132  σΘh  where  132  m  is  the
that  σ
appropriate beam transfer matrix element.

Only  three  plausible  horizontal  distributions
were  measured  because  of  time  pressure  and
problems  with  the  counter.  A  proton-only  store
gave σ
h = 2.8±0.5 mm while two colliding beam
stores  gave  σ
h = 1.1±0.2 mm  and  1.2±0.2 mm.
The  vertical  finger  counter  in  air  gap 2  was  1.6
mm  wide.  When  the  effect  of  the  width  is
factored  out,  the  horizontal  width  ranged  from
1.0 to 2.8 mm which suggests values for the halo
angular 
of
8 to 21 µrad.  The  lower  value  is  consistent  with
the  angular  distribution  based  on  multi-pass
multiple scattering extraction.

distribution 

crystal 

the 

on 

C. Dechanneling

A flat dechanneling tail is clearly visible in the y
finger  distribution  in  Fig.  11  and  in  the  CCD
images  of  Fig.  7.  The  tail  is  cut  off  on  the  left
side  of  Fig.  11  by  the  steel  of  the  Lambertson
magnet.  The  percentage  of  the  particles  in  the
visible  tail  is  20%  of  the  peak.  The  simulation3
predicted  26±2%.  Given  the  complexity  of  the
dechanneling  process  for  the  accelerator  beam
halo, the agreement between the experiment and
the simulation is adequate.

V. EXTRACTION RATES

A principal purpose of this experiment was to
study  absolute  extraction  rates  under  various
conditions.  We  have  measured  extraction  rates
under  three  conditions:  extraction  driven  by
natural  diffusion  during  proton-only  stores,  RF
noise-driven  diffusion  during  a  proton-only
store,  and  luminosity-driven  extraction  during
proton-antiproton stores.

Direct  digital  counting  measurements  of  the
beam  extracted  down  the  beam  line  required
several  corrections.  The  pair  of  counters  in
coincidence in the first air gap which counted the
extracted  beam  was  corrected  for  the  90%
efficiency  of  the  pair.  Accidental  coincidences
were  negligible  because  of  the  low  rate  of  non-
extraction  backgrounds.  Small  corrections  for
multiple  particles  extracted  from  the  same  RF
bucket which the scintillators would count as one

9

particle  were  calculated  by  Poisson-statistics
techniques and were empirically verified in three
of the sessions by recording the pulse heights in
each  of  the  counters  for  10,000  events.  In  the
worst  case,  this  correction  raised  the  extraction
rate  by  70%,  but  more  typically  was  a  10%
correction.

The finger counter distributions were used to
for  ambient
make  other  small  corrections 
background and for the dechanneling tail, which
was  subtracted  from  the  extraction  rate  because
in  a  real  application  of  this  technique  this  tail
would not survive the rest of the beam line. This
correction  typically  reduces  the  extraction  rate
15%.

In  a  typical  proton-only  store,  1011  protons
were circulating in six bunches. In this mode, the
maximum extraction rate achieved was 200 kHz.
Higher  rates  could  have  been  achieved  by
moving  the  crystal  even  closer  to  the  beam,  but
with  only  six  bunches,  a  rate  of  287  kHz
corresponded 
to  extracting  on  average  one
proton  per  bunch,  and  the  counters  could  not
count more than one particle per bunch.

To mitigate this limitation, a special store was
arranged  with  1011  protons  circulating  in  84
bunches.  Additional  diffusion  was  induced  by
transverse  RF  horizontal  noise  using 
the
electrical damper located at F11, creating an rms
diffusion rate at the crystal of 0.04 µm per turn.
The extraction rate was greater than 450 kHz.

In 

for 

the 

operating 

typically
luminosity-driven  stores, 
1012  protons  were  circulating  in  six  bunches.
The maximum extraction rate achieved  was 150
kHz. In this  mode the limitation  was  the  impact
of particles scattered from the crystal in creating
backgrounds 
collider
the 
the  CDF  experiment
experiments.  Although 
received  no  measurable  background  from  the
crystal,  the  D0  “lost  proton”  monitor  was
sensitive  to  scattering  from  the  crystal.  D0  was
the
usually  already 
conservative  upper  limit  set  by  that  experiment
before  the  crystal  was  moved  close  to  the  beam
and  reached  the  limit  when  the  extraction  rate
was between 50 and 150 kHz.

running  at  80%  of 

This limitation was removed during a special
store  with  36  proton  bunches  and  3  antiproton

bunches  during  which  D0  was  not  taking  data.
There  were  3(cid:127)1012  protons  circulating,  and  an
extraction rate of 900 kHz was achieved. The D0
lost proton monitor exceeded its upper limit by a
factor of 1.5 before the crystal was inserted, and
exceeded  the  limit  by  a  factor  of  two  after  the
crystal was inserted.

During  that  same  store,  the  extraction  rate
was  also  studied  as  a  function  of  luminosity.
Only 6 of the proton bunches were colliding with
antiprotons.  Colliding  and  non-colliding  proton
bunches were observed during the same counting
interval  by  employing  two  gates  triggered  on
different  bunches.  With  a 
typical  bunch
luminosity  of  0.4(cid:127)1030  cm-2s-1  and  typical
anti-proton  bunch
and 
circulating  proton 
intensities of 4 to 6(cid:127)1010 the extracted beam rate
increased by factors of 4 to 8 for proton bunches
that were colliding. The extraction rates resulting
from collisions at CDF and at D0 were about the
same.  Further  discussion  is  found  in  Section  X
below.

VI. EXTRACTION EFFICIENCY

The principal motivation of this experiment  was
to  explore  the  possibility  of  producing  useful
extracted  beams  during  collider  operation
without  undue  impact  on  collider  experiments.
To  achieve  such  beams  it  is  desirable  for  the
efficiency to be as high as possible. Efficiencies
of up to 15.4% were measured in a recent CERN
120 GeV experiment10,11 and 18% at 270 GeV12.
Recently a group at IHEP, Russia, working with
an  extremely  short  crystal  have  achieved
efficiencies of the order of 45%13.

“Efficiency” in this context is defined in two
ways. One practical definition, which we call the
“extraction  efficiency”,  is  the  rate  of  beam
extracted  into  the  extraction  channel  divided  by
the increase in the total circulating beam loss rate
in  the  accelerator  after  the  crystal  was  inserted.
From an accelerator operation point of view, this
is  a  practical  definition,  for  it  is  the  ratio  of
the
protons  extracted  to  protons  lost  from 
accelerator  resulting  from  the  crystal  insertion.
This  definition  was  used 
the  CERN
experiment.

in 

Several  effects  contributed  to  this  efficiency.
this

The  major  contribution 

lowering 

to 

10

efficiency  was  from  protons  which  interacted
with the crystal (12.9% of an interaction length)
on one of their several passes through the crystal.
A  second  contribution  was  from  protons  which
were  initially  channeled,  but  then  dechanneled
after being bent through approximately 50 to 300
µrad.  In  this  angular  range,  a  proton  is  within
neither  the  extraction  channel  aperture  nor  the
circulating  beam  aperture  and  is  intercepted  by
the  Lambertson  magnet  steel  or  a  collimator.  A
third  contribution  was  from  protons  which  were
fully  channeled  but  left  the  crystal  through  the
beam-side surface of the crystal because they had
a  large  negative  horizontal  angle,  referred  to
hereafter  as  the  “surface  loss”  contribution.  On
the other hand, unchanneled particles which only
multiple  scatter  in  the  crystal  rarely  leave  the
aperture  of  the  circulating  beam,  since  the  rms
multiple 
is  10.8  µrad,
comparable  to  the  angular  divergence  of  the
circulating beam.

scattering 

angle 

While  the  numerator  (the  rate  of  beam
extracted)  was  straight  forward  to  measure,
determining the change in the total loss rate from
the  accelerator  was  usually  difficult.  The  loss
rate  was determined by doing  a  least  squares  fit
to  the  slope  of  the  circulating  beam  intensity
versus  time  for  several  half-hour  periods  before
and  after  the  crystal  was  inserted.  The  error  in
this slope was determined from the rms deviation
of  the  data  from  the  fitted  line.  The  variation
with time of the loss rates before the crystal was
inserted,  resulting  from  various  instabilities  in
the  accelerator,  usually  exceeded  the  difference
between the crystal-out and crystal-in loss rates.

No successful measurements of this type were
obtained,  but  the  data  can  be  used  to  set  90%
confidence  level  lower  limits  on  the  extraction
efficiency  (see  Table  II).  The  values  varied
considerably from  session to session,  a  result  of
the fact that  while the upper limit  in  the  change
of the loss rate was quite  similar in all  sessions,
the extraction rate varied considerably.

lower 

the
TABLE  II.  Measured 
extraction  effieciency.  In  column  2,  “P”  means
“proton-only”  and  “L”  means  “luminosity
driven.”

limits  for 

Session
number

Type of
store

90% CL lower limit for
extraction efficiency

16

18
20
24
25
30

P

P
L
L
L
P

0.293

0.310
0.041
0.048
0.053
0.117

A  second  way  to  measure  the  efficiency  was  to
compare the number of protons that interact with
the crystal  when its vertical angle is  not aligned
to the beam with the number that interact when it
is  correctly  aligned  for  maximum  channeling.
Fewer interactions are observed when the crystal
is  well  aligned  with  the  beam  because  fewer
protons  interact  with  nuclei  when  a  significant
fraction  of  the  beam  incident  on  the  crystal  is
channeled.  This 
the  “channeling
is  called 
efficiency”  and  is  defined  as  the  difference
between  the  aligned  and  unaligned  interaction
counter rate, divided by the unaligned rate.

The “surface loss” mentioned above does not
lower  this  efficiency,  and  the  dechanneling
losses  contribute  only  partially  (once  a  proton
has dechanneled after channeling through part of
the crystal, it has less than 12.9% probability of a
nuclear  interaction).  Thus  this  efficiency  is
expected to be slightly higher than the extraction
efficiency.

A  simple  model  for  the  ratio  of  these
efficiencies  can  be  constructed.  Of  the  total
number of particles, Ntot, incident on the crystal
(sometimes  several  times  because  of  the  multi-
pass  phenomenon),  their  ultimate  fate  falls  into
three  categories:  those  extracted,  Next;  those
interacting  with  the  crystal,  Nint;  and  those
intercepted  by  an  accelerator  collimator,  Ncol,
after  either  dechanneling  or  large  amounts  of
multiple  scattering.  When  the  crystal  is  very
misaligned  from  the  optimum  channeling  angle,
all the particles interact with the crystal (ignoring
for  the  moment  the  possibility  that  particles
multiple  scattered  in  the  crystal  are  intercepted
by a collimator).

Using  the  above  definitions  of  extraction
efficiency,  EE,  and  channeling  efficiency,
to  show,  CC  =
CE, 

is  straightforward 

it 

that 

those  which 

EE(1 + Ncol/Next).  One  then  needs  a  model  for
the  factor  (1 + Ncol/Next).  To  first  order,  it  is
expected 
centripetally
dechanneled (which occurs entirely in the first 64
µrad of bending) or did not channel  will remain
in the aperture of the accelerator and reencounter
the crystal on a later turn. However, those which
dechannel  in  the  angular  range  60  to  580  µrad
are  expected  to  intercept  a  collimator.  It  is
observed that the dechanneling tail is 20% of the
extracted  beam  in  the  angular  range  290  to  590
µrad.  Extrapolating  linearly  (not  necessarily  a
correct  assumption)  to  the  angular  range  60  to
580  µrad,  a  value  1.35 
factor
(1 + Ncol/Next) is obtained.

the 

for 

In  order  to  do  a  better  job  of  estimating  the
real effects of the collimators, a fast Monte Carlo
program was written which simulated both types
of dechanneling, calculated the probability of an
interaction  in  the  crystal  for  unchanneled  and
dechanneled  particles,  and  added  Gaussianly
distributed  multiple  scattering  angles  for  those
which did not interact. These particles were then
traced  to  the  three  critical  collimators  used  to
scrape the beam during collider mode. The above
factor  was  found  to  vary  from  1.2  to  1.4,
depending  on  the  setting  of  the  collimators  and
the  model  used 
the  angular
distribution  of  the  normal  dechanneling  to  the
region where the tail was invisible. In this model
the  number  of  particles 
intercepted  by
collimators after multiple scattering in the crystal
when the crystal was not aligned to the optimum
channeling  angle  was  not  negligible  (typically
15%).

to  extrapolate 

the  extracted  beam  and 

In  operation,  the  interaction  counters  were
also  sensitive  to  fluctuations  arising  from  such
effects  as  small  horizontal  deviations  of  the
circulating  beam.  Some  of  these  effects  could
change  in  an  unpredictable  way  in  the  time  it
took  to  do  a  typical  scan.  For  example,  Fig.  12
shows  both 
the
interaction counter rate as a function of Θ
v. The
time  ordering  of  the  points  in  the  scan  is  from
right  to  left.  Note  that  the  interaction  rate  is
considerably higher off-peak to the right than to
the left, and is falling with time. In this case the
time  dependence  is  understood:  the  scan  was
begun  immediately  after  the  crystal  had  been
inserted  to  5  mm  from  the  beam,  and  it  takes
several minutes for the rate of beam  incident on

11

the crystal to decrease to an equilibrium rate.

To mitigate such a possible time dependence,
the best measurements were obtained by moving
the  crystal  quickly  back  and  forth  from  an
aligned  to  a  very  unaligned  vertical  angle.  An
example of such data is shown in Carrigan et al.6
In all such measurements the crystal was moved
quickly  back  and  forth  between  three  positions
several times: aligned for  maximum channeling,
very  unaligned  at  an  upward  angle,  and  very
unaligned  at  a  downward  angle.  The  interaction
rate was averaged at the three angles, and errors
determined  from  the  rms  deviation  of  the  data
from the mean. A weighted average was taken of
the two off-peak values for use in the calculation
of the channeling efficiency.

A  background  was  also  subtracted  from  the
measured  interaction  rate.  Experience  showed
that  as  the  crystal  was  moved  from  its  fully
retracted  position,  the  interaction  rate  increased
as soon as the crystal was within the aperture of
the accelerator, long before any crystal extraction
was  observed,  and  remained  constant  until  the
onset  of  extraction.  This  background  was
probably  the  result  of  a  low  intensity,  diffuse
halo  intercepting  the  large  mass  of  the  crystal
holder. This background varied from 6% to 36%
of the off-peak interaction rate, depending on the
session, but was quite constant during a session.
An error estimate  for  the  background  was  made
and  propagated  through  the  calculation  of  the
efficiency.

The  channeling  efficiencies  resulting  from
these measurements are shown in Table III. The
efficiency  need not be the  same  from  session  to
session  (for  example,  the  collimator  settings
were  different  in  each  session,  and  distance  of
the  crystal  from  the  beam  differed),  but  should
be the same for different on/off scans during the
same  session.  Therefore,  weighted  averages  are
shown  in  Table  III  for  sessions  28  and  30.  In
fact, the weighted averages of the three sessions
are  remarkably  similar,  despite  the  fact  that  one
of  the  three  sessions  was  a  proton-only  fill  in
which the collimators were out of the beam.

TABLE  III.  Measured  channeling  efficiency  for
various  sessions  using  “on/off”  data.  Column  2
has the same meaning as in Table II. For two of
the session, the on/off data was taken more than

once  at  different  times  during  the  session,  and
the weighted average (wt. ave.) for the session is
also presented.

Session
number

Channeling
efficiency

Type of
store

L

L
L
L
wt. ave.
P
P
wt. ave.

27

28
28
28
28
30
30
30

Error

0.080

0.203
0.235
0.159
0.111
0.112
0.154
0.091

0.244

-0.055
0.411
0.566
0.348
0.321
0.332
0.325

The  simulation3  predicted  an  extraction
efficiency  of  35%  for  a  realistic  crystal.  The
same 
simulation  program  gives  a  value
consistent  with  the  efficiency  measured  at  120
GeV at CERN14 Using the  factor 1.3 mentioned
above  relating  the  extraction  and  channeling
efficiencies,  our  typical  measured  channeling
efficiency  of  ~30% 
to  an  extraction
efficiency of ~23%.

leads 

One can also calculate channeling efficiencies
using the exact same methodology  with the data
from  the  Θ
v  scans,  but  a  choice  must  be  made
about  which  points  to  call  “on-peak”  and  “off
peak”.  This  was  done  using  the  plot  of  the
extracted  beam  versus  Θ
v.  This  approach  has
been discussed in Ramachandran's thesis5. These
results  are  not  as  credible  as  those  of  Table  III,
for in any of these scans, there may have been an
unknown time-dependence in the interaction rate
resulting from other changes in the accelerator.

interesting 

loss,  and  amounted 

It  would  have  also  been 

to
measure  the  extraction  efficiency  in  kick  mode.
In  this  case  the  denominator  (the  number  of
protons lost from the circulating beam after each
kick)  was  easy  to  measure,  for  in  these  proton-
only  fills, the  kicks  were  nearly  the  only  source
typically  2(cid:127)109
of 
protons/kick.  However,  it  was  very  difficult  to
measure  the  numerator,  the  number  of  protons
extracted  following  each  kick.  This  intensity
range,  ~109  protons/kick,  was  too  low  for  the
toroid or SWIC to function. Attempts to calibrate
the  pulse  height  of  the  counters,  operating  at
reduced  voltage  in  “calorimeter  mode”,  and  to

to 

12

calibrate  the  CCD  using  aborts  of  the  entire
circulating beam  were not successful because of
the  difficulty  in  injecting  and  measuring  such
small amounts of circulating beam.

VII. TIME DEPENDENT AND BEAM
HALO EFFECTS

A wide variety of time-dependent and beam halo
effects  were  observed  in  the  course  of  E853.
Characteristic time constants ranged from tens of
microseconds  to  many  seconds.  Some  were
inextricably  related  to  the  nature  of  channeling
such as multi-turn processes where some fraction
of  the  beam  on  an  incorrectly  aligned  crystal
scattered  to  an  aligned  angle.  Others  like  the
behavior of the extracted beam rate as a function
of  crystal  motion  in  and  out  of  the  beam  were
more  directly 
to  accelerator  beam
properties.

related 

As  discussed  earlier,  data  was  taken  in  two
modes,  kick  and  diffusion.  In  the  kick  mode  an
individual bucket was kicked on to the crystal. In
the  diffusion  mode  some  of  the  beam  halo
diffused  out  to  larger  distances  because  of  such
effects as beam gas scattering and magnet ripple.
Two  special  cases,  scattering  by  a  flying  wire
and RF noise, are discussed in later sections.

The  following  sub-sections  discuss  the  kick
mode  behavior,  beam  halo  effects  observed
through  crystal  and  collimator  motion,  and
oscillations and modulations.

A. Kick mode

The  major  time  structure  in  kick  mode  was  due
to  accelerator  beam  dynamics.  Because  of  the
accelerator  phase  advance  between  the  kicker
magnet at E17 and the crystal at B48, on the first
turn  following  the  kick  the  beam  had  moved
away  from  the  crystal  (illustrated  in  Fig.  3  of
Ref. [4]).  On  turn  2,  and  again  on  turn  7,  the
beam  was  at  maximum  amplitude  towards  the
crystal.  Sizeable  extraction  was  expected  on
turns 2 and 7. Extraction occurred on the turns in
between only when beam that was not channeled
in turn 2 multiple scattered to a different vertical
angle  and  then  returned  to  encounter  the  crystal
with the correct angle on a later turn.

The in-between turns are called “wrong side”
turns, in contrast with “right side” turns such as 2
and  7.  This  process  has  been  successfully

13

modeled  in  simulations  prepared  by  Biryukov3
and  Bogacz  et  al.2  As  would  be  expected,  the
detailed  microstructure  of 
turn-to-turn
variation  was  quite  sensitive  to  the  accelerator
tune. This  was also  observed  experimentally  for
tune 
Indeed,
in  different 
information  on  the  micro-structure  was  more
indicative  of 
than  underlying
tune  changes 
physics related to channeling.

changes 

runs. 

the 

Fig.  13  illustrates  the  behavior  for  the  actual
data  and  the  Bogacz  simulation  for  the  first  23
turns  (about  400  µs).  In  this  time  domain  the
extraction data rate based on the pulse height in a
scintillator is reasonably modeled by the Bogacz
simulation  program  except 
that  extraction
persists  longer  than  predicted.  Not  surprisingly,
the  detailed  pattern  from  the  Bogacz  simulation
is tune-sensitive.

Fig.  14  shows  the  extraction  pattern  for  a
longer  period  (200  ms  or  10000  turns)  for  the
large, right side turns. The measured initial total
decay  time  ranges  from  0.6  to  2.5  ms.  In  that
period  the  signal  decreases  by  10-60%  for
different  kicks.  Short  values  for  this  decay  are
more  in  line  with  the  Bogacz  simulation.  It  is
difficult to produce 1/e times of less than 0.9 ms
with  the  Biryukov  simulation.  Under  somewhat
artificial conditions the Biryukov simulation can
generate  time  constants  greater  than  2.0  ms.
Changing 
the
interaction 
horizontal kick by  substantial  amounts  produces
less than a 20% change. Changing the horizontal
misalignment  by  10  mrad  can  double  the  decay
time.

length  and 

the 

A  related  issue  is  how  long  it  took  to  reach
equilibrium  when  the  crystal  was  vertically
misaligned.  Multiple  scattering  resulting  from
multiple  passes 
the
underlying  mechanism  for  this  effect.  Fig.  15
shows  the  time  distribution  for  38  turns  after
a  kick  for  a  -60  µrad  misalignment.  Data  sets
were  also  obtained  for  -40  and  -20  µrad
misalignments.

the  crystal 

through 

is 

The highest “right side” turn data (circle with
an  x)  has  been  fitted  with  an  exponential  form.
The  form  (dictated  by  available  fitting  routines)
also  effectively  incorporates  a  time  before  any
beam is extracted. At -60 µrad no beam appeared
for several turns. The rise time was 170 µs or 8.5

turns.  The  asymptotic  extraction  signal  was
about 70% of the on-peak case. At -40 µrad, the
initial  delay  was  still  several  turns  and  the  time
constant  was  120  µs.  The  asymptotic  signal
reached the on-peak value.

to 

the  effect  of 

A  naive  picture  gives  some  insight  into  the
process.  On  every  pass  through  the  crystal
(approximately every other turn) the particle was
scattered  10  µrad  by  multiple  scattering.  To
change by 60 µrad required on average 62 passes
or  72  turns  to  full  equilibrium  while  30  turns
were  actually  needed  to  get  to  90%  of  the
asymptotic  value.  Part  of  this  difference  was
probably  due 
the  beam
divergence  which  was  already  14  µrad  after  6
kicks  and  continued 
to  grow  with  each
successive  kick.  With  beam  divergence  and
multiple  scattering  the  time  constant  should  go
as  Θn
m  where  1 < n < 2  and  Θ
the
misalignment  angle.  The  Biryukov  simulation
reproduces  the  general  features  of  the  data  but
the  simulation  time  constants  are  roughly  twice
as  long  (200  µs  at  40  µrad  and  400  µs  at  60
µrad)  and  the  pattern  is  not  as  smooth  as  the
data.  A  wider  effective  accelerator  angular
divergence  than  used  in  the  simulation  might
have led to shorter times.

m 

is 

illustrated 

Another  related  subject  is  the  time  for  a
“wrong side” turn to come out at the same rate as
a “right side” turn. This equilibration is probably
a  result  of  non-linearities  in  the  accelerator
lattice.  Observationally  the  amplitude  of  wrong
side  turns  remained  small  for  20  turns  and  then
increased  and  came  into  equilibrium  with  the
right side turns with a time constant comparable
to the initial fall time for right-side buckets. This
is 
the
simulations  reproduces  this  feature  since  non-
linearities  were  not 
included.  Over  several
hundred  turns  in  the  Biryukov  simulation  the
wrong-side 
small  with  no
remain 
discernible  pattern.  The  experimental  data  has
been  fitted  with  an  exponential  distribution
coming  into  equilibrium  with  an  asymptote.  An
effective  initial  delay  before  a  signal  of  about
350 µs (18 turns)  was  followed by a rise  with a
time constant of 520 µs.

in  Fig.  16.  Neither  of 

turns 

A  second  interesting  feature  appears  in  Fig.
14.  This  is  a  10  ms  period  where  the  extracted
rate  slowly  changed.  The  envelope  decreased

14

slowly at first and then more quickly. The initial
slow portion extended for on the order of 20 ms.
The time constant to the 50% point was 30 to 50
ms.  The  data  hints  that  this  might  have  been
mixed in with some sort of 30 to 50 ms peak-to-
peak  oscillation  (see  later  discussions  under
oscillations).  Nether  of  the  simulations  shows
this  effect.  Again,  a  plausible  suggestion  for  a
driving  mechanism  is  a  non-linear  effect  in  the
accelerator.

There  were  also  effects  extending  out  to
many seconds after a kick. These were observed
using video recordings at an effective rate of 60
frames a second with a CCD camera monitoring
the scintillator screen in the extracted beam line.
Three 
types  of  beam  spot  pictures  were
observed. One was the first frame corresponding
to the first 16 ms  of  Fig.  14.  This  was  typically
followed  by  several 
frames  of  decreasing
intensity  corresponding  to  the  decay  portion  of
Fig.  14.  A  third  set  of  pulses  was  observed  at
times  well  separated  from 
initial  kick
interspersed  with  many  blank  frames.  Since  the
CCD-scintillator  system  was  non-linear  it  was
not  possible  to  make  more  than  a  qualitative
judgment of the pulse intensity.

the 

The  number  of  these  pulses  versus  time
summed  over  several  kicks  is  shown  in  Fig.  17
for  all  pulses  (X's)  and  for  the  lowest  intensity
ones (open circles). Note that this distribution is
for  the  number  of  separated  pulses,  NOT  the
number  of  particles  down  the  beam  line.  This
distribution  measures  some  convolution  of  the
effect  of  small  perturbations  long  after  the  kick
with available halo generated by the kick that has
not yet been scraped. The distribution dies with a
time constant of 0.8 s. After five seconds there is
an almost flat spectrum of very small pulses.

B. Beam halo effects

Several E853 observations relate to the character
of  the  circulating  accelerator  beam  halo.  The
effect  of  retracting  the  crystal  or  a  collimator  a
small distance sheds light on the diffusion rate of
the  halo.  This  rate  is  related  to  the  beam  halo
phase space density and non-linear effects in the
accelerator  system.  Likewise,  the  number  of
kicks required to move beam out to the crystal or
“grow”  the  beam  is  an  indicator  of  the  halo
density.  Moving  the  crystal  or  a  collimator
generated  related  information.  When  the  crystal

was  moved  in  there  was  an  initial  quick  beam
rise that died over a  minute or so followed by a
sustained rate that could persist for hours.

lifetimes  were  11 

Unperturbed  beam  lifetimes  in  the  Tevatron
are  quite  long.  For  E853  typical  proton  beam
lifetimes  ranged  from  70  to  90  hours,  while  the
luminosity 
to  18  hours.
Because  diffusion  rates  were  long  and  data
collection  time  was  short,  little  data  was  taken
where  the  incremental  retraction  of  the  crystal
was small enough to produce a noticeable effect
and the time interval before the next disturbance
was  long  enough.  Fig.  18  shows  the  best
information  available  from  a  diffusion  run  in
collider  mode.  After  a  200 µm  retraction  the
count  rate  dropped  by  a  factor  of  4  and  then
increased  with  a  time  constant  of  2.2  minutes.
Weaker  information  for  a  50 µm  retraction
shows an initial drop of a factor of 2 followed by
a  rise  with  a  time  constant  of  ~15  s.  Based  on
this  information  it  is  difficult  to  speculate  on
whether  the  time  constant  is  linear  or  goes  with
the square of the retraction distance.

Collimator  effects  were  also  studied.  The
effect  of  the  positioning  of  the  three  scraper
collimators  at  D17  and  A0  used  to  protect  the
collider experiments from beam halo was clearly
interwoven  with  crystal  position.  When  the
crystal  was  effectively  closer  to  the  beam  than
the  collimators  the  situation  was  different  than
when 
the
collimators  and  diffusing  beam  was  mostly  lost
on  the  collimators.  For  example  a  5  mm
retraction  of 
the
collimators)  lowered  the  rate  precipitously,  and
even  after  20  minutes  there  was  no  sign  of
increase.

the  crystal  was  shadowed  by 

the  crystal  (well  outside 

In  three  study  sessions  the  collimators  were
retracted  almost  simultaneously  in  small  steps
(typically  2  mils)  near  the  end  of  the  runs  by
total amounts that varied from 0.5 to 1.2 mm. In
all  cases  the  extraction  rate  rose,  but  the  rate  of
rise  as  a  function  of  collimator  position  varied.
This  may  be  a  result  of  the  fact  that  the
collimators did not have the same initial settings
in the  three  runs.  In  a  study  with  a  total  motion
of 0.5 mm and the crystal 5.5 mm from the beam
center the normalized extraction rate of rise was
a  factor  of  5  per  mm  of  collimator  opening
(normalized  to  the  rate  at  the  initial  collimator
positions)  while  in  two  later  sessions  with

15

crystal-beam  separations  of  5.3  and  5.5  mm  the
rate  of  rise  per  mm  was  in  the  1-1.5  per  mm
range. A plot of the extraction rate as a function
of  collimator  position  for  one  of  the  latter
sessions  is  shown  in  Fig  19.  The  data  is
satisfactorily represented with a linear fit. In the
three sessions the D0 proton loss rate rose by 5%
to 20% as the collimators were opened.

Studies of the time to reach equilibrium after
a  collimator  move  were  complicated  by
relatively  quick  collimator  changes  with  few
measurements  taken  between  adjustments.  The
time required to  adjust  the  three  collimators  (on
the order of 10 s) was also a limitation. Fast time
plots and counting rate information indicated  an
initial fast rise of the count rate in less than 30 s,
and  perhaps  much  less.  Information  is  available
on only one relatively long quiescent period after
a  collimator  move.  Twenty  minutes  after
completing a collimator moving session that had
lasted 13 minutes the rate had risen by 30% (four
times  the  estimated  standard  deviation  of  the
measurement).

Somewhat related information is provided by
measurements of the number of kicks required to
move the edge of the beam out  to the crystal so
that the asymptotic rate was reached. Typically it
took 5-7 kicks to grow the beam. Fig. 20 shows
the  behavior  as  a  function  of  kick  number  for  a
typical  case  when  the  crystal  to  beam  center
distance  was  3.54 mm.  The  asymptotic  rate  was
reached in 5 kicks. In a case with the crystal 4.5
mm from the beam it took 10 kicks to reach the
asymptotic rate.

Another related parameter is the time to reach
an  equilibrium  extraction  rate  after  the  crystal
was  moved  in.  Normally  there  was  only  a  short
time  interval  available  for  analysis  after  the
crystal was moved (typically 1-2 minutes) before
some other change was made. Since equilibrium
times  were  short,  only  data  gathered  starting  a
few  seconds  after  a  move  could  be  used.  A
measure  for  the  relaxation  rate  was  obtained  by
fitting  a  linear  slope  to  the  extraction  rate  as  a
function  of  time  to  get  -(1/R)dR/dt  which  is
equal  to  1/Te  (Te  is  the  time  to  approach
equilibrium  and  R  is  the  extraction  rate).  A
typical value of 1/Te was 0.15±0.03 min-1. This
means the rate dropped by 15% in a minute. The
error  bar  is  based  on  the  uncertainty  in  clock

time for the measurements (0.33 min). The value
of  1/Te  at  various  distances  from  the  beam  and
in various study sessions varied from 0.03 to 0.4
min-1.  The  equilibrium  time  seemed  to  shorten
as the goniometer was moved in.

After the initial rapid fall discussed above the
rate decreased with a time constant (1/e) between
0.5  and  5  hours  under  a  variety  of  operating
conditions.  Typically 
is  no  statistical
difference between a linear and an exponential fit
to these long-term halo decays.

there 

C. Oscillations and modulations

In 
the  course  of  E853  several  different
phenomena appeared that were initially ascribed
to  some  sort  of  oscillatory  behavior.  The
possibility  of  oscillations  with  periods  on  the
order of milliseconds was investigated and none
were found.

from 

Tevatron 

The possibility of extracted beam modulation
resulting 
the  Main  Ring  was  also
investigated.  Initially  there  was  concern  that
magnetic fields from the Main Ring or its power
orbit
produce 
busses  would 
perturbations  large  enough  to  modulate  the
extraction  rate.  The  possibility  of  Main  Ring
oscillations was studied in kick mode by looking
at the number of pulses seen in the CCD camera
long  after  the  kick  as  a  function  of  time  in  the
Main Ring cycle. Fig. 21 shows this distribution
summed  over  the  Main  Ring  cycle  for  several
kicks.  No  statistically  significant  peaking  in  the
distribution  of 
the  pulses  was  observed.
Coincidence counter data between air gap 1 and
air gap 2 also gave little or no indication of Main
Ring modulation.

One oscillation-like behavior was observed in
kick  mode  studies.  It  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  14.
This  behavior  showed  wide  variation  from  kick
to  kick.  For  example,  the  period  between  peaks
varied from 25 to 75 ms. These oscillations were
overlaid  on  the  exponential  decay  of  the  signal
after a kick.  Only  a  few  maxima  were  observed
because  the  scope  trace  was  only  200  ms  long.
As a result it was difficult to draw a conclusion.
If  this  was  an  oscillatory  effect  it  might  have
been  related  to  synchrotron  oscillations  with  a
characteristic frequency of 39 Hz at 900 GeV or
a sub-harmonic of the 60 Hz power.

VIII. RF-DRIVEN EXTRACTION

The  impact  of  a  transverse  RF  noise  signal
generated by a horizontal damper located at F11
was  tested  during  two  sessions.  The  effect  of
turning  the  RF  on  or  off  was  almost  immediate
and  had  a  significant  effect  on  the  extracted
beam. It  was  so  significant  that  these  tests  were
complicated by saturation problems in the larger
principal  counters  even  in  a  special  proton-only
store with 84 rather than 6 circulating bunches.

The  smaller  finger  counters  showed  little  or
no  evidence  of  saturation  and  also  had  a  low
background rate with noise off. Fig. 22 illustrates
the  behavior  of  the  crossed  finger  counter
coincidence with increasing rms RF voltage for a
crystal  to  beam  separation  of  3.94  mm.  The
curve  shows  a  fit  to  the  data  of  the  form
2+22  where  R  is  the  count  rate.  A
R = 15.2(cid:127)Vrf
V2  dependence  is  expected  from  an  analysis  of
in  action-angle
the  equations  of  motion 
variables15.

The  possibility  that  accidental  coincindences
contributed to the crossed finger rate was studied
and  was  found  to  contribute  1.5%  at  a  low  Vrf.
This percentage should increase as Vrf2 and was
12%  at  the  highest  voltage  shown  on  Fig.  22.
Accidentals were subtracted from Fig. 22.

In  spite  of  the  saturation  problems  it  is  still
possible  to  make  interesting  estimates  of  upper
limits  on  the  time  constants  for  RF  changes.
When  the  RF  signal  increased  the  count  rates
(typically  taken  several  times  a  minute)  rose
immediately,  suggesting  the  rise  time  was  less
than a minute. Fast time plot information on rate
meters  rose  within  a  10  s  period  and  probably
somewhat  more  rapidly,  suggesting  a 
time
constant (1/e) of 2-3 s for Vrf = 4.5 V on the RF
damper.  This  voltage  should  have  resulted  in  a
scattering  angle  of  Θ = 4(cid:127)10-4  µrad  and  a  jump
at the crystal of 0.04 µm/turn. If this was a linear
process  with  a  linear  growth  with  time  it  would
have  taken  1.5  s  for  a  particle  to  move  out  to  5
σ
x. This naive calculation is meant to show only
order  of  magnitude  agreement  with 
the
observations,  for  the  correct  model  for  this
stochastic  process  is  complicated.  Furthermore,
protons  already  close  to  the  crystal  when  the
noise  was  turned  on  would  reach  the  crystal

16

faster.

The fast time plots also provided information
on  the  effect  of  turning  off  the  RF  damper  or
turning  the  RF  down.  When  the  damper  was
turned  off  from  Vrf  = 4.5  V  the  extracted  beam
rate decayed over a 15 s time period with a time
constant (1/e) of about 10 s.

IX. EXTRACTION DRIVEN WITH
A FIBER SCATTER
Asseev16  and  others  have  suggested  that  an
a
scatterer  placed 
amorphous 
circulating beam than an extraction crystal might
facilitate bent crystal extraction. During E853 an
investigation directed toward this possibility was
carried  out  using  the  Tevatron  “flying  wire”
system located at E11 and E17. The results were
both interesting and curious.

closer 

to 

During  collider  operations  at  the  Tevatron
three 30 µm carbon fibers called flying wires are
rotated through the circulating beam at a velocity
of 5  m/s about once  every  half  hour.  Each  fiber
passes  through  the  beam  twice.  These  are
normally used to  measure the profile in  x  and  y
and  the  momentum  spread  of  the  circulating
beam.  The  “prompt”  time  distribution  of  the
particles scattered off the fibers  is  related  to  the
beam shape at the time the wires fly. For a beam
width  of  σ = 0.7 mm  at  the  wires  the  full  width
at half maximum of the counting rate distribution
as a function of time should be 330 µs.

The  flying  wires  were  carefully  monitored
during  diffusion  mode  running  in  the  latter  part
of  E853.  A  digital  sampling  scope  operating  in
the peak detector mode tracked pulse heights for
both  an  interaction  and  an  extracted  beam
scintillator. An individual count corresponded to
0.1 volts based on observations during setup (the
discriminators  had  been  set  at  0.03  V)  and
baseline  analysis.  The  wire  signals  were  clearly
visible in the extracted beam  so  that  count  rates
taken  during  wire  flys  had  to  be  removed  from
the data analysis. The flying wires were also seen
at  CDF  and  D0  where  the  detectors  were  gated
off when the wires flew.

The  voltages  on  these  scintillators  had  to  be
kept  high  since  they  were  also  being  used  for
counting.  As  a  result  there  was  a  significant
possibility  of  saturation  and  photomultiplier

17

power supply drain because of the instantaneous
rates.  The  phototube  bases  were  equipped  with
transistors  to  provide  some  protection  against
slumping  voltages.  Post-run  analysis  indicated
that  the  extraction  scintillator  probably  should
have  been  able  to  sustain  the  rates.  However  in
view  of  the  unusual  features  exhibited  by  the
extraction  scintillator 
this  potential  problem
should be kept in mind.

to  evaluate 

One  reason  to  believe  that  there  were  no
significant  saturation  effects  or  slumping  of  the
phototube  voltages  is  that  the  scintillators  did
the  characteristic  bunch  structure.  A
show 
second  way 
the  possibility  of
saturation  is  to  look  at  the  ratio  of  prompt
extracted  and  interaction  signals  during  regular
and flying  wire running. During  normal running
the interaction detector rate was 10 times smaller
than  the  extracted  signal  so  that  the  interaction
detector should have saturated less. For a typical
wire  fly  it  was  17,  in  the  opposite  direction
expected for saturation.

Protons  in  the  beam  interact  with  a  carbon
fiber  in  one  of  two  ways.  They  can  undergo
nuclear  collisions  with  characteristic  scattering
angles of 300 µrad or experience atomic multiple
scattering  with  a  scattering  angle  of  0.16  µrad.
The chance of a particle passing through the wire
twice  is  about  1/4.  Since  the  multiple  scattering
was  small  relative  to  the  beam  divergence  it
probably resulted in little beam growth. For 1012
circulating protons on the order of 107 undergo a
nuclear  interaction  with  a  wire.  Of  these  on  the
order  of  3%  or  3(cid:127)105  per  fly  have  scattering
angles  small  enough 
the
accelerator  and  strike  apertures  far  downstream
like  the  crystal.  For  a  typical  fly  0.7(cid:127)105  of  the
particles  scattered  by  a  wire  were  extracted  by
the  crystal.  For  an  extraction  efficiency  of  30%
this  suggests  that  on  the  order  of  2(cid:127)105  were
striking  the  crystal  corresponding  to  a  large
fraction of the losses around the ring. This is not
inconsistent  with  the  fact  that  losses  were
observed  elsewhere  such  as  at  the  two  collider
detectors.

to  remain  within 

A  distinct  and  puzzling  feature  of  the  flying
wire  data  for  E853  was  that  the  extracted  beam
detector for the aligned crystal showed a delayed
signal  that  started  some  milliseconds  after  the
tens  of
prompt  signal  and  extended 

for 

milliseconds (Fig. 23). The overall length of the
time  distribution  is  reminiscent  of  the  pattern
from kick mode, reproduced in Fig. 23 from Fig.
14.  For  a  60  µrad  misalignment  the  size  of  the
prompt  extracted  signal  was  consistent  with  a
normal multi-turn alignment distribution. That is,
the rate was about a factor of eight smaller than
for  an  aligned  crystal.  However  there  was  no
significant  delayed  extraction  signal 
the
misaligned  case.  This  may  indicate  that  the
delayed  peak  was  an  artifact  of  the  higher
intensity  when the crystal  was  well  aligned.  For
the aligned condition the total delayed  extracted
yield was about six times larger than the prompt
yield.  The  interaction  signal  also  had  a  delayed
signal (see shoulder in Fig. 23 but with a shorter
duration.  The 
interaction
signal  was  two  times  larger  than  the  prompt
interaction signal.

integrated  delayed 

in 

that 

evolution  might  have 

The observed behavior could be explained by
the  prompt  extracted  and
postulating 
interaction signals from a wire were due to wide
angle  particles  from  nuclear  interactions  in  the
wire  striking  the  crystal.  The  delayed  signals
could  have  been  due  to  multipass  effects  that
continued over 500-1000 turns. As time went on
halo 
the
preservation  of  smaller  angle  particles  that  still
the
remained 
circulating  beam  so  that  the  extraction  signal
dominated.  However  it  seems  implausible  that
this effect could have resulted in such a huge dip
and peak. Perhaps the most plausible explanation
it  was  caused  by  photomultiplier
is 
saturation  and  slumping  voltage  followed  by  a
recovery.

tightly  collimated  relative 

favored 

that 

to 

The  prompt  rise  time  was  400  µs  (from  10-
90%  of  peak  rate)  for  both  the  extraction  and
interaction signals (see Fig. 24). If this had been
Gaussian,  it  indicates  a  sigma  for  the  beam  of
240 µs or 1.2 mm. While this is somewhat larger
than  the  actual  beam  sigma  at  E11  it  is  not
in  view  of  various  sources  of
unexpected 
broadening.  However 
the
the  FWHM 
extraction  counter  distribution  is  more  like  1  to
1.1  ms,  implying  a  σ  of  470  µs.  This  could  be
reasonably  interpreted  as  multi-turn  broadening.
Such broadening is also present in the interaction
signal  but  can  not  be  estimated  easily.  The
extraction  signal  60  µrad  out  of  alignment  also
has a similar rise time but is narrower and more

for 

Gaussian-like  suggesting  that  indeed  multi-turn
effects  may  be  responsible  for  broadening  the
prompt, aligned extraction signal.

the 

The  falling  side  of 

interaction  rate
distribution  initially  looks  like  a  Gaussian  but
soon  develops  a  long  tail.  The  distribution  has
three  exponential  parts  (see  Fig.  25);  1)  in  the
interval 1 to 2 ms after the peak the decay time is
5 ms, 2) in the interval 2 to 4 ms there is a faster
decay with a time constant of 2 ms, and 3) in the
interval from 5 to 20 ms after the peak the decay
time is 6  ms. These regions are quite distinct. It
is possible that this decay distribution is in some
way  reflecting  the  actual  nuclear  interaction
angular  distribution  with 
times
mirroring  partial  contributions  from  very  small
angle  scatters  that  could  require  more  turns  to
reach the crystal.

longer 

the 

for 

the  wire  used 

The  rise  and  fall  times  for  the  delayed
extraction  signal  are  hard  to  characterize.  They
range  from  12  to  26  ms  with  the  longest  ones
occurring 
to  measure
momentum spread. The times for the  second fly
in each of the three wires are 20-25% longer than
the  first  fly.  On  the  other  hand  there  is  no
indication  from  the  prompt  signal  that  the  core
beam diameter had grown after the first fly. The
x  and  y  distributions  are  about  the  same.  For
both  the  x  and  y  wires  the  rise  in  the  delayed
extraction  signal  was  approximately  linear.  The
decay  time  ranges  from  2  to  5  ms.  This  decay
time is difficult  to  characterize  because  of  other
effects such as modulations.

Several  features  of  the  flying  wire  study  are
worth emphasizing.  First  there  was  a  significant
prompt extraction that occurred  with a  plausible
efficiency.  There  was  also  an  even  stronger
delayed  signal 
that  may  have  come  from
multipass  effects.  The  features  of  this  data  may
deserve further analysis and simulation. For this
reason  details  of  the  data  have  been  presented
although  concerns  about  scintillator  counter
saturation certainly cloud interpretation.

X. LUMINOSITY-DRIVEN EXTRACTION

During  the  first  E853  parasitic  collider  session
the channeled flux was substantially  higher than
earlier dedicated runs with the crystal at the same
relative  distance  from  the  beam.  A  principal
candidate for a driving mechanism was the effect

18

times 

is 
the  geometrical  part  of 

of  interactions  at  the  two  luminous  regions  for
the two collider experiments on the emittance of
a proton bunch. In one picture of this process the
the  antiproton
effective  scattering 
target 
the
current 
luminosity  (see  below)  so  that  the  extracted
beam  rate  is  proportional  to  the  luminosity  L.
The  luminosity  is  equal  to  a  geometrical  factor
times  the  product  Ip(cid:127)Ia  where  Ia  and  Ip  are  the
proton and antiproton currents respectively.

Several 

Since several factors influenced the extracted
beam rate it was interesting to isolate luminosity
from  other  effects.  The  equivalent  in  a  fixed
target experiment would be a target in-target out
measurement. 
approaches  were
considered;  1) changing  the  arrival  times  of  the
proton  and  antiproton  bunches  at  the  interaction
they  did  not  collide  (cogging),
points  so 
2) displacing 
the
the  antiproton  beam  at 
interactions  points,  and  3) eliminating  some  of
the antiproton bunches and thereby removing the
“target”.  All  of  these  required  semi-dedicated
running. Cogging was tried several times and led
to  ambiguous  results  because  the  proton  beam
invariably  moved  transversely  at  some  point
during the exercise due to lattice  dispersion.  No
opportunity arose to try displacing the antiproton
beam, but it might not have worked for the same
reason  cogging  did  not  work.  The  approach
which  worked  was  to  run  with  a  special  store
with  36  proton  bunches  of  which  only  six  were
colliding with three antiproton bunches.

The test of the luminosity-driven process was
to  first  check  that  the  beam  extraction  rate  was
substantially higher with a gate timed to overlap
a colliding bunch than it was for a non-colliding
bunch. Then the relationship of the count rate to
the bunch luminosity was investigated.

in  groups  of 

The  Tevatron  operated  at  900 GeV  with  the
separators  on  for  this  store.  The  36 proton
bunches  were  spaced 
twelve
distributed  evenly  1/3  around  the  ring.  The
individual  proton  bunches  in  the  groups  of  12
were each separated by 395 ns. Three bunches of
antiprotons  were  circulating  spaced  as  though
they  were in one group of twelve  with positions
A1, A5, and A12 filled. This resulted in 6 sets of
bunches  colliding  at  the  interaction  regions
shown at the top of the columns in Table IV.

TABLE IV: Bunches colliding at B0 (CDF) and
D0.  The  notation  P36(cid:127)A12  means  that  proton
bunch  36  was  colliding  with  antiproton  bunch
12.

B0 (CDF)

P13(cid:127)A1

P17(cid:127)A5

P24(cid:127)A12

D0

P25(cid:127)A1

P29(cid:127)A5

P36(cid:127)A12

Data  were  recorded  for  the  number  of  protons
and  antiprotons  in  each  bunch  as  well  as  the
transverse  size  of  the  bunches.  Typically  the
number of protons in a bunch was 50-70(cid:127)109 and
the  number  of  anti-protons  was  40(cid:127)109.
Information was also available on the population
numbers  for  nearby  satellite  bunches.  Some  D0
luminosity information was also recorded. There
were some problems in recording information on
luminosities and several other ACNET variables
because the complicated 36 on 3 collision pattern
resulted  in  the  need  to  reset  many  ACNET
timing  signals.  As  a  result  some  information  on
luminosity was lost.

With  the  exception  of  P25  the  transverse
bunch widths (σ) were all on the order of 0.5 mm
(at the flying wire location) for this run. For P25
the  bunch  width  was  0.65  mm.  No  data  was
available  on  the  horizontal  anti-proton  bunch
width.

Two sets of measurements were taken. In the
first  set  an  effective  gate  consisted  of  three
windows  each  of  470  ns  spaced  evenly  over  a
turn.  Two  such  independent  gates  were  used.
The gates were broader than the spacing between
two  bunches  because  it  was  sometimes  difficult
to  set  the  Tevatron  timing  signal  to  better  than
100  ns.  (In  several  cases  the  gates  were  set  to
nominally  non-colliding  time  values  that  were
later  shown 
to  collect  colliding  bunches.)
Typically  one  of  the  two  gates  was  set  on  a
colliding bunch and the other on a non-colliding
bunch.  With  this  arrangement  collisions  were
detected  that  resulted  from  both  the  B0  and  D0
interaction  regions  (set 1).  Halfway  through  the
measurements  a  different  arrangement  was

19

adopted with only one window (rather than three
equally spaced ones) to see the individual effects
of D0 and CDF (set 2).

rates  exhibited 

During  the  course  of  these  two  sets  of
measurements  the  ungated  count  rates  dropped
steadily. Both the colliding and the non-colliding
bunch 
this  behavior.  This
suggests  that  the  count  rate  drop  was  not  an
effect  related  to  luminosity.  As  a  result  of  this
drop in rate it was necessary to move the crystal
300 µm further in toward the beam at the end of
the first set (from a crystal to beam separation of
5.58  mm  initially)  to  increase  the  instantaneous
count  rate  at  that  time  by  a  factor  of  1.82.  The
time  dependence 
set  of
for 
measurements was exponential with a lifetime of
1.5 hours  (1/e).  This  is  shorter  than  either  the
luminosity  lifetime  (11  hours  for  D0)  or  the
proton  beam  lifetime  (70  hours).  It  may  have
corresponded  to  some  sort  of  halo  lifetime.  The
time dependence was folded in for the analysis.

first 

the 

The  effects  of  leading  and  trailing  satellite
buckets were included but additional small terms
and
associated  with 
downstream of the colliding points were not. The
corrections to just using the product of the main
bunch  populations  were  less  than  3%.  The
calculated bunch luminosity was then:

crossings 

upstream 

= KIp Ia

A
A p A a

Lpa
  

= KIp I aLgeo

 

(X-1)

where  K  is  a  constant  to  normalize  to  the
measured  luminosities,  Ap  is  the  area  of  the
proton beam (assumed to be ππσ
σ
ph) and Aa
is  the  area  of  the  antiproton  beam.  A  is  the
overlap area and is calculated using the smallest
dimensions  of  either  of  the  two  beams.  Lgeo  is
the  geometric  part  of  the  luminosity  so  that
Lgeo = A/ApAa in mm-2.

pv

-30

The  bunch  luminosities  were  also  measured
for  the  D0  cases.  These  measured  luminosities,
-1
Lm, are given in Table V in units of 10
.
s
Values  for  LgeoIpIa  were  found  by  multiplying
the  bunch  populations  (given  in  units  of  109
particles) in Table V by the relevant beam sizes.
K  was  determined  by  averaging  the  three  ratios
of  the  measured  luminosities  divided  by  LaIpIa

cm

-2

to  give  K = 1.338(cid:127)10-4.  The  calculated  bunch
luminosities (Lpa) are also given in Table V. The
measured  and  calculated  D0 
luminosities
(bunches P25(cid:127)A1, P29(cid:127)A5, P36(cid:127)A12) agree quite
well.  The  bunch  with  the  largest  difference
between 
and  measured
calculated 
luminosities was P25(cid:127)A1 where the proton beam
dimensions were 30% larger and the current was
down by 45%. Note that there was a wide spread
in the luminosities of the different bunches.

the 

Table  V.  Calculated  (Lpa)  and  measured  (Lm)
bunch  luminosities,  in  units  of  1030  cm-2s-1.  Ip
and  Ia  are  the  measured  number  of  protons  and
antiprotons  in  the  main  colliding  bunches  in
units of 109. The product IpIa includes the  small
contributions from satellite bunches.

Colliding
Bunches
P13(cid:127)A1
P17(cid:127)A5
P24(cid:127)A12
P25(cid:127)A1
P29(cid:127)A5
P36(cid:127)A12

Ip

54.6
45.1
58.6
29.3
70.9
39.6

Ia

IpIa

Lgeo

Lpa

Lm

42.5
41.9
44.6
42.5
41.9
44.6

2364
1934
2636
1273
2995
1822

1.445
1.308
1.238
0.713
1.330
1.286

0.457
0.339
0.437
0.122
0.534
0.313

0.132
0.494
0.309

The  count  rate  difference  between  colliding  and
non-colliding  buckets  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  26.
The  measured  count  rates  are  compared  to
calculated  rates  based  on  luminosity  plus  an
averaged  background  (see  next  paragraphs).
Measured  count  rates  are  shown  as  histograms
with the widths of the gates. Colliding cases are
shown  as  solid  histograms  while  proton-only
cases  are  dashed.  (Proton  bunches  P14  (set  1)
and  P26  (set  2)  were  nominally  out-of-time  but
subsequently  were  found  to  overlap  colliding
buckets.)  Since  set  1  used  a  gate  that  covered
three  buckets,  two  of  which  were  colliding,  the
rates  for  set 1  were  roughly  twice  as  large  as
set 2. The difference between colliding and non-
colliding buckets is clearly visible in Fig. 26.

The time-dependent “background” was found
by  averaging  the  measured  rates  of  the  non-
colliding  bunches  for  set  1  (B1av = 4282/s)  and
for  set  2  (B2av = 2723/s)  extrapolated  to  an
arbitrary  t0  (30  minutes  before  the  start  of  the
first  set).  The  measured  ratio  for  B1/B2  is  1.57
while the ratio  was expected to be 1.65 because
set  1  had  three  buckets  within  the  gate  rather
than one for set 2, but the rate had been increased

20

by 1.82 when the crystal was moved in for set 2.

To investigate rate dependence on luminosity
the  measured  background-subtracted, 
time-
normalized  extraction  rates  (t = t0)  are  plotted
against Lpa in Fig. 27. Measured values for set 2
are  divided  by  1.82  to  account  for  the  fact  that
the  rates  rose  when  the  crystal  moved  in.  A  fit
constrained to go through the origin gives:

C(/ s ) = (0.269 ± 0.034) × 10 −25 × Lpa
  

(X-2)

where Lpa is in  units of cm-2s-1 and the  rate  is
based  on  the  crystal  to  beam  separation  of  5.5
mm.  All  of  the  available  information  was  used.
The  correlation  coefficient  is  r2 = 0.55.  While
this is not an impressive fit it does suggests that
the  expected  count  rate  above  background  is
proportional to luminosity. To the extent the data
permits concrete analysis, the contribution of D0
and  B0  to  the  extracted  rate  seem  to  have  been
the  same.  This  formula  was  used  to  determine
the  calculated  rates  in  Fig.  26.  The  appropriate
luminosity  was  substituted  and  the  background
rate  was  added.  Instantaneous  values  were  used
for 
than  rates
extrapolated  to  t0)  so  that  count  rates  on  the
same  bucket  measured  at  two  different  times
have different calculated values in Fig. 26. Set 2
cases were multiplied by 1.82.

the  calculated  rates  (rather 

the 

increased 

Luminous  bunches 

rate
in  Fig.  27
substantially.  Based  on  the  fit 
-
30
(equation  X-2)  a  net  luminosity  of  0.5(cid:127)10
  cm
2
-1
s
  gave  a  luminosity  on/off  ratio  of  4.1.  The
fitted  measured count rate (less background)  for
that luminosity determined from equation X-2 is
13300/s. One way to quantify the luminosity on-
off ratio is to ask how far the goniometer would
have  had  to  be  moved  in  to  match  a  non-
luminous  bunch  to  the  original  luminous  rate.
Increasing  the  non-luminous  count  rate  by  a
factor  of  4  at  xg = 2.5  mm  was  equivalent  to
decreasing xg by 0.4 mm or 0.7 σx.

It  is  also  interesting  to  compare  luminosity
and  RF-driven  extraction.  This  can  be  done  by
comparing the ratio of the rate with the driver on
to  the  rate  with  no  driver  under  the  same
conditions.  As  noted  in  the  last  paragraph  this
ratio was 4.1 for Lpa = 0.5(cid:127)1030 cm-2s-1. In the

21

the 

RF-driven case discussed in section VIII the rate
finger 
for 
is
counter 
2+22.  A  ratio  of  4  is  obtained  for
R = 15.2(cid:127)Vrf
Vrf = 2.1 V.

coincidence 

In summary, it is clear that luminous bunches
produce  substantially  more  extracted  beam.  A
useful  study  would  be  an  investigation  of  the
actual  physical  mechanisms  that  influence  the
beam  growth.  It  would  be  interesting  to  try  to
relate them to the beam loss rates. Models might
be  developed  using  emittance  growth  studies
undertaken for the SSC and LHC.

XI. APPLICATIONS

Multiple  pass  crystal  extraction,  first  studied
theoretically  by  Biryukov17  and  Taratin  et  al.18
and since demonstrated in this experiment and at
CERN19,  has  made  crystal  extraction  very
interesting.  With  multiple  passes, 
the  non-
channeled  beam  goes  through  the  crystal  many
times  until  it  interacts  or  channels  and  is
extracted.  The  angular  divergence  of 
the
extracted beam in the bend direction is small, on
the order of the channeling critical angle.

The  application  of  crystal  extraction  most
frequently considered for TeV-range accelerators
has  been  scraping  of  the  halo  in  a  collider  to
produce parasitic beams in the 1 MHz regime. In
E853 a parasitic 120 Khz beam was extracted at
C0  without  undue  background  impact  on  the
collider  detectors.  Parenthetically,  the  collider
loss  monitors  were  set  conservatively  during
E853  and  little  head  room  was  allowed  for
losses.

Crystal extraction can also work for dedicated
extraction. While the efficiency is not as good as
with an electrostatic septum, it can potentially be
well  above  50%.  Recent  Serpukhov  studies13
have  found  that  short  “O”  shaped  crystals  with
no  straight  ends  and  smaller  radii  of  curvature
increase the efficiency further, as expected.

deflection 

electrostatic 

With  crystals  the  large  bends  relative  to
conventional 
offer
intriguing  possibilities  for  applications.  For
example,  crystal  extraction  has  been  used  with
success in the tight lattice at Serpukhov. It could
also  be  used  to  pack  extraction  facilities  into
oversubscribed straight sections at colliders. One

is 

the  possibility  of
ambitious  suggestion 
directing  neutrino  beams  toward  cosmic  ray
facilities  well  off  the  plane  of  an  accelerator20.
The 
discuss  TeV
subsections 
extraction  and  possible  charm  experiments
including magnetic moment measurements.

following 

A. TeV Extraction at Fermilab

the 

fixed 

section 

An interesting candidate for crystal extraction is
a  parasitic  collider  beam  from  the  Tevatron
A0 straight 
target
into 
experimental  areas.  A  1000  GeV  beam  would
have  25%  higher  energy  than  any  fixed  target
beam  of  the  past.  The  beam  could  be  useful  for
such  projects  as  LHC  development  test  beams.
The spill structure would be uniform without the
normal  fixed  target  magnet  ramping  cycle.  The
beam-on time would correspond to the “on” time
for  the  collider.  The  beam  could  be  switched  to
several  different  experimental  areas.  Switching
would 
the
Switchyard  above  800  GeV.  The  beam  could
also  be  operated  at  higher  intensities  for  short
periods in a dedicated mode.

lessen  problems  of  operating 

For  parasitic  operation  the  crystal  would
operate  like  the  E853  crystal.  The  principal
difference  is  that  a  much  larger  bend  angle
would  be  required  to  avoid  obstructions  at  A0
and to mate with the Switchyard beam line.

A  logical  location  for  a  bent  crystal  in  the
Tevatron  is  just  after  the  last  A0  proton  kicker
magnet  as  shown  in  Fig.  28.  This  geometry  has
been  discussed  in  more  detail  elsewhere21.  The
kicker  magnet  chain  normally  kicks  the  beam
into  the  10  m  long  A0  abort  absorber22.  A
horizontal bend of 15.7 mrad is required to cross
the  switchyard  beam  at  PV92  and  also  to  miss
the  abort  dump.  A  vertical  bend  of  4.7  mrad  is
also needed leading to a combined bend of 16.4
mrad.  Both  bends  could  be  provided  by  tilting
the  crystal  just  as  is  done  with  the  skew  dipole
chain  for  normal  fixed  target  operations.  The
extraction  and  transmission  efficiency  of  the
extraction  crystal  would  be  about  9%  based  on
the Biryukov E853 simulation3 and other models
of the channeling process23.

A  reasonable  place  to  reconnect  with  the
switchyard  beam  line  is  at  PV92.  This  would
require  a  horizontal  bend  of  7.17  mrad  coupled
with  a  downward  vertical  bend  of  2.17  mrad.

22

This could be  done  with  several  dipole  magnets
or a second crystal.

 Crystal extracted beam intensity is related to
the circulating proton beam loss rate. There is  a
natural  loss  rate  that  occurs  due  to  the  beam-
beam  interaction  at  the  collision  points,  gas
scattering,  nonlinearities,  and  other  sources.  At
the Tevatron collider the  beam-beam  interaction
is  the  dominant  source  of  loss  for  present  and
future luminosities. These natural losses must be
controlled  by  scraping  the  circulating  beam.  In
fact  a  scraping  crystal  could  cut  the  loss  rate  at
the  detectors.  Such  a  possibility  was  discussed
for the SSC24.

The  external  beam  rate  is  then  a  function  of
the  beam  loss  in  the  accelerator,  the  fraction  of
the beam losses that strike the crystal, the overall
extraction and deflection efficiency of the crystal
system,  and  the  maximum  allowed  loss  rate  at
the  collider  detectors.  For  E853  the  CDF  loss
limit  at  their  detector  was  limited  to  less  than  5
Khz  with  a  loss  rate  of  3.5  KHz  without  the
crystal and the D0 limit was < 1 KHz with a loss
rate  quite  close  to  that.  Six  bunches  were
colliding, the circulating proton beam was 1012,
the proton lifetime was 75 hours, the luminosity
lifetime  was  15  hours,  and  the  CDF  luminosity
was typically 0.5(cid:127)1031.

A  good  extracted  rate  for  E853,  which  kept
the  D0  loss  within  its  limit  was  0.15  MHz.  The
extraction efficiency was of the order of 25%, so
that  0.6  MHz  was  incident  on  the  crystal.  After
the Main Injector comes on-line, there will be 36
bunches  rather  than  6  and  the  proton  intensity
will  increase  tenfold.  It  is  reasonable  to  expect
that  the  beam  incident  on  a  crystal  could  be
6 MHz.  An  optimized  crystal  length  of  12.5  cm
results in an extraction efficiency of 9%, so that
the  beam  transmitted  down  the  Switchyard  line
would be 0.5 MHz, or 0.3 protons per bunch per
turn.

This  design  could  be  improved  in  several
ways.  A  germanium  crystal25  with  its  larger
critical  angle  would  help.  A  smaller  crystal
bending angle could feed a septum magnet chain
such as the Lambertson string that will no longer
be  needed  for  collider  operation.  These  two
improvements  could  result  in  a  gain  of  5  to  10.
the
Another  possibility  would  be 

to  cool 

crystal26.  This  would  increase  the  dechanneling
length  and  improve  the  extraction  efficiency,
perhaps by a factor of two. Finally a pre-scatterer
such  as  a  one-quarter  channeling  wavelength
crystal27 or an amorphous target16 might raise the
yield by a factor of 2. With these improvements
a 5-10 MHz beam is within reach.

There  was  no  evidence  of  radiation  damage
in 70 hours of operation for E853. An extraction
crystal  would  have  to  last  about  100  times
longer.  Measurable  damage28  with  an  effect  on
channeling occurs at a rate on the order of 1020
protons/cm2.  Assuming  the  active  region  of  the
crystal is 10 microns  wide and 0.6  mm  high, an
extraction crystal should be able to handle on the
order of 1016 particle passes or years of parasitic
operation.

B. A charm experiment using a crystal extracted beam

The possible application of a crystal extracted
beam for a fixed target  heavy flavor experiment
has  been  explored  in  some  detail  for  the  SSC,
LHC,  and  the  Tevatron29.  The  Fermilab  fixed
target experiment E771 produced 1.6(cid:127)109 charm
pairs during a 30 day run in a 40 MHz beam with
a 5% interaction length target. Based on that a 10
MHz  parasitic  crystal  extracted  beam  could
produce  1010  charm  events  in  a  year.  Physics
possibilities  include  observations  of  mixing  in
the charm sector and CP violation in D0 decays.

C. Measuring charm baryon magnetic moments

Charm 

baryon 

magnetic 

moment
measurements  could  provide  direct  information
on  the  magnetic  moment  of  the  charm  quark.
Short  charm  lifetimes  make  such  measurements
difficult  with  conventional  techniques.  With  the
high effective magnetic fields available in a bent
crystal  charm  moment  measurements  are
conceivable30. An experiment at Fermilab31 used
this  approach  to  measure  the  magnetic  moment
of the ∑Σ+. Optimistically a 6% measurement of
+  magnetic  moment  would  require  3000
the  Λ
+ →p + K- +ππ+  events.  This  would  need
Λ
4(cid:127)1013 protons or about a month of running in a
10 MHz  beam.  One  distinct  advantage  of  a
parasitic  extraction  beam  for  the  experiment
would be the lower proton rate on target because
the  beam  live  time  would  be  100%  rather  than

c

c

the  normal  33%  for  the  Tevatron  fixed  target
program.

XII. SUMMARY

this 

the  process.  A 

important  aspect  of 

E853 has demonstrated that useful TeV-scale
beams  can  be  extracted  from  a  superconducting
accelerator  in  the  course  of  collider  operation.
is  multi-turn
An 
the
extraction,  which  substantially  increases 
efficiency  of 
significant
luminosity-generated  halo  created  by  normal
collider  operation  was  observed  and  extracted.
This  was  done  without  unduly  affecting  the
backgrounds  at 
the  collider  detectors.  The
experiment  was  able  to  study  both  luminosity-
driven  extraction  and  multi-turn  effects 
in
enough detail to confidently apply the technique
to real situations.

Extraction  efficiency  was  studied  in  some
detail  but  proven  rather  hard 
to  measure
accurately  during  a  tightly-packed  accelerator
schedule  where  much  of  the  E853  running  was
parasitic.  Nevertheless 
the
extraction 
consistent  with
efficiency 
simulations and that the simulations can be used
to extrapolate to future beam designs.

is  clear 

it 
is 

that 

Time  dependent  effects  in  the  experiment
have  provided  interesting  insights  into  several
crystal  extraction  and  accelerator  beam  halo
phenomena.

In  kick  mode  the  major  time  structure  was
due  to  accelerator  beam  dynamics.  The  turn-to-
turn  microstructure  was  sensitive  to  accelerator
tune  and  more  indicative  of  tune  changes  than
initial
channeling  phenomena.  Following  an 
decay with a time constant on the order of 1 ms
the  extraction  signal  was  almost  flat  and  then
dropped in the 30 ms region. Small, longer term
extraction pulses occurred out to 5 seconds. Kick
mode extraction was reasonably  modeled by the
simulation  programs  except  for  the  long-term
persistence and the fact that so-called wrong side
turns came into equilibrium with right side turns
after a time constant comparable to the initial fall
time  for  right-side  buckets.  These  effects  may
have  been  due 
the
accelerator.

to  non-linearities 

in 

The time for an extracted signal to  appear  in
kick  mode  for  a  misaligned  crystal  was  also

23

through 

the  crystal  and 

studied.  This  possibility  arose  because  of
multipasses 
the
associated  multiple  scattering.  The  times  are
consistent  with  the  simulation  and  also  with  a
simple  picture  of  the  process  based  on  multiple
scattering.

to 

Other  E853  observations  related 

the
character  of  the  circulating  accelerator  beam
halo.  Retracting  the  crystal  or  a  collimator  shed
light  on  the  diffusion  rate  of  the  halo.  This  rate
was related to the beam halo phase space density
and  non-linear  effects  in  the  accelerator  system.
Typically  a  200 µm  crystal  pullout  dropped  the
extraction  rate  by  a  factor  of  4  after  which  it
increased  with  a 
time  constant  of  several
minutes. Based on this information it is difficult
to  speculate  on  how  halo  diffusion  depends  on
the pullout distance.

Related  halo  information  was  provided  by
measurements of the number of kicks required to
move  the  edge  of  the  beam  out  to  the  crystal.
Typically with a 10 KV kick it took 5 to 7 kicks
to grow the beam.

When the crystal  was  moved in the  rate  rose
instantaneously  and  then  relaxed  in  less  than  a
minute  to  an  equilibrium  point  with  a  much
longer  decay  period.  After  the  initial  rapid  fall
the characteristic rates for luminosity on-off and
the  proton-only  cases  typically  dropped  with  a
1.5 hour decay constant.

Using  kick  mode  little  evidence  was  found
for  oscillations  and  modulations  beyond  some
indication of a weak modulation with a period in
the  range  of  30-50  ms.  This  modulation  could
have been due to any of several effects including
sub-harmonics  of 
frequency  or
the 
synchrotron oscillations.

line 

increased 

Use  of  transverse  white  RF  noise  from  a
horizontal  damper  at  F11 
the
extraction  rate  dramatically.  Little  interesting
was  learned  about  time-dependent  effects  from
the  damper  studies.  Equilibrium  was  reached  in
less  than  ten  seconds  when  the  damper  was
turned on or off.

The  impact  of  an  amorphous  fiber  pre-
scatterer  on  crystal  extraction  was  studied  by
observing  the  extracted  beam  produced  by  the
carbon fibers used for the accelerator flying wire

24

system. The fibers produced significant extracted
fluxes consistent with expectations.

the 

first 

This  experiment  demonstrated  luminosity-
time  by
for 
driven  extraction 
simultaneously  monitoring  colliding  and  non-
colliding  proton  bunches.  The  extraction  rate
was  found  to  be  proportional  to  the  luminosity.
The luminosity on/luminosity off ratio increased
by a factor of 4 for a luminosity of 0.5(cid:127)1030 cm-
2s-1.  This  was  equivalent  to  decreasing  the
goniometer  distance  from  the  beam  by  0.4 mm
or  0.7  σx.  The  impacts  of  the  luminous  regions
were similar to the effect of the RF noise source
at  F11.  An  RF  noise  signal  of  2.1  V  (rms)  was
equivalent to a luminosity of 0.5x1030 cm-2s-1.

for 

One 

potential 

application 

crystal
extraction  is  the  construction  of  a  parasitic
collider  beam  from  the  Tevatron.  A  1000  GeV
beam into the fixed target areas would have 25%
higher  energy  than  any  earlier  beam.  For  an
optimized  geometry  with  6 MHz  lost  on  the
crystal a 0.5 MHz beam would be transmitted to
a fixed target area. With improvements a 5 to 10
MHz beam  would be possible. This  beam  could
be  used  for  heavy  flavor  experiments  such  as
observations  of  mixing  in  the  charm  sector  and
CP  violation  in  D0  decays.  Another  possibility
would  employ  a  bent  crystal  for  measurements
of charm baryon magnetic moments.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge
important help received from the Beams, Particle
Physics, and Computing Divisions at Fermilab in
carrying out this experiment.

by 

Universities 

*Operated 
Research
Associations, Inc. under Contract No. DE-AC02-
76CH03000  with  the  United  States  Department
of Energy.

FIGURE CAPTIONS

FIG.  1.  Schematic  of  the  Fermilab  accelerator
complex  showing  the  location  of  the  crystal
extraction experiment at C0.

FIG.  2.  Schematic  of  the  channeling  extraction
experiment  at  C0.  The  bent  crystal  is  on  the
outside  of  the  ring  and  deflects  protons  up
through  the  quadrupoles  (Q)  into  the  field-free
region of the  Lambertson  magnets. Downstream
of  the  C0  midpoint  the  extracted  protons  are
detected  in  two  air  gaps  containing  scintillators,
a scintillating screen, and a SWIC.

FIG.  3.  (a)  Orientation  of  the  proton  and  anti-
proton beams at the crystal  looking  downstream
along  the  proton  beam.  The  crystal  deflects  up.
(b)  Beams  at  the  face  of  Lambertson  magnet
string.

FIG.  4.  Extraction  rate  in  diffusion  mode  as  the
crystal was moved in closer to the beam. X is the
distance  from the beam centerline to the face of
the crystal next to the beam.

FIG. 5. Four point crystal bender. An interaction
counter  below  and  downstream  of  the  bender  is
illustrated schematically (not to scale).

FIG. 6. (a). Goniometer installed in the Tevatron.
The  crystal  is  mounted  at  the  upstream  of  the  1
m  long  barrel.  The  motion  is  controlled  by  two
sets  of  stepped  motions  at 
the  ends.  (b).
Schematic of the relative motion of the crystal to
the  4"  diameter  goniometer  barrel  and  3"
Tevatron vacuum apertures when the crystal was
retracted or inserted in the beam.

images  of 

the
FIG.  7.  Fluorescent  screen 
extracted  beam  as  Θv  was  swept  up  through  a
230 µrad scan, from 130 µrad below the peak to
100  µrad  above  the  peak.  The  length  of  the
dechanneling  tail  grows  because  the  beam  spot
moves  up  and  the  Lambertson  magnet  aperture
eclipses  less  of  it.  For  scale,  the  longest  visible
portion of the dechanneling tail is 3 mm.

FIG.  8.  Vertical  angular  alignment  scans  for
extraction  in  kick  mode  (upper  panel)  and
diffusion  mode  (lower  panel).  Note  that  the
diffusion curve is wider.

FIG.  9.  Interaction  counter  rate  with 
the
background subtracted for a Θh scan in diffusion
mode. The downstream end of the crystal points
out  for  positive  Θh.  Note  that  the  minimum  of
the curve is near Θh = 0.

25

FIG. 10. Comparison of the normalized extracted
rate  for  a  Θh  scan  (circles)  to  the  extraction
efficiency  from  the  Biryukov  simulation  in
diffusion mode (diamonds).

FIG.  11.  Vertical  profile  of  the  extracted  beam
taken  with  a  thin  finger  counter.  Note  the
dechanneling  tail  extending  below  the  main
peak.  The  open  circles  have  been  multiplied  by
20 to show the behavior of the dechanneling tail.
The solid line is a Gaussian fit to the data in the
peak region.

FIG.  12.  Counter  rates  for  Θv  scans  for  (a)  the
extracted beam and (b) an interaction counter.

FIG. 13.  Extraction rate as a function of the turn
number  from  the  computer  simulation  and  from
the  pulse  height  in  a  scintillator  following  a
particular  kick,  renormalized  to  the  simulation
result  for  turn  2.  Pulse  heights  of  less  than  30
units are indistinguishable from the noise. There
are 10% fluctuations in the relative pulse heights
from  kick  to  kick.  Agreement  between  the
observations  and  the  simulation  is  good  in  the
early  turns,  but  extraction  persists  during  later
turns longer than the simulation predicts.

FIG.  14.  Behavior  of  the  extracted  beam  signal
over a 200 ms period after a kick. Note the initial
quick decay, a relatively flat portion, a drop over
a  20  ms  region,  and  then  the  reappearance  that
hints of an oscillation. The rate is normalized to
1 initially.

FIG.  15.  Time  to  come  to  equilibrium  after  a
kick  with  the  crystal  misaligned  by  60  µrad.
Each data point is a particular turn. Solid circles
are  the  “right-side”  turns.  The  points  with  Xs
were  fitted  to  an  exponential.  The  rise  time
constant is 170 µs. The rate is normalized to 1 at
the asymptote of the fit.

FIG.  16.  Wrong  side  behavior.  Extraction  rates
on  each  turn  are  plotted  with  the  high  “right
side”  pulses  circled  and  the  low  “wrong-side”
pulses  marked  with  squares.  The  Xs  without
circles  or  squares  are  turns  that  are  in-between
“right  side”  and  “wrong  side”  turns.  The  fitted
curve is discussed in the  text.  The  y  axis  shows
the unnormalized scintillator signal.

FIG.  17.  Long  term  behavior  of  the  extracted
beam after a kick. The y axis shows the number
of  pulses  as  a  function  of  time  after  a  kick.
Crosses  give  the  total  number  of  pulses  and
circles  give  the  number  of  low-intensity  pulses.
Signal intensity decreases with time so that later
pulses are mostly small.

FIG.  18.  Extraction  rate  as  a  function  of  time
immediately  after  retracting  the  crystal  by  200
−λt with
µm. The data are fitted with a form A-Be
t0 = 1/λ = 2.2 minutes. The filled circles indicate
points used for the fit.

FIG. 19. Extraction rate as a function of how far
the  three  collimators  had  been  withdrawn  from
their normal positions during a  major portion of
the run.

FIG. 20. Extraction rate as a function of the kick
number. Characteristically it took 5 to 7 kicks to
reach the equilibrium rate. The extraction rate is
normalized  to  the  full  extraction  rate  after  the
kicks.

FIG. 21. Number of pulses long after a kick as a
function of the time within the Main Ring cycle
(summed  for  several  kicks).  There  is  little
indication  of  any  significant  effect  of  the  Main
Ring cycle.

FIG.  22.  Finger  counter  coincidence  rate  as  a
function  of  RF  damper  voltage.  The  errors  are
based on inter-point variation. The curve is a  fit
to the data.

FIG. 23. Smoothed signals for a typical wire fly
for  extraction  (solid  circles)  and  interactions
(open  diamonds).  The  extraction  rate  has  been
divided by ten. For reference the extracted beam
signal for kick mode from Fig. 14 is reproduced
here normalized to the flying wire extracted rate
(solid line).

FIG. 24. Smoothed time  distributions  for  a  wire
fly  for the prompt signals  from extraction (solid
circles)  and  interactions  (open  diamonds).  The
extraction rate has been divided by ten.

FIG.  25.  Smoothed  time  distribution  for  the
three
flying  wire 
different regions of exponential decay.

interaction  rate  showing 

FIG.  26.  Illustration  of  the  effect  of  colliding
bunches  on  count  rates  for  set  1  (CDF  and  D0
collisions  combined)  and  set  2  (see 
text).
Histograms  are  measured  rates  while  dots  are
calculated  based  on  bunch  luminosities  and  a
smoothed background. The small open circles on
the  baselines  indicate  the  times  of  unmeasured
bunches.  The  vertical  axis  for  set  2  is  halved
because  only  one  bunch  was  counted.  Numbers
above  a  histogram  indicate  the  proton  bunch  or
bunches.

FIG.  27.  Measured,  background-subtracted
extraction  rates  normalized  to  t  =  0  versus
luminosity. The line is a fit to the data.

FIG. 28. Horizontal and vertical beam layout for
a  crystal  extraction  beam  at  A0.  Note  the
absorber  near  A0,  clearances  near  XSEM,  H90,
and  V91  at  about  150  ft  after  A0,  and  the
location of PSEP. The scale for x:y is 10:1.

REFERENCES

                                                          

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

S. E. Anassontzis et al., Nucl. Phys. (Proc.
Suppl.) 27, 352 (1992).

S.  A.  Bogacz,  D.  B.  Cline,  and  S.
Ramachandran,  Nucl.  Instrum.  Methods
Phys. Res., Sect. B 111, 244 (1996).

V.  Biryukov,  Phys.  Rev.  E  52,  6818
(1995).

C.  T.  Murphy  et  al.,  Nucl.  Instrum.
Methods  Phys.  Res.,  Sect.  B  119,  231
(1996).

S.  Ramachandran,  Ph.D.  thesis,  UCLA,
1997.

R.  Carrigan  et  al.,  Phys.  Rev.  ST  Accel.
Beams AB 1, 022801 (1998).

M. Harrison, Fermilab, UPC-153 (1981).

V.  Baublis  et  al,  Nucl.  Instrum.  Methods
Phys. Res., Sect. B 119, 308 (1996).

Z. Tang, Fermilab, TM-1827 (1993).

26

                                                                               

                                                                               

X. Altuna  et  al.,  Phys.  Lett.  B  357,  671
(1995).

C. Biino, et al., Phys Lett B403, 163
(1997).

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

J. S. Forster, H. Hatton, R. J. Toone, G.
Este, S. I. Baker, R. A. Carrigan, Jr., W.
M. Gibson, R. L. Wijayawardana, J. A.
Ellison, L. Emma-Wori, B. O. Kolbesen,
Nuclear Physics B318, 301 (1989).

E. Tsyganov and A. Taratin, Nucl.
Instrum. Methods A363, 511 (1995).

S. I. Baker, R. A. Carrigan, Jr., V. R.
Cupps II, J. S. Forster, W. M. Gibson, and
C. R. Sun, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B90,
119 (1994).

D. Christian in “Heavy Quarks at Fixed
Target”, B. Cox, ed. (Frascati Physics
Series), 421 (1994).

V. M. Samsonov, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
B119, 271 (1996). V. V. Baublis, V. G.
Riabov, V. M. Samsonov, A. V.
Khanzadeev, Preprint PNPI NP-1997
2195 (1997), Gatchina (in Russian).

D. Chen et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 3286
(1992).

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

K. Elsener et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res., Sect. B 119, 215 (1996).

K. Elsener, W. Herr, and J. Klem, p. 159,
International Symposium on Near
Beam Physics, R. Carrigan and N.
Mokhov, eds., Fermilab (1997).

A. G. Afonin, et al., Phys. Lett. B 435,
240 (1998).

V. Biryukov, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res., Sect. B 117, 463 (1996).

J. Marriner, private communication.

A.  A.  Asseev,  et  al.,  Nucl.  Instrum.
Methods  A324,  31  (1993)  and  Nucl.
Instrum. Methods A334, 283 (1993).

V. Biryukov, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
B53, 202 (1991).

A. Taratin, S. Vorobiev, M. Bavizhev, and
I. Yazynin, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B58,
103 (1991).

H. Akbari, et al., Phys. Lett. B313, 491
(1993).

Richard A. Carrigan, Jr., Nucl. Instrum.
Methods B119, 239 (1996).

R. A. Carrigan, Jr., Fermilab TM-1978
(1996).

“The A0 Abort System for the Tevatron
Upgrade”, C. Crawford, Fermilab TM-
1564 (1989).

R. Carrigan, p. 339 in Relativistic
Channeling, eds. R. Carrigan and J.
Ellison, Plenum (1987), New York.

24 M. Maslov, N. Mokhov, and I. Yazinin,

SSCL-484 (1991).

27

