m V)
V(m
-300

-200

-100

0

100

200

300

400

m V)
V(m
-300

-200

-100

0

100

200

300

400

15

t(s)

15

t(s)

FIGURE 1 a)

FIGURE 1 b)

1

0.5

0

0

0.4

0.2

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

f(Hz)

FIGURE 2 a)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

f(Hz)

FIGURE 2 b)

V(t+t

)

400

-300

400

V(t)

-300

V(t+t

)

400

FIGURE 3 a)

-300

FIGURE 3 b)

-300

400

V(t)

t
t
  
  

  

 

 

FIGURE 4 a)

FIGURE 4 b)

1 of 1

  

FIGURE 5

 

1 of 1

                                                    

 

 

 

 

                                                 

 

1 of 1

FIGURE 7 a)

FIGURE 7 b)

FIGURE 7 c)

FIGURE 8 a)

FIGURE 8 b)

Correlation Dimension Maps of EEG

from epileptic Absences

*Carla Silva (MSc), +Iveta R. Pimentel (DPhil), *Alexandre Andrade (MSc),

#John P. Foreid (MD) and *Eduardo Ducla-Soares (PhD)

* Institute  of  Biophysics  and  Biomedical  Engineering  and   + Condensed  Matter  Physics  Centre,
University  of  Lisbon,  Campo  Grande,  1700  Lisboa.   #   Portuguese  Institute  of  Oncology,  Lisboa.

 

 

Summary

Purpose: The understanding of brain activity, and in particular events such as epileptic seizures, lies on
the  characterisation  of  the  dynamics  of  the  neural  networks.  The  theory  of  non-linear  dynamics
provides  signal  analysis  techniques  which  may  give  new  information  on  the  behaviour  of  such
networks.  Methods:  We  calculated  correlation  dimension  maps  for  19-channel  EEG  data  from  3
patients  with  a  total  of  7  absence  seizures.  The  signals  were  analysed  before,  during  and  after  the
seizures.  Phase  randomised  surrogate  data  was  used  to  test  chaos.  Results:  In  the  seizures  of  two
patients we could distinguish two dynamical regions on the cerebral cortex, one that seemed to exhibit
chaos whereas the other seemed to exhibit noise. The pattern shown is essentially the same for seizures
triggered by hyperventilation, but differ for seizures triggered by light flashes. The chaotic dynamics
that one seems to observe is determined by a small number of variables and has low complexity. On
the other hand, in the seizures of another patient no chaotic region was found. Before and during the
seizures  no  chaos  was  found  either,  in  all  cases.  Conclusions:  The  application  of  non-linear  signal
analysis  revealed the  existence of differences  in  the  spatial dynamics associated to  absence seizures.
This may contribute to the understanding of those seizures and be of assistance in clinical diagnosis.

Key words: EEG, Absences, Epilepsy, Chaos, Correlation Dimension.

1. Introduction

Over the last few years there has been an increasing interest in the application of non-linear dynamics
theory,  commonly  referred  as  chaos  theory,  to  brain  activity.  Those  studies  have  mostly  been
concerned with EEG signals from intracranial or scalp recordings, in animals or human subjects, and
considered in particular epilepsy, sleep, cognitive and evoked responses (see e.g. Elbert et al 1994, and
Pritchards and Duke 1995).

Chaos theory (Schuster 1984, Bassingthwaighte et al 1994, Elbert et al. 1994) allows a characterisation
of  the  dynamics  of  complex  systems  from  the  analysis  of  a  signal  generated  by  the  system,  which
consists  of  a  series  of  measurements  in  time  of  a  pertinent  and  easily  accessible  variable.  In  brain
studies one uses EEG data to investigate the dynamics of the brain neuronal networks. 

EEG  signals show in  general great  irregularity that may  have different  origins, i.e.  it  may be  simply
due to noise or otherwise may reflect the presence of chaos. Chaos is irregular behaviour that occurs in
deterministic  systems  with  a  small  number  of  independent  variables  that  are  non-linear.  Noise  is
simply produced by random fluctuation of many variables. Chaos theory allows a distinction on wether

1 of 9

the irregularities in the EEG signal are due to chaos or noise. Such approach may therefore provide a
new  insight  into  the  dynamics  of  brain  activity  since  the  two  situations  involve  different  underlying
mechanisms. In the presence of chaos, the complexity of the dynamics can be quantified in terms of
the properties of the attractor in phase-space, e.g. its correlation dimension D2. Dimensional analysis
may therefore provide a classification of brain activity in terms of its complexity. However a careful
discussion is necessary to distinguish chaos from noise because finding a correlation dimension D2 is a
necessary  but  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  chaos.  Even  though  the  presence  of  chaos  cannot  be
assured,  the  correlation  dimension  analysis  may  provide  valuable  information  as  a  tool  to  detect
 determinism.
differences  in  the  dynamic  behaviour

 associated  to  different

 degrees  of

There  are  different  types  of  epilepsy  (Lopes  da  Silva  and  Niedermeyer  1993),  with  a  focal  or
generalised nature. Epileptic seizures may occur spontaneously or may be induced by various means.
Well-controlled intracranial EEG recordings were performed in  rats with  focal epilepsy and  the data
was analysed using chaos theory (Pijn et al. 1991), in order to test the ability of this tool to detect the
epileptogenic focus and the spread of the seizure activity. A decrease of the correlation dimension D2
was  observed  at  the  seizure  onset.  Later,  chaos  analysis  was  applied  to  intracranial  EEG  recordings
from a group of patients with unilateral temporal lobe epilepsy (Lehnerty and Elger 1995). A low value
of  D 2  was  found  during  the  seizure,  again especially  at  the  zone  of  ictal  onset. Recently,  Pijn  et  al.
(1997)  carried  out  a  very  thorough  analysis  of  chaos  in  intracranially  EEG  recorded  signals,  during
interictal and ictal states, of temporal lobe epileptic patients. Although they were not able to ascribe a
value of D2 to the signals showing seizure activity, they found significant evidence of the existence of
a  considerable  degree  of  determinism  in  the  system  generating  those  signals.  On  the  contrary,  they
found  that  signals  from  areas  that  did  not  show  seizure  activity  were  almost  indistinguishable  from
their  randomised  versions,  regardless  of  whether  they  were  recorded  during  interictal  or  ictal  states.
They then concluded that, in the particular case studied, chaos analysis yields good results in terms of
locating  the  epileptogenic  region  and  following  the  ictal  spread  throughout  the  brain.  Looking  at  a
generalised type of epilepsy, Babloyanz and Destexhe (1986), who were the first to apply chaos theory
to epileptic activity, analysed EEG signals from an absence seizure, recorded at two different sites on
the  brain.  They  found  chaos  in  the  signals,  with  a  low  value  of  D 2  which  implies  low  complexity.
Chaotic behaviour with a higher value of D2 was also reported (Frank et al. 1990) for epileptic activity
but,  in  this  case,  the  seizures  were  a  generalised  state  with  both  absence  and  grand  mal  events.

In  this  work  we  present  a  chaos  analysis  of  19-channel  EEG  data  normally  recorded  in  a  clinical
setting,  from  patients  with  absence  seizures.  This  type  of  generalised  epilepsy  usually  invades  the
entire cerebral cortex and shows, in general, a bilateral symmetry between the two hemispheres. Our
purpose  on  analysing  such  a  set  of  channels  is  to  detect  possible  spatial  variations  in  the  cerebral
dynamics. We present maps of the correlation dimension D 2  over the brain, for a total of 7 seizures
from  3  patients,  stimulated  either  by  hyperventilation  or  light  flashes.  Those  seizures  were  selected
from  a  more  extended  set  of  data  (18  seizures  from  9  patients)  as  they  are  representative  of  the
different dynamical behaviours that we found and that will be presented in this work. We analyse the
EEG  signals  before,  during  and  after  the  epileptic  seizures,  in  order  to  look  at  differences  in  the
dynamics  of  the  neuronal  networks  at  the  various  states.  This  may  allow  a  characterisation  of  the
epileptic  activity.  In  order  to  have  a  stronger  test  to  distinguish  chaos  from  noise  we  compare  our
original  EEG  signals  with  surrogate  data  obtained  through  phase  randomisation  of  their  Fourier
components (Pijn et al. 1991).

 

2. Materials and Methods

2.1 Data acquistion

2 of 9

Electroencephalographic recordings of 19 channels in a standard 10/20 referential configuration, were
taken  from  patients  with  absences.  The  signals  were  recorded  before,  during  and  after  the  epileptic
seizures. These were triggered by hyperventilation or light flashes. The reference potential was given
by  the  average  of  the  signals  at  electrodes  located  on  each  side  of  the  chin.  A  Bio-Logic  recording
system was used with an acquisition rate of 100Hz or 200Hz, and the signals were filtered high-pass
1Hz  and  for  the  sampling  rate  of  200Hz  also  with  a  low-pass  70Hz  (the  highest  value  available  for
spontaneous activity recording, in the system used).

2.2 Data analysis

We start by presenting the most traditional forms of data analysis, direct inspection of the time series,
power  spectrum  and  auto-correlation,  and  then  evolve  into  techniques  of  chaos  theory,  which  will
allow a distinction on wether the irregularities in the EEG signals are noise or possibly chaos; in the
latter case a quantitative characterisation of the complexity of the dynamics is provided in terms of the
correlation dimension D2. 

EEG signal. Signals associated to a triggered epileptic seizure were observed over the entire scalp. Fig.
1  shows  EEG  recordings  at  two  different  channels  on  a  patient.  During  the  seizure  the  electrical
potential  of  the  brain  V(t)  suddenly  increases  by  typically  a  factor  of  ten,  switching  into  a  series  of
spike - slow wave complexes with a dominant frequency of »
 3Hz, which shows some irregularity. All
the  signals  observed,  at  the  different  channels  on  each  patient,  seem  to  exhibit  the  same  structure,
though with differences in amplitude depending on the site. The measured seizures had durations from
about 7 to 15s. 

Power spectrum. The power spectrum gives information on the frequency values present in the signal
and  their  weights.  Although  the  power  spectrum  has  played  a  major  role  in  data  analysis,  it  misses
crucial  information  on  the  phase  contents  of  the  signals.  Fig.  2  shows  the  power  spectrum  of  the
signals in Fig. 1. One can see a large peak at »
 6Hz), and a broad band
around  that  value  extending  from  lower  to  higher  frequencies.  This  band  is  associated  to  the
irregularities in the EEG signal. The power spectrum for all the signals, at the different channels on a
patient, seem to exhibit the same structure, though again with differences in amplitude depending on
the site.

 3Hz (and the harmonic at »

Auto-correlation. The auto-correlation function, defined as A(t) = (cid:242)  V(t')V(t
 +t')dt', gives information
on the correlations in time present in the signal. We calculated the auto-correlation for the EEG signal
at  the  different  channels  in  each  patient  and  found  that  it  is  an  oscillating  function  with  a  decaying
envelope. This  indicates that  the signal has important  correlations but  they decay which implies  that
there is loss of information in time.

The  scalp  electrical  potential  of  the  brain  that  one  measures  results  from  a  set  of   d  independent
variables  X i (t),  which  specify  the  state  of  the  system  at  any  time.  Those  variables  define  a

d-dimensional phase-space, in which the state of the system is represented by 
A
chaotic  system  is  characterised  by  having  an  attractor,  that  is  a  limiting  set  of  points  to  which  all
trajectories are attracted in the phase-space. The attractor has a fractal structure and the complexity of
the dynamics can be quantified in terms of the correlation dimension of the attractor D2. D2 is a lower
estimator of the Hausdorff dimension D which measures the occupation of the attractor in phase-space
(D2<D<d). 

In order  to  investigate  the  chaotic  nature  of  the  dynamics, and  possibly  measure its  complexity, one
needs  to  reconstruct  the  dynamics  of  the  system  in  phase-space  from  the  measured  time  series  V(t).
This can be done by the "method of time delays" (Takens 1981), which is based on building vectors

3 of 9

associated  to  each  time  t i  on  the  time  series,  with  components  that  are  the  signal  at  time  t i  plus  an
increasing number of time delays t  : 

Those vectors create a pseudo phase-space with dimension m, which is topologically equivalent to the
 2d+1. We take t  equal to the first zero crossing of the auto-correlation, so
original phase space, for m‡
that the original and delayed signals are not strongly correlated; this is a usual choice for t
 , and the
results  do  not  depend  significantly  on   t
 when  it  is  taken  within  reasonable  limits  (Schuster  1984,
Fraser and Swinney 1986, Libert and Schuster 1989, Bassingthwaighte et al 1994, Elbert et al. 1994).

Map. A look into the phase-space of the system can be obtained via the map, that is the plot of V(t+t  )
vs  V(t).  The  map  represents  a  projection  of  the  attractor  in  the  pseudo  phase-space  and  reflects  the
correlations in the signal. In Fig. 3 we present the maps corresponding to the signals in Fig. 1. The two
maps are clearly different: in a) one can identify an attractor which reflects particular correlations in
the signal and may therefore imply chaos, whereas in b) the space is more or less uniformly covered
which  is  more  characteristic of noise. This  kind  of analysis  is  giving for the first time  evidence that
although  the  EEG  time  series  look  similar  in  all  the  channels,  indeed  different  dynamics  may  be
occurring in different areas of the brain.

Correlation  dimension. Using  the  Grassberger-Procaccia  (1983 a , 1983 b )  algorithm to  determine  the
correlation dimension D2, one defines the correlation integral:

 0, q

 (x) = 1 if x ‡

where, q
 (x) = 0 if x < 0, and N is the number of points in the time series. Cm(r)
measures the fraction of pairs of points in space that are closer than r. If the system is chaotic one has
that  for  sufficiently  large  m,  m>m*,  the  correlation  integral  takes  the  following  scaling  form,
independent of m,

C(r) ~ rD2 (1)

with the exponent giving the correlation dimension D2 of the attractor corresponding to the measured
signal. Hence D 2  can be obtained  from the slope of ln C(r) vs ln r. The quantity m*  is the minimal
embedding  dimension  as it  is  the  lowest integer dimension  containing the  whole attractor;  m*  gives
information on the number of independent variables governing the dynamics of the system. 

The  correlation  integrals  associated  to  the  signals  in  Fig.  1  are  shown  in  Fig.  4.  In  order  to  avoid
spurious  effects  we  made  the  "Theiler  correction"  to  auto-correlation  in  the  correlation  integrals
(Theiler 1986, Theiler 1990). In the plots of the correlation integral, the region that is relevant for the
analysis  of  the  epileptic  signal  is  the  one  corresponding  to  the  larger  values  of  r,  the  region  for  the
smaller values of r being strongly contaminated by small amplitude noise from different origins. It is
clear that the channels in a) and b) exhibit different behaviour. One observes that in a) there is a region
where the correlation integral behaves like (1), which means that ln Cm(r) has a constant slope, also
independent of m. Such behaviour is translated into the presence of a plateau in the plot of the slopes,
and its value gives the correlation dimension D2. The embedding dimension m* is given by the value
of m above which the plateau sets.  We therefore conclude that the EEG signal in Fig. 1-a) seems to
exhibit  chaotic  behaviour.  By  contrast,  in  b)  no  plateau  is  observed  in  the  plot  of  the  slopes,  which

4 of 9

means that the correlation integral never behaves like (1), and hence the EEG signal in Fig. 1-b) does
not exhibit chaotic behaviour. One could expect that even the presence of small amplitude noise could
blur  the  appearance  of  a  plateau.  In  order  to  have  some  sensitivity  to  that  problem,  we  made  a
simulation  in  which  we  considered  a  sinusoidal  signal  mixed  with  different  levels  of  noise,  and
verified  that  even  in  the  presence  of  noise  which  is  40%  of  the  signal,  the  plateau  remains  defined.
This implies that the presence or absence of a plateau in the EEG signals is intrinsic to the signal, up to
that  level  of  noise. The results  here obtained from  the correlation  integrals confirm  the observations
made from the maps.

Chaos vs noise. Finding a finite correlation dimension D2 does not however necessarily imply having
chaos,  because  coloured  (i.e.  power  law  spectra)  noise  may  also  give  rise  to  it  (Osborne  and
Provenzale 1989). In order to distinguish chaos from noise, we built a control signal that has the same
power spectrum as the measured signal, but has randomised phases. Then we compared the measured
and control signals via the correlation integral slope: only if the two look different may it be concluded
that  the  measured  signal  is  not  noise  and  may  be  chaotic.  Fig.  5  shows  the  correlation  integral  and
respective slope for the control signal corresponding to the signal of Fig. 1-a), to be compared with Fig
4-a).  One  clearly  sees  the  difference  between  the  two  signals,  with  an  absence  of  a  plateau  in  the
control  signal.  We  therefore  conclude  that  the  measured  signal  seems  to  exhibit  chaotic  behaviour.
This  analysis  was  done  for  all  the  signals  showing  a  finite  correlation  dimension,  and  for  all  we
observed  that  the  measured  and  control  signals  were  different,  thus  implying  a  possible  presence  of
chaos. 

We  recall  that,  even  after  passing  the  phase  randomisation  test,  the  existence  of  a  D 2  does  not
necessarily  imply  chaos,  but,  as  we  have  just  seen,  it  provides  a  mean  to  detect  differences  in  the
dynamical behaviour over the scalp.

The  application  of  a  correlation  dimension  analysis  implicitly  assumes  that  the  signal  that  we  are
studying  is  stationary.  An  epileptic  seizure  may  naturally  have  some  non-stationarity.  In  order  to
investigate this aspect we compared, for some seizures, the correlation dimension analysis obtained for
the complete seizure with that obtained for its first half.

 

3. Results

We  now  present  the  results  of  the  correlation  dimension  analysis  of  the  19-channel  EEG  data  for  3
patients  with  absences.
 triggered  by
hyperventilation or light flashes, and seizures from different patients. 

 We  compare  different  seizures  of  the  same  patient,

Patient A. Is a 16 year old boy with absences who is pharmaco-resistant. The MRI and CT scans are
normal, but the SPECT shows a hipoperfusion of the right temporal and parietal lobes. The ictal EEG
recording  has  a  slightly  lower  amplitude  on  the  right  temporal  lobe  while  the  interictal  recording
exhibits a right focus also in that region. 

We  analysed  three  seizures  of  this  patient  with  durations  of  approximately  10s,  15s  and  12s,  which
were triggered by hyperventilation. They were recorded at 200Hz, 100Hz and 100Hz, respectively. Fig.
6 shows the map of the slopes of ln Cm(r) for one of the seizures. There one can see that part of the
channels (1, 3, 4, 5, 8 and 9) exhibit a plateau, to which corresponds a correlation D2, and hence seem
to present chaos, whereas the other channels do not exhibit a plateau, and hence rather seem to present
noise.  It  is  important  to  notice  that  all  the  channels  with  a  plateau  have  the  same  value  for  the
correlation  dimension  D 2  and  the  same value  for the embedding  dimension  m*.  The analysis  of the
two other seizures gives similar results. In Fig. 7 we present the maps for the correlation dimension D2

5 of 9

corresponding to the three seizures of this patient. The main feature that emerges from this analysis is
that one can clearly distinguish two regions with different dynamics: the frontal and left parietal and
temporal  parts  seem  to  exhibit  chaotic  behaviour  whereas  the  rest  rather  seem  to  show  noise.
Furthermore,  one  finds  the  same  pattern  for  the  different  seizures  of  this  patient,  which  are  also
characterised by the same values of the correlation dimension D2 and embedding dimension m*. For
two  of  the  seizures  (the  10s  and  the  15s  ones),  we  also  compared  the  maps  of  D 2  for  the  complete
seizures, with those for the first half of the seizures. We observed that the distinction of two dynamics
regions remains in the latter (for example, the signals in Fig. 1 show the same behaviour as reported
before), but some channels (located in particular in the rear part of the scalp), that did not show chaos
in  the former, seem now to  exhibit  chaos (with the D 2  and m * of the former). This  implies that the
dynamics  may  be  changing  in  time,  in  some  channels.  However,  because  we  are  interested  in
characterising the dynamics of the seizure as a whole, we consider the analysis of the complete signal
to  be  the  proper  procedure.  In  addition,  for  one  of  the  seizures  (the15s  one)  we  analysed  a  bipolar
montage,  and  found  that signals  associated  to  pairs  of channels  (4-10, 5-10, 5-11, 6-10,  6-11, 10-15
14-18)  mainly  located  on  the  central  part  of  the  head,  were  giving  rise  to  a  plateau  and  hence  a
correlation dimension D2 »

 1.9.

Patient  B .  Is  a  12  year  old  girl  with  absences  that  have  responded  favourably  to  Sodium  Valproate
medication.

We  analysed  two  seizures  of  this  patient,  with  duration  of  approximately  7s  and  8s,  the  first  being
triggered by hyperventilation and the second by light flashes, they were both recorded at 100Hz. For
each  of  the  seizures  one  finds  again  two  dynamic  regions  but  now  exhibiting  different  patterns  as
shown in  Fig. 8, which presents the maps of the correlation dimension D 2  corresponding to the two
seizures.  The seizure triggered  by hyperventilation  shows a correlation dimension  on the frontal and
left  parietal  and  temporal  parts,  in  a  similar  way  to  the  observed  for  patient  A,  whereas  the  seizure
triggered  by  light  flashes  shows  a  left/right  symmetry,  with  the  frontal  part  having  a  correlation
dimension. For both cases one finds that all the channels exhibiting a plateau have the same correlation
dimension D2 and embedding dimension m*. 

Patient C. Is a 13 year old girl that has absences with walking automatism. Her epilepsy has had good
evolution under Sodium Valproate medication.

We  analysed  two  seizures  of  this  patient,  with  duration  of  approximately  9s  and  12s,  triggered  by
hyperventilation.  They  were  both  recorded  at  200Hz.  We  find  that  in  both  seizures  none  of  the
channels shows a plateau, that is a correlation dimension D2, and hence none of the channels exhibits
chaos, in contrast to those of the other two patients.

For the three patients we also analysed the EEG signals before and after the seizures, and for all the
cases  we  did  not  find  a  plateau  in  any  of  the  channels,  which  implies  that  there  is  no  sign of  chaos
there.

 

4. Conclusions

The  results  that  we  obtained  show  that  chaos  analysis  provides  new  information  on  the  dynamics
underlying  absences  epilepsy,  and  allows  a  distinction  between  situations  not  realised  before  by  the
more conventional forms of analysis. 

In the seizures of two patients we were able to distinguish regions with different behaviour: part of the
cerebral cortex seems to exhibit chaos whereas the other part seems to exhibit noise. The observation

6 of 9

of different dynamic regions occurring in absences had not been seen before, as far as we know. The
pattern  is  essentially  the  same  for  different  seizures  of  the  same  patient,  when  triggered  by
hyperventilation, but varies for seizures of the same patient triggered either by hyperventilation or light
flashes.  The  dynamics  is  characterised  by  a  correlation  dimension  D 2 »
  1.7-1.9,  which  implies  low
complexity, and an embedding dimension m*»
 4-5, which indicates that the dynamics is governed by a
small number of variables. The determination of the number of variables governing the dynamics is a
valuable  clue  for  model  construction  and  possible  activity  control.  Babloyantz  and  Destexhe  (1986)
had found D2 = 2.05–
 0.09 and m*=5, which are in good agreement with our values. On the contrary,
in the seizures of another patient we were not able to distinguish different dynamic regions and all the
cerebral cortex seems to exhibit noise. Our results therefore reveal the existence of different dynamical
situations associated to absences. 

For  the  EEG  signals  before  and  after  the  epileptic  seizures,  we  did  not  find  evidence  of  chaotic
behaviour.

It would be most desirable to understand what are the above results implying about the nature of the
epileptic absences. It would also be desirable to investigate the correlation between the D2 maps and
the clinical picture of the patients in order to possibly use it as a diagnostic tool. In the future we would
like to complement the present study with the construction of maps for the Kolmogorov entropy and
the Lyapounov exponents, in order to get more information on the possible chaotic behaviour, though
these studies demand longer time series and therefore require special care in the selection of the length
of the seizures and the acquisition rate. Nevertheless the results that we presented here already reveal
new aspects of absences epilepsy.

We are grateful to F. Lopes da Silva for helpful discussions and comments.

Acknowledgements:

 

 

 

References:

Babloyantz, A. and Destexhe, A. Low-dimensional chaos in an instance of epilepsy. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA, 1986, 83:3513-3517.

Bassingthwaighte, J. B., Liebovitch, L. S. e West, B. J., Fractal Physiology, Oxford University Press,
1994.

Elbert,  T.,  William,  J.,  Kowalik,  Z.,  Skinner,  J.E.,  Graf,  K.E.  and  Birbaumer,  N.  Chaos  and
physiology: deterministic chaos in excitable cell assemblies. Physiological Reviews, 1994, 74(1):1-47.

Frank,  G.W.,  Lookman,  T.,  Nerenberg,  M.A.,  Essex,  C.,  Lemieux,  J.  and  Blume,  W.  Chaotic  time
series analyses of epileptic seizures. Physica D, 1990, 46: 427-438.

Fraser,  A.M.  and  Swinney,  H.L.  Independent  coordinates  for  strange  attractors  from  mutual
information. Phys. Rev. A, 1986, 33(2):1134-1140.

Grassberger,  P.  and  Procaccia,  I.  Measuring  the  strangeness  of  strange  attractors.  Physica  9D,  1983,
189-208.

7 of 9

Grassberger, P. and Procaccia, I. On the characterization of strange attractors. Phys. Rev. Lett., 1983
50(5):346-349.

Lehnertz, K. and Elger, C.E. Spatio-temporal dynamics of the primary epileptogenic area in temporal
lobe  epilepsy  characterized  by  neuronal  complexity  loss.  Electroenceph.  Clin.  Neurophysiol.,  1995,
95:108-117.

Liebert,  W.  and  Schuster,  H.G.  Proper  choice  of  the  time  delay  for  analysis  of  chaotic  time  series.
Phys. Lett. A, 1989, 142(2-3), 107-111.

Lopes  da  Silva,  F.H.  and  Niedermeyer,  E.  Electroencephalography:  basic  principles,  clinical
applications, and related fields, William &Wikins, Baltimore, 1993.

Osborne, A.R. and Provenzale, A. Finite correlation dimension for stochastic systems with power-law
spectra. Physica D, 1989, 35:357-381.

Pijn,  J.P.,  van  Neerven,  J.,  Noest,  A.  and  Lopes  da  Silva,  F.H.  Chaos  or  noise  in  EEG  signals;
dependence on state and brain site. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., 1991, 79:371-381. 

Pijn, J.P., Velis, D.N., van der Heyden, M.J., DeGoede, J., van Veelen, C.W. and Lopes da Silva, F.H.
Nonlinear dynamics of epileptic seizures on basis of intracranial EEG recordings. Brain Topography,
1997, 9:249-270.

Pritchards, W.S. and Duke, D.W. Measuring chaos in the brain - a tutorial review of EEG dimension
estimation. Brain and Cognition, 1995, 27:353-397.

Schuster, H.G. Deterministic Chaos. Physik-Verlag, Weinheim, 1984.

Takens, F. Detecting strange attractors in turbulance. In: D.A. Rand and L.S. Young (Ed.), Dynamical
 1981.
Systems  and  Turbulence,

 Lecture  Notes  in  Math.

 Springer-Verlag,

 Heidelberg,

 898.

Theiler, J.  Spurious  dimension  from correlation algorithms applied to  limited  time-series data. Phys.
Rev. A, 1986, 34(3): 2427-2432.

Theiler,  J.  Estimating  fractal  dimension.  Journal  of  the  Optical  Society  of  America  A,  1990,
7(6):1055-1073.

 

 

Figure legends:

Fig. 1 - EEG signal recorded on patient A (seizure of 10s) at: a) channel 1, b) channel 10. 

Fig. 2 - Power spectrum of the signals in Fig. 1-a) and b), respectively. 

Fig.  3  -  Map  corresponding  to  the  signals  in  Fig.  1-a)  and  b),  respectively  ( t

 =8x10 -2 s).

Fig. 4 - Correlation integral Cm(r), and slope of ln Cm(r), with increasing m, for the signals in Fig. 1-a)
and b), respectively. 

8 of 9

Fig. 5 – Correlation integral, C m(r), and slope of ln C m(r), with increasing m, for the control signal
corresponding to the signal in Fig. 1-a).

Fig. 6 - Channel map for the slope of ln Cm(r), for the seizure of 10s in patient A; the channels with a
plateau have D2 »

 1.7 and m* »

 5. 

Fig. 7 - Channel map for the correlation dimension D2 of three seizures from patient A, triggered by
hyperventilation, with duration: a)10s, b)15s and c) 12s; for all of them D2 »
 5 for a) and m*
 4 for b) and c). 

 1.7, m* »

Fig. 8 - Channel map for the correlation dimension D2 of two seizures from patient B, triggered by: a)
 1.9 and m*»
hyperventilation, and b) light flashes, with duration 7s and 8s, respectively; for both D2»
4.

9 of 9

»
