On the Conservation of Physical Quantities

DOUGLAS M. SNYDER

ABSTRACT

  As  regards  each  of 

Certain transformations of isolated physical systems underlying various
conservation  laws  in  physics  are  noted. 
these
transformations,  there  is  a  theoretical  action  that  is  equivalent  to  a  matched
physical  action  on  the  system.    Evidence  supporting  this  thesis  is  found  in
experimental psychological research where results of various experiments allow
that the imagined rotation of an object is analogous to a physical rotation.  The
conservation laws based on the transformations noted are theoretical or mental
in  nature  to  the  same  extent  that  they  are  physical.    When  one  of  the
conservation  principles  noted 
the  relevant
transformation  on  the  system,  this  test  is  essentially  one  of  the  influence  of
mental activity on physical reality.

tested  by  carrying  out 

is 

TEXT

A conservation law in physics,  i.e.,  a law noting a zero rate of change
over  time  for  some  physical  quantity,  reflects  an  underlying  invariance  of
physical  law  under  some  transformation  of  an  isolated  physical  system.
Perhaps the most important conservation law is that concerning energy; this law
reflects the invariance of an isolated physical system with regard to time.  The
conservation of linear momentum reflects the invariance for  such a system with
regard to spatial displacement.  The invariance with regard to spatial rotation of
an isolated physical system  is  the  foundation  for  the  conservation  of  angular
momentum.    Each  of  the  spatial  or  temporal  transformations  underlying  the
conservation  laws  of  energy,  linear  momentum,  and  angular  momentum
possesses a special nature given the relative character of physical events.  There
is no absolute origin for either space or time but only a chosen relative origin.
Maintaining a set of axes while carrying out a physical action to transform the
system  is  equivalent  to  transforming  the  axes  while  leaving  the  system
untouched.  For example, the act of moving a physical system along an axis x
representing a linear spatial direction from  x1  to  x2  (x2  >  x1)  is  equivalent  to
leaving  the  system  untouched  and  linearly  moving  the  axis  such  that  the
coordinate of the system along this axis changes from x1 to x2 ..   The movement
of this axis is essentially a theoretical, or mental, action.  Moving a measuring
device representing the axis such that the system’s  coordinate changes from x1

- 1 -

On the Conservation

to x2  is equivalent to adding x2  -  x1  to  all  points  on  the  axis  and  leaving  the
measuring device untouched.  For each of the transformations noted, there is a
theoretical action that is equivalent to a matched physical action on the system.
The conservation laws based on these transformations are theoretical or mental
in nature to the same extent that  they  are  physical.    The  intrinsic  relationship
between mental activity and physical reality has also been discussed (2, 3).

Evidence supporting this thesis is found in experimental  psychological
research (1).   They reported the results of various experiments, concluding that
the imagined rotation of an object is analogous to a physical rotation.  In one of
Cooper’s experiments,  for example, subjects were asked to  identify whether a
figure in a particular spatially rotated orientation (without having witnessed the
possible rotation of the figure) was  the identical figure initially  presented  or  a
reflected (mirror image) version of this  figure.    The  results  indicated  a  linear
dependence between the angle of rotation from the original position and the time
subjects  took  to  indicate  that  the  figures  were  the  same.    For  the  reflected
figures,  a constant time factor was  added  to  the  time  for  identification  of  the
figure;  the  linear  dependence  was  preserved.    This  linear  dependence  is
consistent with the time taken by subjects to engage in the proposed imagined
rotation.  Cooper and Shepard (1) maintained that imagined spatial rotations are
internal  representations  developed  as  a  result  of  their  evolutionary  adaptive
significance in coping with the external physical world in which  actual  spatial
rotations occur.  But, as discussed, there is no basis for discriminating between
the  imagined  rotation  and  the  actual  rotation  in  the  formulation  of  the
conservation of angular momentum.  Mentally rotating a set of coordinate axes
applied to a physical system is essentially an imagined physical rotation of the
system.   When one of the conservation principles  noted  is  tested  by  carrying
out the relevant transformation on the system,  this test is essentially one of the
influence of mental activity on physical reality.

REFERENCES

1

2

3

  Cooper,  L.  A.,  &  Shepard,  R.  N.  Turning  something  over  in  the  mind.

Scientific American, 1984, 25(6), 106-114.

 Snyder,  D.  M.  On the nature of relationships involving the  observer and the
observed phenomenon in psychology and physics.  Journal of  Mind  and
Behavior, 1983, 4, 389-400.

  Snyder,  D.  M.  Mental  activity  and  physical  reality.  Journal  of  Mind  and

Behavior, in press.

- 2 -

