Making sense of Physics1 in the first year of study

Shirley Booth 
Centre for educational development 
Chalmers University of Technology

Åke Ingerman
Department of Physics (MiNa)
Chalmers University of Technology

We address the question "How do students make sense of Physics from the point of view
of constituting physics knowledge?". A phenomenographic study is described as a result
of which we present six qualitatively different ways in which students experience the first
year of Physics. The variation is analysed in terms of the structure of experience, the
nature of knowledge and an ethical aspect related to the identification of authority. Three
of these ways of experiencing the first year are considered to be unproductive in terms of
making sense of physics, while the other three support to an increasing degree the
formation of a well-grounded physics knowledge object. Implications for practice are
considered.

Abstract

1. Aim

Students beginning to study engineering physics are faced in their first year with a
bewildering array of new subjects and teachers. Such is the case at Chalmers University
of Technology in Göteborg, Sweden, where our study took place. At the heart of the four
and a half year programme is a vision of the all-round engineer-physicist, and in 1993 a
reform of the programme was initiated, aimed at enhancing students' problem-solving and
communications skills. Such moves are currently common (Baillie, 1999) but in this case
it was followed by a drastic drop-out over the two following years, which is the
immediate reason for the current study.

The aim of the overall study is to illuminate the factors surrounding the drop-out that
followed the reform. It was observed that the existing programme had been compressed in
order to accommodate the extra curriculum. A survey of students indicated a puzzling
split: that about one third found it to be a stimulating programme and the same number
found it grinding. We set out to examine the idea that the large number of courses that go
to make up the first year, taught by relatively isolated teachers, led to a fragmentation of
the content for some of the students. In particular, we hypothesised that the programme
was not experienced as a whole and that becoming a physicist had been relegated to the
background, while coping with many disparate courses – predominantly mathematics –
had come to the fore.

A more pragmatic aim of the study was to increase the programme board's awareness of
the complexity of the first year from the students' perspective, and of the results of their
decisions on the conditions for learning.

The research questions addressed by the study as a whole are
•  How do students make sense of Physics from the point of view of constituting physics

knowledge?

                                                          
1 By "Physics" with a capital P we denote the programme of Engineering Physics at Chalmers; by "physics"
with a small p we mean the physical world and the world of physicists.

•  What factors in the programme and the student experience of the programme can be

related to the students’ approaches to studying and learning?

•  What implications are there for the individual student, in their quest for making sense

of Physics?

A wider aim is to illuminate the oft expressed goal of educators in designing new
programmes or reforming old ones, that they want to improve the integration of the
students’ knowledge, in particular mathematics and its applications. We ask ourselves
what the implementations of this goal might look like from the students’ points of view.

This paper focuses on the first of these questions, and the implications for faculty.

2. Method

The study was carried out with a predominantly phenomenographic approach (Marton,
1981; Marton & Booth, 1997). This implies that we were interested in variation in the
ways in which the students experienced their first year of study with respect to its content
and structure, it being made up of some twelve distinct courses distributed across
mathematics, physics and engineering subjects in rough ratio 2:1:1.

Data was collected primarily through interviews. These were held with 20 students
sometime in the second year of studies, selected to represent a cross-section of success
among those who remained on the programme (and thus including some who had reached
the verge of failure). The interview was directed towards exploring the variation of ways
in which the students had experienced their first year, with learning the subjects both as
individual courses and as an integrated whole. First it probed specifically into the ways in
which the student saw the relations between the courses, both structurally and
meaningfully, and engaged them in a semi-structured discussion of factors surrounding
their studies. The students were initially given an A3 sheeet of paper with all the course
titles spread over it, and they were asked to join them up according to perceived
relationship. The interviewer began by asking the students for the meaning of the lines
they had drawn, giving them opportunity to discuss the relationships between the course
contents freely. The interviews then continued by developing the relations they referred to
and by taking up students’ overall experience of the programme, their reasons for
choosing Physics, what kept them going, the way in which the whole was seen, and their
approaches to studying.

In line with the phenomenographic approach, the interviews are seen as forming a "pool
of meaning" in which the variation in ways of experiencing the phenomena of interest are
to be seen. By reading the interviews repeatedly, now as expressions of individual
students, now as series of extracts related to specific issues, we delved more and more
deeply into the meaning of "Physics" as seen by the students. Categories were formed and
reformed; extracts from interviews were sought to support and give substance to the
categories; and logical and empirical links between categories were explored. The aim
was to offer a hierarchy of empirically grounded and logically consistent categories of
description which capture the essence of the whole experience and reveal the essential
variational structure of that experience.

3. Results

Throughout the interviews we took up aspects of ways in which the students experienced
the objects of their studies – the content of courses, the relations between them, the

relation between them and the future (studies and work), understanding and difficulties.
We have also taken note of the ways in which students relate to knowledge, to others and
to self, in a system which we identify with an ethical aspect of experience.

From the data we have analysed an outcome space of six categories of description,
forming a hierarchy of increasing sense-making. We introduce the term “knowledge
fragment” to indicate the way in which the students seem to experience what constitutes
the courses. These we see being experienced as self-contained pieces, bearing meaning
only in a local sense, neither perceived as legitimate or recognisable outside the
immediate educational locality. We also use the term “knowledge object”, related only
partially to the notion as used by Entwistle & Marton (1994). While they mean the ideal
visualisable whole “made up of a tightly integrated and structured interconnected ideas
and data which together make up our own personal understandings” attained after a good
deal of intensive study, we refer rather to the whole that students are experiencing,
whatever its character might be. Based on our interpretation of the empirical data we even
draw a distinction between "study knowledge object" and "physics knowledge object",
where in the first focus is on the process of study, (we could say Physics), the latter is
focused on the meaning of study related to the physical world – a figure-ground
relationship.

There follows a short description of the six ways of experiencing the first year in terms of
the study content, with example extracts from the interviews. Note that we are not
categorising individual students, but are analysing the whole experience as it is told by
the set of students and illustrating by individual statements.

3.1. A. Courses are identified with the study situation

Here the engineering physics programme has been experienced as a discrete set of
courses, a means to the end of a degree. These are related to authority, i.e. teachers and
tradition, and common features, such as the ways in which courses were organised.
S92 indicates such a way of experiencing the first year, here, for example, relating
Mechanics and Strength of Materials:

S9

It was about moments and suchlike, what can I say, forces here and there, but maybe there wasn’t
such a big link, they share the subject a bit, yes I suppose so

Later in the same interview the same student refers thus to Complex Analysis and Fourier
Analysis, bringing out the common organisational feature:

S9 Well, what can I say, maybe there’s not such an enormous connection, but it feels as if they are the

same, more that it is the same sort of organisation in the course, sort of, more than what they are
about. I really like those courses, no problems to hand in, no bonus points to chase after, but it’s
just a case of learning really, and being able to work the problems out.
Is it the teaching more than anything?

I
S9 Yes, more than the content maybe. But well, I liked them a lot.

We would dub this a “study knowledge object”, but it is taken for granted rather than
being a focal concern.

3.2. B. One course is seen as a prerequisite for another course

Courses are now related to their content to the extent that a preordained, correct sequence
of acquisition of knowledge fragments is assumed. A "red thread"3 is sought in terms of

                                                          
2 The 20 students who were interviewed are identified S1 to S20. I refers to the interviewer

needs and demands. Authority for the thread – content and structure – is still the domain
of teachers and tradition.

S7

First Algebra and the maths courses, you can’t take them away, just like RealB4, I didn’t enjoy that
but it still has to be there anyway. Then the rest of the courses, I think they have to be there, but
whether or not you could change their order I don't know, maybe you could. I don’t know how
important EM is, if you could put it earlier or later, it seems to be important because we’ve done so
much of it so far

Asked if he could see a whole in the set of courses he had taken, S7 refers to the lack of
insight into the teacher’s intentions:

S7 Yes, sort of… I can see how they’ve tried to build it up but I don’t know if I see the aim of it, to be

honest, I feel I’m moving forward but I don’t really know where I’m trying to get to
In discussing courses that had common content S6 refers to perceived shortcomings in
authority:

S6 … but it sometimes feels as though the teachers don’t really know what we know and don’t know.

Have you done this before? And have you taken that up? Like in ENets for example, where they
took up Laplace transformations, and they came up an awful lot in the exam, on the first exam in
any case, Laplace transformations, but it hadn’t, in Complex they hadn’t had time to take it up
properly, and then in ENets there was no time to do it properly either, there they assumed we had
gone through it in Complex. That sort of thing. It’s a bit as if, things run into one another a bit
vaguely, the boundaries are unclear, between Control and ENets, for example

Compared with the previous category, the emerging “knowledge object” is related to
study, now being focused on in trying to find the fit of the fragments.

3.3. C. One course is seen as being useful in other courses

Courses now support one another, but they still are necessarily arranged in a specific
order. Reference is made to the knowledge fragments that constitute the courses, which
mesh into one another, course-to-course.

I
S3

And the line between Mechanics and MatStrength?
It’s more a question of MatStrength having a bit of Mechanics in it, … the course in Strength of
Materials, I thought that went smoothly, I didn’t get any links to any other subjects at all except to
just Mechanics, it was mostly force, forces and other things of course, but…

A number of different knowledge fragments, not necessarily from the same course, may
build a specific technique or application, and the future usage of such applications comes
into the picture.

S12 I think that whatever courses you choose you can never cover so much that it’ll be exactly what
you finally work with, there are little bits in each course you have use of and recognise. I don’t
think it’s the details, as long as  you’re not going to do research, and I have no idea if I’ll do that.
Now the knowledge object starts to have features relating to physics, while study as the
object still dominates.

                                                                                                                                                                            
3 A “red thread” is a Swedish term for the logical structure that is either planned or apparent. It is a very
common term among both students, who demand them, and teachers, who try to make them apparent, both
in individual courses and in programmes of courses.
4 Courses are referred to by abbreviated names in interviews
Analysis of single variable
Analysis of several variables
Complex analysis
Vector analysis
Fourier analysis
Linear algebra

RealA
RealB
Complex Mechanics
Vector
Fourier
Linear

EMFields
ENets
Mechanics
MatStrength
Control
Numeric

Electro-magnetic fields
Passive & active electric networks

Strength of materials
Automatic control
Numerical analysis

3.4. D. Courses are related through mutual illumination

Here is to be found sense-making for the first time. Courses now lend meaning to each
other and understanding in an earlier course can be found in a later course. There are now
networks that mesh and unmesh, knowledge fragments might be grouped together in
different ways and offer different perspectives. There is a dynamic in what is focal or
non-focal, and thematic or non-thematic. The Physics that is constituted takes on a
dynamic form and begins to resemble a "physics knowledge object" rather than a “study
knowledge object”.

What is met in one course can illuminate or explain what is met elsewhere:

S12 I see that [ENets] more as a lot of things you just have to accept, currents that go here and there in

ENets, they get explained in EMFields. That’s what I think is essential when you do the Physics
programme, that you get these explanations and don’t simply apply things, but you go a bit further

When discussing sudden insights he had had, S3 says:

S3 Yes, in Numeric as well, when you studied optimisation and other things that you could sort of

deduce from the theory from algebra and linear spaces and things, that you could…, there it comes
in, you saw that it was that you were working at without thinking of it, and that you’d done it
before in RealB as well, without knowing that you were projecting it on a subspace sort of? There
I felt sort of Wow, when I did Linear anyway.

S3 refers to his need to put abstractions into context in order to find “physical meaning”:
S3 The relation between Vector and EMFields was really good. I failed the exam when I took it then,
in the last quarter, largely because I didn’t feel any, sort of had no connection to what it’s used for
actually. We did take EMFields at the same time, but we didn’t get so far that you could start to
look around… there was sort of no… you learn a bit about vorticity and so on but it has no
physical meaning before you’ve done the EMFields course. But then when we had learned electro-
magnetic theory, learned a whole load of Vector, then the parts of that course started to come
together

Being able to confirm abstract concepts in a practical context is referred to:

S12 There (Electrical Measurements) we measure, in some of the labs, things we learned about in

EMFields, phenomena with reflections and suchlike, and see that they do in fact exist, that’s a sort
of link maybe

3.5. E. Courses fit together into an adaptable whole

The courses are seen as constituting parts of a whole, and the strict ordering structure of
the educational programme knowledge content is broken apart. An internal dynamic
enables a picture to develop which is different on different occasions, depending on what
aspects are brought into focus.

S1, speaking of courses where he has gained understanding:

S1

It was sort of, you discovered that in some way, like in RealB, that you suddenly can simply
transform a two-dimensional [double-]integral to a three-dimensional [triple-]integral at once.
Now it feels much more obvious that it is so. It didn’t then. To be able to see something in a
different way, that you couldn’t see before

S10 describes with pleasure tying things together, achieving a “knowledge object” in
Marton & Entwistle’s sense:

S10 Well, when we did Complex, and got towards the end of it, you sort of began to see how a lot of it
is related to what you studied in the first year, then, you sort of got to tie in lots of the maths
courses you’d taken earlier, you got a bird’s eye perspective over the whole thing [as you came to
the end] of Complex, so you started to feel now, now I see some sort of connections anyway. That
was really cool.

And S1 takes s further step in realising that what has been encapsulated in one course can
be seen as a special case of a more general field of knowledge; the knowledge object is
not only visualisable but reformable when needed:

S1

It’s quite a lot of application. In Control you draw upon examples from Mechanics when you are
working out your systems. And in MatStrength it’s actually a question of, you actually take your
mechanics systems and make them very very small, so that they can’t shear and bend. You’re
taking Mechanics into a new dimension, that’s why you use deformable bodies there [in Strength
of Materials] instead. Large bodies. That sounded good!

3.6. F. Courses in Physics come into physics

The borders between courses are erased, a physics knowledge object is constituted,
physics and the physics world are one with the knower.

S12 I think you get a lot of ahah-sensations in the EMFields course, you get to understand a lot of

things that before you simply accepted. It’s really courses like that that are fun to take, you
understand how a microwave oven works and suchlike

What is met in courses is related to potential others in potential situations outside
university

S10 That’s how it was in Control. There you had to tackle problems and sort of feel that, if we had a

specific problem here, something technical that an engineer could come across, how would I solve
it? And how good would my solution be? There really ought to be a lot of that, things that an
employer wants. You should be able to come up with a solution and then judge your solution
critically, and see if it is acceptable. That feels right somehow.

3.7. Summary of the provenance of the categories

Categories arise from the pool of meaning provided by the set of interviews, and not from
individual students. We can see, however, extracts from individual interviews that
indicate one category or the other. In table 1 we summarise the provenance of the
categories.

A

B

C

D

E

F

S2, S9, S18

S2, S5, S6, S7, S8, S9, S10, S11, S15, S17, S18, S19

S1, S3, S4, S7, S10, S11, S12, S13, S14, S16, S17, S20

S1, S3, S4, S8, S11, S12, S13, S14, S16, S17, S20

S1, S10, S12, S16

S10, S12, S16

Table 1. Individual interviews indicate a range of categories

4. Discussion

The empirical study has resulted in an six-tiered outcome space of ways in which students
of Physics experience their first year of study, which is a hierarchy of sense-making. The
first three (A, B, C) refer to courses as courses, knowledge fragments being the
components of the courses, isolated in A, building on one another in B, and meshing into
one another in C. The second group of three (D, E, F) bring the meaning of the content
into focus and ascribe different relationships between the content – mutual in D, multiple
in E and finally extending outside the programme to physics phenomena in F. The
similarity to studies of conceptions of learning is striking (Marton et al., 1993, Säljö,
1979), in that meaning, or sense-making, is a watershed between two groups of three
categories.

We have introduced the notions of “study knowledge object” and “physics knowledge
object” to distinguish between making sense of the study situation in one way or another,
and making sense of physics. To varying degrees these two aspects of the knowledge
object are present throughout the categories, but “study” dominates the earlier categories
and “physics” becomes increasingly in focus in the latter categories.

4.1. The structure of the experience of the first year of Physics

In Table 2 we have analysed the results according to the structure of experience (Marton
& Booth, 1997). It is seen that the referential aspect indicates clearly the shift from no-
meaning to meaning between C and D. The external horizon of the structural aspect of the
ways of experiencing shifts gradually from an unproblematised studying at the university,
here and now, through a refocusing on future study and the world outside the university,
to finally embrace physics as a way of seeing the world outside the university. The
internal horizon of the structural aspect – how the parts of the ways of experiencing are
related to one another and to the whole – shifts in a more discrete sense. Isolated, or
possibly grouped, fragments are all there are in A, the blocks taking on a linear
preordained arrangement in B. In C, thanks to overlapping fragments, the preordained
linear arrangement has branches and parallel paths as well, while in D the fragments are
related more by meshing facilitated by understanding, thus giving freedom for
realignment and restructuring. In E forms of knowledge are constituted of the fragments
to be found in courses, which give new perspectives and ways of seeing, while in F these
ways of seeing are directed outside current experience to an unknown future.

Based on the analytical device of the phenomenographic structure of experience, we have
extended the analysis to consider the nature of knowledge, drawing largely on the
characteristics of the internal horizon of the structure of the ways of experiencing the first
year of Physics. Further, we consider, following Perry’s seminal work “Epistemological
and ethical development in the college years” (Perry, 1970/99) an ethical aspect of the
experience, drawing largely on the referential aspect.

Let us relate the categories to the individuals who were interviewed. If we look back to
Table 1 we see that almost all students expressed experiencing the first year in more than
one of these ways, and most expressed ways that fall above and below the "sense-
making" watershed. That so many voiced C, even if mainly speaking of sense-making, is
hardly surprising giving the design of the interview, based as it was on a chart of
individual courses. Of the 20 interviewed, 8 students expressed ways of experiencing
their first year of Physics only in the range A to C, which can be interpreted as their not
being competent to see the first year in a sense-making way. What these also have in
common is reference to the weight of studies and the effects it has had on them. S2, an
ambitious student not content to get less than top grades and having chosen Physics
because it is reputed to be the toughest programme, says at the end of his interview:

S2

Sometimes it feels as though there’s much too much to do. You can understand that a lot drop out.
And there are periods when you can never take time off, there’re always things to do but you don’t
have time. Then it is easy to lose interest and go over to something else instead … when you get to
exams you generally have to learn what you need to and it often feels that during the study quarters
you are mostly behind and don't know anything.

S6, less confident of her abilities relative to her peers, says:

S6

Interest has been killed by the tempo.

Structural

Aspect

Referential aspect Nature of

Ethical aspect

External horizon

Internal horizon

A University

Gaining a degree

Courses, tasks,
organisation,
teachers, exams,

B University, future
years of Physics

Courses, red
threads,

knowledge

Isolated
fragments,
encapsulated in
courses

Ordered
fragments

Fitting fragments

Authority with
teachers.
"We need the
degree"

Authority with
teachers.
"Knowledge is
what they want
us to find"

Authority with
teachers
"Knowledge is
there to be put
together"

Meshed and re-
arrangeable
fragments
integrated by
understanding

Responsibility
shift towards self.
"Knowledge is
there to
understand"

Building up the
programme
according to the
teachers’
intentions

Building up the
programme
according to the
teachers’
intentions

Gaining an
understanding of
the basics of the
programme

C University, future
years of Physics,
world of work

Courses, red
threads, overlap
and application

D University, future
years of Physics,
world of work

Knowledge
fragments, related
by explanation
theoretical
reasoning and
confirmed by
empirical evidence

E University, future
years of Physics,
world of work

Knowledge forms
that give ways of
seeing

Gaining new ways
of seeing

Knowledge object
forming

F University, future
years of Physics,
physics
phenomena, world
of work

Knowledge forms
that give ways of
seeing physics

Gaining physics
ways of seeing

Knowledge object
related to self and
the physics world

Responsibility
with self.
"Knowledge is
ways of seeing"

Commitment to
physics a
possibility.
"Knowledge is a
way of
experiencing the
world"

Table 2.  Analysis of the variation in ways of experiencing the first year of Physics, with

respect to learning physics

One extension to this work has to be to make contact with students who have actually
dropped out and see how their ways of experience fit into and extend this picture. Another
is to look at the results in case studies of individual students.

4.2. Ethical aspect of the experience of the first year of Physics

The clear watershed between category C and D is further emphasised if an ethical aspect
of the categories is taken into account. The different interpretations of "authority" implies
different views of knowledge. By "authority" we mean where the responsibility lies for
the structure and outcome of the first year of study. In the first group of categories
(A,B,C) the authority clearly lies outside of the student, the responsibility and problem
formulation privilege are mainly taken by the teachers and other persons "in power", not
necessarily known to the student. Following their guidance, the student is guaranteed a
successful outcome of the studies. In the second group of categories (D,E,F), the

responsibility is taken and agenda is set mainly by the student. Drawing upon the work by
Perry (1999), this is very similar to his developmental scheme from the dualistic world of
Authorities and Absolutes to the relative world of Commitment and Nuances.

Parallel to the responsibility aspect, different "coping strategies" could be observed. Even
though the same physical act might exist in both groups, e.g. solving old exams (with
given solutions) close before the exam (popularly called "tentakit"~"examfix"), the
context is very different. In the first group this is one of the acts done to guess what
"they", i.e. the authorities, teachers, want, but in the second this is a opportunity to delve
into more complex problems with a context possibly easier to relate to earlier knowledge.
We see these strategies as ways of creating a confidence, an assurance, trying to take
control over the situation as it is perceived and bring a sense of purpose to one’s studies.

This leads us to relate the dichotomous approach to study – deep approaches vs. surface
approaches (Marton et al., 1984) – to the individual's perception of authority and the
source of the sense of control and/or self-assurance. A student who perceives authority for
knowledge lying outside himself will seek ways of satisfying that authority – finding the
"red thread" that teachers have built their courses round, trying to build knowledge
fragments into a coherent whole according to their plan by studying their exam solutions,
by reading over and over their notes and text-books – a classic surface approach in which
attention is paid to the tokens. A student who sees the authority lying partly at least with
himself will focus on the meaning of and relationships between knowledge fragments
using strategies of studying exam solutions to see the variation in ways the fragments can
mesh to one another, reading notes and text-books to spy hitherto unremarked
connections – the classic deep approach of seeking what the tokens signify.

We intend to extend this research with a study specifically aimed at studying the ethical
aspects of students' study, their experience of authority and ways of coping with the need
for assurance.

4.4. Conditions for learning and implications for faculty

The Physics programme is the major factor in creating the conditions for learning for
these students. The curriculum, embodied as it is in courses and teaching, is the major
contributor to the students learning physics, becoming engineering physicists in
knowledge, language and culture. While this study is not able to say much about
individual courses and individual teachers, and their effects on the conditions for learning,
one can conclude from it that the programme as a whole, and how it is organised and
conducted, has a profound effect.

Any programme that is organised as this one is, as a set of courses given by subject
specialists, (and degree programmes mostly are) has to have as an overriding goal that the
students come to see the subject matter as a related whole, and that this provides them
with ways of seeing and coping with an as yet unknown world. This issue has been
argued cogently by Bowden and Marton (1998)

This study has a clear aim, which is to lead to improvements in the study situation for
Physics students by informing and influencing the teachers and the leaders of the
programme. The vision of the programme is to produce all-round engineering physicists,
capable of working in a wide field of engineering research, development and leadership.
The goals of the programme are less clearly articulated. An oft-stated desire of
programme leaders, not least Physics, is to encourage an integration of knowledge so that
students come to an understanding of a whole from the parts that are presented in

individual courses, yet neither the goals of the programme nor the goals of individual
courses take this line. And, as we see from this study, the desired integration is not a self-
evident result, even when courses are arranged to offer different aspects of a particular
phenomenon.

A naive belief in a given structure, known to and enforced by external authority, works
against integration on the large scale, as it works against deep approaches on the small
scale. There are examples of groups of teachers who try hard to build "red threads" into
their programmes, but fail to ask "whose red thread?" The evidence from this study shows
that a red thread can be experienced as a security line to be clung to rather than an
integration guide through the constituents of an emerging physics knowledge object.
Where integration becomes possible is in Category D, when knowledge fragments are
perceived to mesh and unmesh like Lego blocks, as appropriate for current purpose.

The main aim as we see it should be to encourage and support the students to develop a
commitment to Physics and physics. How, though, can teachers create a study situation
that disfavours the early categories with their strategies of coping in order to bring
disjointed bits of knowledge into the pattern demanded by external authority, and favours
later categories in which there is a commitment to understanding and making a coherent
adaptable whole of the fragments through which new phenomena can be seen and
integrated to form a new whole?

The least but first step is to create a new, and hitherto lacking, College of teachers which
goes across department boundaries, and where the whole programme and integration from
the students’ perspective is the theme. This is in line with the recommendations of
Bowden & Marton (1998) who propose academic teams for curriculum design, cemented
by a system of quality assurance that gives both team and individual responsibilities. That
the teachers learn about one another's subjects and – above all – about their students'
learning, and to relate this to a theoretical framework for learning, needs to be the goal of
the new forum. If we see this in terms of knowledge objects, we can say that the teachers
are thus engaged in building a knowledge object which they will offer to their students.

Another, more focused, approach we can refer to is that offered by Alant et al. (Alant et
al., 1999) Focusing on the observed tendency for students to spend time on quantitative,
algorithmic aspects of their physics studies at the expense of exploring the qualitative
aspects that lead to an understanding, they devised and studied the results of a teaching
experiment. The teachers on the course adopted strategies that would foster a conceptual
focus, foster reflection on the nature of the discipline, promote reflection on the value and
relevance of what was taught, foster student activity, and make metacognition explicit.
The results showed

that the students’ approaches to learning physics and their conceptions of learning shifted dramatically
away from the rote-memorising with which they generally entered higher education. In addition,
linked to shifts in the students’ conceptions of learning were shifts in the ways in which they
conceived of the nature of science, moving from an ‘immutable’ conception of science to a more
‘tentative’ conception of science

They also relate their results to Perry’s work (Perry, 1970/99), pointing out the
epistemological variation that they observed. A distinct difference between the study of
Alant et al. and the present study is that whereas they were looking at students taking
close-knit single and extensive physics courses, the students we were looking at were
meeting a large number of teachers in a large number of separate courses. The content of
their strategies, however, could well make a substantial contribution to the activities of a
suggested College of teachers.

Conclusion

The question we addressed was "How do students make sense of Physics from the point
of view of constituting physics knowledge?". We have identified six qualitatively
different ways in which students experience the first year of Physics and analysed the
variation in terms of the structure of experience, the nature of knowledge and an ethical
aspect related to the identification of authority. Three of these ways of experiencing the
first year are considered to be unproductive in terms of making sense of physics, while
the other three support to an increasing degree the formation of a well-grounded physics
knowledge object, where fragments from different courses are integrated through ways of
seeing physics. The ethical aspects have potentially profound implications for the ways
students take on their studies, related in some sense to the deep and surface approach
dichotomy, and deserve further investigation.

6. References

Alant, B., Linder, C., & Marshall, D. (1999). Metacognitive-linked developments arising
from the design and teaching of conceptual physics. Paper presented at 8th European
Conference for Research on Learning and Instruction, August 24-28, 1999, Göteborg,
Sweden

Baillie, C. (1998). Addressing first year issues in engineering education. European
Journal of Engineering Education, 23, 4, 453-465

Bowden, J. & Marton, F. (1998). The University of Learning. Beyond quality and
competence in higher education. London: Kogan Page.

Entwistle, N. & Marton, F. (1994). Knowledge objects: understandings constituted
through intense academic study. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 64, 161-178.

Marton, F: (1981) Phenomenography – describing conceptions of the world around us.
Instructional Science, 10, 177-200

Marton, F., Beaty, E. & Dall'Alba G. (1993). Conceptions of learning. International
Journal of Educational Research, 19, 277-300.

Marton, F. & Booth, S. (1997). Learning and Awareness. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum
Ass.

Marton, F., Hounsell, D. & Entwistle, N. (Eds.) (1984). The Experience of Learning.
Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press.

Perry, W. (1970/99). Forms of ethical and intellectual development in the college years.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Inc.

Säljö, R. (1979). Learning in the learner's perspective. I. Some common-sense
conceptions. Reports from the Department of Education, Göteborg University, No 76.

