0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

4

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
0
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The preliminary results of fast neutron ﬂux measurements

in the DULB laboratory at Baksan

J.N.Abdurashitova, V.N.Gavrina, A.V.Kalikhova, A.A.Klimenkoa,b, S.B.Osetrova,b,

A.A.Shikhina, A.A.Smolnikova,b, S.I.Vasilieva,b, V.E.Yantza, O.S.Zaborskayaa.

aInstitute for Nuclear Research, 117312 Moscow, Russia

bJoint Institute for Nuclear Research, 141980 Dubna, Russia

(4 Jan 2000)

One of the main sources of a background in underground physics experiments (such as the investi-
gation of solar neutrino ﬂux, neutrino oscillations, neutrinoless double beta decay, and the search for
annual and daily Cold Dark Matter particle ﬂux modulation) are fast neutrons originating from the
surrounding rocks. The measurements of fast neutron ﬂux in the new DULB Laboratory situated
at a depth of 4900 m w.e. in the Baksan Neutrino Observatory have been performed. The relative
neutron shielding properties of several commonly available natural materials were investigated too.
The preliminary results obtained with a high-sensitive fast neutron spectrometer at the level of
sensitivity of about 10−7neutron cm−2s−1 are presented and discussed.

PACS numbers: 06.90.+v, 29.30.Hs

INTRODUCTION

NEUTRON DETECTOR

It is well known that one of the main sources of a back-
ground in underground physics experiments (such as the
investigation of solar neutrino ﬂux, neutrino oscillations,
neutrinoless double beta decay, and the search for annual
and daily Cold Dark Matter particle ﬂux modulation)
are fast neutrons originating from the surrounding rocks.
The sources of the fast neutrons are (α, n) reactions on
the light elements contained in the rock (C, O, F, Na, Mg,
Al, Si). Neutrons from spontaneous ﬁssion of 238U take
an additional contribution in a total fast neutron ﬂux
of about 15-20%. Several research groups have investi-
gated the neutron background at diﬀerent underground
laboratories [1–3]. Some of them used 6Li-dopped liquid
scintillator technique [3], and others used in addition a
Pulse Shape Discrimination technique [1].

The measurements of fast neutron ﬂux in the Deep Un-
derground Low Background Laboratory of Baksan Neu-
trino Observatory (DULB BNO) have been performed
with using of a special, high-sensitive fast neutron spec-
trometer [4]. This laboratory is located under Mt.
Andyrchy (Northen Caucasus Mountains, Russia) in a
tunnel that penetrates 4.5 km into the mountain, at a
depth of 4900 meters of water equivalent.

The results of such measurements lead to a conclu-
sion that a neutron background places a severe limitation
on the sensitivity of current and planned experiments.
Owing this fact, the development of new cost-eﬀective,
high-strength radiation shielding against neutrons be-
comes a very important task for modern non-accelerator
physics experiments. For such purposes the relative neu-
tron shielding properties of several commonly available
natural materials were investigated too. Specially, these
materials are planned for use in the construction of large-
volume underground facilities which will be covered with
suitable shielding materials and are situated in the DULB
Laboratory at Baksan.

The

spectrometer was

constructed to measure
low background neutron ﬂuxes at the level up to
10−7cm−2s−1 in the presence of intensive gamma-ray
background.

The detector consists of 30 l liquid organic scintilla-
tor viewed by photomultipliers with 19 neutron coun-
ters (3He proportional counters) uniformly distributed
through the scintillator volume (see [4] for detail). The
spectrometer schematic view and the principle of opera-
tion are shown in Fig. 1.

Fast neutrons with En > 1 MeV entering the liquid
scintillator (LS) are moderated down to thermal energy,
producing a LS signal. Then they diﬀuse through the de-
tector volume to be captured in 3He counters or on pro-
tons in the scintillator. The LS signal starts the recording
system. After triggering the system waits a signal from
any of the helium counters for a speciﬁc time. This time
window corresponds to the delay time between correlated
events in the scintillator and in the helium counters. This
is one of speciﬁc features of the detector. The signal from
the LS is ’marked’ as a coincident with a neutron capture
in the 3He counters only in the case if a single counter
is triggered during the waiting period. An amplitude of
the ’marked’ LS signal corresponds to an initial neutron
energy. This method allows us to suppress the natural
γ-ray background considerably.

The described event discriminating procedure allows
us to measure extremely low neutron ﬂuxes at the level
up to 10−7cm−2s−1 reliably even if the LS counting rate
is as large as several hundred per second. The dead time
of the detector is equal to the delay time (variable value,
but generally about 120µs) plus about 400µs, which is
needed to analyze a LS event whether it corresponds to
neutron or not. The detection eﬃciency depends in a
complicated manner on the response function of the de-
tector. As a rough estimation, we use the value of the
eﬃciency, which is equal to 0.04±0.02 in the energy range

1

FIG. 2. Delay time distribution for Pu-Be neutron source

TABLE I. Concentration of U, Th and K in the rock sam-

ples.

Sample

Quartzite
Serpentine
Surrounding

mine rock

238U, g/g

(1.1±0.1) 10−7
(2.2±0.5) 10−8
(1.6±0.3) 10−6

232T h, g/g

(4.3±0.1) 10−7
(2.0±0.9) 10−8
(4.0±0.1) 10−6

40K, g/g

(1.9±0.03) 10−7

< 1.2 10−8

(1.6±0.1) 10−6

with high precision. This information will be very use-
ful for development of new low background experiments
and searching for cost-eﬀective neutron absoption shields.
Such measurements were carried out in the DULB BNO
with using the described neutron spectrometer. This new
laboratory, consisted of 8 separate counting facilities, is
located under Mt. Andyrchy in a tunnel, which pen-
etrates 4.3 km into the mountain, at a depth of 4900
m w.e.

Quartzite and serpentine were selected as materials to
be tested because of comparatively low concentrations of
uranium- and thorium-bearing compounds contained in
these rocks. For instant, the measured concentrations
of uranium and thorium for rock serpentine are about
10−8g/g in comparison with 10−6g/g for the surround-
ing rock. As for potassium (40K) contained in serpen-
tine, it has been found less than 10−8g/g in comparison
with 10−6g/g for the surrounding rock. Measurements of
gamma-activity of diﬀerent rock samples have been per-
formed with using a well-type NaI gamma spectrometer
with level of sensitivity of about 10−9g/g, operated in one
of the underground low counting facilities at BNO [5].
The measured Th, U, and K concentrations in diﬀerent
rock samples are given in Table I.

Four series of measurements were performed with the
neutron spectrometer surrounded by diﬀerent radiation

FIG. 1. The neutron spectrometer schematic view and a
principle of operation. (1) is a PMT, (2) is a liquid scintillator
and (3) is a 3H e counter.

from 1 to 15 MeV. This is based on preliminary measure-
ments performed with a Pu-Be source. Owing this fact,
an absolute values of the neutron ﬂuxes can be estimated
with an uncertainty of 50% on the basis of available cal-
ibration data. The delay time is a speciﬁc feature of the
detector and depends on the detector design. The acqui-
sition system allows us to measure the delay time for the
neutron events directly. Such measurements were carried
out using a P u − Be source with a time window selected
to be equal to 300µs. A typical delay time distribution
is shown in Fig. 2 A ﬁtting procedure leads to a time
constant of T1/2 ∼ 55µs. According to this result it is
suﬃcient to select the time window to be equal 120µs for
an actual measurement.

MEASUREMENTS

A. The geometry

It has been mentioned that we have no yet precise
information about the detection eﬃciency, that is why
one can calculate absolute value of neutron ﬂuxes with
only 50% certainty. However, it is possible to measure
the relative neutron absorption abilities of various shields

2

FIG. 3. Schematic view of cross-section of the DULB ex-
perimental site and the detector inside the neutron shield. All
sizes in millimeters.

shields.
In the ﬁrst series the spectrometer was sur-
rounded with a lead shield 4 cm thickness (to reduce the
natural gamma-ray counting rate), and measurements of
the natural neutron background radition ﬁeld existing in
the open experimental site were performed. In the second
and third series the spectrometer was surrounded with
shields of quartzite and serpentine, respectively. The
rock shields consisted of broken pieces of various sizes,
ranging from 1 cm to 15 cm, with an eﬀective shield
thickness of 35 cm in all directions. The mean relaxation
length of fast neutrons in these shields is about 15 cm (25
g/cm2 for quartzite and 21 g/cm2 for serpentine). In the
fourth series we measured the internal background of the
detector using a neutron-absorbing shield consisted of 40-
cm thick section of polyethylene containing an admixture
of boron and water about 30 cm thick. Schematic view of
one of the investigated neutron shield and cross-section
of the DULB experimental site are shown in Fig.3.

B. Calibration

A 60Co γ-source has been used to calibrate the LS-
channel. The energy of the middle of the Compton edge
was assumed to be equal to 1 M eV in the electron en-
ergy scale, which corresponds to ∼ 3M eV in the neutron
energy scale (see Fig.4a). A Pu-Be source was used to
calibrate the NC-channel of 3He counters. The spectrum
produced by the Pu-Be source in the 3He counters has
a speciﬁc shape due to a wall eﬀect which distorts the
counter event spectrum (see Fig. 4b).
In spite of this
distortion, the range of energies observed for true neu-
tron events is less narrow compared to the broad back-

3

FIG. 4. Calibration spectra.

(a) liquid scintillator irra-
diated with 60Co; (b) 3He counters irradiated with Pu-Be
source.

ground spectrum produced by internal alphas. Using of
the only events from the neutron window coincident with
LS signals makes it possible to suppress the internal back-
ground of the detector.

C. Conditions of measurements

Main conditions for all series of measurements, such as
measuring times, LS- and NC-counting rates are given in
the Table II.

The typical exposure time for each series was a few
weeks. The γ-ray background in the open experimen-
tal site is high enough that leads to γ-counting rate in
the LS-channel of about 700 s−1. Due to this fact, fol-
lowing values of dead time were determined for diﬀerent
series: 12% of the total exposure time for measurements
with the lead shield, 4.3% for quartzite series, 2.7% for
serpentine series, and 1.5% for measurements with the
polyethylene/water shield. To calculate the true neutron
counting rates a proper dead time correction has been
performed.

Value

The measuring time, h

Dead Time, %

Total LS-rate, s−1
Total NC-rate, h−1

NC-rate in neutron window, h−1
Random coincidences rate, h−1
Rn neutron counting rate, h−1

TABLE II. Conditions of measurements.

No shield

(5 cm lead)

400
12
202

123 ± 0.6
58 ± 0.4

1.41±0.005
29.6 ± 0.5

Quartzite

Serpentine

290
4.3
83

103 ± 0.6
37 ± 0.4

0.38±0.002

9.6± 0.5

950
2.7
62

92 ± 0.3
27 ±0.2

0.19±0.001
-0.2 ± 0.3

Water+

Polyethylene

605
1.5
21

95± 0.4
27 ± 0.2

0.07±0.001

—

DATA TREATMENT AND RESULTS

Contamination of 222Rn gas inside the experimental
site can make a considerable contribution (up to 20%)
to the background γ-counting rate, which can inﬂuence
results of the performed measurements because 222Rn
activity can vary signiﬁcantly for a period of a measure-
ment.

To suppress the count rate variation eﬀect we used a
special procedure for treatment of experimental data. It
consists of the following steps.

Two types of data ﬁles are stored as a result of a mea-
surement. One of them contains the information about
neutron energy losses ( LS-signal amplitudes), 3He coun-
ters signal amplitudes, and delay time for each ’neutron’
candidate event. Data accumulation was stopped every
half-hour and overall numbers of NC-counts, LS-counts,
LS-counts above 1 M eV , and elapsed time were saved in
a ﬁle. Total background γ - spectra for every half-hour
run were measured simultaneously and saved in a sec-
ond ﬁle to make it possible to take into account a time
variation of the background γ-counting rate.

We consider three contributions into the experimen-
tally measured counting rate Rmeas: the random coinci-
dence rate Rrnd, the internal detector background count-
ing rate Rbkg, and the ’neutron’ counting rate Rn, so that

Rn = Rmeas − Rrnd − Rbkg

(1)

We have made obvious assumption that the total back-
ground γ-spectrum and the random coincidence spec-
trum have the same shapes. To obtain random coin-
cidence spectrum for further subtraction procedure the
total background γ-spectrum has been normalized with
a factor corresponding to the calculated random coinci-
dence rate. The maximal evaluation for the random co-
incidence rate, if the LS- and NC- events are absolutely
independent, can be calculated by the following way:

Rrand = rγrw

n ∆t,

(2)

where rγ is the γ-rate, rw
n is the 3He-counters count-
ing rate in the determined neutron energy window, ∆t
is the time window. In the case of the performed mea-
surements (RLS ≫ RHe), this evaluation is very close
to the real counting rate of random coincidences. Due
to a variation in time of the 222Rn activity, the current
value of ri
γ depends on time too. Owing to this fact,

4

we applied the described subtraction procedure to each
half-hour run with corresponding current value of Ri
rnd,
and then summarized resulting neutron spectra in a total
serial spectrum. The accumulated LS-spectra of all coin-
cidented events (Rmeas) and the recalculated spectra of
random coincidence (Rrnd) for the no-shield, quartzite,
and serpentine series are presented in Fig. 5.

An internal detector background spectrum Rbkg has
been accumulated inside the neutron-absorbing shield
consisting of polyethylene and water. Obtained count-
ing rate of the internal background correlated (neutron-
type, but non-neutron) events was measured as 27 counts
per hour, which in terms of a neutron ﬂux corresponds
to (8.1±0.5) 10−7 s−1cm−2. The residual LS-spectra
(Rmeas − Rrnd) in comparison with the internal back-
ground LS-spectrum (Rbkg) are presented in Fig. 6.

Performing the total subtraction procedure in accord-
ing with the equation (1) we obtain values of the neutron
counting rate Rn for the no-shield, quartzite, and serpen-
tine series. Taking into account the detection eﬃciency
uncertainty (ε = 0.04 ± 0.02) the obtained values of fast
neutron ﬂuxes (above 700 keV of neutron energy) are
presented here in a following way:

a(3.5±1.1) 10−7 s−1cm−2 for the no-shield measure-

ment,

a(2.9±1.1) 10−7 s−1cm−2 for quartzite shield,
a(0.6±0.7) 10−7 s−1cm−2 for serpentine shield,
were a = (ε + ∆ε)/ε.
One can see that the resulting neutron ﬂux measured
when the serpentine shield was in place were found to
be at about the minimum level of sensitivity of the spec-
trometer. It means that a neutron background inside the
serpentine shield is consisted with a neuron ﬂux less than
0.7 10−7s−1cm−2. It indicates that serpentine is indeed
clear from uranium and thorium, and is, therefore, the
most likely candidate for use as a cost-eﬀective neutron
shield component material for large-scale low background
experiments.

A delay time distribution analysis was performed to
understand the origin of a high level of the internal de-
tector background.

DELAY TIME DISTRIBUTIONS

Decays of Bi and Po radioactive isotopes, such as

FIG. 5. The accumulated LS-spectra of all coincidented
events (Rmeas, solid) and the recalculated spectra of random
coincidences (Rrnd, dashed)

FIG. 6. Residual LS-spectra (Rmeas - Rrnd, solid) in com-
parison with the internal background LS-spectrum (Rbkg,
dashed).

214Bi(e, ˜ν)

164µs

→ 214P o(α) → ...,

(3)

which can take place in the helium counter walls, have
been considered as main possible sources of the signiﬁ-
cant internal background. To imitate an actual neutron
event beta decay of 214Bi can ﬁre the liquid scintillator,
followed by a delayed capture α - signal from Po decay
in helium counters. The delay time distribution of the
neutron-type coincidented events obtained for the series
in the water shield is shown in Fig. 7. Fitting procedure
leads to the time constant T1/2 = 164µs.

It means that, as it was supposed, the origin of the
internal background of our detector is mostly due to con-
tamination of 214Bi in the 3He-counter walls. The delay
time distributions for other series of measurements are
shown in Fig. 8.

The following ﬁtting function was used to analize these

distributions (t is expressed in µs):

A + N e−t ln2/55 + Be−t ln2/164,

(4)

where A is a constant, N is an amplitude corresponding
to neutrons and B corresponds to internal background.

The ratio N/B, which was obtained in this manner, de-
creases from measurements in the lead shield to the mea-
surements in the serpentine shield.

CONCLUSIONS

The main results of the measurements can be summa-

rized as follows.

(I). The preliminary results obtained from the fast
neutron spectrum accumulated in the open experimen-
tal site of the DULB Laboratory at Baksan is consisted
with a neutron ﬂux (for neutrons with energy above 700
keV) estimated as values from 5.3 × 10−7 cm−2s−1 to
1.8×10−7 cm−2s−1 depending on the present uncertainty
in determination of the detection eﬃciency.

(II). The neutron spectrometer sensitivity in a shielded
experimental site is estimated as 0.5 × 10−7 cm−2s−1 for
a measuring time of about 1000 h.

(III). It is shown that the main source of the detec-
tion sensitivity limitation, rather then random coinci-
dences, is the internal background of the spectrometer,

5

FIG. 8. Delay time distributions for the coincident events
measured in the series with no shield, quartzite and serpen-
tine.

FIG. 7. Delay time distribution for the coincident events

Physics, v.9, n.2 (1998) pp. 163-172

measured in the water shield.

[2] F. Arneodo, F. Cavanna, S. Parlatti et al. INFN/AE-

[1] V. Chazal, B. Chambon, M. De Jesus et al. Astroparticle

97/52 (1997)

[3] R.Alexan et al. NIM A274 203(1989).
[4] J.N. Abdurashitov, V.N. Gavrin, G.D. Eﬁmov, A.V. Ka-
likhov, A.A. Shikhin and V.E. Yants, “Instrum. and Exp.
Tech.” , Vol. 40, No 6, 1997, pp. 741–752.

[5] A.A.Klimenko, A.A.Pomansky, A.A.Smolnikov, NIM B17

445(1986).

which is mostly due to the presence of α-particle emitters
(214Bi −214 P o decays) in the 3He-counters walls.

(IV). The achieved neutron background inside the ser-
pentine shield is consisted with a neutron ﬂux less than
0.7 10−7s−1cm−2. It indicates that serpentine is one of
the more likely candidate for use as a cost-eﬀective neu-
tron shield component material for large-scale low back-
ground experiments.

We have obtained the presented results using the sim-
ple event discrimination procedure and did not use pulse
shape discrimination yet. Nevertheless, it takes us a pos-
sibility to measure extremely low neutron ﬂuxes up to
10−7cm−2s−1 even when external γ-counting rate is more
than 200 s−1.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to I.I.Pyanzin for the management in
proving of reserves and quarrying of the domestic ultra
basic rock samples. We thank P.S.Wildenhain for care-
ful reading of this article and his critical remarks. We
acknowledge the support of the Russian Foundation of
Basic Research. This research was made possible in part
by the grants of RFBR No. 98–02 16962 and No. 98-02-
17973.

6

