0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
7
1

 

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
3
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SUPERHEATED DROP AS A NEUTRON SPECTROMETER

Mala Das, B. K. Chatterjee, B. Roy1 and S. C. Roy

Department of Physics, Bose Institute

93 / 1 A. P. C. Road, Calcutta 700009, India

Abstract

Superheated drops are known to vaporise when exposed to energetic nu-
clear radiation since the discovery of bubble chamber. The application of su-
perheated drops in neutron research specially in neutron dosimetry is a subject
of intense research for quite sometime. As the degree of superheat increases in
a given liquid, less and less energetic neutrons are required to cause nucleation.
This property of superheated liquid makes it possible to use it as a neutron
spectrometer. Neutron detection eﬃciency of superheated drops made of R12
exposed to Am-Be neutron source have been measured over a wide range of
temperature -17oC to 60oC and the results have been utilized to construct the
energy spectrum of the neutron source. This paper demonstrates that a suit-
able neutron spectrometer may be constructed by using a single liquid and
varying the temperature of the liquid suitably at a closer grid.

PACS No. : 29.30 Hs, 29.40.-n

Keywards : SDD, R12, temperature dependence, neutron, eﬃciency, spec-

trometry.

1Author for communication : Tel.no.-350 2402/03, Ext.-305, Fax no.- 91 033 350 6790, e-mail-

biva@boseinst.ernet.in

1

1. INTRODUCTION

A ﬂuid kept in the liquid state above its boiling temperature is called super-
heated. Application of superheated liquid to detect ionizing radiation is well known
from the times of bubble chamber[1]. The resurgence of its use has been observed
from the late seventies[2,3] and the investigations on the subjects in the last two
decades turned into an almost maturing technology especially to detect neutrons and
more recently to detect photons. The suitability of using superheated drops as a
neutron dosimeter[4,5,6,7,8] has already been established. The superheated drops
are now commercially available as neutron and photon dosimeter in the trade name
superheated drop detector (SDD) 2 and bubble detector (BD). 3 In a superheated
liquid minimum energy (threshold) required to nucleate decreases as the degree of
superheat increases. The degree of superheat of a liquid could be deﬁned simply by
the diﬀerence of ambient temperature above the boiling point of the liquid. There-
fore, liquids with lower boiling points possess higher degree of superheats at a given
ambient temperature (above their boiling points) and as the ambient temperature
increases the given liquid becomes more and more superheated. This property of
the superheated liquid are being utilised to develop neutron dosimetry and neutron
spectrometry[2,3,9,10]. There are two distinct types of methodologies used in de-
veloping neutron spectrometer. In one, a collection of superheated samples made of
liquids with diﬀerent boiling points (i.e. with diﬀerent threshold neutron energies)
are utilised[11], while in the other, two liquids are chosen and the temperature of
the liquids are varied at four diﬀerent temperatures to obtain eight sets of threshold
energies[12,13,14] (equivalent to eight diﬀerent samples with diﬀerent boiling points).
The temperature variation method is superior than using samples with diﬀerent boil-
ing points. By controlling the temperature of the sample one can, in principle, change
the threshold neutron energy at any desired level (equivalent to using ’ﬁner’ windows
to scan the spectrum), while in the other method one is limited by the availability
of liquids with lower boiling points (equivalent to using ’coarser’ windows). In the
present work we measured the detection eﬃciency of a single sample made of R-
12(Dichlorodiﬂuoromethane : CCl2F2), which is known to be sensitive to neutrons of
energies from thermal to tens of MeVs, by (almost) continuously changing tempera-
tures over a wide range. The response of the sample to Am-Be neutrons have been
measured at about thirty diﬀerent temperatures in the range which is equivalent to
using thirty diﬀerent samples with thirty diﬀerent boiling points (the experiment has
been actually performed more than 50 diﬀerent temperatures in the range -17oC to
about 60oC but it has been observed that the sample started responding from about
0.5oC to Am-Be neutrons). In addition to the advantage of using single liquid, con-

2Superheated Drop Detector is the registered trademark of Apfel Enterprises Inc, NewHaven,

CT, USA

3Bubble Detector is the registered trademark of Bubble Technology Industries Ltd.

2

trolling the temperature enables one to scan the energy spectrum by ﬁner ’windows’
thereby improving the inherent energy resolution of the spectrometer when compared
with other such spectrometers using superheated liquid.

2. PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION

The superheated state of the liquid is a metastable state and the nucleation
in this state can be initiated by the presence of heterogeneous nucleation sites such
as air bubbles, solid impurites, gas pockets etc. or by radiation interactions. The
nucleation in superheated state starts with the formation of a critical sized vapour
embroy. The free energy required to form a spherical vapour bubble of radius r in a
liquid is given by

4
3

G = 4πr2γ (T ) −

πr3(pv − po)

(1)

where γ(T ) is the liquid-vapour interfacial tension, pv is vapour pressure of the super-
heated liquid and po is the ambient pressure. The diﬀerence pv -po is called the degree
of superheat of a given liquid. One can see from equation (1) that G is maximum at

r = 2γ (T )/(pv − po) = rc

(2)

where rc is called the critical radius. When a bubble grows to the size of the critical
radius it becomes thermodynamically unstable and grows very fast till the entire
liquid droplet vaporises.

The minimum amount of energy (W) needed to form a vapour bubble of

critical size rc as given by Gibbs[15] from reversible thermodynamics is

W = 16πγ 3 (T )/3(pv − po)2

(3)

where γ (T ) = C (Tc − T − d) with Tc the critical temperature of the liquid and C
and d are constants [16].

With increase in temperature, since the degree of superheat (pv-po) increases
and γ(T ) decreases, the minimum energy (W ) required for vapour bubble nucleation
will be less. The variation of W with temperature for superheated drops of R-12 is
shown in ﬁgure 1. Therefore W , the threshold energy for nucleation depends on the
type and the temperature of the liquid. When a neutron of energy En interacts with
a nucleus of atomic weight A, the maximum energy that can be transferred to the
nucleus from the neutron is through the elastic head on collision and is given by,

Ei = 4AEn/(A + 1)2

(4)

3

After receiving the energy, the nucleus is scattered from its atom and moves
through the liquid losing its energy through Coulombic interaction until it comes to
rest. For a given neutron energy, diﬀerent nuclei of the liquid will receive diﬀerent
amount of energy, depending on their atomic weight. The ion with the highest value
of linear energy transfer (LET) or (dE/dx) in the liquid, will play the major role in
vapour nucleation[17]. The energy deposited along that part of the ion’s path (L)
corresponding to about twice the critical radius contributes signiﬁcantly to bubble
formation[17,18]. For nucleation to occur this deposited must exceed W the minimum
energy required for bubble formation.

Usually most of the energy is lost into heat and a very small fraction of the
deposited energy is utilised in nucleation and W/Ec is called the thermodynamic
eﬃciency (ηT of nucleation [17].

W = krcdE/dx = 2ηT rcdE/dx

(5)

where k (constant) equals twice the thermodynamic eﬃciency (η). Hence, in

the equation

W/rc = kdE/dx

(6)

relates the threshold energy (corresponding to the dE/dx) for nucleation to the am-
bient temperature (corresponding to W/rc). This enables us to convert the tempera-
ture scale of superheated drops to the (threshold) energy scale of incident neutrons.
Therefore by varying the ambient temperature of the superheated drops, one can
observe the variation of the SDD response at diﬀerent neutron energies which has
been used in neutron spectrometry.

3. EXPERIMENT

The experiment was performed with superheated drops of R12 at diﬀerent
temperatures by using the volumetric method, described by Das et al.[19]. The vial
containing the sample was connected to a graduated horizontal glass tube with a
small coloured water column as marker. The vapourization of a liquid drop displaces
the water column by the distance corresponding to the volume of vapour formed.
The details of the preparation of the sample is given elsewhere[20].

If neutrons of ﬂux ψ are incident on superheated drops of volume V , liquid of

densityρL and molecular weight M the vaporization rate is given by

dV
dt

= V ψ

NAρL

M

ηd X niσi

(7)

4

where NA = Avogadro Number

d = average droplet volume
ni = weight factor of the ith element in the molecule whose

neutron nucleus elastic scattering cross section is σi

η = eﬃciency of neutron detection.

Due to nucleation by neutrons, the displacement of the water column along a
horizontal glass tube was measured as a function of time. The procedure of calculating
η from the measured displacement of water column has been explained in detail in
one of our recent publications[19].

The temperature of the sample was controlled by an indigeneously made tem-
perature controller. For low temperature measurements the sample was placed in
an alcohol bath sitting on the top of a cold ﬁnger dipped in liquid nitrogen. The
upper part of the ﬁnger was wrapped with heating tape and by applying diﬀerent
voltages to the tape, diﬀerent steady temperatures of the bath can be achieved. For
measurements of higher temperatures the same setup was used without the liquid
nitrogen. The ﬂuctuation of temperature in these measurements was found to be
within ±0.1oC.

In the experiment the ambient temperature of the sample was increased slowly
from low to any desired higher value and the nucleation rate was measured at each
temperature. The measurement was performed from in a temperature range of -17oC
to about 60oC in a close grid necessary to obtain the energy spectrum of the source
from temperature. The nucleation due to background radiation and due to other
ﬂuctuations has been subtracted. The liquid was observed to become unstable due
to spontaneous nucleatation at about 60oC.

4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND COMPUTATION OF THE NEU-
TRON ENERGY

The variation of neutron detection eﬃciency (η) for R12 with temperature in
presence of neutrons from Am-Be neutron source is presented in ﬁgure 2. The solid
line in ﬁgure 2 is the spline smoothing of the eﬃciency data at diﬀerent temperatures.
The uncertainties presented in the ﬁgure are the total experimental uncertainties of
estimating η. The derivative of eﬃciency, dη/dT against temperature is shown in
ﬁgure 3. Now one has to estimate the equivalence of the energy of the detected
neutrons with the temperature of the SDD sample. One way to do it is to expose
the sample at diﬀerent temperatures to diﬀerent monoenergetic neutron sources and
to note the threshold neutron energies for nucleation [12,14]. A novel approach has
been used in this work.

5

As has been presented in Section 2, the diﬀerent nuclei of the superheated
liquid would receive diﬀerent amount of energy and they must have diﬀerent dE/dx.
In case of R-12 containing C, Cl and F, dE/dx of these ions with diﬀerent neutron
energy are presented in Figure 4. From Figure 4, it is clear that the dE/dx values
of C, Cl and F are comparable in the neutron energy of our interest and we take the
average value of dE/dx of all the ions using the equation below

(dE/dx)average = X niσi(dE/dx)i/ X niσi

(8)

where ni is the number of ions of the i-th element in a R12 molecule, σi is the neutron-
nucleus elastic scattering cross section and (dE/dx)i is the LET of the i-th ion. The
variation of average dE/dx as a function of neutron energy is shown in ﬁgure 5.

From equations (3) and (5), we obtain

(dE/dx) = 8πγ 2 (T )/3k(pv − po)

(9)

From the equation above the dE/dx has been plotted against temperature for diﬀer-
ent arbitrary values of k of which only four such plots (k=1, 0.1, 0.05, 0.0195) are
presented in ﬁgure 6 using the equivalence between the temperature of the sample
and the incident neutron energy from ﬁgure 5. The variation of threshold neutron
energy for nucleation with temperature of the sample for diﬀerent k has been studied
of which four such variations are shown in ﬁgure 7. With the optimum value of k
the temperature axis of the ﬁgure 3 has been converted to neutron energy and the
resulting spectrum was ﬁtted with the peak neutron energy of the 241Am-Be neutron
spectrum. The best ﬁt is obtained for k equals 0.0195. The analysis has been per-
formed upto a maximum temperature of 42.5oC. The ﬁnal neutron energy spectrum
of 241Am-Be source obtained from our analysis is shown in ﬁgure 8.

If L = 2rc is taken as the distance in the ion’s path which contributes signif-
icantly in nucleation of superheated drops [17,18] in calculating the thermodunamic
eﬃceincy of nucleation, our experimental analysis produces the value close to 0.01.
It may be noted here that Apfel et al.[17] obtained this value ranging from 0.03 to
0.05.

6

5. DISCUSSION

The result shows that η increases with temperature. At low temperature, the
threshold energy for nucleation (W) is high, which indicates that a larger energy is
required to cause nucleation. According to equation 3 as temperature increases, W
decreases and more and more neutrons from the low energy range of the spectrum
are taking part in nucleation. So η increases with temperature. The sharp increase
of η near 25oC corresponds to detection of neutrons with energies ranging from high-
est available to those at the peak of the spectrum. At high temperature when all
the neutrons of the spectrum contribute in nucleation, η should be constant with
temperature. But at about 45oC, η increases again. We suspected that the sample
becomes sensitive to gamma rays coming out of the Am-Be source. In a separate
experiment, we indeed observed that R-12 becomes sensitive to gamma rays at about
45oC. Since, as mentioned before, the analysis has been performed upto a maximum
temperature of 42.5oC, the contribution due to gamma rays is absent in the measured
energy spectrum in this work.

Figure 3 shows that the dη/dT vs. T graph resembles the neutron energy
spectrum of 241Am-Be where the second peak corresponds to the gamma sensitivity
of the sample. The ambient temperature of the superheated drops was converted
to the energy of the neutrons following the method described in Section 4. So by
using superheated drops at diﬀerent temperatures, it is possible to obtain the neutron
energy spectrum. This indicates important use of SDD in neutron spectrometry. The
maximum uncertianty in neutron energy as could be found from ﬁgure 7 is within 5%
in the entire region of our investigation. This method can be used to determine any
other neutron energy outside the present range, only then one has to consider the
ion with maximum dE/dx and the rest of the analysis is same as this. The present
study also helps to select the suitable material (liquid) for a given neutron energy
spectrum.

It has been observed in this experiment that the nucleation rate of superheated
drops rapidly changes for samples exposed to thermal shock compared to samples
whose temperature was changed slowly. The liquid appeared to be more fragile when
temperature was changed rapidly. Though this is not quite unexpected in the exact
physics of this phenomenon, why the liquid becomes more fragile under heat shock,
requires further investigation.

7

REFERENCES

1. D.A. Glaser, Phys. Rev. A 87, 665 (1952).
2. R.E. Apfel, US Patent 4,143,274 (1979).
3. R.E. Apfel, Nucl. Inst. Meth. 162, 603(1979).
4. R.E. Apfel and S.C. Roy, Nucl. Inst. Meth. 219, 582 (1984).
5. R.E. Apfel and Y.C. Lo, Health Phys. 56, 79 (1989).
6. R.E. Apfel, Rad. Prot. Dos. 44, 343 (1992).
7. S.C. Roy, R.E. Apfel and Y.C. Lo, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A255, 199 (1987).
8. H.Ing, Nuclear Tracks. 12, 49 (1986).
9. R.E. Apfel, Nucl. Inst. Meth. 179, 615 (1981).
10. K. Chakraborty, P. Roy, S.G. Vaijapurkar and S.C. Roy, Proc. of 7th National
Conference on Particles and Tracks, Jodhpur pp 133 (1990).
11. H. Ing, R. A. Noulty and T. D. Mclean, Rad. Meas.27, 1 (1995).
12. F. d’Errico, W. G. Alberts, G. Curzio, S. Guldbakke, H. Kluge, and M. Matzke,
Rad. Proc. Dos. 61, 159 (1995).
13. F. d’Errico, R. E. Apfel, G. Curzio, E. Dietz, G. F.Gualdrini, S. Guldbakke, R.
Nath, B. R. L. Siebert, Rad. Proc. Dos. 70, 1 (1997).
14. F. d’Errico, W. G. Alberts and M. Matzke, Rad. Proc.Dos. 70, 103 (1997).
15. J. W. Gibbs, Translations of the Connecticut Academy III, p.108 (1875).
16. F. H. Newman and V. H. L. Searle, The general properties of matter(ﬁfth ed.),
p.189 (1985).
17. R. E. Apfel, S. C. Roy and Y. C. Lo, Phys. Rev. A31, 3194 (1985).
18. M. J. Harper and M.E. Nelson, Radiat. Prot. Dosim. 47 , 535 (1990).
19. Mala Das,B. Roy, B. K. Chatterjee and S. C. Roy, Rad.Meas. 30, 35 (1999).
20. B. Roy, B. K. Chatterjee and S. C. Roy, Rad. Meas. 29, 173 (1998).

8

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Fig. 1: Variation of threshold energy (W) required for nucleation in R12 as a
function of temperature (T).

Fig. 2: Observed variation of neutron detection eﬃciency (η) as a function of
temperature (T) in R12.

Fig. 3: Variation of the derivative of neutron detection eﬃciency (dη/dT) as a
function of temperature (T).

Fig. 4: Variation of stopping power (dE/dx) of diﬀerent ions (C, Cl, F) in Freon-12
as a function of neutron energy.

Fig. 5: Variation of average stopping power (dE/dx)average over three diﬀerent ions
in Freon-12 as a function of neutron energy.

Fig. 6: Variation of stopping power (dE/dx) of ion in R12 as a function of temper-
ature (T) of the sample, for diﬀerent arbitrary values of k.

Fig. 7: Variation of neutron energy as a function of temperature (T) of the sample,
for diﬀerent k.

Fig. 8: The neutron energy spectrum of 241Am-Be obtained from the experiment.

9

