0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
7
1

 

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
3
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The rf control and detection system for PACO

the parametric converter detector

Ph. Bernard1 , G. Gemme2∗, R. Parodi2 and E. Picasso3

1)CERN, CH-1211, Geneva 23, Switzerland

2)INFN-Sezione di Genova, via Dodecaneso 33, I-16146 Genova, Italy
3)Scuola Normale Superiore, Piazza dei Cavalieri 7, I-56126, Pisa, Italy

Abstract

In this technical note the rf control and detection system for a
detector of small harmonic displacements based on two coupled mi-
crowave cavities (PACO) is presented. The basic idea underlying this
detector is the principle of parametric power conversion between two
resonant modes of the system, stimulated by the (small) harmonic
modulation of one system parameter. In this experiment we change
the cavity length applying an harmonic voltage to a piezo-electric
crystal. The system can achieve a great sensitivity to small harmonic
displacements and can be an interesting candidate for the detection of
small, mechanically coupled, interactions (e.g. high frequency gravi-
tational waves).

1 Introduction

In this technical note we describe the rf control and detection system for a
detector of small harmonic displacements based on two coupled microwave
cavities (PACO). This experimental conﬁguration was initially proposed by
Bernard, Pegoraro, Picasso and Radicati [1], [2] and later put in practice by
Reece, Reiner and Melissinos [3], [4], and has been discussed in some detail

∗e-mail: gianluca.gemme@ge.infn.it

1

in previous papers [5], [6], [7], [8]. Here we just remind the basic principles
underlying the detector operation.

The detector consists of an electromagnetic resonator with two resonant
frequencies ωs and ωa both much higher than the characteristic frequency
of the harmonic perturbation Ω, and which satisfy the resonance condition
|ωs − ωa| = Ω. In the scheme proposed in [1], [2] the two resonant modes
are obtained coupling two identical resonators; ωs is the frequency of the
symmetric (even) resonant mode, while ωa is the frequency of the antisym-
metric (odd) one. If some energy is initially stored in the symmetric mode,
an harmonic perturbation can induce the transition of some energy to the
initially empty level that can be extracted at frequency ωa. The electromag-
netic power in the antisymmetric mode is proportional to the square of the
amplitude of the perturbation.

In this experiment we use two cylindrical cavities coupled trough an ax-
ial iris and we change the cavity length applying an harmonic voltage to a
piezo-electric crystal. To increase the sensitivity of the detector a resonator
geometry and ﬁeld conﬁguration with high geometrical factor and high qual-
ity factor Q are preferred. To avoid electron ﬁeld emission from the cavity
surface rf modes with vanishing electric ﬁeld at the surface are mandatory.
For these reasons we have chosen TE mode (TE011) superconducting cavi-
ties. The choice of frequency was imposed by the maximum dimension of
the resonator that can be housed in a standard vertical cyostat; in our case
the inner diameter is 300 mm, giving us enough room for a 3 GHz, TE011
resonator.

The system can achieve a great sensitivity to small harmonic displace-
ments (up to δl/l ≈ 10−20 @ Ω =1 MHz, and can be an interesting candidate
for the detection of small, mechanically coupled, interactions (e.g. high fre-
quency gravitational waves).

2 PACO rf system

The three main functions of rf control and measurement system of the PACO
experiment are shown in ﬁgure 1.

The system performs three separate functions listed in the following.

1. The ﬁrst task of the system is to lock the rf frequency of the master
oscillator to the resonant frequency of the even mode of the cavity and
to keep constant the energy stored in the mode.

2

Figure 1: PACO rf system

2. The second task is to increase the detector’s sensitivity by driving the
coupled resonators purely in the even mode and receiving only the
rf power up- converted to the odd mode by the perturbation of the
cavity walls. This goal can be obtained by rejecting the signal at the
even mode frequency tacking advantage of the symmetries in the ﬁeld
distribution of the two modes.

3. The third task is the detection of the up-converted signal pushing the
detector’s sensitivity to the limit set by the contribution of the noise
sources at the operating frequency. The various noise sources have been
described and discussed in a previous paper [6].

3 The rf control loop

The output of the master oscillator (HP4422B) is fed into the cavity trough a
TWT ampliﬁer giving a saturated output of 20 Watt in the frequency range of
2-4 GHz. The stored energy in the cavity is adjusted at the operating level

3

by controlling the output of the master oscillator via the built in variable
attenuator.

The output signal is sampled via a 3 dB power splitter. The A output
of the splitter is sent to the TWT ampliﬁer, the B output is sent, trough
the phase shifter (PS), to the local oscillator (LO) input of a rf mixer acting
as a phase detector (PD). The output of the rf power ampliﬁer is fed to the
resonant cavity trough a double directional coupler, and a 180o hybrid ring
acting as a magic tee. The rf power enters the magic tee via the sum arm, Σ,
and is split in two signals of same amplitude and zero relative phase, coming
out the tee co-linear arms 1 and 2.

The rf signal, reﬂected by the input ports of the cavity, enters the magic
tee trough the co-linear arms. The two signals are added at the Σ arm
and sampled by the directional coupler to give information about the energy
stored in cavity allowing for the measurement of the coupling factor, quality
factor, stored energy. While driving the cavity on the even mode no reﬂected
signal is shown at the ∆ port of the magic tee where the signals coming from
the co-linear arms are algebraically added to zero due to the 180o phase shift
between the two signals coming by the co-linear arms.

To get the maximum of the performances of the magic tee we need to
have equal reﬂected signals (phase and amplitude) at the cavity input ports.
The equal amplitude goal can be achieved by a careful design of the input
couplers; a good design guarantees us also very nice phase equality at the
ports. To preserve the signal integrity we use matched output lines (in phase
and amplitude) inside the cryostat. The cable used for the output lines is
the best rf cable (as far as attenuation and phase stability are concerned)
money can buy, nevertheless no characterisation at cryogenic temperatures
exists. Because the phase shift is very sensitive to temperature inhomo-
geneities between the two cables and the phase diﬀerence between the two
co-linear arms of the magic tee gives a quite strong signal at the ∆ port, we
need to compensate for diﬀerential thermal contractions of the cables inside
the cryostat, leading to phase unbalance in the feed lines. To do that we
insert a phase shifter in one of the lines to reduce to a minimum the leakage
of the unwanted modes on the two ports. As we will show in the following
section, mode leakage of the even mode to the ∆ port sets a limit to the
system sensitivity increasing the overall noise level of the detector.

Mode leakage of the odd mode to the Σ port reduces the system sensitivity
by reducing the signal level available for detection. The converted rf power
(odd mode) coupled to the input Σ port is lost forever. The rf system is

4

symmetric on both the input and output ports of the detector cavity. The
output ports of the cavity are coupled for a maximum output signal on the
odd mode (detection mode) and the magic tee is used to reject the rf power at
the frequency of the even mode. The up-converted signal (odd mode) comes
out at the ∆ port of the magic tee. A fraction of the signal at the Σ port is
fed to the rf input of the phase detector PD via a low noise rf ampliﬁer. The
intermediate frequency (IF) output of the phase detector PD is fed back to
the rf master oscillator to lock the output signal to the resonant frequency
of the resonator. The total phase shift around the loop is set trough the
phase shifter PS, to have the maximum of energy stored in the detector. A
carefully design of the servo loop ampliﬁer (SLA) guarantees the stability of
the system and the rejection of the residual noise of the master oscillator up
to one MHz. The same fraction of the Σ output of the output magic tee is
used to keep constant, to 100 ppm, the energy stored in the cavity feeding
back an error signal to drive the electronically controlled output attenuator
of the master oscillator.

Great deal of care is needed in tailoring the frequency response of both
controls because the two loops can interact producing phase-amplitude os-
cillations in the rf ﬁelds stored in the cavities.

4 Sensitivity enhancement using the mode sym-

metry

The two modes of the detector cavity have (as in the case of two coupled
pendulums) opposite symmetries of the ﬁelds. The rf detection system can
greatly be improved if the mode symmetry information is used in the rf
feed and detection system to reduce the residual components of the noise
produced by the master oscillator line width. A further improvement is
obtained tacking advantage of the very high selectivity of the resonator’s
modes having a quality factor Q ≈ 1010.

Using two separate sets of ports to drive the cavity and to receive the
up-converted signal (at the frequency of the odd mode), the cavity acts as a
very sharp ﬁlter, with an high rejection of the signal noise (coming from the
master oscillator) at the frequency of the up-converted signal. The resulting
attenuation is given by the shape of the cavity resonance, a Lorentz shape
with a full width half maximum F W HM = f /Q, where f is the resonant

5

Figure 2: PACO rf control loop

frequency. This already low residual noise, can be even more reduced with
the two magic tees. Using two equal couplers at the cavity input, driven by
the two co-linear arms of a magic tee fed via the Σ port, we store energy in
the cavity only on the even mode. Receiving the up-converted signal at the
∆ port the of the second magic tee, rejects the even mode components from
the cavity by an amount given by the magic tee insulation.

In the case of an ideal magic tee the mode rejection is inﬁnite as the tee
insulation. No even mode component is transmitted trough the system and
there will be no signal at the output port if the cavity is driven purely in the
even mode. In the ideal case this results is obtained also in the more simple
scheme used by Melissinos and Reece [3], [4], measuring the up converted
power coming out of the detector along the input lines.

Our scheme gives better sensitivity and performances in the real case.
The ﬁrst obvious gain is the sum of the ∆ to Σ port insulation of the two
tees, plus the possibility of adjusting separately the input and output lines
to get better mode rejection.
In a commercial magic tee the insulation is
speciﬁed to be ≈ 25 − 35 dB over the whole bandwidth of the device (usually

6

Figure 3: Sensitivity enhancement circuit

an octave in frequency). The reason for this quite low insulation is mainly
due to the diﬃculty of balancing on a large range of frequency the phases of
the signals coming from the two co-linear arms of the tee.

Consider two equal signals in phase

V = V0 cos(ωt + φ)

(1)

entering the co-linear arms of the magic tee; suppose a phase unbalance of α
degrees between the two path to the ∆ port : the resulting signals at the ∆
are

V∆ = V0 cos(ωt + φ) − V0 cos(ωt + φ + α) =
= V0 cos(ωt + φ) − V0 cos(ωt + φ) cos α + V0 sin(ωt + φ) sin α

or, for a small value of α

V∆ = α V0 sin(ωt + φ)

(2)

(3)

Now a phase unbalance as small as ﬁve degrees reduces the insulation from
∆ to Σ port to only 25 dB. This fairly low insulation in magic tees comes

7

from the diﬃculty of designing a 90 degrees rf broad band phase shifter. A
custom designed magic tee can be optimized to give a better insulation (35-
40 dB) on a more limited frequency interval. Since the bandwidth-insulation
product is roughly constant, pushing the requirements to high insulation (70-
80 dB) reduces too much the useful bandwidth, giving not so much ﬂexibility
in the rf system design . Any mismatch between the frequencies of the cavity
modes and of the magic tees results in a very severe degradation of the
noise rejection for the whole system at the detection frequency, spoiling the
ultimate sensitivity of the detector.

Our electronic scheme allows for an independent compensation of the
magic tee phase mismatch either at the feed frequency and at the detection
frequency in a ﬂexible way: the phase mismatch is compensated using a
variable phase shifter at the input of one of the co-linear arms. Getting the
optimum phase at the input side will results in a pure excitation of the even
(drive) mode of the two cavity system, keeping the power at the frequency
of the odd (detection) mode 70 dB (the tee insulation) below the level of the
drive mode. Adjusting the phase at the output will couple to the output only
the odd mode components rejecting the even mode component by 70 dB. The
total even-odd mode rejection of the system is the sum of the attenuation
we can obtain from the two 90o hybrids; in the real world a practical limit
is set by the cross talk eﬀects between input and output limiting to 120-130
dB the maximum achievable insulation.

The price we pay for the mode selectivity improvement in our set-up
is aﬀordable and gives us the possibility of a separate and more controlled
tuning of the input and output circuits. The use of two separated ports for
the input and output (with separated magic tees) add some complication
to the rf system. The coupling coeﬃcient of the input and output port of
the two cell cavity need to be critically coupled (β = 1) to the rf source
and the rf detection system. In this way we will have the optimum transfer
of power to the even mode (a maximum of stored energy) and to the odd
mode (a maximum in the detector output). Because the frequency and ﬁeld
distribution of the two modes are quite close, the input and output ports
will be critically coupled to both modes. For that reason 50% of the even
mode signal will be coupled to the idle Σ port at the output magic tee, and
symmetrically 50% of the odd mode signal is coupled to the idle ∆ port at
the input magic tee. The new couplings will greatly aﬀect the detector’s
performances, aﬀecting the loaded quality factor of the cavity and changing
in a substantial way the way to couple the cavity to the rf source.

8

At the glance it is clear that closing the two idle ports with a matched

load will worsen the detector performance due to the following reasons:

1. Half of the converted power at the odd mode frequency will be lost

worsening of a factor 2 the detector sensitivity.

2. The loaded quality factor of the cavity is reduced by a factor roughly

2 with the same reduction in the system sensitivity.

3. The coupling to the rf generator is reduced with a reduction of the
detector eﬃciency (due to the input mismatch the incoming power is
partially reﬂected and more power is needed from the rf system to store
the same energy in the cavity).

A detailed analysis showed that closing the idle ports with an impedance
giving a reﬂection coeﬃcient amplitude one and phase zero solves the problem
reﬂecting back to the cavity all the rf power coupled to the idle ports. Using
that termination of the idle ports the two rf arms at the input and output
are de-coupled (at least by the mode selectivity factor equal to the sum of
the ∆ and Σ ports insulation of the two hybrids). An rf impedance having
reﬂection coeﬃcient equal to one is an open circuit or a short circuit plus a
180o phase shift. For this reason we close the two idle ports using a phase
shifter and a short. Again this solution gives the possibility to ﬁne tune the
system and compensate for the eﬀect of non-ideal elements in the rf system.
At the Σ port of the detection arm we insert a directional coupler to
sample a tiny amount of the even mode power coming from the cavity. This
transmitted power is fed to the frequency-amplitude servo loop used to lock
the frequency of the master oscillator to the cavity frequency and to keep
constant the energy content in the cavity. This choice gives to our rf control
system a better reliability over the Melissinos-Reece control system using the
reﬂected power from the cavity for the frequency control loop. The eﬀect of
this sampling behaves in our system as the sampling antenna used to monitor
and control the rf power fed to a superconducting cavity.

As a ﬁnal remark our system, despite some complexity, guarantees the

following improvement over the one used in the previous experiment:

• A better rejection of the phase amplitude noise of the master oscillator

obtained using the sharp resonance of the resonator itself.

• A better insulation of the drive and detector ports obtained by using

separate drive and detection arms of the rf system.

9

Figure 4: PACO detection system

• The possibility of an independent adjustment of the phase lag in the two
arms giving a better magic tee insulation at the operating frequencies.

• A greater reliability for the frequency amplitude loop using the trans-

mitted power, instead than the reﬂected, coming from the cavity.

5 Detection of the converted signal

The signal converted to the odd mode by the interaction between the mechan-
ical perturbation and the rf ﬁelds is coupled to the ∆ port of the detection
arm of the rf system and ampliﬁed by the low noise rf ampliﬁer LNA. Great
deal of care must be used in the choice of the LNA, because the noise ﬁgure
of the ampliﬁer greatly aﬀects the detector’s sensitivity in the detection re-
gion above the mechanical resonances of the cavity (typically spanning the
frequency interval 1-10 kHz) The LNA we choose is a commercial, room tem-
perature, low noise ampliﬁer with a 48 dB gain and quite large bandwidth
of 500 MHz centered on our operating frequency of 3 GHz. The LNA Noise
ﬁgure is 0.8 dB corresponding to a noise temperature of 360 K.

The converted rf signal ampliﬁed by the LNA is fed to the rf input port
(RF) of a low noise double balanced mixer M1; the local oscillator port (LO)

10

of M1 is driven by the even mode rf power (at frequency ωs) transmitted by
the cavity. The LO input level is adjusted for a minimum noise contribution
from the mixer. As shown in the previous section the input spectrum to the
RF port of the mixer is composed by two signals: the ﬁrst at frequency ωs
coming from the rf leakage of the even mode trough the detection system
(even if greatly reduced by the aforementioned double rejection of the care-
fully tuned magic tees); the second is the converted energy on the odd mode
at frequency ωa. Both signal are down converted by the M1 mixer giving
to the IF port a DC signal proportional to the even mode leakage and the
signal at frequency Ω proportional to the odd mode excitation.

The down-converted IF output is further ampliﬁed using a low noise audio
preampliﬁer (Stanford Research SR560). The combination of tunable built
in ﬁlters of the SR560 ampliﬁer allows us to further reject (if necessary) the
DC component coming from the even mode leakage. Last the output of the
audio ampliﬁer is fed to the lock in ampliﬁer (Stanford Research SR844)
used as synchronous detector driven by the low frequency synthesizer used
to drive the detector cavity trough a piezoelectric ceramic at frequency Ω.

The detection electronics for the detection of harmonic, mechanically cou-
pled interactions, at frequency Ω (as gravitational waves) is slightly diﬀerent.
Since the exact frequency and phase of the driving source is not known, we
can’t perform a synchronous detection; we need to perform a auto correla-
tion of the detector output - or to cross-correlate the outputs of two diﬀerent
detectors - to detect the down converted component at Ω. The output of the
SR560 preampliﬁer is fed to a ﬀt signal analyzer (Stanford Research SR780)
able to average the input signal on a bandwidth as small as 0.1 mHz, giving
us a very comfortable margin to get the ultimate sensitivity foreseen for the
feasibility study of our detector.

The outlined scheme of electronic detection gives us the non-marginal
beneﬁt of being (at the ﬁrst order at least) self compensating against per-
turbations changing in the same way the frequency of the two modes of the
detector. This type of perturbation is usually produced by changes of the
cavity walls due to changes of pressure of the helium bath used to keep the
cavity at the operating temperature or by the thermal contraction of the cav-
ity walls produced by changes of the operating temperature. Furthermore
similar eﬀects are produced by the radiation pressure of the electromagnetic
energy stored in the even mode; this pressure acts in a symmetrical way on
the cavity walls producing equal deformation of both the detector’s cells. The
result of the deformation is a frequency shift of both the modes of a same

11

amount of frequency; this kind of deformation does not aﬀect (at the ﬁrst
order at least) the coupling of the cells ﬁxing the amount of splitting between
the even and odd modes. As a result the frequencies of the two modes ωs
and ωa will change under the eﬀect of pressure changes on the cavity walls
but the diﬀerence Ω (related to the coupling) will not.

In our scheme the local oscillator (used for the down conversion of the rf
signal coming from the detector) is the rf signal transmitted by our cavity
at the frequency of the even mode. In this way the common mode frequency
drift of the resonators is automatically cancelled (at the ﬁrst order at least)
and the mixer M1 output is a signal exactly at the perturbation frequency
Ω. This eﬀect gives us the possibility of using a quite simple refrigeration
scheme (without any complex and cumbersome servo loop) to keep constant
the helium bath temperature and pressure.

6 Experimental results

The electromagnetic properties of the cavity have been measured in a vertical
cryostat after careful tuning of the two cells frequencies. The symmetric
mode frequency was ωs/(2π) = 3.03431 GHz and the mode separation was
Ω = 1.3817 MHz. The unloaded quality factor at 4.2 K was Q = 5 · 107, and
no signiﬁcant improvement was found lowering the helium bath temperature
at 1.8 K. Even after a second chemical polishing, performed at CERN, which
removed approximately 300 µm of niobium from the surface, no improvement
was observed. We believe that this very low Q value is due to hot spots on the
surface caused by welding problems occurred during the cavity fabrication.
Adjusting the phase and amplitude of the rf signal entering and leaving the
cavity, the arms of the two magic tees were balanced to launch the even
mode at the cavity input and to pick up the odd mode at the cavity output.
With 30 dBm of power at the Σ port of the ﬁrst magic tee, -90 dBm were
detected at the ∆ port of the second one, giving an overall attenuation of
the symmetric mode of 120 dB. The energy stored in the cavity with 30 dBm
input power was approximately 1 mJ. The signal emerging from the ∆ port
of the output magic tee was ampliﬁed by the LNA and fed into a spectrum
analyzer. The signal level at frequency ωa was 120 dBm in a 1 Hz bandwidth.
System sensitivity at this stage is given by

hmin ≈ 6.55 · 10−18 Hz−1/2

(4)

12

This value is quite far from our goal of hmin = 10−20 (Hz)−1/2. Since, to
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst example of a parametric detector operated in
trasmission, and since this conﬁguration requires very careful adjustments of
the input and output ports balancing, we believe that signiﬁcant improve-
ments are obtainable. Furthermore the new cavity under construction should
show the high quality factor needed to reach high sensitivity.

References

[1] F. Pegoraro, L.A. Radicati, Ph. Bernard and E. Picasso, Phys. Lett.

68A, 165, (1978).

[2] F. Pegoraro, E. Picasso and L.A. Radicati, J. Phys. 11A, (10), 1949,

(1978).

[3] C.E. Reece, P.J. Reiner and A.C. Melissinos, Phys. Lett. 104A, 341,

(1984).

[4] C.E. Reece, P.J. Reiner and A.C. Melissinos, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A245,

299 (1986).

[5] Ph. Bernard, G. Gemme, R. Parodi and E. Picasso, Eigth Workshop on
Rf Superconductivity, Abano Terme, (1997); Particle Accelerators 61,
[343]/79, (1998)

[6] Ph. Bernard, G. Gemme, R. Parodi and E. Picasso, Infn Internal Note,

INFN/TC-98/17, (1998).

[7] Ph.

Bernard,
Infn

G.
Internal

Gemme,

casso,
http://wwwsis.lnf.infn.it/pub/INFN-TC-99-21.pdf.

Note,

R.

Parodi

and
INFN/TC-99/21,

E.

Pi-
(1999),

[8] Ph. Bernard, G. Gemme, R. Parodi and E. Picasso, Ninth Workshop on

Rf Superconductivity, Santa Fe (NM), (1999), gr-qc/9911024.

13

