0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
0
1

 

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
1
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Tumour Therapy with Particle Beams

Claus Grupen1

Department of Physics, University of Siegen

Germany

Abstract. Photons are exponentially attenuated in matter producing high doses
close to the surface. Therefore they are not well suited for the treatment of
deep seated tumours. Charged particles, in contrast, exhibit a sharp increase
of ionisation density close to the end of their range, the so-called Bragg-peak.
The depth of the Bragg-peak can be adjusted by varying the particle’s energy.
In parallel with the large energy deposit the increase in biological eﬀectiveness
for cell killing at the end of the range provides an ideal scalpel for the surgeon
eﬀectively without touching the surface tissue. Consequently proton therapy has
gained a lot of ground for treating well localized tumours. Even superior still
are heavy ions, where the ionisation pattern is increased by the square of their
charge (∼ z2).

INTRODUCTION

It has been known for a long time that tissue, in particular tumour tissue, is
sensitive to ionising radiation. Therefore it is only natural that tumours have
been treated with various types of radiation, like γ-rays and electrons. γ-rays
are easily available from radioactive sources, like 60Co, and electrons can be
accelerated to MeV -energies by relatively inexpensive linear accelerators. The
disadvantage of γ-rays and electrons is that they deposit most of their energy
close to the surface. To reduce the surface dose in tumour treatment requires
rotating the source or the patient so that the surface dose is distributed over a
larger volume. In contrast, protons and heavy ions deposit most of their energy
close to the end of their range (Bragg-peak). The increase in energy loss at
the Bragg-peak amounts to a factor of about 5 compared to the surface dose,
depending somewhat on the particle’s energy. Heavy ions oﬀer, in addition,
the possibility to monitor the destructive power of the beam by observing
annihilation radiation by standard positron-emission tomography techniques
(PET). The annihilation radiation is emitted by β +-active nuclear fragments
produced by the incident heavy ion beam itself.

1) e-mail: grupen@aleph.physik.uni-siegen.de

FIGURE 1. Mass attenuation coeﬃcient for photons in water as a function of the photon
energy [1]

ENERGY LOSS OF PARTICLES IN TISSUE [1]

A photon beam is attenuated in matter according to

I(x) = I0e−µx

(1)

where I0 is the initial intensity and I(x) the beam intensity at the depth x. µ
is the linear mass attenuation coeﬃcient which depends on the photon energy
E and the target charge Z. µ(E) is shown in ﬁgure 1 for a target composed
of water, which is essentially equivalent to tissue. The main interaction mech-
anisms which contribute to µ(E) are the photoelectric eﬀect (∼ Z 5/E 3.5),
Compton scattering (∼ (Z/E) ln E) and pair-production (∼ Z 2 ln E). For
energies typical for radioactive sources (∼ MeV ) Compton scattering domi-
nates. The absorption proﬁle of photons in matter exhibits a peak close to
the surface followed by an exponential decay.

Charged particles suﬀer energy loss by ionisation. This energy loss is de-

scribed by the Bethe-Bloch formula:

where

dE
dx

= 2κ{ln

Emax

kin
I

− β 2 −

δ
2

}

κ = 2π NA r2

emec2z2 Z
A

·

1
β 2 .

(2)

(3)

z
Z
A
me
c
NA
re
β
Emax

kin

charge of the beam particle
charge of the absorber material

–
–
– mass number of the absorber material
–
– velocity of light
– Avogadro’s number
–
– velocity of the particle divided by c
– maximum transferable energy

electron mass

classical electron radius

to an atomic electron

I
δ

– mean excitation energy of the target material
– density parameter

For protons (z = 1) interacting in water (or tissue) equation (2) can be ap-
proximated by

dE
dx

= 0, 16 ·

1
β 2 ln

Emax

kin [eV ]
100

(cid:20) MeV
cm (cid:21)

where

Emax

kin ≈ 2mec2β 2γ 2 ,

(4)

(5)

which gives an energy loss of 4.2 MeV /cm for 200 MeV protons at the surface
and ∼ 20 MeV /cm close to the end of their range. For heavy ions the energy
loss is essentially scaled by z2. When charged particles reach the end of their
range the energy loss ﬁrst rises like 1/β 2 but when they are very slow they
capture electrons from the target material and their eﬀective charge decreases
and hence their energy loss rapidly falls to zero.

A typical energy loss curve for ions as a function of their energy is sketched
in ﬁgure 2 [2]. The energy loss of 12C ions as a function of the depth in water
is shown in ﬁgure 3 [2,3]. The tail of the energy loss beyond the Bragg-peak
originates from fragmentation products of 12C ions, which are faster than the
12C ions and have a somewhat longer range.

In the ionisation process a generally small fraction of the particle’s energy
is transferred to the atomic electrons. In rare cases these electrons can get
a larger amount of energy. The δ-electrons deviate from the main ionisation
trail and produce a fuzzy-like track (ﬁgure 4, [2]).

In addition to ionisation light particles, like electrons, can also undergo
bremsstrahlung (dE/dx ∼ z2Z 2E). Since the probability for this process
is inversely proportional to the square of the mass of the beam particle,
bremsstrahlung can be neglected for particles heavier than the electron for
energies relevant to tumour therapy [1].

The above mentioned fragmentation of heavy ions leads to the production
of positron emitters. For the 12C case, lighter isotopes like 11C and 10C are

FIGURE 2. Energy loss of ions in matter as a function of their energy (after [2])

FIGURE 3. Energy loss of carbon-ions (12C) in water as a function of depth [2,3]

FIGURE 4. Sketch of a proton and a carbon nucleus track in tissue. The fuzziness of the
tracks is caused by short range δ-rays [2]

produced. Both isotopes decay with short half-lives (T1/2(11C) = 20, 38 min;
T1/2(10C) = 19.3 s) to boron according to

11C → 11B + e+ + νe
10C → 10B + e+ + νe .

(6)

The positrons have a very short range, typically below 1 mm. After coming to
rest they annihilate with electrons of the tissue giving oﬀ two monochromatic
photons of 511 keV which are emitted back-to-back

e+ + e− → γ + γ .

(7)

These photons can be detected by positron-emission tomography techniques
and can be used to monitor the destructive eﬀect of heavy ions on the tumour
tissue.

PRODUCTION OF PARTICLE BEAMS

The treatment of deep seated tumours requires charged particles of typi-
cally 100 to 400 MeV per nucleon, i.e. 100 to 400 MeV protons or 1.2 to
4.8 GeV 12C ions. These particles are accelerated in either a linear acceler-
ator or in a synchrotron. As an example ﬁgure 5 shows a typical set-up for
the production of heavy ions. 12C atoms are evaporated from an ion source
and pre-accelerated. Thin foils are used to strip oﬀ all electrons from the
ions. The 12C nuclei are then injected into a synchrotron, where they are ac-
celerated by radiofrequency cavities to the desired energy. The ions are kept

FIGURE 5. Sketch of a typical set-up for the acceleration of heavy ions (not all compo-
nents are shown)

on track by dipole bending magnets and they are focussed by quadrupoles.
After having reached the ﬁnal energy they are ejected by a kicker magnet,
which directs the particles to the treatment room. Their path is monitored by
tracking chambers (multi-wire proportional counteres, ion chambers or drift-
chambers). If beam losses occur veto-counters (mostly scintillation counters)
ensure that only a pencil beam is steered to the treatment room.

Nowadays, mainly protons and heavy ions are used for tumour therapy.
Other possibilities consist of the use of negative pions [7–9], which are pro-
duced by high energy protons in a beam dump according to

p + nucleus → p + nucleus + π− + π+ + π0

(8)

where the π− are momentum selected and collimated. After losing their energy
by ionisation the negative pions are captured in the tumour tissue by nuclei
at the end of their range and produce so-called ‘stars’ in which neutrons are
created. The Bragg-peak of the negative pions along with the local production
of neutrons which have a high biological eﬀectiveness leads to an eﬃcient cell
killing in the tumour at the end of the pion’s range.

Neutrons are also possible candidates for tumour treatment [10]. For this
purpose the tumour is sensitized by a boron compound before neutron treat-
ment. The boron compound must be selected in such a way that it is prefer-
entially deposited in the tumour region. Neutrons are then captured by the

FIGURE 6. Comparison of depth-dose curves of neutrons, γ-rays (produced by a 8M V
driven X-ray tube), 200 M eV protons, 20 M eV electrons and 192Ir-γ-rays (161 keV ) [4]

boron according to:

n + 10B → 7Li + α .

(9)

The produced α-particles (He-nuclei) have a very short range (∼ several µm)
and high biological eﬀectiveness. Best results are obtained with epithermal
neutrons (∼ 1 keV ) produced by 5 MeV protons on light targets (e.g. Be).

Direct irradiation with neutrons – without sensitizing the tumour – has the
disadvantage that neutrons show a similar dose depth curve like 60Co γ-rays
thus producing a high amount of biologically very eﬀective damage in the
healthy tissue around the tumour (see ﬁgure 6 [4]).

APPLICATIONS IN TUMOUR THERAPY

The target for cell killing is the DNA in the cell nucleus (see ﬁgure 7 (after
[2])). The size of the DNA-molecule compares favorably well with the width
of the ionisation track of a heavy ion. The DNA contains two strands con-
taining identical information. A damage of one strand by ionising radiation
can easily be repaired by copying the information from the unaﬀected strand
to the damaged one. Therefore the high ionisation density at the end of a
particle’s range matches well with the requirement to produce double strand
breaks in the DNA, which the cell will not survive. Heavy ions like 12C seem
to be optimal for this purpose. Ions heavier than carbon would even be more
powerful in destroying tumour tissue, however, their energy loss in the sur-
rounding tissue and in the entrance region already reaches a level where the
fraction of irreparable damage is too high, while for lighter ions (like 12C)

FIGURE 7. Sketch of typical dimensions of biological targets (after [2])

mostly repairable damage is produced in the healthy tissue outside the tar-
geted tumour. The cell killing rate in the tumour region thus beneﬁts from
two properties of protons or ions like carbon:

• the increased energy loss of protons and ions at the end of their range

and

• the increased biological eﬀectiveness of double strand breaks at high ion-

isation density.

The cell killing rate is eventually related to the equivalent dose H in the tumour
region, which can be expressed by

H =

1

m Z dE

dx

dx · RBE

(10)

where m is the tumour mass and RBE the increased relative biological eﬀec-
tiveness. The integral extends over the tumour region.

As mentioned above the rate and location of cell killing can be monitored
by observing the annihilation photons which result from the β +-decay of frag-
ments formed by the beam.

These physical and biological principles are employed in an eﬃcient way by
the raster scan technique [3,5,6]. A pencil beam of heavy ions (diameter ∼
1 mm) is aimed at the tumour. The beam location and spread is monitored by
tracking chambers with high spatial resolution. In the treatment planning the
tumour is subdivided into three-dimensional pixels (“voxels”). Then the dose
required to destroy the tumour, which is proportional to the beam intensity,

FIGURE 8. Principle of the raster scan method [5,6]

is calculated for every voxel. For a ﬁxed depth in tissue an areal scan is
performed by magnetic deﬂection sweeping the beam across the area in a
similar way as a TV image is produced (see ﬁgure 8, [5,6]). The tumour volume
is ﬁlled from the back by energy variation (∼ range variation) of the beam.
Typically 50 energy steps are used starting at the rear plane. For a depth
proﬁle from 2 cm to 30 cm one has to cover energies from 80 MeV /nucleon
to 430 MeV /nucleon. When the beam energy is reduced the required dose
for the plane under irradiation is calculated using the damage that the more
energetic beam had already produced in its entrance region. This ensures
that the lateral (caused by magnetic deﬂection) and longitudinal scanning (by
energy variation) covers the tumour completely.
In ﬁgure 9 (after [2]) the
dose distribution for individual energy settings and the resulting total dose
is sketched and compared with the damage that X-rays from a 60Co-source
would produce. An artist impression of the dose distribution for a lung and a
brain tumour is given in ﬁgure 10.

TREATMENT FACILITIES

Berkeley was the birthplace of therapy with hadrons. Since 1954 protons
and later Helium-nuclei were used for treatment. Throughout the world treat-
ment with protons is standard (Sweden, USA, Russia, Japan, Switzerland,
England, Belgium, France, South Africa). In some places negative pions have
been used in the past (USA, Canada, Switzerland). The most promising re-
sults have been obtained with heavy ions (Berkeley, USA; Chiba, Japan; and
Darmstadt, Germany). In total ∼ 25000 patients have been treated from 1954
to 1999.

FIGURE 9. Superposition of Bragg-peaks by energy variation (after [2])

FIGURE 10. a) The position of the Bragg-peak can be adjusted by energy se-
lection to produce a maximum damage at
site (here in the lung).
b) Mapping of a brain tumour with ionisation from heavy ions. Some damage at the
entrance region cannot be avoided

the tumour

SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

The inverse ionisation dose proﬁle of charged particles has been known for a
long time, from nuclear and particle physics. The instrumentation originally
developed for elementary particle physics experiments has made it possible
to design and monitor particle beams with great precision which can then be
used for tumour therapy. Heavy ions seem to be ideal projectiles for tumour
treatment. They are suitable for well localized tumours. The availability of
treatment facilities is increasing. Naturally such a facility requires an expen-
sive and complex accelerator for the charged particles. For beam steering and
control sophisticated particle detectors and interlock systems are necessary to
ensure the safety of patients.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author has beneﬁtted a great deal from information provided by
G. Kraft from GSI-Darmstadt and from discussions with him.
I acknowl-
edge also the help of Mrs. L. Hoppe and C. Haucke for the drawing of the
ﬁgures, Mrs. A. Wied for typing the text, Mr. Ngac An Bang for giving the
paper the ﬁnal LaTeX-touch, and Mr. D. Robinson for a careful reading of
the manuscript.

REFERENCES

1. C. Grupen ‘Particle Detectors’ Cambridge University Press 1996
2. G. Kraft ‘Radiobiology of Heavy Charged Particles’ GSI-Preprint 96-60, Nov.

1996

3. G. Kraft ‘Tumour Therapy with Ion Beams’ invited paper at the SAMBA-
Symposium at the University of Siegen 1999, to be printed in Nucl.Instr.Meth.
2000

4. Medical Radiation Group, National Accelerator Centre, South Africa, Internet

paper 1999

5. G. Kraft ‘The Impact of Nuclear Science on Medicine’

Nucl. Phys. A 654 (1999) 1058c - 1067c

6. G. Kraft ‘Radiotherapy with Heavy Charged Particles’

http://www.gsi.de

7. N.A. Dyson ‘Nuclear Physics with Application in Medicine and Biology’ John

Wiley & Sons Inc. N.Y. (1981) and
‘Radiation Physics with Application in Medicine and Biology’, Ellis Horwood,
N.Y. (1993)

8. S.B. Curtis, M.R. Raju ‘A Calculation of the Physical Characteristics of Neg-
ative Pion Beams Energy Loss Distribution and Bragg-Curves’ Rad. Research
34 (1968) 239

9. G.B. Goodman ‘Pion Therapy for Cancer – What are the Prospects’ TRIUMF-

Preprint TRI-PP-92-134 (1992)

10. A.J. Lennox ‘Hospital-Based Proton Linear Accelerator for Particle Therapy

and Radioisotope Production’ Fermilab-Pub. 90/217 (1990)

