0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
3
2

 

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
6
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SUPERHEATED DROP NEUTRON SPECTROMETER

Mala Das, B. K. Chatterjee, B. Roy and S.C. ROY

Department of Physics, Bose Institute, Calcutta 700009, India

1.Introduction:

The Superheated Drop Detector or SDD invented by Apfel in 1979[1] is one
of the useful detector in neutron detection. The basic principle of operation of this
detector is same as bubble chamber. Here the superheated drops are suspended in
dust free visco-elastic gel medium. Upon nucleation by e nergetic radiations the drops
form bubbles and the drops nucleate independent of each other. So one nucleation
does not consume the whole liquid and the repressurisation process that is needed
in bubble chamber, is not required here. This is an advantage of SDD over bubble
chamber. Each of the drops store mechanical energy in it and it is released when
triggered by radiations. The superheated liquid can be prepared by increasing the
temperature of the liquid at a given pressure or alternatively it can be prepared by
lowering the pressure of the liquid at a given temperature. This detector can be
made on polymer matrix also where the bubbles formed after nucleation of drops are
tightly bound as was done by Ing and his group, called the ”Bubble Detector” (BD).
Here the nucleation is observed by counting visually the number of bubbles trapped
in the gel[2]. The test liquid remains in glass tube under pressure created by another
liquid and just before the experiment, the liquid is sensitized by unscrewing the cap
of the tube and allow the liquid to become superheated. These SDD/BD serves as an
excellent detector for the detection of neutrons. There are diﬀerent detecting systems
by which the nucleation in SDD can be measured. One way is to count acoustically the
pulses produced by drops vaporization with the help of a piezo electric transducer and
a drop counter[3]. Another way is to measure the volume of the vapor formed upon
nucleation by a passive method. This system consists of vertical graduated pipette[4]
or horizontal glass tubes placed on a graduated platform[5,6] with an indicator (gel
piston or coloured water column) indicating the volume of the vapor formed upon
nucleation. The sensitivity of this type of detector can be varied by changing the
diameter of the glass tube. This system does not require any power source and can
be used as an alarm dosimeter, in area monitoring etc. The third way is to count
visually the bubbles trapped in hard polymer matrix[2]. The suitability of using
superheated drops as a neutron dosimeter[7,8,9,10] has already been established. It
is a very sensitive neutron dosimeter and can measure the neutron dose as low as
0.1µSv. The SDD/BD neutron dosimeters are now commercially available from Apfel
Enterprises Inc, USA and from Bubble Technology Industries Ltd., Canada.

1

2. Principle of neutron spectrometry :

Since its discovery, attempts have been made on the application of this de-
tector in neutron spectrometry. There is a minimum energy required for nucleation
at a given temperature below which no nucleation occurs. This minimum energy is
called the threshold energy for nucleation. The threshold energy decreases as the
degree of superheat of the liquid increases. The degree of superheat of a liquid is
the diﬀerence between the vapor pressure of the liquid at a given temperature and
the ambient pressure or the diﬀerence between the boiling point of the liquid and
the ambient temperature. Therefore liquid with lower boiling point possess higher
degree of superheat at a given temperature and as the ambient temperature increases
the liquid becomes more and more superheated. This property of the superheated
liquid is being utilized to develop the neutron spectrometry. There are diﬀerent ways
by which superheated drops can be used in neutron spectrometry. One of the ways
is to use the diﬀerent superheated liquids of diﬀerent degree of superheat and the
threshold neutron energies can be obtained by irradiating the detectors with dif-
ferent monochromatic neutron sources [11]. Other way is to use the same detector
operating at diﬀerent temperature. Since the threshold energy depends on the op-
erating temperature of the detector, so by varying the temperature of the detector
suitably, neutrons of diﬀerent energies can be detected as was done by d’Errico et.
al.[12]. They have used two superheated liquids operating at four diﬀerent tempera-
tures to obtain eight diﬀerent threshold neutron energies . It is to be noted that in
order to get a good resolution of the spectrum, temperature variation at a close grid
is necessary.

3. Present work : Now there is a diﬀerent approach by which the neutron energy
spectrum can be obtained from the temperature dependence of threshold energy of
SDD. After the interactions of the neutrons with the nuclei of the constituting atoms
of superheated liquid, ions of diﬀerent energies are formed. The ion having the highest
value of LET (dE/dx) in the liquid, will play the major role in nucleation. Another
important point is that there is a speciﬁc length L, along the ions track, the energy
(Ec) deposited over that length will contribute signiﬁcant role in nucleation. Actually
a very small fraction of the deposited energy is usually used up in nucleation i.e. W/Ec
is very small and this ratio is called the thermodynamic eﬃciency of nucleation ((T).
After the deposition of energy by the ions, nucleation occurs with the formation of a
critical size vapor bubble of radius rc inside the liquid drop. It is suggested that L =
2 rc [13,14] and Ec can be expressed as Ec = 2 rc dE/dx Therefore,W = ηT Ec or W
= 2 ηT rc dE/dx

or W/rc = k dE/dx, where k = 2 ηT W and rc both are functions of tempera-
ture and dE/dx is a function of the energy of the projectile ions in superheated liquid,

2

which can be converted to the energy of the incident neutrons. So this equation re-
lates the threshold neutron energy for nucleation to the ambient temperature. This
enables one to convert the temperature of the detector to the energy of the incident
neutrons. Therefore using the above equation as a working equation, neutron energy
spectrum can be obtained by observing the SDD response at diﬀerent temperature.
This gives an important application of SDD in neutron spectrometry. The nucleation
rate in superheated drops is proportional to the total volume of the drops (V), inci-
dent neutron ﬂux ψ, neutron-nucleus interaction cross section σ and to the neutron
detection eﬃciency η of SDD. Neutron detection eﬃciency η, is deﬁned as the fraction
of the incident neutrons which are used up in nucleation. By observing the nucleation
rate in superheated drops, η can be obtained from the known values of V, ψ and σ.
If one measures η at diﬀerent temperatures, the derivative of η against temperature
resembles the neutron energy spectrum of the source. The temperature axis can be
converted to the neutron energy following the method discussed here. For a given
neutron energy spectrum, at low temperature only the high energy neutrons take
part in nucleation and as temperature increases, threshold energy decreases and so in
addition to the high energy neutrons, low energy neutrons are also detected. So for
a polychromatic source, η should increase with temperature. When all the neutrons
in the spectrum contribute in nucleation, η should be constant with temperature be-
cause no more neutrons are left to be detected. For a monochromatic source, there is
only one sharp increase of η at a particular temperature corresponding to the energy
and it should be constant for the other temperatures. This detector can be made
sensitive to diﬀerent ranges of neutron energies as the users choice by varying the
temperature of the liquid. This detector can detect neutrons with energies ranging
from thermal to fast energy. We have tested the present principle of spectrometry
with a 3 Ci Am-Be neutron source[15]. The temperature was varied from -17oC to
about 60oC with the help of an indigenously made temperature controller. There
is a fair agreement between the neutron energy spectrum of Am-Be obtained from
our experiment and the available spectrum of the source. The main advantage of
this type of spectrometer is that it is easy to prepare, low cost of the materials and
no need of power supply. Nowadays, Superheated Drop Detectors are widely used
in the determination of neutron spectra in space, at high altitude studies, gamma
detection, detection of radon, for cold dark matter search, charged particle detection
etc. Besides these applications, the radiation induced nucleation in superheated drop
detector is itself a very interesting ﬁeld of research.

References :-1. R. E. Apfel (1979) U. S. Patent 4,143,274.

2. H. Ing and H. C. Birnboim (1984) Nucl. Tracks and Rad. Meas. 8, 285. 3. R. E.
Apfel and S. C. Roy (1983) Rev. Sci. Instrum. 54, 1397.
4. R. E. Apfel (1992) Rad. Prot. Dos. 44, 343.
5. B. Roy, B. K. Chatterjee, Mala Das and S. C. Roy (1998) Rad. Phys. Chem. 51,

3

473.
6. Mala Das, B. Roy, B. K. Chatterjee and S. C. Roy (1999) Rad. Meas. 30, 35.
7. R. E. Apfel and S. C. Roy (1984) Nucl. Inst. Meth. 219, 582.
8. R. E. Apfel and Y. C. Lo (1989) Health Phys. 56, 79.
9. S. C. Roy, R. E. Apfel and Y. C. Lo (1987) Nucl. Inst. Meth. A255, 199.
10. H. Ing (1986) Nuclear Tracks 12, 49.
11. H. Ing, R. A. Noulty and T. D. Mclean (1995) Rad. Meas. 27, 1.
12. F. dErrico Rad. Prot. Dos. (1995) Rad. Prot. Dos. 61, 159.
13. R. E. Apfel, S. C. Roy and Y. C. Lo (1985) Phys. Rev. A 31, 3194.
14. M. J. Harper and M. E. Nelson (1990) Rad. Prot. Dos. 47, 535.
15. Mala Das, B. K. Chatterjee, B. Roy and S. C. Roy (1999) Nucl. Inst. Meth A
(submitted).

4

