0
0
0
2

 

v
o
N
3

 

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
0
0
1
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A monitor of beam polarization proﬁles for

the TRIUMF parity experiment 1

A.R. Berdoz f, J. Birchall a, J.B. Bland a, J.D. Bowman b,

J.R. Campbell a, G.H. Coombes c, C.A. Davis d,a,2, P.W. Green c,

A.A. Hamian a, Y. Kuznetsov e,3, L. Lee a, C.D.P. Levy d,

R.E. Mischke b, S.A. Page a, W.D. Ramsay a, S.D. Reitzner a,
T. Ries d, G. Roy c, A.M. Sekulovich a, J. Soukup c, T. Stocki c,

V. Sum a, N.A. Titov e, W.T.H. van Oers a, R.J. Woo a,

A.N. Zelenski e

aUniversity of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB

bLos Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM

cUniversity of Alberta, Edmonton, AB

dTRIUMF, Vancouver, BC

eInstitute for Nuclear Research, Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia

f Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA

Abstract

TRIUMF experiment E497 is a study of parity violation in pp scattering at an
energy where the leading term in the analyzing power is expected to vanish, thus
measuring a unique combination of weak-interaction ﬂavour conserving terms. It is
desired to reach a level of sensitivity of 2 × 10−8 in both statistical and systematic
errors. The leading systematic errors depend on transverse polarization components
and, at least, the ﬁrst moment of transverse polarization. A novel polarimeter that
measures proﬁles of both transverse components of polarization as a function of
position is described.

Key words: Beams; Polarimeter; Parity Violation
PACS: 24.80+y; 29.27.Hj; 13.75.Cs

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

2 February 2008

1 Introduction

Several measurements of the parity violating component in the nucleon-nucleon
interaction have been reported over the years [1] [2] [3] [4] [5], achieving greater
precision over time. Such an experiment that aims to measure longitudinal an-
alyzing power, Az, to a precision of ±2 × 10−8 (in statistics and systematics)
is underway at TRIUMF [6]. Other experimenters have measured the same
quantity with protons incident on light nuclei [7] [8]. The TRIUMF experi-
ment is unique in that it seeks to measure the parity-violating eﬀect at an
energy, 221 MeV, where the leading term (which dominates below 100 MeV),
Az(1S0 −3 P0), is zero (averaged over the acceptance of the detector), thus
observing the Az(3P2 −1 D2) term as the dominant component [9]. The diﬀer-
ence in these terms is that they are dependent on diﬀerent combinations of
the weak meson couplings [9]. In addition, another experiment is planned at
450 MeV at TRIUMF [10].

Initially, it was recognized that residual transverse components of polarization
which changed sign with the longitudinal component of polarization gave rise
to a systematic error if the detection system was asymmetric or if the incident
proton beam were oﬀ the symmetry axis [11]. Later, it was recognized that
even if the transverse polarization components of a ﬁnite-sized beam averaged
to zero, an inhomogeneous distribution of the transverse polarization over the
beam proﬁle could result in a signiﬁcant contribution to the measured Az [12]
[13].

The ETH-SIN-Z¨urich-Karlsruhe-Wisconsin group [1] [2] describe a beam in-
tensity/polarization proﬁle monitor [14] that operates with two wheels (x and
y) each driving two graphite targets through their 50 MeV proton beam. Pro-
tons scattered at 51◦, near the maximum of the 12C(p, p)12C analyzing power,
were observed in four scintillators left, right, bottom and top, and timed with
respect to a reference on the wheel, i.e. the position of the target for that scat-
tered proton. The data, along with information about the spin state, were read
into a series of spectra from which intensity and polarization proﬁles could be
deduced. They used two such devices in their beamline. This polarimeter is
also described modiﬁed for use at lower energies [16]. The targets used were
much thinner and they adapted a multi-channel scaler and multi-channel an-
alyzer to record and store the proﬁles.

1 Work supported in part by a grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada
2 Corresponding author. TRIUMF, 4004 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, B.C., Canada
V6T 2A3; Tel.:1-604-222-1047, loc. 6316; fax: 1-604-222-1074
E-mail address: cymru@triumf.ca
3 Deceased

2

The Bonn group [3] describe a beam proﬁle scanner that measures polarization
[15] by physically moving a polarimeter (one for vertical and one for horizontal
proﬁle) with a thin graphite target through the beam. The target is optimized
to allow passage of one target at a time through the beam while data collection
is enabled. They detected protons scattered at 48◦. An elastically scattered
proton in any of four Si detectors generated a sampling of an ADC that read a
voltage picked up from a linear potentiometer related to the device’s position.
Again, position dependent spectra were generated from which intensity and
polarization proﬁles can be deduced. They also used two such devices in their
beamline.

The Los Alamos-Illinois group [4] [7] describe a simple scanning target used
in a conventional polarimeter.

2 Speciﬁcations and design

Requirements of the TRIUMF Parity experiment are that it be able to inti-
mately (i.e., within the data collection cycles of the experiment, each cycle
being eight periods of 25 ms duration) monitor the proﬁle of the transverse
polarization components as a function of position (Py(x) and Px(y)), and that
one be able to determine the corrections derived therefrom to Az to a level
at or below ±6 × 10−9 over the whole data collection period (several hundred
hours not counting calibrations and other overhead). These quantities are the
average transverse components of polarization which given an eﬀect propor-
tional to displacement from the detector symmetry axis, < x >< Py > and
< y >< Px >, and the intrinsic ﬁrst moments of polarization, < xPy > and
< yPx >, which will contribute even if the proton beam is perfectly aligned
with the apparatus. Higher order terms and in-plane terms (such as < xPx >
and < yPy >) should be negligible [12] [2].

Typical run time conditions keep transverse components of polarization under
±1% per data run (typically one hour). Intrinsic ﬁrst moments of transverse
polarization are typically within ±25µm per run.

As mentioned above, some researchers [14] [15] [16] use graphite targets which
have relatively high counting rates and high analyzing powers. However, the
angular dependence of both cross section and analyzing power and the con-
tribution of inelastic scattering, especially at higher energies, make this unde-
sirable in the present case. By moving the polarimeter detectors rigidly with
the target, Chlebek et al. [15] avoid position correlated acceptance problems.
Such a device had initially been considered [17] but abandoned when it be-
came apparent that the higher energy and larger beam size would make such
a scheme too unwieldy.

3

Fig. 1. General schematic view of a PPM. The forward and recoil paths for one
arm are shown with the scintillators indicated as dark volumes. The paths originate
from the plane in which the blades lie.

The mechanics of the present detector have been described in [19], though
there have been modiﬁcations since then which will be explained below. The
device is a four-branch polarimeter whose target consists of two wheels that
can drive strips (‘blades’) of CH2 (two on each wheel) through the beam at a
speed locked to the experiment cycle time. It is shown in Figure 1. Two blades
per wheel were chosen as an optimal compromise between polarization mea-
suring time and Az (i.e., experimental determination of the helicity dependent
asymmetry of the beam transmission through an LH2 target) measuring time.

Two of these detectors are mounted in the experimental beamline to allow
for extrapolation of the polarization proﬁles to the target location. They are
shown in Figure 2. They are upstream of the Transverse ﬁeld Ionization Cham-
bers (TRIC’s) that sandwich the LH2 target. The TRIC signals (proportional
to the beam current) determine the parity violating longitudinal analyzing
power that is the observable of interest.

4

Fig. 2. A section of the E497 experiment along TRIUMF beamline 4A/2 showing
the whole of the upstream PPM on the right, the rear of the downstream PPM
on the left, and, between them, a beam position monitor [19]. Several scintillators,
light guides, and PMT housings can clearly be seen on the upstream PPM.

2.1 PPM Detectors

Each branch consists of a forward arm of two scintillators at 17.5◦ from the
axis and a recoil arm. The angle of 17.5◦ was chosen as a reasonable compro-
mise near the p − p analyzing power maximum over the energy range at which
parity violation may be investigated at TRIUMF, see Figure 3. The ﬁgure of
merit for a polarimeter can be deﬁned as:

A2

t(θ)

dσ
dΩ

(θ).

(1)

This is also shown in Figure 3.

The forward arm consists of two scintillators. The solid-angle of acceptance for
scattered protons is deﬁned by a rotated counter (Ω) whose angle of rotation
along its axis perpendicular to the scattering plane is chosen to cancel the
eﬀect of the change in p − p scattering cross-section and detector geometry
with target blade position [21]. At 223 MeV, this rotation angle is determined
to be 49◦ with respect to the plane perpendicular to the nominal 17.5◦ center-

5

Fig. 3. Analyzing power (solid line) and ﬁgure of merit (dashed line) as a function
of lab angle for p + p scattering as determined from Ref. [18]. The peak in ﬁgure
of merit is ideal for optimal statistical error and the peak in analyzing power is
optimal (ﬂattest response as a function of target position) for systematic errors.

line of the scattered protons, in the direction as shown in Figure 4. Between the
Ω-counter and the target plane is a counter (C) whose function is to determine
that the scattered protons are collinear with the target. The recoil arm is at
70.6◦ at which the recoil protons from p − p scattering will be stopped in the
front (R) counter or in a 1.6 mm thick aluminum shield immediately behind
it. Protons from other sources that are too penetrating will pass through and
hit the veto (V ) counter immediately behind. The location and dimensions of
each counter are recorded in Table 1. A schematic of a single branch lay-out
is given in Figure 4.

Each scintillator 3 was attached to a light-pipe viewed by a two-inch RCA
8575 4 photomultiplier tube. The TRIUMF-built bases were equipped with
zener-diodes on the ﬁrst three dynodes and the voltages had to be carefully
adjusted due to the high rates. The front arm counters, C and Ω, of each
branch were mounted externally with the protons passing through a 3.2 mm
(at 17.5◦) thick spun-aluminum shell, at a distance of 470 mm from the target,
into air. The recoil arm counters, R and V , were mounted internally with a
vacuum seal along each scintillator light pipe. The external counters and light

3 BC-404; Bicron; 12345 Kinsman Rd., Newbury, OH, U.S.A., 44065
4 RCA Corp.

6

Table 1
PPM scintillator counter dimensions. Distances are from the center of the target
plane.

Counter Height Width Thickness Distance

Arm

(mm)

(mm)

(mm)

(mm)

C

Ω

R

37.5

28.5

37.5

46.0∗

120.2

22.5

6.4

6.4

6.4

600.2

Forward

900.0

Forward

104.4

Recoil

156.9

30.0

Recoil

V
∗Counter is rotated at 49◦ with suitably beveled edges.

151.7

6.4

Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of a single branch of one of the PPM’s.

pipes were wrapped with aluminized mylar and tape to keep out the ambient
lighting; the internal counters were wrapped with a light-tight aluminum foil
only and their external sections of light pipe were wrapped as the external
counters.

7

Fig. 5. A view of the rear of a PPM showing the external belt drive, the stepping
motor at bottom, and the shaft encoder shielding at top.

2.2 PPM Targets

The mounting of the target blades and the drive arrangement is shown in
Figure 5. The wheel pivots are 215 mm from the beam centre. Each arm holds
two targets to better balance the statistics of the PPM with the experiment
statistics. This gives two x scans and two y scans per PPM, a total of eight.
Each scan occurs during one spin-state of an eight state cycle. The direction
of the spin in each state is deﬁned by the eight state cycle which can be
(+ − − + − + + −) or its complement. The initial state of each cycle is
chosen according to the same (+ − − + − + + −) pattern, making up a
64-state ‘supercycle’. The initial spin direction of each supercycle is chosen
randomly. This timing sequence is shown in Figure 7.

Each blade target is 1.6 mm wide, 5 mm along the beam, and 85 mm high (past
its holder-clamp) and is machine cut from sheets of high density polyethylene.
As each blade passes through the beam, a proton scattered in a plane contain-
ing the direction of motion of the blade is observed in one of the two forward
arms, left-right (horizontal motion) or bottom-top (vertical motion), and the
corresponding recoil proton from free p − p scattering is observed in the recoil
arm on the opposite side. Protons scattered in a plane perpendicular to the
direction of motion of the blade (i.e., those that would give Px(x) and Py(y))

8

are not recorded as their recoil protons would in many cases be stopped or
severely multiple-scattered in the target.

The target blades are driven through the beam by a D.C. servo-motor/tacho-
meter unit 5 salvaged from an old reel-to-reel tape drive. The two wheels are
connected by a timing belt that is mounted external to the PPM housing.
This was done because it was proven necessary to ensure proper cooling. The
power to the wheels is transmitted through ferroﬂuidically-sealed shafts 6 . The
read-out of the shaft position was done through a shaft encoder 7 . It was found
necessary to shield this encoder and switch to a rad-hard version as radiation
damage caused failure after the ﬁrst few weeks of running. This has not been
a problem since.

In addition, with the blades turned oﬀ and parked out of the beam, it is
possible to insert a ﬁxed target of CH2 some 0.2 mm thick. This target has
a very thin ﬁlm of aluminum evaporated on the surface to prevent charging,
and is mounted in a circular aluminum frame 100 mm in diameter. This allows
a rapid determination of Py and Px in the parity beamline, useful for initial
tuning of the solenoids that provide longitudinal polarization.

2.3 Synchronization and Control

The PPM’s rotate at ﬁve revolutions per second and are adjusted for 180◦ an-
gular mismatch. A full 200 ms cycle compromises eight blade passages with 25
ms between passages. The synchronization of the PPM’s, as well as the main-
tenance of the rotation speed, is accomplished by an application of electronic
gearing. Each PPM is equipped with a 2500 line incremental shaft encoder
and DC brushed servo motor.

The motors are controlled by a Galil DMC1030 8 3-axis PC ISA bus based
digital servo motion control card. A functional block diagram of the control
system is shown in Figure 6. A reference 60 Hz square wave signal is generated
from the 60 Hz AC line which has a frequency regulation of 0.06%. This signal
is frequency multiplied by a factor of 125 and phase locked to the 60 Hz line via
a voltage controlled oscillator (VCO) feedback regulator circuit. The resulting
7500 Hz is phase shifted to produce a double phase quadrature signal. This is
directed to the x-axis encoder input of the DMC and represents the master

5 Electro-Craft Corporation; 1600 Second St. So., Hopkins, MN, U.S.A. 55343
6 Ferroﬂuidics Corp.; 40 Simon St., Nashua, NH 03061, U.S.A.
7 Type H25D; BEI Sensors and Motion Systems Co., Industrial Encoder Division;
7230 Hollister Ave., Goleta, CA, U.S.A. 93117-2891
8 Galil Motion Control, Inc.; 203 Ravendale Drive, Mountain View, CA, U.S.A.
94043-5216

9

Fig. 6. Schematic of the PPM control system. The Y and Z references and positions
are input in quadrature counts, + and − respectively to the Up/Down counter,
whose output is fed to the PID ﬁlter. The PID ﬁlters’ outputs are fed to Pulse
Width Modulated (PWM) switching 20 kHz ampliﬁers in current/torque mode.
The ampliﬁer output runs the DC servo motor as discussed in section 2.2. The
optical encoders provide the position signals. The reference circuit, adjusted by φ60
is used to provide the reference signals.

axis signal which the slave axes, y and z, are commanded to follow through the
gear function ratios, Fy and Fz. The phase slip function factor, φ60, utilizes
machine round oﬀ error which comes from the fact that 2500 is not evenly
divisible by 60, so that at 5 Hz the right amount of phase slip relative to 60
Hz is obtained. This means that rotator speeds of 3 Hz, 6 Hz, 9 Hz, etc., can
be set precisely to zero phase slip, while speeds in between cannot (unless the
encoder resolution were changed to 3000 lines per turn). Normally, the phase
slip is set to one 60 Hz cycle in 20 minutes. At 5 Hz, the encoder frequency
is perfectly suited for this application. However, the factors φ60, Fy, and Fz
can be conﬁgured interactively by the user from the windows graphical user
interface (GUI) at any time.

In normal operation the gearing is set for 1:1 on both PPM’s and the phase
diﬀerence between the two PPM’s is set for 180◦. To compensate for small
mechanical misalignment in the mechanisms, a ﬁne phase adjustment is made
so that the actual blade passages through the beam (between the two PPM’s)
are exactly 180◦ apart. The gear ratios Fy and Fz modify the output signal,
c from the x-axis phase slip function and produces command frequency ref-
θ′

10

erences, θyc and θzc, so the PPM speed is correctly calibrated, as required by
the user, based on the 60 Hz line signal. During standard use Fy = Fz, which
means that the two PPM’s are phase locked to run at the same speed with
zero relative phase slip.

Measurements with a digital oscilloscope showed that during rotation at 5
Hz the servo loops kept the two PPM’s within ±1 encoder tick (i.e, ±0.003
radians) of each other. The two reference signals, θyc and θzc, are treated by
the microprocessor as quadrature counts which are the Basic Length Unit at
machine hardware level. This means that the phase synchronization and posi-
tion accuracy of the servo loop is four times greater than the line frequency of
the encoder. These signals are compared in an up/down counter against the
encoder feedback signal and the diﬀerence is used to produce an analog com-
mand voltage signal for the servo ampliﬁer via a PID ﬁlter and DAC running
at a sampling rate of 1 kHz. This produces the current to drive the motors.
The PID ﬁlter parameters, KP , KD, and KI, are the same for both PPM’s
due to their similar plant dynamics and shaft torque resistances. However,
the stable operating region is very narrow due to the ﬂexible couplings and
the large inertia mis-match between the motor armature and the blade rotor
mechanism (required due to space constraints). The aim is to increase KP
in order to minimize the phase lock and position error, but not high enough
to make the static gain loop unstable. To help stabilize the latter, KD is in-
creased high enough to damp out the low frequency instabilities, but not high
enough to destabilize the derivative loop gain. KI is set to zero in order not to
induce low frequency oscillations into the loop due to the high load inertia. An
interesting aspect to Figure 6 is that the distance between the PPM/Servo-
Amp units at beam line level and the DMC controller is over 150 meters. This
is very unusual in servo control applications due to the destabilizing eﬀects of
phase delay in the encoder and command signal cables; but was required due
to the radiation environment.

For control measurements, it is possible to run a single PPM or to park a
PPM’s blades at a speciﬁc angle.

3 Signal Processing and Data Acquisition

The PPM data collection is an integral part of the experimental data collec-
tion cycle. The PPM blade scans are carefully synchronized not only to each
other, but are used to drive the polarized source spin ﬂip cycle and the signal
integration gates on the two transverse ion-chambers that bracket the target
and whose helicity-dependent output constitutes the parity-violating signal of
the experiment. Each shaft encoder pulse forms the time-base for the experi-

11

Fig. 7. The data collection cycle. Shown are the ﬁrst two states of the eight-state
cycle, which can be ( + − − + − + + −) or its complement. During each state
of the cycle, one of the eight PPM blades passes through the beam. For the two
states shown here, the two vertically scanning blades of PPM1 would scan during the
‘Vert. 1 gate’ intervals. While the blade is passing through the beam the appropriate
electronics and MCS channels are gated/enabled and the MCS channel is advanced
by a signal from the shaft encoder (see Fig. 8). The PPM data is read out while the
other equipment (TRIC/IPM) data collection is enabled. The spin state selection
and sequencer start are controlled by the front-end processor.

ment as an input to a timing and sequence module 9 . A schematic diagram of
the data collection cycle is shown in Figure 7.

3.1 Electronics

A schematic lay-out of the PPM electronics is given in Figure 8.

The signals from the phototube bases were fed through an ampliﬁer, thus
allowing the tubes to be run at lower voltages, important due to the high
singles rates, and into individual linear discriminators. Each pair of forward

9 Model 221; Jorway Corp.; 27 Bond St., Westbury, NY, U.S.A. 11590

12

Fig. 8. Schematic of the PPM electronics, two branches of one four-branch PPM are
shown. The discriminated signals from each counter (10 ns width) are timed in to
form the logic coincidence for each branch, Ln, Rn, Bn, Tn, and their corresponding
delayed coincidence (accidental), Lnacc, Rnacc, Bnacc, Tnacc; n = 1, 2 labelling
either one of the two PPM’s. The four signals for any PPM plane (horizontal [Ln,
Rn, Lnacc, Rnacc] or vertical [Bn, Tn, Bnacc, Tnacc]) are OR’ed together with the
other planes and presented to the four MCS units, suitably gated for the appropriate
blade as explained in the caption to Figure 6.

arm signals, C and Ω, were formed into a logical coincidence, C · Ω, and each
recoil arm was formed into an anticoincidence, R· ¯V . These were timed together
to form (C · Ω) · (R · ¯V ) and (C · Ω) · (R · ¯V )del (del indicating that the signal
has been delayed by one cyclotron RF period — 43 ns), where the ﬁrst is
the coincident signals, L, R, B, and T , and the latter are their corresponding
accidentals, La, Ra, Ba, and Ta. These signals are grouped together in common
modules for L−R and B −T and for the two PPMs, which can be inhibited by
the timing sequence. This allows a fan-in of the signals, for example L1, B1,
L2, and B2, together and they are then presented to the same scaler input,
as their respective blades are never in the beam at the same time.

The scanning scalers and memory modules 10 read in the data in synch with
a clock signal. As each blade moves through the beam the scaler advances
through a sequence of channels that are related to the position of the blade.

10 3521A, MM8206A; LeCroy Research Systems; 700 Chestnut Ridge Road, Chest-
nut Ridge, NY, U.S.A. 10977-6499

13

The data is then read out through a routine running in a dedicated processor 11
that stores the results in memory according to the timing sequence, e.g., LI ,
BI, LII, and BII, and the spin-state. Thus there is a requirement for only four
such scalers and memory modules to record two true and two accidental signals
per blade. This allows many of the more crucial experimental modules to reside
in a single crate, important for the in-crate control through the Starburst and
timing sequences. The status of each spin state (+ or − helicity) is nowhere
introduced as a gating signal to any of the hardware; thus avoiding undesirable
cross-talk which might lead to a helicity-dependent electronics eﬀect. Rather,
the spin state status of the initial state (state 1, see Fig. 7) in a pattern of eight
states is separately reported, as a frequency modulated/encrypted signal, to
the computer.

3.2 Data Acquisition

The PPM information was read out of the front-end processor as a separate
event, there being separate events for the TRIC and other monitor informa-
tion. This allowed the PPM information to be transferred to the main data
acquisition computer 12 while other data was being collected, and vice versa.
The data was then written to tape and made available to other processors
for on-line analysis and monitoring. The last was especially important for the
PPM data as it allowed us to monitor both transverse polarization compo-
nents and the ﬁrst moments of polarization on a run-by-run (approximately
hourly) basis. If these observables became excessively large, then the beam-
line solenoids or other cyclotron parameters were tuned to reduce them. As
PPM information was available in each data buﬀer, each buﬀer (200 ms of
data) could be analyzed separately and bundled as seemed appropriate for a
regression analysis. A ﬁrst analysis of such a kind was done in a semi-online
manner so that more sophisticated monitoring of the experiment could be
carried out.

4 Results

The PPM counter’s were run at a comparatively high rate. Table 2 shows the
peak rates for both singles in each individual counter and the coincidence rate
at a beam current of 200 nA and a size of 5 mm. At this current, ﬁrst order

11 Starburst J11; Creative Electronic Systems; 70 route de Pont Butin, 1213 Petit-
Lancy 1, Switzerland
12 VAXstation 3200; Digital Equipment Corp.; Maynard, MA, U.S.A.

14

Table 2
Singles and coincidence rates in PPM detectors.

Detector

Peak Singles Rate (MHz)

C

Ω

R

V

3.1

0.8

3.0

1.5

Coincidence

Peak Rate (kHz)

(C · Ω) · (R · ¯V )

(C · Ω) · (R · ¯V + 43ns)

110.

38.

accidentals (forward arm accidentally in coincidence with the recoils arm) were
typically 35% of the (C · Ω) · (R · ¯V ) coincidence rate.

Two higher order accidentals were examined: (1) C · (R · ¯V ) with an accidental
hit in the Ω counter; and (2) (C ·Ω) · R with an accidental hit in the V counter.
The ﬁrst are ‘near’ events in the sense that they are close to the acceptance of
the PPM with a similar (very slightly lower, see Fig. 3) analyzing power; and
the second are ‘stolen’ events in that they would have been accepted as true
events but for the accidental veto. Both might result in errors in the measured
intrinsic ﬁrst moment of polarization coupled to a helicity correlated change
in the beam intensity (otherwise, they just tend to pull down the average
analyzing power slightly). The eﬀects were measured by taking data with a 43
ns (one RF period for the TRIUMF cyclotron) delay in the Ω counter for case
(1), and a 43 ns delay in the V counter for case (2). For an assumed helicity
dependent variation of current, ∆I
I = 10−5, the change in the ﬁrst moment due
to case (1) was 1.2 ± 0.2 × 10−3µm, and for case (2) was 0.0 ± 0.2 × 10−3µm.
As these would result in false terms to Az of the order of 10−11, they were
inconsequential for the experiment.

Tests were also done with carbon blades replacing the usual CH2 blades in
the polarimeter. These indicated that 1% of the true events in the PPM came
from the carbon in the CH2 blades (12C(p, 2p)X, etc.). This had a very small
contribution to the eﬀective analyzing power.

As the data collection involved spin oﬀ periods interspersed with the polarized
beam, it was possible to monitor the PPM’s response (instrumental asymme-
try) to zero polarization (ideally what we would like to see in the experiment
with a perfect longitudinally polarized beam). An instrumental asymmetry as
a function of blade position plot is presented in Figure 9. It was found that
the slope of the instrumental asymmetry was strongly dependent on the di-
vergence or convergence of the beam, as then the angle of incidence is position

15

Fig. 9. Instrumental asymmetry as a function of target (blade) position.

dependent and the scattering angle dependence on position is diﬀerent from
the assumption of a parallel beam. Note that the requirement for the exper-
iment is for as parallel a beam (i.e., very weakly focussed at the target) as
reasonably achievable.

Figure 10 shows a helicity-correlated polarization proﬁle measured by the up-
stream PPM with 200 nA beam and a beam size (σ) of 5.0 mm. Under those
conditions, each PPM measures an average < Px > and < Py > to ±0.002
and < xPy > and < yPx > to ±7 µm in one hour.

The eﬀective analyzing power as a function of blade position is determined by
moving the beam across the range of the blade sweep with the beam trans-
versely polarized. Absolute calibration was done by comparing the integrated
result to the existing IBP.

5 Conclusions

The PPM rotation control system has worked very well. It is convenient to use
and normally maintains PPM synchronization to ± one shaft encoder line.

The PPM’s have been successfully used throughout the TRIUMF Parity ex-
periment (E497). For three runs (not the full data set) of data taken in 1997,

16

Fig. 10. A beam proﬁle (top) and polarization proﬁle (bottom) for a longitudinally
polarized beam. In this example < Px > is obviously non-zero (about 1%).

17

1998 and 1999 (about four months) consisting of about 240 hours of TRIC
data (the actual parity violation measurement) collection: The ‘false’ parity
violating analyzing power (Az) derived from transverse components of polar-
ization coupled with a displacement from the ideal instrumental symmetry
axis has been measured as (0.02 ± 0.01) × 10−7. The false Az derived from
the ﬁrst moments of polarization has been measured as (0.72 ± 0.19) × 10−7.
This conﬁrms the expectation that the latter is a large (indeed, so far, the
largest) correction. It is also the largest contribution to the E497 error. Im-
proved PPM error to total error could be achieved by changing the number of
targets (and thus the ratio of PPM data collection time to TRIC data collec-
tion time) or seeking some other means of rapidly and accurately measuring
the polarization proﬁles.

References

[1] S. Kistryn et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, (1987) 1616.

[2] R. Balzer et al., Phys. Rev. C 30, (1984) 1409.

[3] P.D. Eversheim et al., Phys. Lett. B 256, (1991) 11.

[4] V. Yuan, H. Frauenfelder, R.W. Harper, J.D. Bowman, R. Carlini,
D.W. MacArthur, R.E. Mischke, D.E. Nagle, R.L. Talaga, and A.B. McDonald,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, (1986) 1680.

[5] J.M. Potter, J.D. Bowman, C.F. Hwang, J.L. McKibben, R.E. Mischke,
D.E. Nagle, P.G. Debrunner, H. Frauenfelder, and L.B. Sorensen, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 33, (1974) 1307.

[6] A.R. Berdoz et al., in Proc. of the Int’l. Conf. on Quark Lepton Nuclear Physics
(QULEN‘97), H. Ejiri, T. Kishimoto, Y. Mizuno, T. Nakano, and H. Toki, eds.,
Nucl. Phys. A629, (1998) 433c; S.A. Page et al., in Proc. of the Int’l. Symposium
on Weak and Electromagnetic Interactions in Nuclei (WEIN-89), edited by P.
Depommier, Editions Frontieres (1989) 557.

[7] R.W. Harper, V. Yuan, H. Frauenfelder, J.D. Bowman, R. Carlini,
R.E. Mischke, D.E. Nagle, R.L. Talaga, and A.B. McDonald, Phys. Rev. D
31, (1985) 1151.

[8] J.D. Bowman et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 34, (1975) 1184.

18

[9] J. Birchall et al., in Polarization Phenomena in Nuclear Physics, AIP Conf.

Proc. 339, (1995) 136.

[10] J. Birchall et al., TRIUMF Experiment proposal E761, (1995) unpublished.

[11] M. Simonius, Phys. Lett. 41B, (1972) 415.

[12] M. Simonius, R. Henneck, Ch. Jacquemart, J. Lang, W. Haeberli, and

Ch. Weddigen, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 177, (1980) 471.

[13] D.E. Nagle, J.D. Bowman, C. Hoﬀman, J. McKibben, R. Mischke, J.M. Potter,
H. Frauenfelder, and L. Sorenson, in High Energy Physics with Polarized Beams
and Targets, ed. by G.H. Thomas, AIP Conf. Proc. 51, (1978) 224.

[14] W. Haeberli, R. Henneck, Ch. Jacquemart, J. Lang, R. M¨uller, M. Simonius,

W. Reichart, and Ch. Weddigen, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 163, (1979) 403.

[15] J. Chlebek, S. Kuhn, P.D. Eversheim, and F. Hinterberger, Nucl. Instr. and

Meth. in Phys. Res. A256, (1987) 98.

[16] B. Vuaridel, K. Elsener, W. Gr¨uebler, V. K¨onig, and P.A. Schmelzbach, Nucl.

Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. A244, (1986) 335.

[17] J. Birchall, Can. J. Phys. 66, (1988) 530.

[18] R.A. Arndt,

Interactive dial-in program SAID,

1994; R.A. Arndt,

I.I. Strakovsky, and R.L. Workman, Phys. Rev. C 50, 2731 (1994).

[19] J. Soukup et al., Beam Instrumentation Workshop, AIP Conf. Proc. 333, (1994)

492.

[20] A.R. Berdoz et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A307, (1991) 26.

[21] L.G. Greeniaus and J. Soukup, TRIUMF Report No. TR-DN-81-1, (1987)

unpublished.

19

