1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Subpixel Spatial Resolution of the X-Ray
Charge-Coupled Device Based on the Charge
Cloud Shape

accepted December, 14, 2000 to Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.

J. HIRAGA a H.TSUNEMI a E.MIYATA a

aDepartment of Earth and Space Science, Graduate School of Science, Osaka
University, 1-1 Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 5600043, Japan
CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST)

Abstract

When an X-ray photon lands into a pixel (event pixel), the primary charge is
mainly collected into the event pixel. If the X-ray landing position is suﬃciently close
to the pixel boundary, the primary charge spills over to the adjacent pixel forming
split events. We can easily understand that there are three parameters coupled
together; the X-ray landing position inside the pixel, the X-ray event pattern and
the primary charge cloud shape. We can determine any one of them from the other
two parameters. Since we know the charge cloud shape using the multi-pitch mesh
experiment, we can calculate the X-ray landing position with subpixel resolution
using the event pattern. We applied our method to Ti-K X-rays for the charge-
coupled device with 12 µm square pixel. Once the primary charge splits into the
adjacent pixel, we can determine the X-ray landing position with subpixel resolution.
Using three- or four-pixel split events, we can determine the X-ray landing position
with an accuracy of less than 1 µm. For a two-pixel split event, we obtained a
similar position accuracy in the split direction with no improvement in the direction
perpendicular to it. We will discuss the type of CCD which can achieve the subpixel
resolution for the entire area of the CCD.

Key words: charge-coupled device, X-ray event, split event, subpixel spatial
resolution

1 Introduction

A charge-coupled device (CCD) is widely used in optical imaging, particularly
in the digital camera for commercial use. It mainly employs an interline type

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

CCD. The pixel size is approximately a few µm square which produces a few-
mega-pixel image [1] . Although the interline type CCD has a relatively poor
opening area, the micro-lens array system can increase the eﬀective opening
area up to 70% or higher. Furthermore, the CCD for optical region requires the
depletion region to be at the most several µm. However, the CCD for X-ray
use has diﬀerent characteristics from that for optical use. It has a relatively
good spatial resolution and a moderate energy resolution. Since the micro-
lens array does not work for X-ray photons, the frame transfer type CCD is
required for X-ray use to have a high opening area. The low energy X-ray,
especially below 1 keV, is easily photoabsorbed, which requires the material
above the depletion region to be as thin as possible. The cross-over of the gate
structure above the depletion region makes the low energy X-ray responsivity
within the pixel complicated. The photoabsorption depth in silicon for 10 keV
X-ray is about 100 µm, which requires a much thicker depletion region for
X-ray use than that for optical use.

Several CCDs for X-ray use, particularly for X-ray astronomy, have been devel-
oped to date. The ASCA satellite launched in February, 1993, employs CCDs
with 27 µm square pixels with a depletion depth of 35 µm [2,3]. The Chandra
Observatory launched in July, 1999, employs CCDs with 24 µm square pixels
with a depletion depth of about 70 µm [4,5]. The XMM-Newton Observatory
launched in December, 1999, employs two types of CCDs [6] : one has a 150 µm
square pixel with a depletion depth of 280 µm [7] while the other has a 40 µm
square pixel with a depletion depth of 40 µm [8]. These CCDs for X-ray use
are developed to have thick depletion regions rather than to have high spatial
resolution.

When an X-ray photon is photoabsorbed in a CCD, it generates a number of
electrons proportional to the incident X-ray energy. The electrons generated
by X-ray photons usually expand by the diﬀusion process while they are pulled
to the potential well of the CCD pixel. They usually form a charge cloud of
a ﬁnite size. They are collected into several pixels forming various types of
event pattern (‘grade’) depending on how they split. When the entire charge
is collected into one pixel (no surrounding pixels have a signal), it is called a
‘single pixel event’: when it splits into more than one pixel, it is called a ‘split
pixel event’. The event grade is determined both by the landing position of
X-rays within the pixel and by the charge cloud shape. The X-ray responsiv-
ity depends on the event grade as well as its landing position. This is quite
in contrast to the optical photon that generates only one or two electrons.
Therefore, there is no concept of the event grade in an optical region.

We introduced a new technique, ‘mesh experiment’, which enables us to mea-
sure the X-ray responsivity of the CCD with subpixel resolution [9]. In this
experiment, a parallel X-ray beam is irradiated onto the CCD chip above which
a metal mesh is placed. The mesh has many small holes which are periodically

2

spaced. There are two types of experiments; a single pitch mesh experiment
and a multi-pitch mesh experiment. If the small hole spacing on the mesh is
equal to the CCD pixel size, it is called a single pitch mesh experiment and if it
is a multiple of the CCD pixel size, it is called a multi-pitch mesh experiment.
Using this technique, the detailed gate structures were directly measured from
the X-ray absorption feature [10,11]. The details of the mesh experiment are
described in literature by Tsunemi et al. [12]

Using the multi-pitch mesh experiment, we can unequivocally identify the X-
ray landing position inside the pixel. In this way, we can directly measure
the event grade, and how the charge cloud splits into surrounding pixels, as
a function of the landing position inside the pixel. We can ﬁnd out that the
fraction of the charge splitting into the adjacent pixel increases as the X-ray
landing position approaches the pixel boundary. We can easily understand
that there are three parameters coupled together; the X-ray landing position
inside the pixel, the X-ray event grade and the charge cloud shape. If we
know two out of three parameters, we can calculate the third one. The X-ray
event grade is easily measured by the photon count CCD system. The X-ray
landing position can be directly measured by the mesh experiment, resulting
us to measure the charge cloud shape [13]. Once we know the charge cloud
shape, we can measure the X-ray landing position without applying the mesh
experiment.

In this paper, we brieﬂy describe the mesh experiment and present the method
of determining the X-ray landing position for various types of event grades in
order to achieve the subpixel resolution.

2 Experiment

An X-ray photon photoabsorbed inside the CCD usually generates a number
of electrons, the primary charge cloud. One X-ray photon photoabsorbed gen-
erates one X-ray event, a series of pixels collecting a primary charge cloud. The
primary charge cloud expands to some extent while it is pulled to the potential
well. If the X-ray photon is photoabsorbed below the depletion region, some
fraction of the charge is collected as a multi-pixel event. If the X-ray photon
is photoabsorbed in the depletion region, the size of the primary charge cloud
is at the most a few µm which is smaller than that of the CCD pixel size. The
actual charge cloud size depends on the photoabsorbed depth. Therefore, we
can distinguish the events photoabsorbed in the depletion region from those
photoabsorbed below the depletion region by the event pattern. The former
shows the incident X-ray energy while the latter does not due to the charge
loss. We will focus on the events photoabsorbed in the depletion region.

3

We will obtain various grades of events depending on the X-ray landing posi-
tion. A major fraction of the primary charge will be collected in the pixel in
which the X-ray lands. We term this pixel as the ‘event pixel’. When the entire
primary charge cloud is collected into the event pixel, the surrounding pixels
have no signal, resulting in a single pixel event. If the X-ray landing position in
the event pixel is suﬃciently close to the pixel boundary, the primary charge
splits into two pixels forming a two-pixel split event. If the X-ray landing po-
sition is close to the event pixel corner, the primary charge splits into three
or four pixels forming three- or four-pixel split event or ‘corner event’.

When we detect an X-ray event in the CCD, we usually see 3 × 3 pixels as the
event pattern. The central pixel of the event pattern is the event pixel that has
the maximum charge in the 3 × 3 pixels. The pixels around the event pixel
are ‘surrounding pixels’. In practice, we introduce the split threshold level, Th,
in order to test whether or not the pixel has charge. If we ﬁnd that the output
from the surrounding pixels exceeds Th, we term the pixel as a ‘split pixel’. In
X-ray spectroscopy, we usually sum up the output from the event pixel and
those from the split pixels in order to evaluate the incident X-ray energy. Since
each pixel usually contains noise level, the best energy resolution is obtained
by eliminating the pixels whose output is less than Th. The overall noise level
in our system is 10 electrons or less, therefore, we set Th to be 50 electrons so
that we do not treat the pixel with no signal as a split pixel by noise.

We performed the mesh experiment employing a CCD (Hamamatsu Photonics,
N38 11-5A0N-2) consisting of 12 µm square pixels for X-ray use. The mesh
fabricated of gold has small holes of 2.1 µm diameter spaced 48 µm apart. The
pitch of mesh holes is four times larger than the CCD pixel size which forms a
multi-pitch mesh experiment. The mesh is placed just 1 mm above the CCD.
In this way, we can measure what type of event grades are generated as a
function of the X-ray landing position inside the CCD pixel.

3 Event Pattern

When an X-ray photon lands on the CCD at (Xin, Yin), the output,
D(n, m; Xin, Yin), from the (n, m) pixel in the X-ray event is expressed as
an integration of the primary charge cloud, C(X, Y ), over the pixel area that
is given in eq. (1).

D(n, m; Xin, Yin) =

dX

dY C(X − Xin, Y − Yin)

(1)

Xn+1

Ym+1

Z
Xn

Z
Ym

4

where Xn, Xn+1, and Ym, Ym+1 represent the pixel boundary of the X and Y
coordinates, respectively. Since the CCD employed has a square shaped pixel,
we set Xn+1 − Xn = Ym+1 − Ym ≡ L, where L represents the pixel size.
We assume that all the CCD pixels are identical, therefore, we obtain the
relationship in eq. (2) as below,

D(n + k, m + l; Xin, Yin) = D(n, m; Xin − k L, Yin − l L) .

(2)

When the (n, m) pixel represents the event pixel, the event pattern of the 3×3
pixels are expressed in the matrix below,

D(n − 1, m + 1; Xin, Yin) D(n, m + 1; Xin, Yin) D(n + 1, m + 1; Xin, Yin)

D(n − 1, m; Xin, Yin)

D(n, m; Xin, Yin)
D(n − 1, m − 1; Xin, Yin) D(n, m − 1; Xin, Yin) D(n + 1, m − 1; Xin, Yin)

D(n + 1, m; Xin, Yin)

It can be rewritten in the form below using eq. (2) as,

D(n, m; Xin + L, Yin − L) D(n, m; Xin, Yin − L) D(n, m; Xin − L, Yin − L)

D(n, m; Xin + L, Yin)

D(n, m; Xin, Yin)
D(n, m; Xin + L, Yin + L) D(n, m; Xin, Yin + L) D(n, m; Xin − L, Yin + L)

D(n, m; Xin − L, Yin)




















(3)








(4)







In this way, the 3 × 3 pixel data express the function of D. Employing the
multi-pitch mesh experiment, we can directly measure the 3×3 pixel data as a
function of (Xin, Yin). Then, we can obtain the function, D, which is expressed
as Dn in the literature [13], from the raw data. In practice, we relocate the
event pattern to match the function, D in eq. (1), which is shown in Fig. 1 in
3 × 3 pixel region.

Using the eq. (1), we ﬁnd that the charge cloud shape is obtained by diﬀeren-
tiating D with (Xin, Yin). The detailed derivation of the charge cloud shape is
given in the literature [13]. In the mesh experiment, we can conﬁne the X-ray
landing position with the precision of the mesh hole. Therefore, the diﬀeren-
tiation of D is a convolution between the charge cloud shape and the mesh
hole shape. Since we know the mesh hole shape, we can deduce the actual
charge cloud shape which is well approximated by an axial symmetric Gaus-
sian function. In this way, we can calculate the primary charge cloud shape as
a function of the incident X-ray energy as shown in Fig. 2 [14].

The longer the attenuation length of X-ray photons in silicon, the bigger is the
charge cloud size. This is well approximated by a simple diﬀusion model [15].

5

Y

X

1pixel

Fig. 1. Signal output from the event pixel as a function of the X-ray landing position
in the 3 × 3 pixel region. Projections along X and Y axes are also shown.

In the following analysis, we will mainly focus on the Ti-K X-ray photons since
it has the biggest charge cloud size in our analysis. Then, we will estimate the
X-ray landing position by comparing the event pattern with D.

4 Data Reduction

4.1 Analysis method

Once we know the charge cloud shape, we need not employ the mesh any more.
Since we can easily determine the X-ray event pattern, we can calculate the
incident X-ray energy by adding up the signal contained in the event. Then
we can estimate the charge cloud shape and calculate D according to eq. (1).
Figure 3 shows D which is free from the eﬀect of the mesh hole shape.

When we obtain a 3 × 3 event pattern, we can compare it with the eq. (4).
We calculate the sum of the square of diﬀerences between the 3 × 3 pixel data
and D as a function of (Xin, Yin). The estimated landing position is given as
the position when the sum is minimum. Once we detect an X-ray event, we

6

Fig. 2. Primary charge cloud size generated by various X-ray photons for
Mo-L (2.3 keV), Al-K (1.5 keV) and Ti-K (4.5 keV) as a function of the attenuation
length in silicon. The solid line represents the model calculation.

always employ the 3 × 3 pixel data regardless of its grade, whether it is a
single pixel event or not etc. It should be noted that our method does not
take into account Th. However, we will sort the event by grades to determine
which grades can yield how much accuracy in estimating the landing position.

4.2 Estimated landing position

Using this method, we can evaluate the X-ray landing position, (Xin, Yin),
while we know the location of the mesh hole shadow on the CCD, (Xhole, Yhole),
in which the X-ray must have landed. Then the diﬀerence, ∆ ≡ (Xin, Yin) −
(Xhole, Yhole), shows the uncertainty of the position estimation. We calculate
∆ for all X-ray events to estimate the position accuracy. Since the actual
landing position of the X-ray photon is somewhere inside the mesh hole, ∆
is a convolution between the mesh hole shape and the uncertainty of the
estimation of the X-ray landing position.

Figure 4 shows the distribution of ∆ for various event grades. In this ﬁgure,
we plotted the distribution of ∆ in the 24 µm square. The mesh hole shadow
is also shown by the small circle on the lower left side of the ﬁgures and the
dashed squares represent the size of the CCD pixel for comparison. We ﬁtted
the results by two-dimensional Gaussian function and obtained the size of the
major and minor axes. The major and minor axes always coincide with the
horizontal or vertical directions on the CCD. It should be noted that Fig. 4

7

Y

X

1pixel

Fig. 3. Model calculation for D. The signal output from the event pixel is shown as
a function of the X-ray landing position in the 3 × 3 pixel region. This ﬁgure is free
from the eﬀect of the mesh hole shape.

denotes the actual position accuracy convoluted with the mesh hole shape.
The geometrical mesh hole size is 2.1 µm in diameter while the eﬀective mesh
hole shadow on the CCD is expanded by the diﬀraction. The actual mesh hole
shadow on the CCD is about 2.2 µm for Ti-K X-rays in our conﬁguration.
Hence we can eliminate the eﬀect of the mesh hole shape to evaluate the
position accuracy of our method summarized in Table 1.

For single pixel events, only one pixel contains a signiﬁcant fraction of the
charge while the surrounding pixels contain noise. Therefore, the landing po-
sition inside the pixel is well within the pixel boundary where D is almost
constant. The actual shape of the region where the single pixel event is gen-
erated is well within the pixel boundary. The position uncertainty is slightly
better than the pixel size.

The position accuracy can be improved when the charge splits into adjacent
pixels. When the X-ray landing position is suﬃciently close to the vertical
boundary, the X-ray event forms a horizontally split two-pixel event. In this
case, the X-ray landing position can be improved along the horizontal direc-
tion. However, there is almost no improvement in the vertical direction. A
similar improvement can be achieved for a vertically split two-pixel event. We

8

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 4. Position accuracies using our method shown in a 24 µm square. The small
circle in the lower left shows the shape of the mesh hole shadow on the CCD and the
dashed square represents the size of the CCD pixel. Position accuracy for single pixel
events (a), for vertically split two-pixel events (b), for horizontally split two-pixel
events (c) and for corner events (d).

note that the position accuracy of split direction for the vertically split two-
pixel event is better than that of the horizontally split two-pixel event. The
smaller extent of the charge cloud has higher electron density than the bigger
extent of the charge cloud. The higher electron density will lead to a ﬁner
position accuracy. Therefore, the above fact is consistent with the elongation
of the charge cloud shape [14]. Finally, when an X-ray lands near the pixel
corner, the charge splits both along the horizontal and the vertical directions.
Then we can improve the two-dimensional position resolution.

Yoshita et al. [16] have already demonstrated that the CCD has a subpixel
spatial resolution using split events. They obtained the position accuracy to
1.5 ∼ 2.0 µm. However, they employed only two-pixel split events, resulting in
the improvement of the position resolution for one dimension. This is mainly
due to the experimental setup: they employed a single pitch mesh experiment.
They had diﬃculties in precisely determining the X-ray landing position for
corner events. However, we employed a multi-pitch mesh experiment by which
we could unequivocally determine the X-ray landing position for all X-ray
events. Hence, we could improve the two-dimensional position resolution for

9

the ﬁrst time. Furthermore, we introduced the mesh with smaller holes to
improve the position accuracy.

4.3 Position estimation using the event pixel

This is a very conventional method where the center of the event pixel is
considered to be the X-ray landing position. The position accuracy using this
method should be determined by the convolution between the pixel shape and
the mesh hole shadow. If we assume that the X-ray detection eﬃciency is
uniform over the pixel, we can calculate the position accuracy which is 3.6 µm
(standard deviation, σ) using 12 µm square pixels and 2.2 µm diameter mesh
holes. We evaluated the accuracy of the position estimation employing this
conventional method. Figure 5 shows the distribution of ∆ using all the X-ray
events. We will analyze the result by the same method used in our study. The
results listed in Table 1 are almost consistent with what we expected. A small
diﬀerence between our results and those we expected is probably due to the
nonuniformity of the X-ray detection eﬃciency over the pixel.

(a)

10

Fig. 5. Same as for Fig.4 using the center of the event pixel as the X-ray landing
position.

5 Discussion

So far, the spatial resolution of the CCD is considered to be limited by the
pixel size. Furthermore, the charge cloud generated by X-ray photons expands,
resulting in the incident X-ray position blur.

By the conventional method, the position accuracy (σ) determined by the pixel
size would be approximately 0.3 times of the pixel size. Tsunemi et al. [12]
reported a method to improve the position accuracy up to 0.13 times of the

Table 1
Accuracy of the incident X-ray position

Ti-K X-rays Branching ratio Horizontal direction Vertical direction

Single pixel event

Horizontally split two-pixel event

Vertically split two-pixel event

Corner event

Event pixel

(%)

55.2

20.3

13.0

11.5

(µm)

3.1± 0.2
1.0± 0.1
3.4± 0.2
0.7± 0.1

3.4± 0.2

(µm)

3.4± 0.2
3.1± 0.2
0.6± 0.1
0.7± 0.1

3.9± 0.2

pixel size. They estimated the X-ray landing position by employing the center
of gravity of the X-ray event pattern, particularly for the two-pixel split events.
However, the center of gravity of the event does not precisely show the X-ray
landing position since the charge cloud size is smaller than the pixel size. The
precise X-ray landing position should be determined by referring to the charge
cloud shape. Therefore, our method, considering the charge cloud shape, can
improve the accuracy of the X-ray landing position better than that using the
center of gravity. Our result shows the accuracy of the X-ray landing position
up to 0.06 times the pixel size, which shows that the CCD for X-ray use can
be an image sensor with a subµm resolution.

The charge cloud size of the X-ray used in our experiment is relatively small
compared with the CCD pixel size employed. This combination makes the
fraction of the single pixel event high and that of the split event, particularly
the corner event, low as described in Table 1. The improvement of the position
resolution can be eﬀectively attained when the charge splits into the adjacent
pixel. Since our method is practically useful only for corner events, we have
to increase the fraction of the split events in order to make the entire area of
the X-ray CCD as an image sensor with a subµm resolution. What are the
practical conditions by which we can obtain the subpixel resolution using our
method more eﬀectively? There are two ways to do this: one is to make the
charge cloud size big and the other is to manufacture a CCD chip with small
pixel size.

The charge cloud shape depends on the travel distance between the photoab-
sorption location and the potential well. The longer the travel distance, the
bigger is the charge cloud shape. Since the CCD employed is a front illumi-
nation type (FI) CCD, the travel distance becomes longer for higher X-ray
energy, resulting in a bigger charge cloud shape. However, this does not apply
to a back illumination type (BI) CCD. In the BI CCD, the X-ray photon enters
from behind the depletion region. X-rays with shorter photoabsorption length
generate a charge cloud at the far end of the depletion region. The charge
cloud will travel a relatively long distance, resulting in a relatively large cloud

11

shape. Therefore, a low energy X-ray in the BI CCD will generate a larger
charge cloud than that in the FI CCD. Our method will function eﬃciently in
the BI CCD.

The accuracy of the X-ray landing position depends on the accuracy of the
charge cloud shape. The actual charge cloud shape will depend on various
parameters; the incident X-ray energy, the thickness of the depletion region
and the working condition of the CCD, and the applied voltage on the gates
and the clocking pattern. We can directly measure the charge cloud shape
using the mesh experiment. However, obtained the charge cloud shape is a
mean shape for a given X-ray energy, it will be diﬀerent for individual X-ray
photons depending on the photoabsorption depth. This will become a position
error through our method.

Our method requires the charge cloud generated by the X-ray photon to spill
over the adjacent pixel. Therefore, we need not make the CCD pixel very small
if the pixel size is comparable to the primary charge cloud size. Furthermore,
we need a CCD with a thicker depletion region to obtain a higher detection
eﬃciency for high energy X-ray. We only require the pixel size to be small
enough to generate split events. What types of grades generated by an X-ray
photon depend not only on where the X-ray lands but also on how deep the
X-ray is photoabsorbed in the depletion layer which is a stochastic process.
The charge cloud size (σ) measured for Ti-K(4.5 keV) X-rays is 1.0 ∼ 1.4 µm.
Considering the noise level, we can detect the split charge to the adjacent pixel
when the X-ray photon lands within about 3 µm away from the boundary.
Therefore if the pixel size is about 6 µm square, we can obtain split events
wherever the X-ray lands. In the present CCD, having 12 µm square pixel,
X-rays landing on the central part of the pixel become single pixel events even
if they are photoabsorbed deep in the depletion region.

We should note that the X-ray photoabsorbed in the shallow region generates
a very small charge cloud size in the FI CCD. Therefore, some fraction of X-ray
photons generates single pixel event however small the pixel size is. Whereas
no X-ray photon landing onto the central part of the pixel generates a split
pixel event if the pixel size is bigger than the charge extent. The branching
ratio of the X-ray events does not represent the area generating each event
grade but represents what fraction of the X-ray events becomes what type of
grades. Hence, we can expect that some X-ray events will generate split events
even if they land at the center of the pixel of the CCD with about 6 µm square
pixel. Since the CCD chip employed at present has a 12-µm-square pixel, we
can say that the CCD with two times smaller pixel will be an image sensor
with a subµm resolution.

12

6 Conclusion

We performed the multi-pitch mesh experiment using the gold mesh of 2.1 µm
diameter holes. Then, we calculated the function, D, which shows the output
from the event pixel as a function of the X-ray landing position. The primary
charge cloud shape generated by X-ray photons can be measured from D.

Using the charge cloud shape, we can calculate the X-ray landing position
with subpixel resolution. Our method compares the 3 × 3 pixel data with D.
The position resolution is improved in the direction where the charge splits.
Therefore, there is almost no improvement for single pixel events. The position
resolution for two-pixel split events can be improved in one direction. When
the X-ray photon lands near the pixel corner, the charge splits both in the
horizontal direction and the vertical direction generating corner events. Then
the two-dimensional position resolution can be improved to subpixel resolu-
tion. The accuracy of the position is less than 1 µm in the direction where the
charge splits.

We have discussed how we can improve the position resolution of the CCD for
X-ray use by introducing our method. Our method becomes practical when
an X-ray photon produces a split event. For the optical region, a CCD with
very small pixel size is manufactured whereas it is not designed for X-ray use.
Taking into account the noise level in our system, we ﬁnd that the CCD with
a pixel size of about 6 µm square will generate split events from the entire
region. Therefore, the CCD can be used as an image sensor with a subµm
resolution for X-ray photons.

7 Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to all the members of the CCD team in Osaka Uni-
versity. This work is supported by the ACT-JST program, Japan Science and
Technology Corporation and the SUMITOMO FOUNDATION. J.H. was par-
tially supported by JSPS Research Fellowship for Young Scientists, Japan.

References

[1] T. Watanabe: Ph.D.thesis, Osaka University, 2000.
[2] Y. Tanaka, H. Inoue and S. S. Holt: Publ. Astron. Soc. Jpn. 46 (1994) 37.

[3] B. E. Burke, R. W. Mountain, P. J. Daniels, M. J. Cooper and V. S. Dolat:

IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 41 (1994) 375.

13

[4] M. C. Weisskopf and S. L. O’Dell: Proc SPIE 3113 (1997) .

[5] B. E. Burke, J. A. Gregory, M. W. Bautz et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,

44 (1997) 1633.

[6] P. Barr et al. ESA SP-1097, 1988.

[7] K. Dennerl, U. G. Briel, F. Harberl, G. Hartner, N. Krause, M. Pops and

V. E. Zavlin:Proc SPIE 3765 (1999) 232.

[8] A. D. Short, A. Keay and M. J. L. Turner: Proc. SPIE 3445, (1998) 13.

[9] H. Tsunemi, K. Yoshita and S. Kitamoto, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 36 (1997) 2906.

[10] M. J. Pivovaroﬀ, S. Jones, M. W. Bautz, S. Kissel, G. Prigozhin, G. Ricker, H.

Tsunemi and E. Miyata, IEEE Trans. Nucl Sci., 45 (1998) 164.

[11] K. Yoshita, H. Tsunemi, K. C. Gendreau, G. Pennington and M. W. Bautz,

IEEE Trans. Nucl Sci., 45 (1998) 915.

[12] H. Tsunemi, J. Hiraga, K. Yoshita and S. Kitamoto, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 37

(1998) 2734.

Phys., 37 (1998) 4627.

[13] J. Hiraga, H. Tsunemi, K. Yoshita, E. Miyata and M. Ohtani, Jpn. J. Appl.

[14] H. Tsunemi, J. Hiraga, K. Mori, K. Yoshita and E. Miyata Nucl. Instrum. &

Methods, A 436 (1999) 32.

[15] G. R. Hopkinson, Opt. Eng. 26 (1987) 766.

[16] K. Yoshita, H. Tsunemi,E. Miyata, K. C. Gendreau and M. W. Bautzs, IEEE

Trans. Electron Devices, 46 (1999) 100.

14

