1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Diﬀraction on a polycrystal for investigations
and diagnostics of X-ray radiation of
relativistic particles in a forward direction

Alexander V. Shchagin∗

Kharkov Institute of Physics and Technology, Kharkov 61108,
Ukraine

Abstract

It is shown that the diﬀraction on a polycrystal can be used for
investigation and diagnostics of X-ray radiation emitted in a forward
direction by relativistic charged particles moving in crystalline or other
targets or ﬁelds. Methods for measuring radiation spectral density, di-
vergence, and linear polarization at any requisite energy from a few
units to tens of keV are proposed. The explanation for the origination
of experimentally observed and earlier unidentiﬁed spectral peaks as
a result of Bragg diﬀraction on a polycrystal is described. The exper-
iment for veriﬁcation of the explanation is suggested.

.
PACS: 41.50.+h; 41.60.-m; 07.85.-m
.
Key words: Radiation of relativistic particles, Bragg diﬀraction,

Polycrystal

1 Introduction

There exist several kinds of X-ray radiation of relativistic charged parti-
cles moving through a radiator, i.e., amorphous or crystalline targets or

∗E-mail: shchagin@kipt.kharkov.ua

1

ﬁelds. These are ordinary bremsstrahlung, transition radiation (TR), res-
onance transition radiation, coherent bremsstrahlung, channeling radiation,
parametric X-ray radiation (PXR), undulator radiation, Thomson or Comp-
ton scattering, etc. Most of them are going from the radiator in a forward
1 relative to the incident parti-
direction mainly within the angle of about γ−
cle velocity vector −→V , where γ is the relativistic factor of incident particles.
Several of the above-mentioned kinds of radiation can be generated in the ra-
diator (e.g., in a crystal) simultaneously, and the total radiation in a forward
direction (RFD) is going along the vector −→V . To investigate the composition
of the total radiation and the role of its components, experimental measure-
ments of the RFD spectral properties are needed. However, it is generally
diﬃcult to measure the spectral properties of the RFD from relativistic par-
ticle beams on account of its high intensity, wide spectrum and a restricted
counting rate of spectrometers. In the gamma-ray band, it is the Compton
scattering that is successfully used for investigations of the RFD. In the X-
ray band, the use of Bragg diﬀraction seems to be more natural.
In this
paper we suggest that the Bragg diﬀraction in a polycrystal placed behind
the radiator should be used for measurements of the RFD spectral density,
divergence and linear polarization at any wanted X-ray energy. Besides, we
shall discuss the experiment, where, in our opinion, the Bragg diﬀraction of
X-ray RFD by the polycrystal was observed.

2 How to measure X-ray radiation in a for-
ward direction with the use of a polycrystal

The scheme of the setup for measurements of the X-ray RFD properties is
shown in Fig. 1. The beam of incident relativistic particles from the ac-
celerator passes through the radiator R and generates RFD going along the
1. Then the RFD crosses the poly-
particle beam within the angle of about γ−
crystalline foil P. The particle beam can be either deﬂected by the bending
magnet or can pass through the foil, too, if its radiation in the foil does not
prevent the observation of radiation under study. The spectrometric X-ray
detector D is installed at an observation angle θ. The polycrystalline foil con-
sists of a number of randomly aligned crystalline grains. Some of them can
appear oriented relative to the vector −→V and the observation direction −→Ω to

2

satisfy the Bragg condition. One of these grains with the crystallographic
planes denoted by the reciprocal lattice vector −→g is shown in the foil in Fig.
1. The X-ray RFD of Bragg energy EB will be reﬂected by these planes into
the detector. Thus, the spectrometric detector will be able to register several
spectral peaks of energies EB, corresponding to several main crystallographic
planes of the polycrystal. These energies can be found by the formula from
Ref. [1]

,

2

EB =

c¯hg2
−→g −→Ω
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
where −→Ω is the unit vector in the observation direction at the observation
(cid:12)
angle θ relative to the particle velocity vector −→V and the RFD axis,
=
= 2π√l2+m2+n2
|−→g
, a is the lattice constant; l, m, n
a
|
are the Miller indices for the crystallographic planes with a nonzero structure
factor.

−→g −→Ω
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2 = g sin θ

2, g =

cos π

|−→g

(1)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

−

|

θ

The scheme in Fig. 1 is similar to the one used in the well-known Debye-
Scherrer method for investigations of polycrystalline samples by a monochro-
matic X-ray beam. Here, we propose that this scheme with the known poly-
crystal should be used for investigation and diagnostics of intense RFD X-ray
beams that may have wide and complicated spectra.

2.1 Spectral density

The number of counts registered by the detector in the spectral peak of
energy EB is proportional to the RFD spectral density at this energy. For
absolute measurements of RFD spectral density, one should calibrate the
foil+detector system using the radiator with the known spectral density of
X-ray radiation and provide a reliable monitoring of the number of incident
electrons. For measurement of RFD spectral density in arbitrary units, one
can change radiators or their properties at a ﬁxed geometry of both the
foil and the detector and register number of counts in the spectral peaks at
energy EB generated by constant number of incident particles. For example,
in this way one can measure the spectral density of channeling radiation as a
function of crystal-radiator alignment. Note that only a small part of RFD
can be diﬀracted by a thin polycrystalline foil into the detector. This is
favorable for preventing the spectrometer from overloading at measurements

3

of intense X-ray RFD beams. The wanted energy EB can be provided by
a proper choice of the polycrystal and the observation angle in accordance
with the formula (1).

2.2 Divergence

The width ∆E of the measured spectral peak at energy EB is a function of
the experimental angular resolution ∆θ and the incident X-ray RFD beam
divergence α in the observation plane, and also the energy resolution of the
detector ∆Ed. The experimental angular resolution is determined by the
angular size of both the detector and the RFD beam spot on the foil in the
observation plane. Using the Eq. (1), one can ﬁnd

∆E2 = ∆E2

d +

EB
2 tan θ

2

∆θ2 +

EB
2 tan θ

2

α2.

 

2 !
In practice, the divergence can be measured provided that the spectral peak
broadening due to the RFD divergence exceeds or is comparable to the broad-
ening due to the experimental angular resolution and energy resolution of the
detector. In this case, the divergence α in the observation plane can be found
from (2).

2 !

 

(2)

2.3 Linear polarization

The Bragg diﬀraction intensity has its maximum for X-rays polarized in the
plane perpendicular to the diﬀraction plane, and its minimum for the X-
rays polarized in the plane of diﬀraction. These maximum and minimum
are particularly pronounced at θ close to π/2. Due to these well-known
peculiarities of Bragg diﬀraction, the setup shown in Fig. 1 should possess
the polarization analyzing power. The setup can be used for measurements
of the RFD linear polarization at energy EB. To this end, one should perform
measurements of polycrystal-diﬀracted radiation at a ﬁxed observation angle
θ as a function of the azimuthal angle of the detector rotation around the
vector −→V .

4

3 Discussion of some experimental results from

Ref. [2]

In our opinion, the diﬀraction of RFD by the polycrystal has been observed in
Ref. [2]. The experimental setup in Ref. [2] was partially similar to the one
shown in Fig. 1. The authors of Ref. [2] studied the PXR and the diﬀracted
TR in the Bragg direction, the radiations being generated by the 150 MeV
electron beam in silicon single-crystal radiators of various conﬁgurations.
Diﬀraction of TR realized in the same single-crystal radiators. Behind the
radiator, a 10 µm thick molybdenum foil was installed. The characteristic
X-ray radiation, excited in the foil, was used for monitoring the number of
beam electrons that have passed through the radiators. Those authors have
measured a series of nice spectra having a low spectral background by a Si(Li)
detector at θ = 25.8◦. In the spectra they observed clearly marked spectral
peaks of PXR and diﬀracted TR from the radiator, and also the peaks of
characteristic X-ray radiation from the molybdenum foil at reference energies
EKα = 17.45 keV and EKβ = 19.6 keV. Besides, they observed spectral
25.0 keV, the origin of which was not
peaks with energies
identiﬁed in Ref.
[2]. Here, we shall discuss the data concerned with these
unidentiﬁed spectral peaks (USPs).

12.5 keV and

≈

≈

In Ref. [2] the authors have noted that the molybdenum foil was amor-
phous. To understand the origin of the USPs, let us suppose that the molyb-
denum foil is polycrystalline. This polycrystal can diﬀract the radiation of
Bragg energies from the RFD, generated in the radiator, into the cone and,
in particular, in the detector direction. The Bragg energies calculated by
formula (1) for the crystallographic planes with nonzero structure factors
(110), (220), (200) of molybdenum lattice [3] at the reference lattice con-
stant a=3.15˚A and θ = 25.8◦ are E(110)
= 25.0 keV,
E(200)
and E(220)
are
practically coincident with the ones of both USPs observed in Ref. [2]. The
energy E(200)
is close to EKα of the characteristic peak, and these peaks are
not seen resolved in the experimental spectra in Ref. [2].

= 12.5 keV, E(220)
B = 17.6 keV, respectively. The calculated energies E(110)

B

B

B

B

B

Consider some other experimental data concerned with USPs described

in Ref. [2]:

i. The USPs disappear if the radiator is removed. This is because the
RFD from the radiator disappears. Therefore, only characteristic peaks ex-

5

cited by the electron beam in the foil are seen in Fig. 11b of Ref. [2]. Note
that the spectral peaks of PXR with the energies practically equal to the
energies of USPs can be generated by the beam electrons in molybdenum
grains. Their absence in Fig. 11b of Ref. [2] means that the PXR from the
polycrystal is weak and is no obstacle for correct measurements of RFD (see
item 3 in nest section).

ii. The USPs disappear if the molybdenum foil is removed. This is

because the Bragg diﬀraction without the polycrystal is absent.

iii. The energies of USPs do not vary with signiﬁcant variations of the
crystal-radiator alignments. This is because the RFD is going along the ﬁxed
vector −→V independently of the crystal-radiator alignment.

iv. The energies of USPs are the same at arbitrary alignment of the
molybdenum foil. This is because the RFD is diﬀracted by the molybde-
num grains which appears at appropriate for Bragg diﬀraction alignment
independently of the alignment of the whole foil.

h

i

100

v. The 12.5 keV USP seems to vanish with the alignment of the Si crystal-
axis close to the incident particle beam axis (see Fig. 12c in
radiator
Ref. [2]). This may be due to a signiﬁcant broadening of the USP as a result
of an appreciably increased RFD divergence. The increased RFD divergence
may be a result of increased electron beam scattering in the crystal-radiator
at this alignment because of the crystal-radiator conﬁguration [2]. Besides,
the increasing of the electron beam scattering is possible at motion of elec-
trons along the

strings of the crystal.

100

Thus, the above-considered experimental data from Ref. [2] seems are in
agreement with our explanation of the USPs origin as a result of the RFD
Bragg diﬀraction by the molybdenum polycrystal.

h

i

4 Results and discussion

1. In this paper we have suggested the methods for diagnostics and measure-
ments of intense X-ray RFD. They permit measurements of spectral density,
divergence and linear polarization of the RFD with the use of Bragg diﬀrac-
tion on a polycrystal. The methods seem relatively simple and inexpensive,
as only a single polycrystalline foil with an arbitrary alignment should be in-
stalled, and ordinary spectrometric detector(s) can be used for measurements
at any energy chosen in the range from several keV to tens of keV.

6

2. Here, we have suggested the explanation of spectral peak origination
at energies of about 12.5 and 25.0 keV, observed and unidentiﬁed in Ref. [2].
The peaks are due to the Bragg diﬀraction of RFD from the radiator by a
polycrystalline molybdenum foil installed behind the radiator. This expla-
nation can be additionally veriﬁed with the experimental setup described in
Ref. [2]. For this purpose, one can vary the registration angle of the detector
θ and observe variations of the spectral peak energies. For the molybdenum
polycrystal, they should obey the following formulae obtained from (1):

(3)

(4)

(5)

E(110)

B =

1.969

√2

·
sin θ
2

keV

E(220)

B =

1.969

√8

·
sin θ
2

keV

E(200)

B =

2

1.969
·
sin θ
2

keV

for the spectral peak from the (110) plane of molybdenum (
Ref. [2] at θ = 25.8◦) and

≈

12.5 keV in

for the spectral peak from the (220) plane of molybdenum (
Ref. [2] at θ = 25.8◦). Besides, a new peak at energy

≈

25.0 keV in

from the (200) plane of molybdenum may appear. In the experimental con-
ditions [2] at θ = 25.8◦, the energy of this spectral peak E(200)
B = 17.64 keV
is close to the one for the characteristic Kα peak at EKα = 17.45 keV. These
peaks could not be resolved by the detector with an energy resolution of 450
eV used in [2].

Besides, our explanation can be veriﬁed by using another kind of poly-
crystal at the same observation angle. For example, the copper polycrystal
can diﬀract the RFD with energies 13.3, 15.4, 21.8 keV from crystallographic
planes (111), (200), (220) respectively at θ = 25.8◦.

3. As we mentioned above, the electron beam can generate the PXR
in the randomly aligned crystal grains of a polycrystal. However, only a
small part of these grains has a proper alignment and produces the PXR
reﬂection in the observation direction. One can estimate relative number
1, only
of such grains. As the angular size of PXR reﬂection is about γ−
2 can
γ−
grains with reciprocal lattice vectors −→g within the solid angle

∼

7

take part in generation of the reﬂection in ﬁxed observation direction. The
γ−2
2π . The eﬀective thickness Tef f for
relative number of such grains is
generation of PXR reﬂection in ﬁxed observation direction of the polycrystal
with thickness T may be estimated as

∼

Tef f ≈

2

γ−
2π

T.

(6)

Thus, the PXR from thin polycrystal should be weak and therefore is not
seen in Fig. 11b of Ref. [2].

4. To investigate radiation in a forward direction in the wanted X-ray en-
ergy range, one can use a polycrystal and position-sensitive X-ray detector(s)
installed at corresponding observation angles.

The diﬀraction on a polycrystal provides good possibility for studying
the PXR and/or other kinds of radiation diﬀracted in a crystal-radiator with
simultaneous measurements of radiation in a forward direction. For example,
the search for PXR in a forward direction may be continued and/or channel-
ing or transition radiation may be studied with the use of a polycrystal.

5 Acknowledgments

The author is thankful to V.M. Sanin for discussion of this paper. The paper
became possible partially due to Project STCU # 1031 from Science and
Technology Center in Ukraine.

References

148(1990)485.

[1] A.V. Shchagin, V.I. Pristupa, N.A. Khizhnyak, Phys. Lett. A

[2] K. Chouﬀani, M.Yu. Andreyashkin, I. Endo, J. Masuda, T. Takahashi,

Y. Takashima, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. B 173(2001)241.

[3] C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, Fourth Edition, John Wiley

and Sons, Inc.

8

6 Figure caption

Fig. 1. The relativistic particle beam passes through the radiator R and
generates radiation in a forward direction (RFD). The RFD is going along
the particle velocity vector −→V and passes through the polycrystalline foil P.
One of randomly aligned grains of the polycrystal with the crystallographic
planes and corresponding reciprocal vector −→g is shown in the foil. The
spectrometric X-ray detector D is installed at observation angle θ. The ob-
servation direction is shown by the unit vector −→Ω . The detector can register
polycrystal-diﬀracted RFD at Bragg energies.

9

5

3

’

&
J

W &

&
9

5)’

