1
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
5
0
7
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An all-cryogenic THz transmission spectrometer

P.J. Burke
Integrated Nanosystems Research Facility, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697

J.P. Eisenstein
Condensed Matter Physics, Caltech, Pasadena, CA 91125

L.N. Pfeiﬀer, K.W. West
Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974
(February 15, 2014)

This paper describes a THz transmission spectrometer for the spectral range of 2-65 cm
(100 GHz to 2 THz) with a spectral resolution of at least 1.8 cm
(50 GHz) where the source,
sample, and detector are all fully contained in a cryogenic environment. Cyclotron emission from
a two-dimensional electron gas heated with an electrical current serves as a magnetic ﬁeld tunable
source. The spectrometer is demonstrated at 4.2 K by measuring the resonant cyclotron absorption
of a second two dimensional electron gas. Unique aspects of the spectrometer are that 1) an ultra-
broadband detector is used and 2) the emitter is run quasi-continuously with a chopping frequency of
only 1 Hz. Since optical coupling to room temperature components is not necessary, this technique
is compatible with ultra-low temperature (sub 100 mK) operation.

−1

−1

I. INTRODUCTION

Many quantum systems of contemporary interest in
condensed matter physics have energy levels in the meV
range. These include, but are not limited to, two di-
mensional electron gas (2DEG) systems in high magnetic
ﬁelds exhibiting the fractional and integer quantum hall
eﬀects, quantum nano-structures such as quantum dots
and carbon nanotubes, and metallic single-electron tran-
sistors. In these systems, temperature dependent behav-
ior in dc transport measurements is observed all the way
down to tens of mK. The measurement of the far-infrared
(THz) transmission through such systems at ultra-low
temperatures could provide complementary information
about the excitation spectrum of the system.

The standard technique to measure THz transmis-
sion is with a Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer
(FTIR) or a molecular gas laser which couples optically
to a cold sample from room temperature. The disadvan-
tage of this technique is that broadband, thermal black-
body radiation is also coupled to the sample; this is in-
compatible with ultra-low temperature (sub 100 mK) op-
eration. Numerically, the (integrated) power density is
40 mW/cm2 at 300 K; typically [1] this must be attenu-
ated to of order pW in order to avoid sample heating in
many ultra-low temperature systems; at the same time
the radiation in the frequency band of interest must be
detectable with reasonable signal to noise for the FTIR
system to operate at all. In principle, this technique can
be carried out. One must construct a set of ﬁlters with
the desired pass functions from microwave to optical fre-
quencies [2].

In this paper an all-cryogenic spectrometer is presented

that bypasses the necessity to construct such ﬁlters. The
spectrometer is based on magnetic ﬁeld tunable cyclotron
resonance (C.R.) emission from a high-mobility 2DEG in
a GaAs/AlGaAs heterojunction, together with a broad-
band detector. Figure 1 illustrates the concept. Our
demonstration experiment is carried out in a 4 K envi-
ronment, but the technique is compatible with ultra-low
temperature (dilution refrigerator) environments.

A transmission spectrometer using C.R. emission from
bulk GaAs was proposed in 1980 [3]. Based on that pro-
posal, a spectrometer was built by Knap [4] in 1992 us-
ing C.R. emission from 2DEGs in GaAs, with a spec-
tral resolution of 1.3 cm−1 using narrow and moderate
band detectors. The spectrometer presented here is an
improvement on that developed by Knap it two impor-
tant ways. First, an ultra-broadband detector is used
in place of a narrow band detector. This allows a much
wider range of frequencies to be accessed in principle; in
this particular case the range of 2-65 cm−1 are immedi-
ately accessible with a single sweep of the magnetic ﬁeld.
Second, we use a very low chopping frequency (1 Hz).
Previous studies of C.R. emission [4–13] typically used
microsecond or millisecond pulses with low duty cycle for
fear of overheating the sample and inadvertently broad-
ening the emission linewidth. The experimental results
presented here indicate that low chopping frequencies do
not signiﬁcantly degrade the emission linewidth. Low
chopping frequencies will allow the use of state-of-the-art
ultra-low-noise bolometers, which have exquisite sensitiv-
ity but time constants limited to typically tens of ms [14].
In this paper, we also provide a quantitative estimate of
the generated C.R. power and spectrometer noise perfor-
mance, as well as quantitative estimates for the ultimate

1

Cryogenic(cid:13)
environment

Detector

Sample(cid:13)

Source(cid:13)
Freq. = eB/hm

FIG. 1. Schematic of technique described in this paper.

limits of this technique using current as well as future
detector technology with the promise of single photon
sensitivity in the THz band [15–17].

II. THZ SOURCE

A. Principle of operation

In two-dimensional electron gas in the presence of a
magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to the plane, the spectrum
of states (in the absence of disorder and interactions) is
given by a discrete set of Landau levels, with energies
given by

where

E = (cid:0)n +

(cid:1) ¯hωc,

1
2

¯hωc = eB/m

∗

.

(1)

(2)

ωc is referred to as the cyclotron frequency. At low tem-
peratures, the lowest energy states are ﬁlled, and higher
energy states are empty. If the electrons are heated to a
higher temperature, then higher energy states are pop-
ulated. The higher-energy electrons can decay to the
lower energy levels via phonon emission or photon emis-
sion; in the latter case the photon frequency is given by
hf = eB/m∗. In our technique, we heat the electrons
with a dc current; the emission frequency is then tunable
by magnetic ﬁeld. This cyclotron emission from 2DEGs
has been studied by many groups [4–13,18–20]. Here,
we are mainly interested in characterizing the emission
power and spectrum in order to use it as a THz source.
Our source consists of a 5x5 mm2 (cleaved) 2DEG
formed in a GaAs/AlGaAs modulation-doped quantum

2

well grown by molecular beam epitaxy. The mobility
and density are 1.25 1011 cm−2 and 600, 000 cm2/V s,
respectively. Ohmic contacts of diﬀused Au/Ni/Ge are
deposited along both edges of the sample to make low-
resistance contacts. We have characterized the emission
power using a broadband detector. To drive our source
electrically, we apply a 0.5 Hz sinusoidal voltage to the
terminals, typically with a 10 kΩ resistor in series with
the emitter. Since heating by the electrical current causes
spontaneous emission, and since the power delivered to
the emitter from the battery is proportional to V 2, the
emission power is periodic with a frequency given by
twice the electrical drive frequency. We thus detect the
synchronous voltage on the detector at the second har-
monic of the drive frequency, 1 Hz.

The detector is a commercially available broadband
composite bolometer [21] placed at one end of a 7 ” long
1/2 ” diameter evacuated (gold plated) light pipe. It con-
sists Ge thermistor mounted on a thin-ﬁlm (NiCr) coated
sapphire absorber with dimensions 4x4 mm2. The emit-
ter is placed at the other end of the light pipe, inside
the bore of a superconducting magnet. The measured
emission power at the detector for an electrical input
power of 1 mW (electric ﬁeld of roughly 20 V/cm) is
shown in ﬁgure 2 as a function of the source magnetic
ﬁeld. The smooth variation of power as a function of
magnetic ﬁeld is due to the variation of the emitter resis-
tance (and hence the power delivered from the battery)
with the magnetic ﬁeld. The periodic structures are in-
terference fringes due to the Fabry-Perot etalon formed
by the substrate. This eﬀect was modeled and measured
by Zinovev [13], and provides evidence that the source is
indeed quasi-monochromatic. Three important ﬁgures of
merit for our source are the optical beam pattern, emit-
ted power, and linewidth. We discuss these each in turn
below.

B. Optics

The emission from our sample is mostly into the sub-
strate due to its high dielectric constant. We have
mounted the sample with a thin layer of vacuum grease
onto a highly-reﬂective (gold plated) mount. This re-
ﬂects most of the light emitted into the substrate. We
also tried evaporating a thin metallization layer on the
back surface (Al), with no change in the output power.
It is well-known that the emissivity from thin ﬁlms is
distributed very uniformly over the entire 2 π steridian
available solid angle [22]. In our case, since the beam pat-
tern is spread out even more after reﬂection and passing
through the dielectric/air interface, the emission is es-
sentially isotropically distributed as a function of solid
angle. We use a light-pipe to guide the radiation to the
detector; in principle a lens system can be used to focus it
if that is desired. The radiation is circularly polarized for
vertical emission, but multiple reﬂections oﬀ of the light

pipe walls and the substrate/sample interface at varying
angles served to randomize the polarization.

*
Cyclotron frequency eB/m
0.6

0.8

0.4

 (THz)
1.0

0.2

1.2

1.4

C. Power

The absolute power available is important, since this
sets the sensitivity requirements for the detector in our
arrangement. Absolute power calibrations at this fre-
quency are typically no better than a factor of two [23],
and our results for the measured signal are also repro-
ducible to only a factor of two between cooldowns. This
may be due to drift in the detector responsivity or to in-
herent changes in the sample between thermal cycles. We
estimate the absolute power response of the detector us-
ing the method of dc substitution. In this method, we de-
termine the detector responsivity (in V/W) to dc power,
and assume the responsitivity is the same for THz power.
This is generally the best agreed upon method for abso-
lute power measurements at THz frequencies. This gives
a responsivity of 3 105 V /W for our detector; we ﬁnd it
also has a noise equivalent power (NEP) of 0.5 pW/√Hz
at a chopping frequency of 1 Hz [24]. We estimate an
optical eﬃciency from the source to the detector of order
10%; this is mainly due to the fact the we use a 1/2”
diameter light pipe, but the detector is only 4x4 mm2 in
size. (No cone is used to concentrate the radiation onto
the detector.) Thus, from the measured power we deter-
mine the absolute output power is roughly 100 pW for
an electrical input power of 1 mW. In a dilution refriger-
ator environment, the emitter would have to be carefully
heat sunk to a thermal stage that could handle the power
load. This is possible without too much diﬃculty.

Our results for the emission power are consistent with
those of Zinovev [13], who used microsecond electrical
pulses and found roughly 50 pW of ac power out for
roughly 1 mW in, but inconsistent with the results of
Kawano [19], who ﬁnd 50 pW out for 50 mW in. These
variations in the output power within the literature may
be related to the sample geometry or the optical coupling
techniques used.

D. Linewidth

The spectral resolution of our spectrometer is limited
by the linewidth of the source. In reality, the spectrum
of states in a 2DEG in a magnetic ﬁeld is broadened by
disorder. We infer an upper limit on the linewidth of our
source by measuring the transmission vs. magnetic ﬁeld
through a sample with a known resonant absorption be-
havior. This is discussed in further detail in section III.
Based on these measurements, we infer an upper limit of
1.8 cm−1 (FWHM) on our source linewidth. These re-
sults are consistent with those of Knap [4] and Komiyama
[18], who studied C.R. emission from samples of similar
mobility. The fact that we ﬁnd such a narrow linewidth

)

W
p
(
 
r
e
w
o
P
 
d
e
t
c
e
t
e
D

0.0

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0.0

to detector

µ

250   m "cavity"
causes interference
fringes

Substrate

Cu block (reflector)

2DEG

0.5

1.0

2.5
Magnetic field at emitter (T)

2.0

1.5

3.0

3.5

FIG. 2. Detected power vs. magnetic ﬁeld.

even when running the emitter quasi-continuous is im-
portant; this issue is discussed in more detail below.

If the current distribution and optical emissivity as a
function of position on the surface of the sample were
known, it should in principle be possible to model the
interference fringes in ﬁgure 3 to determine the spec-
tral linewidth. Zinovev [13] modeled the interference
fringes for the case of vertical emission only and found
qualitative agreement with the measured fringe pat-
tern. However, the emission angle is not purely verti-
cal; in reality it is spread out over 2 π steradians al-
most evenly (see above). Since we do not know the de-
tails of where in the sample the emission comes from,
it is diﬃcult to relate the contrast of the interference
fringes to the linewidth of the radiation. Thus, while the
presence of fringes indicates a component of the emis-
sion is monochromatic, it does not uniquely determine its
linewidth, nor the amount of incoherent broadband radi-
ation. The fringe pattern did not vary strongly with the
mobility of the emitter sample (µ = 600, 000 cm2/V s vs.
2.7 106 cm2/V s), suggesting that the “contrast” of the
interference fringes is not a good measure of the emission
linewidth.

E. Chopping technique

In contrast to most C.R. emission experiments, we run
our sources quasi-continuous, and not pulsed, and still
ﬁnd reasonably narrow linewidth compared to the results
found in the literature. This an important point if one
wants to use this technique with ultimate state-of-the-

3

Detector(cid:13)

Move sample to
change its field

Sample(cid:13)

10(cid:13)

5(cid:13)

0(cid:13)

-5(cid:13)

)
s
e
h
c
n
i
(
 
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
D

Source(cid:13)
Freq. = eB/hm(cid:13)

FIG. 3. Actual setup.

0.5
0
Relative field value

1

art low-noise detectors. Fast detectors used for pulsed
measurement typically have NEPs of 10−12 W/√Hz
[25,26]. With the output power of our source in the 10-
100 pW range, this gives limited signal to noise. Re-
cent progress on ultra-low noise detectors for measuring
the cosmic microwave background have achieved NEPs
of 2 10−18 W/√Hz [14] at an operating temperature of
100 mK. Although ultra-sensitive, they have time con-
stants (typically 10 ms) that do not allow for pulsed oper-
ation. Thus, our quasi-continuous technique is important
if those ultra-low noise detectors are to be used.

Initial work on fast low noise detectors based on
lithographically fabricated hot-electron “microbolome-
ters” began in the late 1980s [27].
In a later variant
of the idea [28], electrical NEPs of 10−17 W/√Hz with a
response time constant of 10 µs were measured. If these
could be antenna coupled, they would make fast, sensi-
tive detectors. This would obviate the need for the low
chopping frequencies described in this paper. This gen-
eral line of investigation is currently being pursued by
several groups in order to demonstrate optical NEPs in
that range or better with fast response time [16,17,29,30].
Nonetheless, our results show that the development of
fast, sensitive detectors is not a necessity for the tech-
nique described herein. Current state-of-the-are ultra-
sensitive bolometer technology can be used without a
degradation in the performance (i.e.
linewidth) of the
spectrometer due to the low chopping frequency.

III. THZ TRANSMISSION SPECTROMETER

A. Principle of operation

In principle, our technique is simple and straightfor-
ward. The frequency of the source is tuned by its local

4

magnetic ﬁeld, and the light is guided through the sam-
ple and onto the detector. One can sweep the source
frequency by sweeping its magnetic ﬁeld; the power mea-
sured on the detector is a direct measure of the trans-
mission through the sample at each frequency. An alter-
native mode of operation is to ﬁx the source frequency
(by ﬁxing it’s local magnetic ﬁeld) and sweep some sam-
ple parameter, to determine the transmission at a ﬁxed
frequency vs. the sample parameter. We discuss this in
more detail in the next section.

B. Demonstration of operation

We have carried out a demonstration experiment to
measure the transmission through another 2DEG at a
ﬁxed frequency as a function of magnetic ﬁeld at the
sample. For a 2DEG in a magnetic ﬁeld, absorption of
THz photons occurs only if photon energy matches the
cyclotron energy, hf = eB/m∗. Thus, as a function of
frequency of the emitter (or magnetic ﬁeld of the sample
as realized here), the transmission is unity (neglecting
the vacuum-dielectric mismatch) oﬀ resonance, and min-
imum on resonance. If the light is randomly polarized,
the absorption coeﬃcient depends on the sample mobility
and density. The transmission minimum is limited the-
oretically to 50%, although weaker absorption is usually
observed.

In our spectrometer, the light from the emitter passes
through a 1/2” diameter light pipe for about 3”, and
is then passed through a 3 degree cone onto the trans-
mission sample through a 1/8” hole, and then through
Instead of
another 1/2” light pipe onto the detector.
using two separate magnets, one to set the emitter fre-
quency and one to set the sample magnetic ﬁeld, we use
a one-magnet setup indicated schematically in ﬁgure 3.
By ﬁxing the current through the superconducting mag-
net, we ﬁx the magnetic ﬁeld at the source and hence the
emission frequency. (The emitter is located towards the
bottom of the magnet at the 55 % ﬁeld region.) We then
monitor the detector voltage while sweeping the magnetic
ﬁeld at the sample; this is accomplished by physically
moving the sample in the region where the ﬁeld strength
varies with position. The ﬁeld proﬁle is shown in ﬁgure
3; by moving the sample up and down two inches, we can
vary the sample magnetic ﬁeld from 25% to 75% of the
value at the ﬁeld center. With a 9 T superconducting
magnet, we can achieve a maximum ﬁeld of 5 T at the
emitter, corresponding to a maximum emission frequency
of 65 cm−1.

We plot in ﬁgure 4 the measured transmission coeﬃ-
cient as a function of sample magnetic ﬁeld. The right
axis is the measured power on the detector; the emitter
frequency is ﬁxed at 1.1 THz. We ﬁnd a Lorentzian reso-
nance with a FWHM linewidth of 0.26 Tesla (2.7 cm−1)
for this sample (µ = 600, 000 cm2/V
s). On another
sample with somewhat higher mobility (2.7 106 cm2/V

−

−

100

)

%

(
 
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
s
n
a
r
T

95

90

85

2

3

4

Magnetic field at sample (T)

FIG. 4. Resonant absorption. The emitter ﬁeld is ﬁxed at

2.75 T; hence the emission frequency is ﬁxed at 1.1 THz.

s), we measure a linewidth of
roughly 0.2 Tesla
(1.8 cm−1). We conclude from this that the emitter
linewidth is no broader than 1.8 cm−1; otherwise the
sharp absorption feature in ﬁgure 4 would not be seen.

It is possible that there is a spectral component of the
emitted power which is broadly distributed away from
ωC . From the measurement described, we can set an up-
per limit on the amount of this component. Since the
absorption for randomly polarized light is at most 50%
and our absorption dip is about 10%, we conclude that
at most 80% of the emitted power of the source is oﬀ
resonance; and that at least 20% power is concentrated
in the spectral region around ωc. However, this is only
an upper limit on the out of band emission because we
have not independently measured the transmission of our
sample; if the true sample absorption is less than the the-
oretical limit of 50% on resonance, then the background
component of the emission is less than 80%.

The linewidth of cyclotron resonance absorption in
high mobility 2DEGs has been studied for many years by
many groups. A very typical feature is that the linewidth
varies periodically with ﬁlling factor ν = nh/eB, and
that the linewidth is an absolute maximum at ﬁlling fac-
tor 2. Our measurements presented here are near ν = 2,
so that our measurement of the spectral resolution is
probably an upper limit on the ultimate attainable spec-
tral resolution using this technique.

In ﬁgure 6, we plot the measured linewidth vs. sample
mobility at a ﬁlling factor of ν = 2, as well as several mea-
sured values from the literature [31–36]. The tempera-
ture for the references varied between 1.3 K and 5 K. The

2.0

1.9

1.8

1.7

 

D
e
t
e
c
t
e
d
p
o
w
e
r
 
(
p
W

)

linewidths we measure are comparable to those measured
by other groups, suggesting that our emitter linewidth is
narrow enough to measure roughly the correct value for
the transmission linewidth.

We have also measured the transmission through the
sample oﬀ of the resonant absorption as a function of
source frequency. We ﬁnd roughly unity transmission oﬀ
resonance. We have also carried out this swept frequency
transmission measurement though a blank sample (con-
taining no 2DEG) of GaAs.
In either case, we do not
observe any Fabry-Perot fringes due to the ﬁnite (trans-
mitting) sample thickness, even though the sample is not
wedged. We conclude from this that the incoming ra-
diation is equally distributed as a function of angle of
incidence. This is an added advantage of this technique;
the transmission samples do not need to be wedged.

Finally, even though the emitter must be placed in a
magnetic ﬁeld, many dilution refrigerators have compen-
sating coils to minimize the magnetic ﬁeld at the mix-
ing chamber. By placing the transmission sample and
detector near this compensated region, the technique de-
scribed here can be applied to systems in low magnetic
ﬁelds as well.

C. Ultimate sensitivity limits

Based on the noise of our detector, we can measure the
power transmitted through the sample with a statistical
uncertainty of roughly 0.5 pW in a one second integra-
tion time. In ﬁgure 4, the transmitted power is roughly
2 pW oﬀ resonance; we used an equivalent noise band-
width of approximately 1 mHz for that measurement.
The statistical error on each transmission measurement
point is thus about 1 %. This noise performance is clearly
marginal, and underscores the need for lower noise de-
tector technology. If the spectrometer described in this
paper were to be incorporated into a low temperature
environment, low-noise state of the art bolometers [14]
with NEPs of as low as 2 10−18 W/√Hz could be used.
This would allow for a much better measurement of the
transmission coeﬃcient, with a statistical uncertainty of
10−5 %, given the power levels we use.

For a given statistical uncertainty in the measured
transmission coeﬃcient at each frequency, we can predict
the statistical uncertainty on the measured linewidth and
line position for a Lorentzian absorption proﬁle. Based
on numerical simulations of typical experimental param-
eters, we ﬁnd a statistical uncertainty in the measured
linewidth of roughly 25 Gauss (or 1 GHz in frequency)
per 1% error in measured transmission coeﬃcient, and
roughly 2.5 Gauss (0.1 GHz) in the measured position
per 1% error in measured transmission coeﬃcient. With
a detector with NEP of 2 10−18 W/√Hz, we could deter-
mine the linewidth and center frequency with a statistical
uncertainty of order 1 kHz. We note that if this technique
were used on samples with narrower absorption features

5

ν = 2

This work

1

0.1

M
H
W
F

 
,
)
T
(
 
h
t
d
i
w
e
n
i
L

5
10

6
10

2
/V-s)
Mobility (cm

FIG. 5. Linewidth vs. mobility for this and other refer-
ences, at ν=2. Symbols are: ∗ Schlesinger 1984, (cid:13) Seiden-
busch 1987, square Batke 1988,▽ Nicholas 1989, △ Englert
1983, + Heron 2000.

than the emitter linewidth, it would not be possible to
determine the shape of those absorption feature. How-
ever, it would be possible to determine the position (in
frequency or magnetic ﬁeld) of the absorption feature to
a precision much better than the emitter linewidth.

Recent work on THz detectors has demonstrated
single-photon sensitivity [15] with unknown quantum-
eﬃciency and proposals exist [16,17] for single-photon
sensitivity with excellent predicted quantum eﬃciency.
These detectors must be operated in an ultra-low tem-
perature environment which is very compatible with the
spectrometer presented here. We now consider the ulti-
mate limits of the spectrometer developed here if single
photon THz detectors were to be used.

At low (dilution refrigerator) temperatures, the ther-
mal background of THz photons is negligible. There-
fore, the statistical uncertainty in the measured signal
would be limited only by the “shot” noise of the incom-
ing photons. Roughly 109 photons/second are generated
in a 1 pW beam. For classical statistics, the ﬂuctua-
tions are √109 photons/second, i.e. 10−17 W; for quan-
tum statistics the ﬂuctuations can be lower or higher,
corresponding to bunching or antibunching [37]. Gener-
ally, the statistics of the radiation depends on the emis-
sion process. To our knowledge this has not been in-
vestigated (either theoretically or experimentally) in cy-
clotron resonance emission. These calculations suggest
that perfect (noiseless) THz detectors would not signif-
icantly improve the noise performance of our spectrom-

eter, as compared to state-of-the-art low noise detectors
with NEPs of 2 10−18 W/√Hz, since the statistics of
the signal dominate the noise performance. However,
the ultimate limit of a few photons emitted per second
with a single photon THz detector, where the photons
interact with a quantum system of interest between the
source and detector, may give experimentalists new tools
to explore quantum information processing in condensed
matter systems [38,39].

IV. CONCLUSIONS

Using a 2DEG as a cyclotron resonance source, we have
developed an all-cryogenic THz transmission spectrome-
ter for the spectral range of 2-65 cm−1, with a spectral
resolution of at least 1.8 cm−1. Since a broadband de-
tector is used, the entire frequency range can be accessed
by the single sweep of the magnetic ﬁeld at the emitter.
Additionally, we have demonstrated that a low chopping
frequency does not degrade the emission linewidth; this is
important for future use with ultra-low noise detectors.
The spectrometer was demonstrated by measuring the
THz transmission through another 2DEG as a function
of magnetic ﬁeld of the 2DEG.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

PJB was supported in part by the Sherman Fairchild
Foundation and Sandia National Labs, through a grant
from DARPA.

(1992).

(1981).

(1984).

[1] A. Mittal et al., Surface Science 362, 537 (1996).
[2] J. Bock and A. Lange, Applied Optics 34, 7254 (1995).
[3] E. Gornik, in Narrow Gap Semiconductors Physics and
Applications, Vol. 133 of Lecture Notes in Physics, edited
by W. Zawadzki (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1980), pp. 160–
175.

[4] W. Knap et al., Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 63, 3293

[5] E. Gornik et al., Solid State Communications 38, 541

[6] E. Gornik et al., Solid State Communications 196, 339

[7] W. Seidenbusch, Physical Review B 36, 1877 (1987).
[8] E. Gornik, W. Seidenbusch, and R. Lassnig,

in Two-
Dimensional systems, heterostructures, and superlat-
tices, edited by G. Bauer, F. Kuchar, and H. Heinrich
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1984), pp. 60–68.

[9] K. von Klitzing et al.,

in Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on the Physics of Semiconductors, San
Fransisco, 1984, edited by J. Chadi and W. Harrison
(Springer-Verlag, ADDRESS, 1985), pp. 271–274.

6

[10] E. Diessel, H. Sigg, and K. von Klitzing, Infrared Physics

view A 60, 3508 (1999).

[39] B. Cole et al., Nature 410, 60 (2001).

32, 69 (1991).

ogy 6, 160 (1991).

ogy 9, 320 (1994).

B 49, 14466 (1994).

[11] C. Chaubet et al., Semiconductor Science and Technol-

[12] W. Zawadzki et al., Semiconductor Science and Technol-

[13] N. Zinovev, R. Fletcher, and L. Challis, Physical Review

[14] J. Bock et al., Proceedings of the SPIE 3357, 297 (1998).
[15] S. Komiyama et al., Nature 403, 405 (2000).
[16] R. Schoelkopf et al., IEEE Transactions on Applied Su-

perconductivity 9, 2935 (1999).

[17] B. Karasik, W. McGrath, M. Gershenson, and A.
Sergeev, Journal of Applied Physics 87, 7586 (2000).
[18] S. Komiyama et al., in Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional Symposium ”Nanostructures: Physics and Tech-
nology”, edited by Z. Alferov and L. Esaki (Ioﬀe Institute,
St. Petersburg, 1998), pp. 140–147.

[19] Y. Kawano and S. Komiyama, Physical Review B 61,

2931 (2000).

[20] Y. Kawano, Y. Hisanaga, and S. Komiyama, Physical

Review B 59, 12537 (1999).

[21] Haller-Beeman Assoc. Inc., El Sobrante, CA.
[22] N. Nishioka, P. Richards, and D. Woody, Applied Optics

19, 1562 (1978).

[23] R. Datla, E. Grossman, and M. Hobish, Journal of Re-
search of the National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology 100, 717 (1995).

[24] The bolometer we used had normal metal (0.0005” diam-
eter) brass leads for the electrical readout. If supercon-
ducting electrical leads would have been used, a lower
NEP could have been achieved. We chose normal metal
leads for this prototype experiment because we did not
use a compensating coil at the detector to null the mag-
netic ﬁeld; stray magnetic ﬁelds at the detector could
have aﬀected its responsivity if we used superconducting
leads.

[25] E. Brown, M. Wengler, and T. Phillips, Journal of Ap-

plied Physics 58, 2051 (1985).

[26] G. Strasser, K. Bochter, M. Witzany, and E. Gornik,

Infrared Physics 32, 439 (1991).

[27] E. M. Gershenzon et al., Pis’ma Zh. Tekh. Fiz. .
[28] M. Nahum and J. Martinis, Applied Physics Letters 63,

3075 (1993).

[29] C. Cates et al., Physica E 2, 463 (1998).
[30] J. Hergenrother, J. Lu, and M. Tinkham, IEEE Trans-
actions on Applied Superconductivity 5, 2604 (1995).

[31] Z. Schlesinger et al., Physical Review B 30, 435 (1984).
[32] W. Seidenbusch, E. Gornik, and G. Weimann, Physical

[33] E. Batke, H. St¨ormer, and A. Gossard, Physical Review

Review B 36, 9155 (1987).

B 37, 3093 (1988).

[34] R. Nicholas et al., Physical Review B 39, 10955 (1989).
[35] T. Englert et al., Solid State Communications 46, 545

(1983).

15, 589 (2000).

[36] R. Heron et al., Semiconductor Science and Technology

[37] L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Optical Coherence and Quantum
Optics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995).
[38] M. Sherwin, A. Imamoglu, and T. Montroy, Physical Re-

7

