1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Performance of the triple-GEM detector with
optimized 2-D readout in high intensity
hadron beam.

A.Bondar, A.Buzulutskov, L.Shekhtman, A.Sokolov, A.Vasiljev

Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russian Federation

Abstract

Multiple-GEM detectors are considered to be good candidates for tracking devices
in experiments with high hadronic background. We present the results of the triple-
GEM detectors beam test in a high intensity pion beam. The detectors had an
optimized two-dimensional readout with minimized strip capacitance. Such opti-
mization permitted the starting point of the eﬃciency plateau down to a gain of
5000. The probability of GEM discharges induced by heavily ionizing particles has
been measured as a function of gain: at a gain of 20000 it amounts to 10−11 per
incident particle. Such a value will ensure safe operation of the detector in the
conditions of forward region of the LHC experiments.

1 Introduction

Micro-pattern gas technologies have been considered as a good candidates for
inner tracking systems of LHC experiments. A major problem of gas micro-
pattern devices appeared to be heavily ionizing particles that are produced in
nuclear interactions of hadrons with the material of the detectors. High and
dense ionization produced in a sensitive region of the detector can provoke
sparking with subsequent deterioration of its properties (gain and eﬃciency)
and possible destruction. It was shown that introducing several gas ampliﬁca-
tion stages one can signiﬁcantly improve performance of micropattern devices
in this respect [1]. The most convenient and safe way of producing such mul-
tistage gas amliﬁcation was application of Gas Electron Multiplier (GEM)[2].
The last development in this direction, the Triple-GEM detector, utilizing 3
consequtive GEM foils was shown to be the most safe with respect to sparking
in hadronic environment [3,4].

Triple-GEM detectors have been developed as a possible technology for the
inner tracking in LHCb experiment [3,5]. Simulation of the LHCb interaction

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

7 January 2014

region, including the beam vacuum pipe, were performed to estimate the par-
ticle ﬂuxes [6], using an average nominal luminosity of 2*1032cm−2s−1. The
particle ﬂuxes and its compositions depend strongly on the position along the
beam axis and on the distance from the beam. Maximum charged hadron rate
is expected to be 8∗103mm−2s−1 and total hadron rate per station reaches 100
MHz. It was shown that the GEM foil can withstand more than 100 sparks per
cm2 without permanent damage[7]. If we require that sparking rate is limited
to 1 per 103s per tracking plane and take into account local and total hadronic
rate, it follows that the discharge probability per incident particle must not
exceed 10−11.

In this paper we describe the Triple-GEM detector with optimized readout
board. New readout allowed to reduce signiﬁcantly interstrip capacitance and
thus improve signal to noise ratio of the detector. The results of test in high in-
tensity pion beam demonstrate considerable improvement in the performance
related to discharges due to heavily ionizing particles.

2 Detector design and experimental set-up.

The Triple-GEM detector consists of a primary ionization gap, 3 consequtive
GEM foils separated by transfer gaps and a readout Printed Circuit Board
(PCB), separated from the bottom GEM by an induction gap. The design
and general properties of multi-GEM detectors were discussed in details earlier
[3,4,5,8]. Here we will concentrate mainly on the design of readout PCB and
its inﬂuence on operation of the detector. In LHCb each tracking plane of the
Inner tracking system has to provide position in horizontal direction with a
precision of better than ∼200µ to keep momentum resolution below 0.5%. In
the vertical direction, position accuracy can be 10 times worse as it is needed
only for pattern recognition. Thus a stereo readout is foreseen with an angle
of 0.1 rad.

The ﬁrst measurements performed with large size prototype with small angle
stereo readout [3] showed that the basic limitation on signal to noise ratio was
high strip capacitance of the PCB. In the case of [3] it was about 100 pF for
30 cm long strips.

The PCB for such a detector is produced in two layers separated one from the
other by a 50µ kapton foil. Between metal strips of the top layer the kapton
layer is etched out and the metal of bottom layer is opened. We propose to
make zero degree strips at the top layer and small angle stereo strips and the
bottom layer. The bottom strips have to be made in short sections parallel to
the top ones with narrow “bridges” connecting the sections belonging to one
bottom strip. Schematic drawing of this layout is shown in ﬁg.1.

2

4 mm

Top strip − 0.06 mm
Bottom strip − 0.15 mm
Bridge − 0.05 mm

0.4mm

Fig. 1. Schematic view of the PCB layout.

In such a layout the area of overlapping regions between top and bottom metal
layers is reduced, thus minimizing the interstrip capacitance. Moreover, as the
bottom and top strips are parralel, the sharing of induced charge between will
be constant, and will not depend on the position along the strip. This is not
the case for the layout in [3] where top strips were not parallel to those at the
bottom.

In order to reduce further the interstrip capacitance the strips have to be made
as narrow as possible. A natural limitation for the width is the feature size of
the technology, that is about 50µ. Thus the width of the top strip was chosen
as 60µ. The ratio of the strip widths is determined by the requirement to have
the same signal to be induced on top and bottom strips. As top and bottom
strips are separated by 50µ and signal is induced by charge moving from the
last GEM through the induction gap, bottom strips have to be wider than
the top ones. We used MAXWELL package to calculate the necessary ratio
of widths and strip capacitances. The thickness of copper layers was assumed
to be 5µ. The kapton layer was 50µ thick and the width of kapton strip at

3

the bottom was taken 10µ larger than at the top (at the contact with top
strip). We also introduced in the model thick (1mm) epoxy substrate below
the bottom strips. The calculations were made for a strip pitch of 400µ.

In the calculations we required that the ratio of the signals induced on the bot-
tom strips with respect to the top ones is equal to 1.2, in order to compensate
for the larger capacitance of the bottom strips. The results of the calculations
are shown in table 1.

In order to achieve the sharing of induced signals as indicated above the width
of the bottom strips has to be 150µ. The values of calculated strip capacitance
per cm of length are shown in the ﬁrst row of Table 1. The capacitance of the
bottom strip is almost 2 times higher than that of top strip. However we
can see that for 30cm long strip total capacitance will be below 20pF. In the
second row of the table the results of measurements are shown. A 10 ∗ 19cm2
prototype PCB was used for the measurments with all strips grounded around
the one which capacitance was measured. Experimental results are higher than
calculated ones probably due to the diﬀerences in the particular shape of metal
and kapton strip edges.

layer

strip width pF/cm (calculation)

pF/cm (measurement)

bottom

top

150µ

60µ

0.62

0.32

0.73

0.54

Table 1
Strip widths and capacitances for the optimized PCB.

The prototype boards were produced with parameters shown in table 1 and
size of sensitive area of 10 ∗ 10cm2. Top and bottom strips were extended from
both sides forming very long bonding pads with a length of 4.5 cm and eﬀective
pitch of 200µ. Such long pads were made to have more freedom in connecting
electronics, and simulate the case of a real strip length having smaller sensitive
area.

The Triple-GEM detectors were assembled with prototype boards and GEM
foils with 10 ∗ 10cm2 sensitive area. All transfer gaps were 1mm and induction
gaps 2 mm. In the transfer and induction gaps we put bent strips of mylar
1mm and 2mm wide respectively that were attached to the frame at both
ends. These strips served as spacers keeping GEM foil at a precise distance
from the PCB and from each other. The drift gap was kept as 3mm.

Two detectors were equipped with PREMUX hybrid with 512 channels each.
Detailed description of PREMUX can be found in [9]. Each channel of PRE-
MUX contains low-noise preampliﬁer, shaper and analogue buﬀer. Analog

4

buﬀers can be readout sequentially through 1MHz multiplexer. Top and bot-
tom strips were connected to the channels of PREMUX in series, i.e. each
”stereo” channel was followed by a ”straight” channel. The separation of sig-
nals from ”stereo” and ”straight” strips has been made oﬀ-line during data
analysis.

In order to study the performance of the Triple-GEM detectors in high inten-
sity hadron beams, assembled devices were exposed to the beam of 350 MeV
pions at the proton cyclotron in Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI, Villigen, Switzer-
land). The beam was tuned to have maximum intensity of ∼ 104mm−2s−1.
The width of the beam was ∼ 9 cm (FWHM) and the height was ∼ 5 cm. To-
tal beam intensity within the area of the detectors (10 ∗ 10cm2) was 6 ∗ 107s−1.
With this beam intensity we could measure discharge probablity below 10−11
with reasonable statistical signiﬁcance in several hours.

A schematic layout of the set-up at the beam is shown in ﬁg.2. The two
detectors were attached to the bench as close as possible to each other between
two scintillating counters. The counters were used for the measurements of gain
and eﬃciency at low intensity. For these measurements the beam intensity
was reduced down to ∼ 100 − 1000Hz. Coincidence of scintillating counters
was used as a trigger that produced sample-and-hold signal for PREMUX.
Analog signals from each strip of the detectors were stored in the buﬀers of
PREMUX, readout and digitized by a sampling ADC and then stored in the
computer. More detailed description of the Data Aqcuisition system (DAQ)
for PREMUX can be found in [10].

Detector 2

Sc2

Sc1

Beam

Detector 1

Fig. 2. Schematic view of the set-up.

The correspondence between signal after the ADC and the input charge was
found before the measurements using built-in calibration capacitances. With
this electronic calibration we could determine input charge and gain of the
detectors.

For counting of the discharges we measured the current of the drift cathode. In

5

the presence of full beam intensity this current was higher than 1nA when the
gain was above 103. However when a discharge occured this current dropped
to zero and then restored according to the recovery of GEM voltage. Using
a current meter with analog output proportional to the input current, we
assembled a simple set-up including an ampliﬁer, discriminator and scaler.
The threshold of this set-up was tuned in such a way that all the discharges
were counted.

3 Results and discussion.

The main goal of this work was to study the dependence of discharge prob-
ability on gas gain in the detector and compare it with the eﬃciency versus
gain performance. The beginning of the eﬃciency plateau is determined by
the primary ionisation deposited in the drift gap and noise of the electronics.
In ﬁg.3 noise values (sigma of the gaussian ﬁt) are shown for all channels of
one of the detectors, for straight strips (top ﬁgure) and stereo strips (bottom
ﬁgure). We can see that the noise for stereo strips is higher (∼ 9 ADC bins)
than for straight strips (∼ 6 ADC bins). From electronic calibration we knew
that 1 ADC bin corresponded to 125 electrons. Thus the noise value for stereo
channels was ∼ 1200e and for straight channels it was ∼ 800 e. At the left
side of the bottom ﬁgure we can see some reduction of the noise as stereo
strips become shorter reaching the side edge of the structure rather than the
opposite edge.

In ﬁg.4 typical signals from charged particle are shown. Top and bottom ﬁgures
correspond to straight and stereo strips respectively. In both layers two groups
of channels(clusters) have signals. Higher signal obviously corresponds to the
main charge induced by the incident particle, while the smaller signal is a
pick-up from the opposite layer. This conclusion is conﬁrmed by coincidence
of the smaller cluster position with the main one from the opposite layer. Such
a strong pick-up is determined by very long extensions of the strips outside
sensitive area where strips from both layers go parellel to each other. In the
ﬁnal detector such a design should be avoided and strips at the regions of
fan-outs and bonding pads have to be as short as possible.

In order to ﬁnd the cluster corresponding to an incident particle, ﬁrst, all
channels were sorted into straight and stereo ones. Then those channels that
exceeded a certain threshold (usually 2-3 sigma noise) were found. Signals
were summed up within continous groups of such channels (clusters). We took
always only the cluster with the highest charge for further analysis. An exam-
ple of cluster charge distribution is shown in ﬁg.5. We can see clear separation
of the main part of the signal from noise peak. Here the cluster signals from
both layers were summed together.

6

Fig. 3. Noise values (sigma of gaussian ﬁt) for all channels of the detector.

The relationship between signals in top and bottom layers is shown in ﬁg.6.
Here the correlation between cluster charge in top and bottom layers is plotted.
We see that these signals are almost equal to each other. Thus the result of this
measurement is lower by 20% than the value expected from the calculations.
Signals that are seen at the sides of the ﬁgure can appear when the main
cluster is lost and the “pick-up” signal is taken instead. Losses of signal might
happen due to two noisy and two broken channels in the bottom layer that
were excluded from the analysis (see ﬁg.3).

The pion beam was tuned in such a way that most of the sensitive area of
the detectors was irradiated. In ﬁg.7 the distribution of reconstructed cluster
positions in two dimensions is shown. This distribution demonstrates roughly
the beam intensity within the area of the detector and scintillator counters.
Binning in horizontal direction is determined by the spacing of straight strips
(0.4 mm), while that in the vertical direction corresponds to the pitch of stereo
structure (4 mm),

7

Fig. 4. Typical signal from charged particle. Response of top and bottom layers is
shown.

Gas gain of the detectors was determined as the ratio of average cluster charge
over the average number of primary electrons released by minimum ionising
particle in the 3 mm gap. The latter is equal approximately to 30 electrons
for the gas mixture used (Ar − CO2, 70-30). In ﬁg.8 the dependence of gain
on GEM voltage is shown for both detectors. Voltage diﬀerences from top
to bottom electrodes in all GEMs were kept the same. The values of ﬁeld in
transfer, induction and drift gaps are indicated in the ﬁgure. The diﬀerence in
gain at the same GEM voltage in two detectors can be explained by a limited
precision of spacing of the GEM foils, accuracy of resistors in the resistive
network and possible diﬀerence in hole diameter in diﬀerent GEMs.

As we did not have any tracking devices apart from the detectors under study,
we used one detector to determine the eﬃciency of the other. Eﬃciency of
detector 2 was deﬁned as the ratio of the number of cases when signals were
found in both detectors to the total number of cases when detector 1 had
a signal. With this deﬁnition of the eﬃciency we could not get values close

8

Fig. 5. Typical cluster charge distribution.

to 100% because the detectors were not precisely aligned. Some tracks that
were detected by detector 1 did not pass through detector 2. This problem
however did not prevent to deﬁne the starting point of eﬃciency plateau. The
dependence of eﬃciency on the gain together with the discharge probability is
shown in ﬁg.9. The values of eﬃciency are indicated at the left scale and the
values of discharge probability at the right. The beginning of eﬃciency plateau
is clearly determined at a gain of ∼ 5000 while the value of probability equal
to 10−11 is achieved at a gain of ∼ 20000. There is a margin of a factor 4
between the beginning of eﬃciency plateau and discharge threshold where the
detector can be operated safely.

4 Conclusions

Safe operation of the Triple-GEM detector was demostrated with a margin
of a factor 4 between the beginning of eﬃciency plateau and gain where the

9

Fig. 6. Correlation between cluster charge in top and in bottom layers.

discharge probability per incident particle exceeded 10−11. The detector had a
sensitive area of 10∗10cm2 but the eﬀective strip length was 19 cm. This result
was possible due to an optimized design of the readout PCB that allowed
signiﬁcant reduction of the strip capacitance down to 0.5-0.7 pF/cm. The
detector still suﬀers from pick-up between the layers of PCB. In the ﬁnal
design the regions of fan-outs and bonding pads will be made as short as
possible and this eﬀect will be signiﬁcantly suppressed.

5 Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank very much J.-P.Perroud, P.Sievers, M.Ziegler
and U.Straumann for signiﬁcant help during the test period in PSI, L.Ropelewski
and F.Sauli for assistance in preparation at CERN, D.Renker for help at the
experimental area in PSI.

10

Fig. 7. Beam proﬁle measured at low intensity at detector 2.

References

[1] High rate behavior and discharge limits in micro-pattern gas detectors,

A.Bressan et.al., NIM A v.425(1999), p.254-61.

[2] GEM: a new concept for electron ampliﬁcation in gas detectors, F.Sauli, NIM

A v.386(1997), p.531-34.

ex/0007007, 4 Jul 2000.

et.al., CERN-EP-2000-151.

[3] A triple GEM detector with two dimensional readout, M.Ziegler et.al., hep-

[4] Discharge study and prevention in the gas electron multiplier, S.Bachmann

[5] Performance of GEM detectors in high intensity particle beams, S.Bachmann

et.al., NIM A v.470(2001), p.548-61.

[6] Radiation environment at the LHCb Inner Tracker area, V.Talanov, LHCB-

2000-013.

11

Fig. 8. Dependence of gain on GEM voltage in two detectors.

[7] Private communication with J.-P.Perroud, May 2000.

[8] Charge ampliﬁcation and transfer processes in the gas electron multiplier,

S.Bachmann et.al., NIM A v.438(1999), p.376-408.

[9] L.Jones, PreMUX speciﬁcation V2.3, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory internal

document, 1995.

[10] Tracking properties of the two-stage GEM/micro-groove detector, A.Bondar

et.al., NIM A v.454(2000), p.315.

12

Fig. 9. Dependence of eﬃciency (left scale) and discharge probability per incident
particle(right scale) on gain. Dashed line is indicating the level of 10−11 considered
as a safe limit.

13

