1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
4
0
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

WECT003

READOUT AND CONTROL OF A POWER-RECYCLED
INTERFEROMETRIC GRAVITATIONAL WAVE ANTENNA ∗

Daniel Sigg and Haisheng Rong, LIGO Hanford Observatory,
P.O. Box 1970 S9-02, Richland, WA 99352
Peter Fritschel, Michael Zucker, Department of Physics and Center for Space Research,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
Rolf Bork, Nergis Mavalvala, Dale Ouimette, LIGO Project,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
Gabriela Gonz´alez, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge,LA 70803

Abstract

Interferometric gravitational wave antennas are based on
Michelson interferometers whose sensitivity to small dif-
ferential length changes has been enhanced by adding mul-
tiple coupled optical resonators. The use of optical cav-
ities is essential for reaching the required sensitivity, but
sets challenges for the control system which must maintain
the cavities near resonance. The goal for the strain sensi-
tivity of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Ob-
servatory (LIGO) is 10−21 rms, integrated over a 100 Hz
bandwidth centered at 150 Hz. We present the major de-
sign features of the LIGO length and frequency sensing
and control system which will hold the differential length
10−14 m of the operating point. We also high-
to within 5
light the restrictions imposed by couplings of noise into the
gravitational wave readout signal and the required immu-
nity against them.

×

1

INTRODUCTION

The interferometric gravitational wave detectors currently
under construction by LIGO[1], VIRGO[2], GEO[3] and
TAMA[4] are expected to reach strain sensitivity levels of
10−22/√Hz at 150 Hz over baselines of several hundred
∼
meters up to several kilometers[5]. To achieve this sensi-
tivity all of these interferometers implement a Michelson
laser interferometer enhanced by multiple coupled optical
resonators[6, 7].

LIGO implements a power-recycled Michelson interfer-
ometer with Fabry-Perot arm cavities (see Fig. 1). Using
optical cavities is essential in reaching the ultimate sen-
sitivity goal but it requires an active electronic feedback
system to keep them “on resonance”. The control system
must keep the round-trip length of a cavity near an inte-
ger multiple of the laser wavelength so that light newly in-

∗ Work supported by National Science Foundation cooperative agree-

ment PHY-9210038

troduced into the cavity interferes constructively with light
from previous round-trips. Under these conditions the light
inside the cavity builds up and the cavity is said to be on
resonance[8]. Attaining high power buildup in the arm cav-
ities also requires that minimal light is allowed to leave
the system through the antisymmetric port, so that all the
light is sent back in the direction of the laser where it is re-
ﬂected back into the system by the power recycling mirror.
Hence, an additional feedback loop is needed to control the
Michelson phase so that the antisymmetric port is set on a
dark fringe.

2 ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES

It is important to distinguish low (< 50 Hz) and high fre-
quency behaviour of the instrument. The low frequency
region is typically dominated by environmental inﬂuences
many orders of magnitude larger than the designed sensi-
tivity and in many cases also many orders of magnitude
larger than what can be tolerated for stable operations. It
is the high frequency regime which yields good sensitiv-
ity and which is used for detecting gravitational waves. To
suppress low frequency disturbances many active feedback
control systems are needed to compensate 4 longitudinal[9]
and 14 angular[10] degrees-of-freedom in the main inter-
ferometer alone. Additional feedback compensation net-
works are needed to locally damp the suspended mirrors
(13
4 dofs), to control the mode cleaner (5 dofs) and to
control the laser (2 dofs).

×

For example, seismic motion of the ground[13] is many
orders of magnitude larger than the required gravitational
wave sensitivity.
In LIGO a multi-stage passive seismic
isolation stack[11] together with a single-stage pendulum
suspension system[12] is used to isolate the optical com-
ponents from ground vibrations. This system system works
10 Hz, but gives no suppres-
well for frequencies above
sion at frequencies of a Hz and below.

∼

laser

mode
cleaner

interferometer

ETM

L2

FI

PRM

l2

ITM

l1
BS

L1

PC

PC

PBS

P

SMC

PC

l /4

reference cavity

Srefl

Sprc Santi

PBS

l /4

VCO

AOM

Sref

Figure 1: Schematic view of the optical path in LIGO. The light of a frequency stabilized Nd:YAG laser is passed through
a triangular mode cleaner cavity before it is launched into a Michelson interferometer. To stabilize the laser frequency
a small fraction of the light is sampled, doubly passed through an acousto-optic modulator (AOM) which serves as a
frequency shifter, passed through a Pockels cell and sent to a reference cavity. Using a polarizing beamsplitter (PBS) and
quarter-wave plate (λ/4) the light reﬂected from the reference cavity is measured by a photodetector to obtain the error
signal, Sref , which in turn is used to adjust the laser frequency. The main laser light is passed through a pre-modecleaner
(not shown) and two Pockels cells which impose the phase-modulated rf sidebands used to lock the mode cleaner and
the Michelson interferometer. The mode cleaner locking signal, SMC, is measured by a photodetector in reﬂection of the
mode cleaner cavity. The light which passes through the mode cleaner is sent through a Faraday isolator (FI) which also
serves the purpose—together with a polarizer (P)—to separate out the reﬂected light signal, Sreﬂ. The main interferometer
consists of a beamsplitter (BS), two arm cavities each of them formed by an input test mass (ITM) and an end test mass
(ETM), and the power recycling mirror (PRM). Additional locking signals are obtained at the antisymmetric port, Santi,
and by sampling a small amount of light from inside the power recycling cavity, Sprc.

3 FEEDBACK COMPENSATION

NETWORK

In order to implement feedback each degree-of-freedom
which is under control of the compensation network has to
be measurable. LIGO implements the Pound-Drever-Hall
reﬂection locking technique[14] to keep cavities on reso-
nance and a variant of this technique is used to control the
angular degrees-of-freedom[15]. These techniques work
well near resonance where they behave linearly but have
a strong non-linear behaviour far way from resonance giv-
ing no or misleading signals. The ﬁrst step of engaging the
feedback compensation network is to catch the system on
resonance with a highly sophisticated computer code[16]
running on a digital controls system.

A schematic view of the length control system for the
common mode degrees-of-freedom is shown in Fig. 2. The
signal Sreﬂ measuring the common arm length of the inter-
ferometer is fed back to a combination of test masses, mode
cleaner length and laser frequency to achieve the required

laser frequency noise suppression of < 10−6Hz/√Hz in
the frequency band of interest. To maintain maximum op-
tical power in the system—and thus maximum signal to
shot noise ratio—the control system must hold the com-
10−12 m rms of its res-
mon cavity length within < 2
onance point. A similar but less complicated system is
deployed to control the differential degrees-of-freedom.
Their the differential arm cavity length has to be held
10−14 m rms of its operating point to not
within < 5
pollute the gravitational wave signal with laser frequency
noise.

×

×

4 CONCLUSIONS

So far LIGO has successfully demonstrated that the inter-
ferometer can be locked and kept on resonance for hours.
The main goal in the near term is to improve the sensitivity
which is still many orders of magnitude away from design,
to engage the remaining feedback control paths and to ﬁne-
tune servo parameters.

laser

MC

Lref

flaser

LMC

l+

150

SMC

3

ofs
LMC

20k

0.001

Sprc

ifo

1
L+

Srefl

ao

10k

300

Figure 2: Common mode control system. The mode
cleaner error signal, SMC, is split into two paths: the mode
cleaner length path (1) feeding back to the position of a
mode cleaner mirror, LMC , and the laser path (2) feeding
back to the laser frequency, flaser, using the VCO/AOM.
The in-phase reﬂection signal, Sreﬂ, of the interferometer
(ifo) is split into four paths: the arm cavity path (3) feed-
ing back to the common arm cavity mirror positions, L+,
the additive offset (ao) path (4) feeding back to the error
point of the mode cleaner control system, the mode cleaner
length offset path (5) feeding back to the mode cleaner
mirror position, Lof s
MC , and the tidal path (6) feeding back
to the reference cavity length, Lref , using the thermal ac-
tuator. The in-phase signal at the power recycling cavity
port, Sprc, is mostly sensitive to the power recycling cavity
length, l+, and is feed back to the recycling mirror posi-
tion (7). The numbers in the feedback paths indicate unity
gain frequencies in hertz.

5 REFERENCES

[1] A. Abramovici, W. Althouse, J. Camp, J.A. Giaime, A. Gille-
spie, S. Kawamura, A. Kuhnert, T. Lyons, F.J. Raab,
R.L. Savage Jr., D. Shoemaker, L. Sievers, R. Spero, R. Vogt,
R. Weiss, S. Whitcomb, and M. Zucker, “Improved sensitiv-
ity in a gravitational wave interferometer and implications for
LIGO,” Phys. Lett. A218, 157–163 (1996).

[2] B. Caron, A. Dominjon, C. Drezen, R. Flaminio, X. Grave,
F. Marion, L. Massonnet, C. Mehmel, R. Morand, B. Mours,
V. Sannibale, M. Yvert, D. Babusci, S. Bellucci, S. Can-
dusso, G. Giordano, G. Matone, J.-M. Mackowski, L. Pinard,
F. Barone, E. Calloni, L. DiFiore, M. Flagiello, F. Garuti,
A. Grado, M. Longo, M. Lops, S. Marano, L. Milano,
S. Solimeno, V. Brisson, F. Cavalier, M. Davier, P. Hello,
P. Heusse, P. Mann, Y. Acker, M. Barsuglia, B. Bhawal,
F. Bondu, A. Brillet, H. Heitmann, J.-M. Innocent, L. La-
trach, C.N. Man, M. PhamTu, E. Tournier, M. Taubmann,
J.-Y. Vinet, C. Boccara, P. Gleyzes, V. Loriette, J.-P. Roger,
G. Cagnoli, L. Gammaitoni, J. Kovalik, F. Marchesoni,
M. Punturo, M. Beccaria, M. Bernardini, E. Bougleux,
S. Braccini, C. Bradaschia, G. Cella, A. Ciampa, E. Cuoco,
G. Curci, R. DelFabbro, R. DeSalvo, A. DiVirgilio, D. Enard,
I. Ferrante, F. Fidecaro, A. Giassi, A. Giazotto, L. Holloway,

P. LaPenna, G. Losurdo, S. Mancini, M. Mazzoni, F. Palla,
H.-B. Pan, D. Passuello, P. Pelfer, R. Poggiani, R. Stanga,
A. Vicere, Z. Zhang, V. Ferrari, E. Majorana, P. Puppo, P. Ra-
pagnani, and F. Ricci, “The VIRGO interferometer for gravi-
tational wave detection,” Nucl. Phys. B54, 167–175 (1997).

[3] K. Danzmann, “GEO 600 — A 600-m Laser Interferomet-
ric Gravitational Wave Antenna,” in First Edoardo Amaldi
conference on gravitational wave experiments, E. Coccia,
G. Pizella and F. Ronga, eds. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,
1995), p. 100–111.

[4] K. Tsubono, “300-m Laser Interferometer Gravitational
Wave Detector (TAMA300) in Japan,” in First Edoardo
Amaldi conference on gravitational wave experiments,
E. Coccia, G. Pizella and F. Ronga, eds. (World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, 1995), p. 112–114.

[5] R. Weiss, “Electromagnetically coupled broadband gravita-
tional antennae,” MIT Res. Lab. Electron. Q. Prog. Rep. 105,
54–76 (1972).

[6] J.-Y. Vinet, B.J. Meers, C.N. Man, and A. Brillet, “Optimiza-
tion of long-baseline optical interferometers for gravitational-
wave detection,” Phys. Rev. D38, 433–447 (1988).

[7] B.J. Meers, “The frequency response of interferometric grav-
itational wave detectors,” Phys. Lett. A142, 465–470 (1989).

[8] A.E. Siegman, Lasers, (University Science, Mill Valley,

Calif., 1986), Chap. 13, p. 663.

[9] P. Fritschel, R. Bork, G. Gonz´alez, N. Mavalvala,
D. Ouimette, H. Rong, D. Sigg, and M. Zucker, “Readout
and control of a power-recycled interferometric gravitational
wave antenna,” Appl. Opt. 40, 4988–4998 (2001).

[10] P. Fritschel, G. Gonz´alez, N. Mavalvala, D. Shoemaker,
D. Sigg, and M. Zucker, “Alignment of a long-baseline grav-
itational wave interferometer,” Appl. Opt. 37, 6734–6747
(1998).

[11] J. Giaime, P. Saha, D. Shoemaker, and L. Sievers, “A pas-
sive vibration isolation stack for LIGO: design, modeling,
and testing,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 67, 208–214 (1996).

[12] A. Gillespie and F. Raab, “Thermal noise in the test mass
suspensions of a laser interferometer gravitational-wave de-
tector prototype,” Phy. Lett. A178, 357–363 (1993).

[13] T. Lay, and T.C. Wallace, Modern global seimology, (Aca-

demic Press, San Diego, California, 1995), p. 179.

[14] R.W.P. Drever,

J.L. Hall, F.V. Kowalski,

J. Hough,
G.M. Ford, A.J. Munley, and H. Ward, “Laser phase and fre-
quency stabilization using an optical resonator,” Appl. Phys.
B31, 97–105 (1983).

[15] Y. Hefetz, N. Mavalvala, and D. Sigg, “Principles of calcu-
lating alignment signals in complex optical interferometers,”
J. Opt. Soc. Am. B14, 1597–1605 (1997).
D. Sigg, and N. Mavalvala, “Principles of calculating the dy-
namical response of misaligned complex resonant optical in-
terferometers,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A17, 1642–1649 (2000).

[16] M. Evans, N. Mavalvala, P. Fritschel, R. Bork, R. Gustafson,
W. Kells, M. Landry, D. Sigg, R. Weiss, S. Whitcomb, and
H. Yamamoto, “Lock acqusition of a gravitational wave in-
terferometer,” submitted to Opt. Lett. (2001).

➀
➁
➂
➃
➄
➅
➆
