2
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
1
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Energy Resolution Improvement of Scintielectron detectors:
Priorities and Prospects

S.V. Naydenov ∗ , V.D. Ryzhikov †
Institute for Single Crystals, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine
60 Lenin Ave., 61001 Kharkov, Ukraine

February 2, 2008

Abstract

The development prospects of a scintillator-photodiode type detector with an improved
energy resolution attaining few per cent, R from 1 to 2%, are considered. The main resolution
components have been analyzed theoretically, their theoretical and physical limits have been
established. Empirical data on the properties of novel scintillators have been presented conﬁr-
ming the possibility of the R improvement. New optimization methods have been proposed to
optimize the detector statistical ﬂuctuations and the scintillator intrinsic resolution. A speciﬁc
importance of the intrinsic resolution is shown as a limiting threshold factor at the ionizing
radiation energy values from 662 keV to 10 M eV and over.

I. INTRODUCTION
Among the solid detectors, the scintillator-PMT (SC-PMT) and scintillator- photodiode (SC-
PD) type detectors are widely used along with the semiconductor (SCD) ones. In the SCD, the
ionizing radiation is transformed directly into the charge carriers. In contrast, in the SC-PMT and
SC-PD ones, a two-stage transformation takes place, ﬁrst into optical photons (in the scintillator)
and then into the charge carriers (in the photoreceiving device). The double transformation results
in the energy losses and redistribution (dispersion). Therefore, the sensitivity and energy resolution
of the SCD are one decimal order higher. It is of a principal importance that, as the SCD volume
increases from 1 mm3 to 1 or 10 cm3, these advantage become lost due to the carrier re-capturing
in the traps. Therefore, the parameters of modern large-volume SCD are not so high as those of
scintielectron detectors at room temperatures. The energy resolution of a SC-PD pair including
the traditional CsI(Tl) scintillator of a volume up to 1cm3 and a silicon [1] or HgI2 [2] photodiode
at room temperature is about 5% to 6% on the 662keV line. The advance in the development of
large wide-band SCD is only insigniﬁcant during lasr few years. An alternative way is to develop
a novel high-eﬃciency scintillator matched spectrally to a solid photoreceiver. This will provide a
detector with a volume of at least 10cm3 having the energy resolution of few per cent.

The theory of energy transformation process in scintillators is developed well. There are sev-
eral models to describe that process and to calculate the energy resolution, e.g., [3–6] and others.
The possible correlation between important characteristics of the process, such as the conversion
eﬃciency, the light collection coeﬃcient, the self-absorption, etc., on the one hand, and the energy
resolution of the scintillation and of the entire system, on the other one, is, however, still insuﬃ-
ciently studied. The theoretical threshold of the energy resolution was not considered. It is just
the above-mentioned problems that are the consideration objects in this work.

II. ENERGY RESOLUTION COMPONENTS.

STATISTICAL CONTRIBUTIONS

Let the energy resolution of a scintillator-photodiode couple be considered. Under approxima-

tion of the Gaussian shape of the electron signal output line, the resolution R takes the form

R =

F W HM
M AX

= G

; G = √8 ln 2

2 .355 ,

≈

∆E
E

h

i

(1)

∗e-mail: naydenov@isc.kharkov.com
†e-mail: ryzhikov@stcri.kharkov.ua

1

E
h

is the spectral line average energy; ∆E =

where
, its dispersion. The depen-
dence on the radiation energy Eγ is deﬁned by the system eﬃciency in the photoabsorption peak,
ηp:

− h

h(cid:10)

E

(cid:11)

i

i

E2

1/2

2
i

E = ηpEγ;

=

E
h

i

ηpi
h

Eγ; ∆E = f (Eγ;

; ∆ηp; ...).

ηpi
h

(2)

The conversion eﬃciencies of the system, namely, the total, η (the electron yield of the PD
per 1M eV of the ionizing radiation), scintillation, ηsc (the light yield per 1M eV ), and peak, ηp
(the fraction of the total eﬃciency η falling on the photoabsorption peak), ones, depend on the
radiation energy as well as on a series of physical and geometric parameters denoted in (2) by dots
(...). These eﬃciencies are ﬂuctuating quantities. That is why there is no direct (monotonous)
dependence of the line width, ∆E, and thus, of the detector resolution, R = R(η), on its conversion
eﬃciency η measured in the current regime. However, the correlations associated with the light
yield improvement and its more eﬃcient use are conserved. These correlations result as a rule in
a resolution improvement that is conﬁrmed by experimental data.

The ﬂuctuation unmonotonity, ∆E = ∆E(η), is due to that the main parameters of the Gaus-
sian distribution, namely, the mean value and dispersion, are independent of each other. Physically,
this fact is due to that the energy transformation and transfer processes are multifactorial and in-
deﬁnite. The spectral line widening does not result from the statistical contributions only. The
latter are related directly to the conversion eﬃciency η. Non-statistical ﬂuctuations are of no less
importance. The latter include the ﬂuctuations of various geometric-dynamic and spatially non-
uniform factors inﬂuencing the detector conversion output. Moreover, ﬂuctuations due to that the
light yield is not in proportion with the energy Eγ and those of the mutually dependent (compet-
ing) quantities are associated with the above-mentioned ones. Due to that complication, the most
eﬃcient method to determine the resolution consists in that the most important noise channels are
separated is such a way that the corresponding ﬂuctuations may be assumed to be independent.
Then, each of those contributions is estimated. The independent ﬂuctuation are added vectorially
[7]. Therefore, we have for the total resolution (the index k is the noise channel number):

It is naturally that the resolution of a scintielectron detector can be determined as

R2 =

R2
k.

Xk

R2 = R2

sc + R2

st + R2

pd,

where Rsc is the scintillator intrinsic resolution; Rst, the statistical ﬂuctuations of the energy
carriers (photons and electrons); Rpd, the noise of the photodiode and electronic devices. Note
that each contribution in the formula (4) may contain in its turn partial components characterizing
R for each partial channel , it is necessary to attain
the speciﬁc widening mechanisms. Since Rk ≤
the noise level of at least 1 to 2% for each component to provide the same value of the total
resolution.

Let the conditions be determined allowing us to neglect the photodiode noise. This contribution
depends mainly on the total number of noising electrons Nnoise relative to the useful electronic
signal

Rpd ∝

Rnoise ∝

Nnoise

Ne ≈

(∆E)pd
ηEγ

,

where ∆Epd is the corresponding energy spread; η means the mean value of the conversion eﬃciency,
if not otherwise speciﬁed. It will be shown below that a suﬃciently high η (of the order of 10%)
is required to compensate the statistical detector noise. Then at the mean energy values of 0.5 to
1M eV , the useful signal Ne should be at least 30000 electrons. It follows from the expression (5)
2% on condition that the spread (∆E)pd
that the photodoide resolution will be smaller than 1

− −

2

(3)

(4)

(5)

−−

does not exceed 1
2keV or Nnoise is less than 200 or 300 “dark” electrons. Such a low noise level
has been attained already in modern semiconductor photodiodes, see [8] and other publications.
For example, the speciﬁc silicon photodiode being used as the SCD exhibits the resolution of 5.5keV
on the 122keV line of 57Co and detects reliably the 5.5keV signal from 55Fe [8]. Thus, its resolution
on the 137Cs line expressed in relative units should amount 2.36
0.8%, that
is, less than 1%. The photodiode noise is even lower in the case of high energy spectrometry, since
in the Eq. (5). Thus, the electronic noises may be assumed to be suppressed
Rpd ∝
strongly, at least under forced cooling. Their level Rpd is lower than 1%. Then it is just the
statistical noises that are of decisive importance in the moderate energy spectroscopy.

(5.5keV /662keV )

e ∝

E−1
γ

N −1

×

∝

The statistical resolution Rst consists of independent contributions of quantum ﬂuctuations
of the number (or energy) of the scintillation photons Rst,ph and the photodiode photoelectrons
Rst,el:

R2

st = R2

st,ph + R2

st,el

(6)

− −

In contrast to the cascade theory [9] for the SC-PMT assembly, the statistical ﬂuctuations of
photons cannot be neglected in this case. For SC-PD with a small Rst, a nearly ideal energy
transport from the scintillation quanta to the photodiode photons is required. Therefore, the
statistical noises of the photons and electrons will be of the same order of magnitude. The Rst,ph
contribution is often neglected also in SC-PD detectors, but at worse resolution values exceeding
4

5%.

Let a formula be derived for Rst in a detector with a high conversion eﬃciency. The γ-
quantum energy transformation into a scintillation photon and then into an electronic signal will
be considered to that end as independent events within a Bernoulli’s test series [7]. The statistical
ﬂuctuations of such a test series are described by a binomial distribution with the mean value
p). Here N it the number of tests, i.e., the number of
x = N p and the dispersion Dx = N p(1
converted particles at 100% eﬃciency. The event probability, p, means the scintillation eﬃciency
ηsc and the total one η, respectively. Thus, the partial statistical contributions will be expressed
as

−

Rst, j = 2. 355

; Nj =

; j = (sc; el),

(7)

1
ηj
−
ηjNj

s

Eγ
εj

where εsc and εel are the mean energy of the scintillation quantum and the mean energy of an
electron-hole pair formation in the semiconductor, respectively. The total statistical contribution
is

Rst =

2.355
η (Eγ/εel) (cid:20)

1 + KY

ηsc

1
(cid:18)

−

εsc + εel

εsc (cid:19)(cid:21)

1/2

,

where the coeﬃcient KY = (η/ηsc) (εsc/εel) is introduced. Usually, εsc = hc/λ = 1239/λ(nm)
2
yields, in the limiting case η

∝
3eV and, for example, εel(Si) = 3.6eV in a silicon SCD. In detectors with low conversion
ηsc < 1, the usual Poisson noise of the charge carriers is obtained:

÷

p

≤

Rst ≈

Rpoisson

st,el =

2.355
η (Eγ/εel)

.

p
At ηsc exceeding 20% or η not less than 10%, the distinctions of the binomial distribution from
the Poisson one become substantial. The ﬂuctuations of the former drop steeper as those of the
latter. This points directly that an increase in ηsc is of prospects for the maximum attenuation
of the threshold statistical ﬂuctuations. Under ideal energy transformation when η = ηsc = 1, the
theoretical limit is attained:

(8)

(9)

Rideal

st = Rst (η = 1) = 0 .

(10)

3

An important feature of the statistical resolution follows from the expression (8). This reso-
lution is characterized by a monotonous dependence on both conversion eﬃciencies. The other
contributions to the total resolution do not exhibit that property. It is useful to transform the Eq.
(8) into the form

Rst =

2.355

ηsc (Eγ/εel) s

K

−1
Y +

ηsc

1
(cid:18)

−

εsc + εel

.
εsc (cid:19)

(11)

Solving this equation for ηsc, we obtain

p

ηsc =

6. 91
λ Eγ (cid:19)

(cid:18)

1 + K

−1
Y

R2

st +

6. 91
λ Eγ

εsc+εel
εel

h

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

i

,

(12)

where the energy Eγ should be expressed in (keV ) and the scintillation wavelength λ, in (nm).
This expression deﬁnes the scintillation eﬃciency necessary to provide the preset statistical noise
level in a detector with the coeﬃcient KY deﬁning the matching between the scintillator and the
photodiode, 0 < KY < 1. At the ideal spectral and optical matching, the KY value is deﬁned
Kc. For a “red” scintillator
mainly by the light collection coeﬃcient Kc, so that (εel/εsc)KY ≈
with λ = 640nm, at a good light collection with Kc = 0.6 to 0.8, the statistical resolution at the
662keV energy is small on the condition following from the Eq. (12),

Rst(Eγ ∝

1 M eV )

1%

≤

ηsc ≥

⇔

25% .

(13)

−

For the total conversion eﬃciency η, that level will amount 10 to 15%. In the energy region
Eγ. In the
up to 10M eV and over, the statistical resolution drops dramatically, since Rst ∝
best scintillation assemblies, the statistical noise at the 662keV line is from 2% to 4%, see., e.g.,
[10] and other publications. At high Eγ from 10M eV to 1GeV , this contribution will decrease by
a factor from 3

4 to several decimal orders and amounts several fractions of a percent.

1/

p

Thus, the statistical contribution can be minimized substantially in a detector with a high
scintillation eﬃciency and well-matched SC-PD couple. The development of new scintillators based
on semiconductors (e.g., ZnSe(Te) [10]) or rare-earth elements (e.g., LaCl3(Ce) [11]) evidences the
real attaining of extremely small Rstvalues even in the moderate energy region. The high light
yield is necessary also to optimize the intrinsic energy resolution of the scintillator, Rsc. It includes
usually non-statistical ﬂuctuations. This quantity is a natural threshold of the limiting improved
detector resolution. This is associated with that Rsc includes residual (slightly dependent on or
independent at all of Eγ) contributions at any radiation energy, including the high one. Its part
will be decisive in the improved-spectrometry detectors.

III. THE SCINTILLATOR INTRINSIC RESOLUTION
The decisive role of the intrinsic resolution noted in [3–6], [8–11] and other works is clearly
pronounced in alkali halide scintillators where it amounts from 4% to 5%. In heavy oxides BGO
and CWO the internal resolution of suﬃciently small samples (less than 10cm3 in volume) is
negligible, since their light yield is in proportion to the ionizing radiation energy. Note that re-
cent studies, in particular, in [12–15], conﬁrm convincingly the dominating dependence between
the light yield non-proportionality and the deterioration of the detector intrinsic resolution. The
non-proportionality is due mainly to the conversion eﬃciency non-linearity with respect to the
secondary electron formation at the radiation absorption by the scintillator and to uncorrelated
processes of the multiple Compton’s scattering. The proportionality eﬀect is manifested in nu-
merous experimental data. For example, RbGd2Br7(Ce) seems to exhibit a rather good intrinsic
resolution at the proportional light yield [13]; its total resolution at the 662keV line is 4.1%, the
statistical contribution of the PMT statistical noise of 3.5% being the main component in this case.
The intrinsic resolution of ZnSe(Te) scintillator amounts 3.26% at the same line of 137Cs while the
total resolution is 5.37% [14].

The intrinsic resolution includes several components. Some of those drop monotonously depen-
ding on Eγ. There are components, however, independent of or slightly depending on the ionizing

4

radiation energy provided that it is absorbed completely in the crystal (the escape resolution and
edge eﬀects being neglected). Among those threshold contributions, the substantional resolution
of the scintillator Rsub and the light collection resolution Rlc are most substantial, so that

where the insubstantial rest of the intrinsic resolution is denoted as Rr. To neglect the escape
resolution, it is necessary to use the crystals having the characteristic dimension L not less than

R2

sc = R2

sub + R2

lc + R2

r

,

L

Le ≈

≥

0.45 Eγ(M eV )
ρ (g/cm3)

,

(14)

(15)

where Le is the radiative δ-electron free path in the radiation energy region under consideration.
The edge eﬀects can be neglected in “heavy” crystals of a volume of several tens of mm3 or
more. To retain a small crystal volume at very high energy levels, metallized reﬂectors are to be
used. Other advantages oﬀered by the mirror scintillator boundary will be considered below. The
substantional resolution Rsub is due mainly to the light yield non-proportionality, Esc = ηscEγ;
ηsc = ηsc(Eγ)
= const, and by its spatial inhomogeneity. The light collection contribution Rlc
is deﬁned by the geometric-dynamic ﬂuctuations in the crystal of a preset shape at ﬁxed optical
parameters in the crystal volume and at its boundary.

The spatial inhomogeneity of scintillations, ηsc = ηsc (~r), is of great importance, in particular,
in activated compounds. The resolution of inhomogeneities is deﬁned by the factor Rinhom =
with the spatial averaging of the corresponding ﬂuctuations. To suppress the
2.36(∆ηsc)/
statistical noise, a high mean scintillation eﬃciency
of about 25% is necessary at moderate
energies. To attain the low macroinhomogeneity resolution in this case, the dispersion ∆ηsc should
not excess 0.1%. It is just a superhigh homogeneity of the activator distribution that answers to
this requirement.

ηsci
h

ηsci
h

There are scintillators with extra small Rsub values. Their speciﬁc feature is the light yield
proportionality. Those include the above- mentioned tungstates. For example, CdWO4 of 200 cm3
volume has Rsub less than 0.3% (after this contribution is isolated from the total resolution) and
0.03% to 0.08% at the crystal volume from 3 cm3 to 20 cm3 (data of [16] were used for the es-
timations). ZnSe(Te) shows a rather good linearity with ηsc(5.9keV )/ηsc(662keV ) = 85% and
ηsc(16.6keV )/ηsc(662keV ) = 90% [14], the physical light yield being 28000ph/M eV . Some com-
plex oxides behave somewhat worse. So, Lu3Al5O12(Ce) has the light yield 13000 ph/M eV and
ηsc(16.6keV )/ηsc(662keV ) = 76%, while LuAlO3(Ce) where the light yield is decreased down
to 11000 ph/M eV shows ηsc(16.6keV )/ηsc(662keV ) = 71% [15]. To compare, the non-linearity
of NaCl(Tl) amounts about 80% at the light yield of 40000 ph/M eV . Nevertheless, the above-
mentioned modern scintillators and other ones oﬀer good prospects in the attaining of the high
scintillator energy resolution (both intrinsic and total one) as their spectrometric characteristics
will be further improved.

To minimize the substantional contribution, it is necessary to develop a material with a high
scintillation eﬃciency as well as high light yield proportionality and homogeneity. The scintillators
exhibiting the intrinsic (or nearly intrinsic) luminescence type seem to be of priority. There is
no strict theory explaining in terms of physical phenomena why unactivated scintillators or those
activated with isovalent impurities show substantially improved substantional resolutions. This
regularity, however, is observed in experiments. This may be due to the following physical reasons.
The absence of a non-isovalent activator, on the one hand, provides the uniform and homogeneous
distribution of the emission centers over the sites of the ideal crystal lattice. On the other hand, the
absence of the direct energy transformation where its intermediate transport from the matrix to
the emission centers is required is accompanied by losses and results in the detected pulse widening.
The scintillators containing non-isovalent impurities (emission centers) show a considerable
non-proportionality of the light yield, in particular, near the K-absorption threshold. For example,
among yttrium garnets, it is just crystals containing the isovalent cerium admixture, YAlO3(Ce)
(YAP) and Y3Al5O12(Ce) (YAG) that exhibit the best proportionality while Y2SiO5(Ce) (YSO)
with non-isovalent Si and Ce the worse one, cf. [13]. The proportionality of Lu2SiO5(Ce) (LSO)
In the same time, it is considerably better at zinc
and Gd2SiO5(Ce) (GSO) is rather poor.

5

6
selenide with isovalent tellurium or at lanthanum chloride with isovalent cerium. Furthermore,
tungstates and germanates with their intrinsic emission centers in the crystal matrix show an
ideal proportionality. Non-activated NaI and CsI also exhibit a smaller intrinsic resolution than
those activated with sodium or thallium. Moreover, at low temperatures (liquid nitrogen) pure
NaI and CsI have considerably higher light yields relative to NaI(Tl) amounting 217% and 190%,
respectively [16]. The light yield is increased when the interaction with the lattice phonons is
suppressed. The considerable increase of the scintillation eﬃciency can be associated with the
more pronounced deﬁniteness of the energy transformation in the absence of activator. This should
be accompanied by an improvement in the substantional resolution. It is just what is observed
even at room temperatures when the light yield of activated compounds is enhanced. This is due
to the same cause, a very small intrinsic resolution of non-activated scintillators. Finally, it is to
note that it is just the PbWO4 (PWO) scintillator that has been chosen as the main component
of high-energy calorimeters for the CERN accelerator and other ones. This is connected, not in
the last place, with its extremely low substantional resolution Rsub. At high energies, 1GeV to
100GeV and over, a resolution smaller than 1% has been already attained for such detectors.

The geometric ﬂuctuations of the light collection, Rlc, under homogeneous scintillation distri-
bution are deﬁned only by the light collection coeﬃcient dispersion. This resolution component,
in spite of its non-statistical character, has the following form in the Gaussian approximation:

K 2
h
q

2

Kci

Rlc = 2.355

c i − h
Kci
h
The light collection resolution and the coeﬃcient Kc itself depend on the scintillator geometric
shape and optical properties, namely, the light reﬂection, refraction and absorption. The resolution
attains its minimum under ideal light collection with mirror reﬂection at the boundary and without
light absorption in the scintillator.

(16)

.

The reason for the ideality of the mirror light collection is established in the frame of the
stochastic (geometric-dynamic) light collection theory [17]. The picture of the geometric (light)
rays distribution in a detector of macroscale size can be substituted by a dynamic model, a billiard
with elastic reﬂections from the boundary. The billiards are described by special dynamic systems,
the reversible maps in a symmetric phase space with coordinates (ϕ1, ϕ2). A couple of such
coordinates deﬁnes a ray with two successive reﬂection points at the billiard (detector) boundary.
The light collection parameters are expressed in terms of the invariant distribution functionf for the
corresponding dynamic ﬂow. The latter deﬁnes the total set of all possible light rays being reﬂected
from the billiard boundary. It is just the possibility to consider the light collection picture not
for individual trajectories but in its entirety that makes a substantial distinction of this approach
from widespread numerical models. The non-averaged quantities Kc and K 2

c are expressed as

Kc =

f (ϕ1, ϕ2) χc (ϕ1, ϕ2)A (ϕ1, ϕ2) dϕ1 dϕ2;

K 2

c =

f (ϕ1, ϕ2) χ2

c (ϕ1, ϕ2)A2 (ϕ1, ϕ2) dϕ1 dϕ2,

Z Z

Z Z

where χM is the characteristic function of the set M (equal to unity in the points of the set and
zero outside of it); χc corresponds to the light pick-oﬀ in the phase space that does not include the
captured light region. The factor A
µsc L) describes the light losses; µsc is the optical
absorption coeﬃcient of the scintillator; L – the length of the latter. The expressions (17) and (18)
should be averaged over the ﬂash distribution in the scintillator, depending on the corresponding
distribution (that was assumed above to be homogeneous). For the mirror light collection with
1; neglecting the absorption in an optically transparent crystal, we have
mirror boundaries, r
. Then, starting
A
from (16)–(18), we obtain the relationship

1. Using the projection property χ2 = χ, we obtain the equality

Kci

exp (

K 2
c

=

∝

−

≈

≈

h

(cid:10)

(cid:11)

(17)

(18)

(19)

Rmirror
lc

= 2. 355

1

Kci

− h
Kci
h

s

.

6

Mathematically, the obtained ﬂuctuation character corresponds to the binomial distribution.

At the ideal light collection, when Kc = 1 and r = 1, the theoretical limit is attained:

Rlc(Kc = 1 ; r = 1) = 0 ,

(20)

that is conﬁrmed by numerical and experimental data (see e.g. [10], [16]). The limiting high Kc
values are attainable in detectors where the dynamics of light rays is completely chaotic. Due to
the “disjoining of correlations”, the captured light is absent therein and the technical light yield
is limited by the absorption factor only. The mentioned detector shape answers to the chaotic
billiard geometry. The known geometries of those type include the “stadium”, the cube with an
internal void, etc. As an exception, it is just sphere corresponding to the integrable billiard that
is characterized by the ideal light collection.

The light collection becomes changed considerably if the absorption takes place (A

= 1). This
results not only in a reduced intensity of the scintillation propagation but causes the light collec-
tion inhomogeneity. The eﬀective light collection with a high resolution is attained in small-size
scintillators and/or in those having a high optical transparency. It follows from experimental data,
numerical calculations and theoretical estimations that a scintillator of regular geometry with a
volume of about 10cm3 (e.g., a cylinder of commensurable height and diameter values about 3cm)
and a high-quality mirror boundary (r from 0.8 to 0.9) will exhibit a suﬃciently low light collection
resolution on condition that

Rlc ≤

1%

⇔

µsc L

≤

0. 1

(10L

lsc)

,

≤

(21)

where lsc = µ−1
is the light ray free path in the scintillator. On the same conditions, a good
sc
light collection Kc, up to 60% , is attained. It is just the alkali halide crystals that exhibit a high
transparency, lsc[NaI(Tl)] attaining 2m; it is somewhat lower in tungstates, lsc being from 10cm to
50cm. Nevertheless, the lsc values of about 30cm that are required for a scintillator of about 10cm3
volume are quite attainable. Note that the optical transparency increase improves, in an indirect
manner, the substantional resolution Rsub that depends also on the energy loss in the scintillator.
The increase of the scintillator volume results as a rule in a worse intrinsic energy resolution
due to the optical absorption. But exceptions are possible when a special geometry is chosen that
optimizes the light collection. The search for scintillators with high atomic numbers, Zef f , and
density values, ρ, becomes very actual. This approach allows to avoid the sharp increase of the
scintillator volume in the moderate and high energy spectrometry. The improvement of the light
collection and its resolution is a geometric-dynamic problems to a considerable extent and does not
require any substantial changes in the scintillator production technology. Basing on the modern
advances in the non-linear physics, some untraditional scintillator geometries could be developed,
such as asymmetrical shapes, varying curvature boundaries, “stadium” type defocusing billiards,
systems containing topological defects, e.g., holes. The light collection inhomogeneities must be
optimized in such scintillators due to strong stochastic mixing of the light rays.

Thus, the light collection intrinsic resolution is minimized in mirror-reﬂecting scintillators of
appropriate geometry and high optical transparency. Alternatively, volume-diﬀuse systems con-
sisting of small crystalline grains in an optically conductive medium can be used for scintillators
with high optical losses. The intrinsic material resolution is expected to be small in non-activated
scintillators or “combined” ones (where the emission of an isovalent activator and the intrinsic
one of the scintillator are combined) at a high conversion eﬃciency, homogeneity and the com-
plete absorption of the ionizing radiation. Scintillators with a high Zef f and meeting the condition
L, where lr is the radiation attenuation length. The intrinsic scintillator resolution can
(2
3) lr ≤
÷
2% by satisfying the above-mentioned conditions in combination.
be lowered down to a level of 1
IV. CONCLUSIONS
It follows from the above theoretical analysis that there are no physical reasons hindering to
attain suﬃciently small values of the main energy resolution components in a SC-PD detector.
Only in the low energy range (several hundreds keV ) where it is just the statistical contribution
that predominates, the latter increases sharply as the radiation energy drops even in scintillators
with a limiting scintillation quantum yield. In contrast, the R values from 15 to 2% are quite
attainable in the range of 662keV to 10M eV and over. To that end, it is necessary to increase

−

7

6
substantially the total conversion eﬃciency (1.5 to 2 times) and the scintillation eﬃciency (up to
25 to 30%) as compared to the available SC-PD detectors having R of 3 to 5%. Moreover, optically
transparent, homogeneous scintillators exhibiting a high light yield proportionality, in particular
those close to the proper emission type, are to be searched for. To improve the light collection,
the search for untraditional scintillator geometry (e.g., the “stadium” type one) providing a strong
chaotization of light beams therein (at the mirror surface) should be preferred. The last advances
in the ﬁeld of “heavy” crystals with light yields exceeding that of CsI(Tl) (see [10],[11], [18-20],
etc.) evidence clearly that these problems are quite realizable and oﬀer good prospects.

V. REFERENCES
[1] J. M. Markakis, “Energy resolution of CsI(Tl) crystals with various photoreceivers”, IEEE

Trans. Nucl. Sci., NS-35, no. 1, p. 356, 1988.

[2] J.M. Markakis, “High resolution scintillation spectroscopy with HgI2 as photodetector”,

Nucl. Instrum. and Meth., vol. A 263, no. 2-3, p. 499, 1988.

[3] P. Iredale, “The eﬀect of the nonproportional responce of NaI(Tl) crystals to electrons upon

to resolution of gamma rays”, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth., vol. 11, p. 340, 1961.

[4] R.B. Murray and A. Meyer, “Scintillation response of activated inorganic crystals to various

charged particles”, Physical Review, vol. 122, no. 3, p. 815, 1961.

[5] C.D. Zerby, A. Meyer and R.B. Murray, “Intrinsic line broadening in NaI(Tl) gamma-ray

spectrometers”, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth., vol. 12, p. 115, 1961.

[6] R. Hill, A.J.L. Collinson, “The variation of resolution with gamma energy in activated alkali

halide crystals”, Proc. Prys. Soc., vol. 85, p. 1067, 1965.

[7] W. Feller, “An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications”, vol. 1, New York,

1970.

[8] H. Grossman, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth., vol. A 295, no. 3, p. 400, 1990; A. Gramsch, K.

Lynn, M. Weber et al., Nucl. Instrum. and Meth., vol. A311, no. 3, p. 529, 1992.

[9] E. Bretenberger, Progr. Nucl. Phys., v.10, no. 4, p. 16, 1955.
[10] L.V Atroshchenko, S.F. Burachas, L.P Gal’chinetskii, B.V. Grinyov, V.D. Ryzhikov, N.G.
Starzhynski, “Scintillator crystals and detectors of ionizing radiations on their base”, Kyiv, Naukova
Dumka, 1998 (in Russian).

[11] E.V.D. van Loef, P. Dorenbos, C.W.E. van Eijk et al., “High-energy-resolution scintillator:

Ce3+ activated LaCl3”, Applied Phys. Letters, vol. 77, no. 10, p. 1467, 2000.

[12] J.D. Valentine, B.D. Rooney, J. Li, “The light yield nonproportionality component of

scintillator energy resolution”, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 45, p. 512, 1998.

[13] P. Dorenbos, J.T.M. de Hass, C.W.E. van Eijk, “Nonproportionality in the scintillation
response and the energy resolution obtainable with scintillation crystals”, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci.,
vol. 42, no. 1, p. 2190, 1995; P. Dorenbos, M. Marsman, C.W.E. van Eijk, “Energy resolution non-
proportionality, and absolute light yield of scintillation crystals”, Inorganic Scintillators and Their
Applications, Proc. of the Intern. Conf. SCINT95, ed. by P. Dorenbos, C.W.E. van Eijk, Delft,
the Netherlands, 1995, p. 148; J.C. Guilliot-Noel, J.C. van’t Spijker, J.T.M. de Hass, P. Dorenbos,
C.W.E. van Eijk, “Scintillation properties of RbGd2Br7(Ce). Advantages and limitations”, IEEE
Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 46, no.5, p. 1274, 1999.

[14] M. Balcerzyk, M. Moszynski and M. Kapusta, “Energy resolution of contemporary scintilla-
tors. Quest for high resolution, proportional detector”, Proceedings of the 5th Intern. Conf. on
Inorganic Scintillators and Their Applications, SCINT99, Moscow, August 16-20, 1999, p. 167-172.
[15] M. Balcerzyk, M. Moszynski, M. Kapusta et al., “YSO, LSO, GSO and LGSO. A study of
energy resolution and non-proportionality”, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 47, no. 4, p. 1319, 2000.
[16] Yu. A. Tsirlin, M.E. Globus, E.P. Sysoeva, “Optimization of detecting gamma-irradiation

by scintillation crystals”, Energoatomizdat, Moscow, 1991 (in Russian).

[17] S.V. Naydenov, V.V. Yanovsky, “Stochastical theory of light collection. I. Detectors and
billiards”, Functional Materials, vol. 7, no.4 (2), p. 743-752, 2000; “II. Projective geometry and
invariant distribution function of a billiard”, Ibidem, vol. 8, no.1, p. 27-35, 2001.

[18] S. Derenzo, W. Moses, “Experimental eﬀorts and results in ﬁnding new heavy scintillators”,
Heavy scintillators. Proc. of the Intern. Conference “Crystal2000”, (ed. by F. Notarisstefani et
al.), Chamonix, France, 1992, p. 125.

[19] W.W. Moses, M.J. Weber, S.E. Derenzo et al., “Recent results in a search for inorganic
scintillators for X- and gamma ray detection” Proc. of the Intern. Conference on Inorganic Scint.

8

and Their Applications, SCINT97, (ed. by Y. Zhiwen et al.), Shanghai, China, September 22-
25, 1997, p. 358; J.C. van’t Spijker, P. Dorenbos, C.P. Allier, C.W. E.van’t Eijk, A.E. Ettema,
“Lu2S3(Ce+3): a new red luminescing scintillator”,. Ibidem, p. 311; J.C. van’t Spijker, P. Doren-
bos, C.W.E.van’t Eijk et al., “Scintillation properties of LiLuSiO4(Ce+3)”, Ibidem, p. 326.

[20] E.V.D. van Loef, P.Dorenbos, and C.W.E. van Eijk, “High-energy-resolution scintillator:

Ce3+ activated LaBr3”, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 79, no. 10, p. 1573, 2001.

9

