2
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
4
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
4
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fiber-coupled Antennas for Ultrafast Coherent Terahertz Spectroscopy in Low
Temperatures and High Magnetic Fields

S. A. Crooker
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory - LANL, MS E536, Los Alamos, NM 87545
(27 March 2002)

For the purposes of measuring the high-frequency complex conductivity of correlated-electron ma-
terials at low temperatures and high magnetic ﬁelds, a method is introduced for performing coherent
time-domain terahertz spectroscopy directly in the cryogenic bore of existing dc and pulsed mag-
nets. Miniature ﬁber-coupled THz emitters and receivers are constructed and are demonstrated to
work down to 1.5 Kelvin and up to 17 Tesla, for eventual use in higher-ﬁeld magnets. Maintaining
the sub-micron alignment between ﬁber and antenna during thermal cycling, obtaining ultrafast
(< 200 fs) optical gating pulses at the end of long optical ﬁbers, and designing highly eﬃcient de-
vices that work well with low-power optical gating pulses constitute the major technical challenges
of this project. Data on a YBCO superconducting thin ﬁlm and a high mobility 2D electron gas is
shown.

PACS numbers:

Introduction
Time-domain terahertz spectroscopy is an established
technique for the measurement of high-frequency con-
ductivity, typically in the range between 100 GHz and
∼3000 GHz. Pioneered in the late 1980s1,2, “table-
top” terahertz spectrometers employing photoconduc-
tive antennas gated by ultrafast optical pulses have been
used to study a wide range of material systems, includ-
ing semiconductors and dielectrics3, normal and high-Tc
superconductors4,5, liquids6, ﬂames7, and gases8. This
THz frequency range lies between that which is readily
accessible by microwave cavity techniques (on the low
frequency side), and Fourier-transform infrared spectro-
scopies (on the high frequency side). These frequencies
correspond to energies between 0.4 meV and ∼12 meV,
or alternatively, temperatures between 4K and 140K and
magnetic ﬁelds between 4 Tesla and 100 Tesla.

This is precisely the energy, temperature, and in par-
ticular the magnetic ﬁeld scale relevant to many novel
correlated-electron systems of interest today, including
high-Tc superconductors (where the upper critical ﬁeld
Hc2 corresponds to tens or even hundreds of Tesla9),
heavy-fermion and Kondo-insulating materials (where,
e.g., the Kondo spin/charge gap in Ce3Bi4Pt3 may be
closed above 30 T10), colossal magnetoresistive mangan-
ites (melting of charge/orbital order at high ﬁelds11), 2D
electron gases (composite fermion dynamics in the high-
ﬁeld fractional quantum Hall regime), and organic met-
als (novel ﬁeld-induced superconductivity above 17 T12).
Thus it is of keen interest to perform measurements of
the complex THz conductivity not only in the regime
of low temperatures, but also at high magnetic ﬁelds.
However, the conventional “table-top” transmission ter-
ahertz spectrometer is a rather involved and physically
large setup, typically utilizing several micropositioning
stages to align the THz antennas with respect to the free-
space laser beams, and oﬀ-axis parabolic optics to colli-
mate and focus the terahertz pulses over short distances.

These traditional methods work extremely well, but are
not compatible with high-ﬁeld magnets (10-60 T), which
are generally solenoids with narrow, cryogenic bores ac-
cessible primarily via meters-long experimental probes.

To this end we have developed extremely sensitive,
miniaturized, optical ﬁber-coupled THz emitters and re-
ceivers for remote use directly in the low-temperature
bore of a high-ﬁeld (dc or pulsed) magnet. These de-
vices permit ultrafast, coherent, time-domain THz trans-
mission spectroscopy of samples in the frequency range
between 100 GHz and ∼2000 GHz. Due to the co-
herent nature of the detection (both amplitude and
phase of the THz electric ﬁeld are measured), the com-
plex conductivity may be directly evaluated without
the need for Kramers-Kronig analyses, in contrast with
phase-incoherent schemes based on thermal cyclotron
emission13. The gated nature of the detection permits
high signal-to-noise data with minimal (∼2 mW) op-
tical power input and, where necessary, the ability to
acquire complete spectra in tens of milliseconds. The
primary challenges of this project include maintaining
sub-micron alignment between ﬁber and antenna upon
repeated thermal cycling, achieving ultrafast (< 200 fs)
optical pulses at the end of tens of meters of singlemode
optical ﬁber, and obtaining complete time-domain scans
with high signal-to-noise ratio using only milliwatts of
optical power, no lock-in detection, and (for pulsed mag-
nets) only ∼100 ms of integration time.

Experimental setup
Using photoconductive antennas, wide-bandwidth
THz pulses may only be generated (and detected) by
gating the antennas with ultrafast optical pulses, and
for this reason it is necessary to compensate for the posi-
tive group-velocity dispersion (GVD) of optical ﬁbers so
that fast optical pulses may be obtained at the ends of
long ﬁbers. Normal silica optical ﬁber exhibits a GVD
of roughly 120 fs/m-nm at 800 nm, so that without com-

1

R

Ti:S

FL1

PC

20m fiber

FL2

G2

1.5-300K
0-18T

G1

25mm

FIG. 1. Experimental schematic. Ultrafast optical pulses
are pre-chirped (stretched) by gratings G1 and G2, and
coupled into ﬁbers by ﬁber launchers FL1 and FL2. A
rapid-scanning retroreﬂector (R) and polarization controller
(PC) are also present in the pulse train for the THz receiver.
Pulses achieve minimum temporal width (and highest peak
intensity) at the photoconductive THz emitter and receiver,
which are located in the cryogenic bore of a high-ﬁeld magnet.

pensation, a 100 fs input optical pulse with a bandwidth
of 10 nm broadens, in the best case, to > 20 picoseconds
after a typical 20 meter length of ﬁber. Such a lengthy op-
tical pulse is useless for generating or detecting THz radi-
ation. Thus it is necessary to precompensate and impose
a negative chirp on the optical pulses before launching
into the optical ﬁbers, so that the optical pulses shorten
in time as they travel through the ﬁber and achieve a
minimum value right at the THz devices.

The experimental schematic for THz transmission
spectroscopy in high-ﬁeld magnets is illustrated in Fig.
1. Ultrafast optical pulses (100 fs, centered at 800 nm)
from a commercial Ti:sapphire laser are directed to a
two-grating pulse stretcher, which imparts a negative
chirp (blue wavelengths leading red wavelengths) onto
the pulses. The magnitude of the negative chirp, tuned
via the separation between the two gratings G1 and G2
(1200 grooves/mm), is chosen to optimally compensate
for the intrinsic positive GVD of optical ﬁber, and thus
depends on the laser wavelength and the length of ﬁber
used. For typical ﬁber lengths of 20 meters, the 100 fs,
transform-limited pulses are stretched to approximately
24 picoseconds. After leaving the pulse stretcher, the
negatively-chirped pulse train is equally split into an
“emitter” and a “receiver” beam. The former is launched
directly into a singlemode optical ﬁber, while the lat-
ter is delayed by a scanning retroreﬂector before being
launched into another singlemode ﬁber of equal length.
As the optical pulses travel from the laboratory to the
low-temperature probe housing the THz antennas, their
temporal width decreases due to the positive GVD of the

FIG. 2. a) Photographs of a) a ﬁber-coupled THz antenna
(next to a standard razor blade), and b) the lowest section of
the cryogenic high-ﬁeld THz probe.

ﬁber, achieving a minimum pulsewidth directly at the
lithographically-deﬁned photoconductive antennas. The
minimum pulsewidth depends critically on pulse energy,
ﬁber length, and stretcher position as discussed in detail
below. The receiver’s ﬁber passes through a polarization
controller (PC), as it was found that the signal ampli-
tude depends slightly (±15%) on the polarization of the
optical pulses incident on the THz receiver.

In an experiment, the sample of interest is positioned
between the THz emitter and receiver in the cryogenic
bore of the magnet. Following the usual prescription, an
ultrafast optical pulse promotes mobile carriers in the bi-
ased stripline emitter, and the subsequent current surge
generates a burst of broadband THz radiation which is
coupled into free space through a silicon hyperhemispher-
ical substrate lens of radius 2-5 mm. The height of
the substrate lens is chosen to collimate the THz radi-
ation. After passing through the sample, the THz pulse
is focussed onto the stripline receiver by another sub-
strate lens, where the “instantaneous” THz electric ﬁeld
is gated by a second ultrafast optical pulse, generating a
measurable current. The complete time-dependent THz
electric ﬁeld is mapped by rapidly scanning the time de-
lay between the excitation and gating optical pulses, and
the ampliﬁed current signal is sent directly to a digitizing
oscilloscope. Photographs of a ﬁber-coupled antenna and
of the actual apparatus are shown in Figure 2. The THz
emitter and receiver are mounted facing one another with
a gap of roughly 1 cm. The emitter bias is provided by
twisted-pair leads and external batteries (10-20 V, typ-
ically). The detected photocurrent is coupled from the
receiver to an external current ampliﬁer (DL Instruments
model 1212) via a micro-coaxial cable selected for its low
loss and insensitivity to microphonic noise. A rotating

2

copper sample stage enables the sample to be moved out
of the THz beam path, so that a reference scan (crucial
for quantitative interpretation of data) may be taken at
each new temperature or ﬁeld. Temperature control is
provided by a Cernox thermometer in the sample stage
and a wire heater on the body of the probe. The entire
probe is 25 mm in diameter, and may be used in vacuum,
vapor, or liquid helium environments .

Pulse dispersion management in long ﬁbers
The power and bandwidth of the generated THz radi-
ation is strongly inﬂuenced by the temporal width of the
ultrafast optical pulses that are used to gate the anten-
nas. Fig. 3 shows the signal (∝ THz electric ﬁeld) for
a ﬁber-coupled emitter/receiver pair that are driven by
800 nm optical pulses of constant energy (26 pJ/pulse),
but varying pulsewidth. Here, the optical pulsewidth at
the antennas is varied between 175 fs and 1300 fs by
changing the spacing between the gratings in the pulse
stretcher. The eﬀects are immediately clear: Both the
amplitude and bandwidth of the measured THz radia-
tion decrease as the temporal width of the optical gating
pulses is increased from the minimum value of 175 fs. The
drop in power is particularly marked at higher frequen-
cies; e.g., above 800 GHz the power spectrum of the THz
pulses (Fig. 3b) decreases over an order of magnitude.

After propagating through a typical length of 10-20 m
of optical ﬁber, the minimum temporal width of an op-
tical pulse is always somewhat larger than the original
100 fs, even when the positive GVD of the optical ﬁber
is optimally balanced by the pulse stretcher. The main
reasons for this are uncompensated cubic phase disper-
sion in the stretcher/ﬁber system, and self-phase modu-
lation (SPM) in the optical ﬁber. Quadratic, cubic, and
higher-order phase dispersion of an optical pulse in ﬁber
arises simply because the index of refraction of silica (or
any material) is not constant with wavelength, and thus
diﬀerent wavelengths within a broadband ultrafast opti-
cal pulse travel with diﬀerent group velocities. Whereas
the negative quadratic phase dispersion (GVD) imparted
by the pulse stretcher may be tuned to exactly cancel the
positive quadratic phase dispersion of the ﬁber, both the
stretcher and the ﬁber impart a small cubic phase dis-
persion onto the optical pulse, and these contributions
do not cancel. Indeed, it is only by rather involved de-
sign, or via the inclusion of phase-shifting optics, that
cubic phase dispersion may be compensated14. For the
purposes of generating and detecting THz radiation, the
pulse broadening due to cubic phase dispersion does not
degrade the signal signiﬁcantly to warrant correction, al-
though for longer lengths of ﬁber (> 50 m) correction
may be necessary.

Self-phase modulation, on the other hand, is an in-
herently nonlinear optical phenomenon arising from an
intensity-dependent phase shift, whose eﬀect is to redis-
tribute energy within an optical pulse to diﬀerent spec-
tral components. Thus, unlike the linear eﬀects of GVD
(quadratic) or cubic phase dispersion, SPM acts to cre-

FIG. 3. The measured ultrafast THz electric ﬁeld from a
ﬁber-coupled emitter/receiver pair as a function of the tem-
poral width of the 800 nm optical gating pulses. The ﬁber
length is 10m b) The corresponding power spectrum.

ate or remove additional wavelengths within the optical
pulse. Because SPM in ﬁbers arises from the high in-
stantaneous power in ultrafast optical pulses, it may be
minimized by using very low-power pulses, typically of
order 30 pJ or less for 100 fs pulses.

The combined eﬀects of SPM, cubic phase disper-
sion, pulse power, and stretcher position on the opti-
cal pulsewidth are shown in Figure 4. Here, prechirped
100 fs low-power (closed circles) and high-power (open
circles) optical pulses centered at 800 nm are launched
into 20 meters of optical ﬁber, and the temporal width
of the pulses at the end of the ﬁber is measured as a
function of stretcher position. The pulsewidth is mea-
sured via autocorrelation and a sech2(t) pulse shape is
assumed. At one extreme, when the distance between
the two stretcher gratings is 15 mm longer than the
optimum separation of 160 mm, the pulses are “over-
stretched”, and therefore never achieve their minimum
value in the optical ﬁber (i.e., the pulses are still some-
what negatively chirped at the ﬁber exit). As the dis-
tance between the gratings is decreased, the pulses exit
the ﬁber with shorter and shorter pulsewidth until an
optimum position is reached and the GVD of the ﬁber
is exactly compensated. Further decreasing the distance
between the gratings results in “understretched” pulses,

3

260 pJ/pulse

1200

1000

800

600

400

)
s
f
(
 
h
t
d
i
w
e
s
l
u
P

26 pJ/pulse

200

-15

-10
Relative stretcher position (mm)

-5

0

5

10

FIG. 4. The temporal width of the optical gating pulses,
measured at the end of 20 m of singlemode ﬁber, as the dis-
tance between gratings G1 and G2 is varied. Solid (open)
dots correspond to low (high) power pulses. Lines are guides
to the eye.

where the minimum pulsewidth is achieved somewhere
within the optical ﬁber (rather than at the end). Note
that the minimum pulsewidth for the low-power pulses
(250 fs) is larger than the 100 fs input pulsewidth. Since
further reduction of the pulse energy has very little ef-
fect on the shape of this curve (not shown), the 250 fs
pulsewidth is due to the uncompensated cubic phase dis-
persion of the stretcher-ﬁber combination (also, similar
experiments in 10, 5, and 1 meter ﬁbers show that the
minimum pulsewidth approaches 100 fs).

More interesting are the data from the high-power
pulses, which exhibit a much larger minimum pulsewidth
of 700 fs (and, this minimum value occurs at a slightly
diﬀerent position of the stretcher). In this case, the ef-
fects of nonlinear SPM, arising from the large instanta-
neous intensity of the high-power pulse, actually narrows
the spectral bandwidth of the optical pulse, thereby pre-
venting the optical pulse from attaining a small temporal
width, even if the pulse were transform-limited. SPM-
induced spectral narrowing in a 10 meter optical ﬁber is
explicitly shown in Fig. 5. As a function of pulse energy,
the minimum attainable pulsewidth at the ﬁber exit is
shown in Fig. 5a. Figure 5b shows the associated spec-
tral content of these pulses, normalized for comparison.
For pulse energies below 26 pJ/pulse, the minimum ob-
tainable pulsewidth remains unchanged at ∼175 fs, and
the spectral content of these pulses is relatively constant
and equal to the spectrum of the pulses before enter-
ing the optical ﬁber, indicating that nonlinear (SPM)
eﬀects in the ﬁber are not signiﬁcant. For pulse energies
above 26 pJ, SPM causes the minimum pulsewidth to
grow dramatically from 175 fs, reaching a value of 400 fs
at 260 pJ/pulse, or 20 mW of average laser power. The
spectral bandwidth of the pulses shrinks correspondingly,
from a value of 10 nm for low-power pulses, to just under
3.5 nm for the 260 pJ pulses. Although it stands in con-
trast to the much more well-known and widely exploited

FIG. 5. a) The minimum temporal width of the optical gat-
ing pulses, measured at the end of 10 meters of singlemode
ﬁber as a function of pulse power. b) The corresponding spec-
trum of the pulses at the end of the ﬁber. The increased tem-
poral width and spectral narrowing above 26 pJ/pulse are due
to eﬀects of nonlinear self-phase-modulation.

spectral broadening which occurs for positively-chirped
or transform-limited optical pulses, SPM-induced spec-
tral narrowing of negatively-chirped optical pulses has
been previously studied15, and further, might even be ex-
ploited as part of a system for ﬁber delivery of ultrafast
nanojoule optical pulses16. Regardless, it is clear that
the deleterious eﬀects of SPM on the temporal width of
the optical pulses (and subsequently on the THz band-
width and power) requires that the optical pulse energies
be kept very low – less than ∼30 pJ/pulse, or 2.3 mW
average power from the 76 MHz repetition rate Ti:S laser.

Antenna design and construction
The stringent upper limit on the energy of the optical
gating pulses mandate the use of specially-designed THz
emitter and receiver antennas for maximum emission ef-
ﬁciency and detection sensitivity when coupled to single-
mode optical ﬁbers. Additionally, to minimize the ther-
mal load at liquid helium temperatures (< 4 K), it is de-
sirable to design THz antennas which operate eﬃciently
using as little laser power as possible (in practice, 1-2
mW). For the most part, the THz devices are “standard”
photoconductive striplines2 deposited via photolithogra-
phy onto semiconductor substrates, with 10-20 micron
wide, 1 cm long, titanium-gold lines separated by 50-
100 microns. Following the work of Brener et al.17, the

4

THz emitter also incorporates opposing triangular fea-
tures at the midpoint of the stripline to concentrate the
electric ﬁeld in a localized region so as to enhance the
THz output. The gap between the tips of the triangu-
lar features is 5 microns, chosen to match the mode-ﬁeld
diameter of the single-mode ﬁber. Similarly, the THz
stripline receiver incorporates a standard dipole, again
with a 5 micron gap. The semiconductor substrates are
ErAs/GaAs superlattices grown by molecular-beam epi-
taxy on GaAs wafers18. Here, the ErAs material traps
carriers eﬃciently, resulting in the desired subpicosecond
carrier lifetimes necessary for THz photomixing applica-
tions. Functionally, this material system is related to
low-temperature-grown GaAs (LT-GaAs), but with the
added advantages of greater ﬂexibility and control over
sample parameters. THz receivers made on ErAs/GaAs
superlattices were found to exhibit excellent sensitivity
to THz electric ﬁelds, on par with that of LT-GaAs and
over an order of magnitude more sensitive (per unit power
of the optical gating pulse) than implanted silicon-on-
sapphire substrates.

Good alignment and bonding of the single-mode opti-
cal ﬁber to the small “sweet spot” of the THz antenna
is critical to the construction of a usable THz device,
as well over half of the THz signal may be lost if the
ﬁber and antenna become misaligned by as little as 1
micron. Because the devices are used in cryogenic envi-
ronments and must undergo repeated thermal cycling,
proper selection of materials and careful construction
are necessary to minimize diﬀerential thermal contrac-
tion which leads to misalignment (or destruction) of the
device. Fiber-coupled THz devices are constructed in
the following way: Using an infrared microscope, high-
resistivity silicon hyperhemispheres are centered exactly
over the antenna dipole on the back side of the wafer,
and bonded with a dilute mixture of rubber cement in
toluene. Single-mode optical ﬁbers are then epoxied into
ceramic ferrules, and polished ﬂush with the face of the
ferrule. The ceramic ferrule is then positioned over the
THz antenna using an XYZ translation stage with sub-
micron actuators (Thorlabs MDT611). The THz emit-
ter is biased (10-20 V), the THz receiver is connected
to a fast current ampliﬁer, and optical pulses are cou-
pled into the ﬁbers so that the THz signal may be mon-
itored in real time and used to determine the optimum
position of the ﬁber/ferrule with respect to the antenna.
Maximum signal is achieved when the ferrule is nearly
in contact with and is positioned exactly over the an-
tenna dipole. Bonding of the ferrule to the antenna is
achieved by backing the ferrule away from the antenna
and applying an extremely thin layer of clear, degassed
Stycast 1266 epoxy to the end of the ferrule, after which
the ferrule may again be brought into contact with the
antenna and the signal maximized. Once optimized,
the epoxy may be left to cure. During alignment, us-
ing extremely low-power optical pulses and using viscous
(slightly cured) epoxy avoids the formation of bubbles
due to local heating from the optical pulses. The result-

FIG. 6. a) The measured THz electric ﬁeld from an in-situ
ﬁber-coupled emitter/receiver pair at cryogenic temperatures,
demonstrating a weak temperature dependence and phase
shift. b) Same, but as a function of magnetic ﬁeld at 1.6K.

ing bond formed between the ferrule and the antenna is
quite robust and rigid, and most importantly, does not
suﬀer any misalignment upon repeated thermal cycling
from room temperature to cryogenic temperatures. Use
of the ceramic ferrule is important to provide mechani-
cal support for the optical ﬁber, to match the thermal
contraction of the GaAs substrate, and to facilitate the
use of as little epoxy as possible. Most epoxies, being
polymer-based, exhibit thermal contraction that is much
larger than the contraction of the GaAs substrate upon
which the THz antenna resides (1.1% total contraction
from 300K to 4K for Stycast 1266, as compared to ∼0.1%
net contraction for GaAs), so that thick layers of epoxy
invariably shatter the substrate upon cooldown. Devices
made with stainless steel ferrules occasionally fail upon
cooldown, presumably due to the increased mismatch
of thermal contraction between stainless steel (0.3% net
contraction) and GaAs. Standard UV-curing optical ce-
ments performed poorly under cryogenic conditions, and
sub-micron alignment was diﬃcult to maintain during
the curing process. To make ﬁber-coupled THz devices
for room-temperature use only, any combination of fer-
rule and epoxy works well – even gluing a bare cleaved
ﬁber directly to the antenna with a drop of Stycast 1266
is quite reliable, if somewhat ﬂimsy. Alternatively, for
room-temperature antennas coupled by short lengths of
ﬁber, at least one very nice complete commercial system
exists for THz spectroscopy and imaging applications19.

Antenna performance
That the ﬁber-coupled THz antennas perform well at

5

a)

B=0T

b)

T=70K

20 K
40 K
50 K
58 K
68 K
79 K
90 K

0 T
2 T
4 T
6 T

4

3

2

1

0
2

1

4
0
1
 
x
 
 
)

(

I

 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
u
d
n
o
c
 
y
r
a
n
i
g
a
m

I

0
0.2

0.4

0.8
0.6
Frequency (THz)

1

1.2

1.4

FIG. 8. a) The imaginary conductivity of a 50 nm thick
YBCO ﬁlm (Tc=85K) as a function of temperature, showing
suppression of phase-coherent superconductivity at high tem-
peratures. b) Same, except that here the superconductivity
is suppressed by application of magnetic ﬁeld at 70K. Sample
courtesy of Q. Jia (LANL).

attenuated with ﬁeld, although with no change in band-
width. Most likely, the applied ﬁeld acts to bend the
trajectories of the photoexcited electrons away from the
axis of the antenna dipoles, causing a reduction in signal.
It is not knows whether the ﬁeld predominantly aﬀects
the eﬃciency of the emitter, or the sensitivity of the re-
ceiver.

In the data of Fig. 6, 128 sweeps of the 20 Hz scan-
ning retro-reﬂector are digitally averaged by the oscillo-
scope, so as to increase the signal-to-noise ratio. Since
a long-term goal of this project is to perform ultrafast
coherent THz spectroscopy in very high pulsed magnetic
ﬁelds (and in particular during the 100 ms ﬂat-top of
the 60 Tesla Long-Pulse magnet at the Los Alamos mag-
net lab10,21), it is necessary that these ﬁber-coupled de-
vices exhibit suﬃcient signal-to-noise to facilitate THz
spectroscopy on short time scales. Figure 7 shows com-
plete THz traces representing 25 ms (one half-cycle of the
retroreﬂector), 100 ms, and 1600 ms of acquired data.
The measured root-mean-square noise on each scan (see
insets) is 1.06 mV, 0.41 mV, and 0.12 mV, respectively,
for signal-to-noise ratios of approximately 190, 490, and
1700. Thus rather precise spectroscopic THz measure-
ments may be performed in high-ﬁeld pulsed magnets. Of
course, in dc magnets (superconducting to 20 T, or resis-
tive to 45 T), no limitations on the amount of averaging
time are imposed, and the accuracy of the measurements
may be correspondingly increased.

FIG. 7. THz traces acquired in a) 25 ms, b) 100 ms, and

c) 1600 ms. Insets show the noise level.

low temperatures and at high magnetic ﬁelds is shown in
Fig. 6. Here, an emitter and receiver, each coupled by
20 meters of optical ﬁber, are mounted on the cryogenic
probe and loaded in the variable-temperature insert of an
18 T superconducting magnet. The emitter and receiver
are driven by 1.5 mW and 2.4 mW of average laser power,
respectively. The receiver current is ampliﬁed (107 V/A)
and sent directly to a digitizing oscilloscope. The ampli-
tude of the measured THz signal varies only slightly upon
cooldown from 300K to 1.6K, exhibiting a weak maxi-
mum near 100K. The bandwidth of the THz radiation
is unchanged by temperature. THz emitters fabricated
on standard semi-insulating GaAs substrates are found
to exhibit a much more pronounced temperature depen-
dence, in accord with recent studies by Markelz20, where
the changes are ascribed to the strongly temperature-
dependent mobility of electrons in GaAs. The arrival
times of the emitter and receiver optical pulses do vary
slightly with temperature, presumably due to unequal
lengths of thermally-contracted optical ﬁber in the cryo-
genic environment, and this causes a small temporal
(phase) shift in the measured THz electric ﬁeld, as can be
seen in Fig. 6a at 90K and 2.2K. Because the THz am-
plitude and phase do vary slightly with temperature, the
use of back-to-back sample and reference scans at each
new temperature (and magnetic ﬁeld) is necessary to ex-
tract quantitative conductivity data. Fig. 6b shows the
performance of the emitter/receiver pair (now immersed
in 1.6K superﬂuid helium) as a function of magnetic ﬁeld
up to 17 T. The amplitude of the THz electric ﬁeld is

6

s
w
1

0.1

)
.
u
.
a
(
 
r
e
w
o
p
 
z
H
T

0.01

T=1.6K

1T

1.5T

0.5T

2T

2.5T

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

1

Frequency (THz)

3T
1.2 1.4

FIG. 9. Low-ﬁeld dependence of the power spectrum of
the raw time-domain THz data upon passage through a
high-mobility 2D electron gas at 1.6K. Strong absorption res-
onances correspond to cyclotron motion. Sample courtesy of
M. Lilly (Sandia National Laboratory).

Data
To demonstrate the utility of the ﬁber-coupled THz
antennas, preliminary results on two material systems
are shown in Fig.
8 and 9. Here, the experimental
probe is loaded into a cryogenic vacuum can in the bore
of a 7 T superconducting solenoid. Figure 8 shows the
imaginary part of the measured THz conductivity of a
high-temperature superconducting YBCO ﬁlm (50 nm
thick, Tc ∼85K). At low temperatures (Fig. 8a), the 1/ω
conductivity from the Drude-like response of supercon-
ducting particles with inﬁnite scattering time is clearly
observed. With increasing temperature above Tc this
conductivity falls rapidly, indicating the disappearance
of phase coherent superconductivity, in agreement with
previous works5,22. Fig. 8b shows that similar behavior
is observed as a function of magnetic ﬁeld for tempera-
tures below Tc, indicating again that superconductivity
is being suppressed, but this time by the application of
magnetic ﬁeld rather than temperature. By using applied
magnetic ﬁelds to suppress the superconducting state,
these studies will permit investigation of the terahertz
complex conductivity of the interesting normal state of
high-Tc superconductors at low temperatures below the
zero-ﬁeld Tc, where transport (zero frequency) measure-
ments in pulsed ﬁelds have yielded a rich behavior9.

Lastly, Fig. 9 shows data on a very diﬀerent system;
namely, a very high mobility 2-dimensional electron gas
(µ = 107 cm2/V-s) formed at a GaAs/AlGaAs hetero-
junction. Here, the raw power spectrum of the transmit-
ted THz pulse is shown in the low-ﬁeld regime where the
electron cyclotron energy falls within the THz detection
bandwidth. Clear oscillations in the time-domain data
(not shown) correspond to the observed cyclotron absorp-

tion resonance, which evolves with the expected behav-
ior (¯hωc = eB/m∗c = 1.73 meV/T = 420 GHz/Tesla).
The additional oscillations in the power spectrum are
an artifact arising from a multiple reﬂection of the THz
pulse which appears ∼12 ps later in the time domain, and
which may be avoided by stacking additional “dummy”
wafers of GaAs onto the back of the 2DEG sample. Com-
bined with a carrier density modulation scheme23 that is
synchronized with the scanning retroreﬂector and digi-
tizer, very sensitive density- and ﬁeld-dependent stud-
ies of the THz conductivity of ultraclean 2D electron
systems in the fractional quantum Hall regime may be
performed, providing deeper insight into the dynamics
and interactions of composite fermions (although gener-
ally such studies require millikelvin temperatures and the
present apparatus would require adaptation to a dilution
refrigerator.)

S.A.C. gratefully acknowledges A. J. Taylor for involve-
ment in this project, and M. Hanson and A. C. Gossard
(UCSB) for the ErAs/GaAs material. This work was
supported by the NHMFL In-House Research Program.

1 P. R. Smith, D. H. Auston, and M. C. Nuss, IEEE J. Quant.

Elect. QE-24, 255 (1988).

2 C. Fattinger and D. Grischkowsky, Appl. Phys. Lett.
54, 490 (1989); M. van Exeter, C. Fattinger, and D.
Grischkowsky, Appl. Phys. Lett. 55, 337 (1989); N.
Katzenellenbogen and D. Grischkowsky, Appl. Phys. Lett.
58, 222 (1991).

3 D. Grischkowsky, S. Keiding, M. van Exeter, and C. Fat-

tinger, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 7, 2006 (1990).

4 M. C. Nuss et al., J. Appl. Phys. 70, 2238 (1991);
5 See, e.g., M. C. Nuss et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 58, 2561
(1991); A. Frenkel et al., Phys. Rev. B 54, 1355 (1996); J.
Corson et al., Nature 398, 221 (1999).

6 J. E. Pedersen and S. R. Keiding, IEEE J. Quant. Elect.
28, 2518 (1992); D. M. Mittleman et al., Chem. Phys. Lett.
275, 332 (1997).

7 R. A. Cheville and D. Grischkowsky, Optics Lett. 20, 1646

(1995).

8 H. Harde, N. Katzenellenbogen, and D. Grischkowsky, J.
Opt. Soc. Am. B, 11, 1018 (1994). D. M. Mittleman et al.,
Appl. Phys. B, B67, 379 (1998).

9 G. S. Boebinger et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 5417 (1996);

S. Ono et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 638 (2000).

10 M. Jaime et al., Nature 405, 160 (2000); G. S. Boebinger,
A. Passner, P.C. Canﬁeld, Z. Fisk, Physica B 21, 227
(1995).

11 Y. Tokura and N. Nagaosa, Science 288, 462 (2000).
12 S. Uji et al., Nature 410, 908 (2001); L. Balicas et al., Phys.

Rev. Lett. 87, 067002 (2001).

13 P. J. Burke, J. P. Eisenstein, L. N. Pfeiﬀer, K. W. West,

Rev. Sci. Inst. 73, 130 (2002).

14 S. Shen and A. M. Weiner, IEEE Photon. Tech. Lett. 11,

7

827 (1999); C. C. Chang, H. P. Sardesai and A. Weiner,
Optics Lett. 23, 283 (1998).

15 B. R. Washburn, J. A. Buck, and S. E. Ralph, Optics Lett.,

16 S. W. Clark, F. Ilday, and F. W. Wise, Optics Lett. 26,

25, 445 (2000).

1320 (2001).

17 I. Brener et al., Optics Lett. 21, 1924 (1996); Y. Cai et al.,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 2076 (1997).

18 C. Kadow et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 3548 (1999); C.
Kadow et al., Physica E 7, 97 (2000); C. Kadow et al.,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 76, 3510 (2000).

19 www.picometrix.com; see also J. V. Rudd, D. Zimdars, M.

Warmuth, Proc. of the SPIE 3934, 27 (2000).

20 A. Markelz and E. J. Heilweil, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72, 2229

21 S. A. Crooker et al., Phys. Rev. B 60, R2173 (1999).
22 R. D. Averitt et al., Phys. Rev. B 63, 140502 (2001).
23 D. Some and A. Nurmikko, Appl. Phys. Lett. 65, 3377

(1998).

(1994).

8

