2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Multi-energy techniques for radiographic
monitoring of chemical composition

S.V. Naydenov, V.D. Ryzhikov
Institute for Single Crystals of NAS of Ukraine,
60 Lenin ave., 61001 Kharkov, Ukraine

February 2, 2008

Abstract

A theoretical model of multi-energy radiography (MER) are proposed. It
is shown that, as distinct from the conventional radiography, MER allows
identiﬁcation of organic substances and control of their chemical composition.
Broad prospects are noted for MER application, speciﬁcally, for detection
of prohibited substances (explosives, drugs, etc.) during customs and anti-
terrorist safety inspection.
Key-words: multi-energy radiography, non-destructive testing
PACS numbers: 07.85.-m ; 81.70.Jb ; 87.59.Bh ; 95.75.Rs

1 Introduction

Modern radiography [1] is among the most important application ﬁelds of X-ray and
gamma-radiation in science, technology and medicine. Radiographic control is indis-
pensable for reconstruction of internal spatial structure of tested objects. However,
rather often it is also needed to control their chemical composition. This problem
is especially acute when organic substances of similar absorption properties are to
be distinguished. Solution of this problem would be of considerable help for ﬁne
studies of multiplier and multi-component macro- and microstructures, media and
mixtures, as well as for medical diagnostics of biological tissues. In this respect, prin-
cipally new possibilities are opened by the development of multi-energy radiography
(MER). As distinct from the conventional radiography, here radiation is detected
at several characteristic energies in several separated ranges. For these purposes, a
special design [2] is convenient, using linear or planar systems of combined scintil-
lation detectors, each of which predominantly detects low-energy (ZnSe : T e), or
middle-energy (CsI : T l), or high energy radiation (heavy oxides). Such systems
have been technically realized [3], and are intensely used. However, theory of MER
is only beginning its development. In this paper, a theoretical model is proposed,
and the most typical MER schemes are considered. It is shown that, as distinct from
the conventional radiography, 2-MER is capable not only of qualitatively discerning
organic materials from inorganic materials, but can quantitatively identify them.

1

2 Model of Radiography

Radiography is described with a simple physical model. X-ray and gamma-
radiation are absorbed exponentially. Therefore, it is convenient to introduce the
reﬂex R = ln (F0 /F ), where F0 and F are detected output ﬂux in the background
mode and after scanning of elementary cross-section of the object of thickness T .
Let components Xj of the “radiographic state vector” determine the chemical com-
position. We will use the known formulas describing absorption cross-sections for
photo-eﬀect, Compton scattering and pair production. Then unknown Xj are re-
lated by a certain dependence to physical parameters: eﬀective atomic number Z,
density ρ and surface density σ = ρ T , relative partial coeﬃcients ak of simple el-
ements of a complex compound. The reﬂex of a digitized signal after detection at
speciﬁed radiation energies Ei is presented in a linear form

Ri = R(Ei) =

MijXj; i = 1, . . . , M ,

(1)

M

Xj=1

where M is the multi-polarity of MER and Mij is matrix determined by the mon-
Its components depend upon Ei and certain constants of the
itoring conditions.
absorption dependence on energy. The most readily accessible is testing of single-
layered objects of constant thickness and rectangular geometry. Generalizations in-
voke no diﬃculties. To obtain higher MER eﬃciency, one should improve monochro-
maticity Ei = const of separately detected signals, putting at the same time apart
the Ei1 6= Ei2 ranges. The separation can be made using a system of ﬁlters or
choosing X-ray sources of diﬀerent characteristic energies. A corresponding selec-
tion should be carried out also for detectors. Each of them should detect radiation
ﬂux of a characteristic energy, Fi = F (Ei). Block design of MER is presented in
ﬁg. 1. To reconstruct chemical composition, an inverse problem is to be solved, i.e.,
determination of Xj from Ri data. The higher is the multi-polarity M ≥ 2, the
larger quantity of information on the object can be obtained.

There are several MER designs, depending upon the multi-polarity M and char-
acter of absorption channels. Besides this, some of physical parameters of the object
may be considered known from other measurements (e.g., thickness can be deter-
mined from tomography) or varying only weakly (density of organic substances),
etc. Then, for a quantitative monitoring, it is suﬃcient to determine only the most
essential of Xj. For rough distinction between organic and inorganic substances,
one can limit oneself to reconstruction only of Z. For a more complete control of
organic substances, content ak of the composing elements should be established:
carbon C, nitrogen N and oxygen O. To detect an explosive, it is often suﬃcient to
ﬁnd concentration of N and O [4].

3 Control of chemical composition

In the case of 2-MER from the system (1) eﬀective Z is reconstructed:

Z =

1σ1r1 − zq
zq
z1σ1r1 − z2σ2r2 (cid:21)

2σ2r2

(cid:20)

1
q−1

;

2

(2)

Figure 1: Design of MER with reconstruction of “phase coordinates” of the object
X.

r1 = (c12R2 − c22R1) ; r2 = (c11R2 − c21R1) ,

(3)

where q = 4 and q = 2 for monitoring in the region of photo-eﬀect or pair formation,
respectively; ci j = R (Ei; zj, σj) are test data of measurements using two (j = 1, 2)
samples of the known composition (zj; σj = ρj Tj) and thickness Tj. This allows
quantitative distinction between organic and inorganic substances (e.g., discerning
metal and explosive).

For 2-radiography we derive, from the appropriate equations of 2-radiography,
expressions for partial fractions of the elements with speciﬁed atomic numbers Z1
and Z2 (Z1 6= Z2):

a1,2 =

Z1,2
Z1 − Z2 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

f1,2(R1, R2; ci j);

a1 + a2 = 1 ;

(4)

f1,2 =

; N1 = d12r1 − d22r2; N2 = d11r1 − d21r2; D = D1r1 − D2r2;

(5)

N1,2
D

D1(2) = z1(2)σ1(2)

Z 3

1(2) − z3

1(2)

+ Z 2

1(2)Z2(1) + Z1(2)Z 2

2(1) + Z 3

2(1)

;

(cid:2)(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

d11; d12
d21; d22 (cid:19)

=

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

z1σ1 (Z 3
z2σ2 (Z 3

1 − z3
1 − z3

1);
2);

z1σ1 (Z 3
z2σ2 (Z 3

2 − z3
1)
2 − z3
2) (cid:19)

.

(6)

(7)

Expressions (4)–(7) can be used for identiﬁcation of organic compounds that are
close to each other as for their eﬀective atomic number Z (e.g., distinguishing be-
tween explosives and plastics). Formulas include only reﬂexes R1,2 and test data
(ci j and Z1,2). Thus, the theoretical expressions are self-contained and convenient
for practical calculations in MER applications.

3

4 Conclusions

Technological realization of the above-described speciﬁc schemes of 2-MER makes
it possible to quantitatively distinguish organic compounds and to determine their
chemical formulas. Chemical composition monitoring of organic compounds is a key
to detection of prohibited and dangerous substances (explosives, drugs, biological
substances) in the ﬁght against illegal traﬃc and terrorism, to ensure safety of the
passengers. Development of MER is useful for higher eﬃciency of non-destructive
testing and diagnostics of combined and complex objects, pipelines, units, junctions,
etc., because quantitative monitoring of eﬀective atomic number and density sub-
stantially improves contrast sensitivity of the non-destructive testing. In medicine,
MER opens new possibilities for separate diagnostics of soft and hard tissues, more
precise determination of a misbalance of chemical elements (e.g., diagnostics of Os-
teoporosis at low concentration of calcium in bone tissues), etc. In remote control,
MER can be used for chemical composition analysis of distant objects in astro-
physics, or of environmental media, including atmosphere, in ecology.

References

[1] 15th WCNDT, Rome (Italy), Oct. 15-21, 2000, Abstracts Book, 800 p.

[2] R.M. Harrison, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A310 (1991) 24.

[3] Heimann Systems, Prospects, Germany, http://www.heimannsystems.com .

[4] L. Grodzins, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B36/37 (1991) 829.

4

