2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using jjap.cls <ver.1.0.1>

Application of the Mesh Experiment for the Back-Illuminated
CCD: I. Experiment and the Charge Cloud Shape

Emi Miyata, Masami Miki, Junko Hiraga, Hirohiko Kouno, Kazutoshi Yasui, Hiroshi
Tsunemi, Kazuhisa Miyaguchi2, and Kouei Yamamoto2

Department of Earth & Space Science, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University,
1-1 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan
1 Solid State Division, Hamamatsu Photonics K.K.,
1126-1 Ichino-cho, Hamamatsu City 435-8558, Japan

(Received

)

We have employed a mesh experiment for back-illuminated (BI) CCDs. BI CCDs

possess the same structure to those of FI CCDs. Since X-ray photons enter from the back

surface of the CCD, a primary charge cloud is formed far from the electrodes. The primary

charge cloud expands through diﬀusion process until it reaches the potential well that is

just below the electrodes. Therefore, the diﬀusion time for the charge cloud produced is

longer than that in the FI CCD, resulting a larger charge cloud shape expected.

The mesh experiment enables us to specify the X-ray point of interaction with a subpixel

resolution. We then have measured a charge cloud shape produced in the BI CCD. We

found that there are two components of the charge cloud shape having diﬀerent size:

a narrow component and a broad component. The size of the narrow component is

2.8 − 5.7 µm in unit of a standard deviation and strongly depends on the attenuation

length in Si of incident X-rays. The shorter the attenuation length of X-rays is, the larger

the charge cloud becomes. This result is qualitatively consistent with a diﬀusion model

inside the CCD. On the other hand, the size of the broad component is roughly constant

of ≃ 13 µm and does not depend on X-ray energies. Judging from the design value of

the CCD and the fraction of each component, we conclude that the narrow component is

originated in the depletion region whereas the broad component is in the ﬁeld-free region.

KEYWORDS: charge-coupled device, X-ray event, split event, subpixel spatial resolution,

mesh experiment

1

1. Introduction

A charge-coupled device (CCD) is widely used in an optical imaging as well as an X-ray

imaging. When an X-ray photon is photoabsorbed in the CCD, it generates a primary

charge cloud consisting of thousands of electrons. The size of the primary charge cloud is

73×(E/2.3 keV)1.75 nm where E is energy of X-ray photon in unit of keV.1) The primary

charge cloud expands through diﬀusion process until they reach the potential well of the

CCD pixel. The ﬁnal charge cloud after diﬀusion process is collected into several pixels

forming various types of event pattern depending on how they split.

We have developed a new technique “mesh experiment” which enables us to restrict

the X-ray point of interaction with a subpixel resolution.2) Hiraga et al.3) investigated

the event pattern produced and measured the charge cloud shape produced in the front-

illuminated (FI) CCD for the ﬁrst time. They found that a charge cloud shape could

be well represented by a Gaussian function. They also obtained the standard deviation,

σ, of the ﬁnal charge cloud to be 0.7 ∼ 1.5 µm for 1.5 ∼ 4.5 keV X-rays by using a FI

CCD. Based on this experiment, they conﬁrmed that there are three parameters tightly

coupled together;4) an X-ray point of interaction within a pixel, an X-ray event pattern

and a charge cloud shape. Any two parameters can determine the third one. The event

pattern is quite easily noticed while the charge cloud shape is diﬃcult to be measured.

Currently, they can separately measure it only by using the mesh experiment. Therefore,

they can determine the X-ray point of interaction with much better spatial resolution

than the pixel size. They obtained the position resolution of 0.7 µm using the pixel size of

12 µm if an X-ray photon became a split pixel event. However, due to its relatively small

size of the charge cloud, the fraction of split pixel events whose point of interaction can

be improved is less than 10 % of the total events.

In this paper, we applied the mesh experiment to the back-illuminated (BI) CCD.

Figure 1 shows the cross-section and the potential proﬁle of FI CCDs.

In the case of

FI CCDs, since X-ray photons enter from the front side where there are electrodes. A

major part of X-rays are photo-absorbed close to electrodes, resulting a ﬁnal charge cloud

to be relatively small. Figure 2 shows the cross-section and the potential proﬁle of BI

2

CCDs. In the case of BI CCDs, a substrate of CCD, shown in Fig 1 (a), is etched from

the back toward the depletion layer (thinning process) in order to achieve high quantum

eﬃciency for blue lights and low energy X-rays. After the thinning process, almost all

of the substrate has been removed. The thickness of the BI CCD employed is ≃ 20 µm.

Since X-ray photons enter from the back surface of the CCD shown in Fig 2, a primary

charge cloud is formed far from the electrodes. The primary charge cloud expands through

diﬀusion process until they reach the potential well which is just below the electrodes.

Therefore, the diﬀusion time for the charge cloud generated by X-rays is longer than those

in the FI CCD, resulting that a larger charge cloud shape is expected.

Low energy X-rays, however, are photo-absorbed in the ﬁeld-free region of BI CCDs.

The primary charge cloud expands due to a diﬀusion process toward the electrodes as

well as the back surface. The charge traveled to the back surface will be lost due to a

recombination process. In the production of BI CCDs, accumulation is the most signiﬁcant

process that gives an internal potential to the back surface of CCDs and repels the signal

charge to the electrodes.5) In the case of the BI CCD employed, the accumulation process

is performed by ion implantation.6) As shown in Fig 2 (b), the potential at close to the

back surface is locally lower than that at the inner region caused by the accumulation

process which enables us to collect the charge generated close the back surface.

2. Experiment and Results

The basic idea and the algorithm of data reconstruction for the mesh experiment are

given in Tsunemi et al.2) We performed mesh experiment employing a BI CCD (S7170)

fabricated by Hamamatsu Photonics K.K. The BI CCD has a two-phase electrode and

full-frame transfer type. It possesses 512×512 active pixels with a size of 24 µm square.

The mesh made of gold has small holes of 2.1 µm diameter with spaced 48 µm apart. The

pitch of mesh holes is twice larger than that of the CCD pixel. The mesh is placed just

5 mm above the CCD. We employed the 21 m long X-ray beam line in our laboratory.

We used the X-ray generator of Ultra-X18, fabricated by RIGAKU, with Al, Mo, and Ti

targets in order to irradiate the characteristic emission line of each target: Al-K (1.5 keV),

Mo-L (2.3 keV), and Ti-K (4.5 keV). We applied the voltage of 6, 5, and 7 kV for Al, Mo,

3

and Ti target, respectively. We used a mechanical shutter made of stainless steel having

thickness of 60 µm to control the X-ray beam so that the pile-up would not become a

serious eﬀect. We drove the BI CCD with our newly-developed system named E-NA

system.7) The CCD analog data were processed by an integration-type circuit8) and

digital data were acquired with a VME system. We controlled the operating temperature

of the CCD to be −100 ◦C during the experiment.

Figure 3 shows X-ray spectra of single-pixel events obtained with three targets em-

ployed. The readout noise of our system is ≃ 20 e−rms. Each spectrum shows the char-

acteristic emission line superimposed on the continuum emission. We should note that

the peak channel of Mo-L emission line is close to that of Al-K emission line whereas the

We selected events between two dashed lines shown in Fig 3 in the subsequent analysis.

energy is quite diﬀerent.

2.1 Event pattern

Figure 4 shows a part of a raw image obtained with single-pixel events. We can see a

clear moir´e pattern. Based on the moir´e pattern obtained, we can determine the geomet-

rical relation between the mesh and the CCD. Details of the method are given in Tsunemi

et al.9)

Once we ﬁnd their relations, we can determine the X-ray point of interaction within a

pixel for all X-ray events. We thus rearranged each X-ray event with a subpixel resolution

and investigated the distribution of single-pixel event, two-pixel split event, three- and

four-pixel split event and more extended events as a function of the point of interaction

inside a pixel. Figure 5 shows their X-ray intensity maps in 3×3 representative pixels

(RP) for Mo-L X-rays. Each black dot corresponds to an individual X-ray event. When

X-ray photons enter the center of a pixel, a major part of them produce single-pixel

events shown in (a). When the X-ray point of interaction becomes close to the horizontal

or vertical boundary of each pixel, the horizontally or vertically two-pixel split events are

formed shown in (b) or (c). When an X-ray photon enters the corner of each pixel, it

produces three- or four-pixel split event shown in (d). This tendency is consistent with

that obtained for the FI CCD.10) However, we found that the regions forming the three-

4

and four-pixel split events become larger and extend into inner region than FI results (e.g.

Figure 7 of Tsunemi et al.9)) whereas the pixel size of the BI CCD employed is 24 µm

that is two times larger than that of the FI CCD. This suggests that a charge cloud size

produced in the BI CCD is much larger than that of the FI CCD. This fact is clariﬁed in

Fig 5 (e) since a charge cloud spreads into more than four pixels even if an X-ray enters

the center of a pixel.

2.2 Absorption structure of BI CCDs

As shown in Fig 1, X-ray photons enter from the electrodes in the case of FI CCDs. The

thickness of electrodes is not uniform and some part of electrodes is overlapped, resulting

the detection eﬃciency within a pixel to be far from uniform.2, 11–13) It makes it diﬃcult

to make the response matrix of FI CCDs.

As to the BI CCDs, on the other hand, X-ray photons enter from the back surface

where the thickness of the ﬁeld-free region is much thinner than those of FI CCDs shown in

Fig 2. The potential created by the accumulation process also drives the charge generated

in the ﬁeld-free region toward the electrodes, resulting higher detection eﬃciency for low

energy X-rays. Since the thickness of the back surface of CCDs is uniform, we can expect

a uniform detection eﬃciencies within pixels for BI CCDs. Figure 6 shows the X-ray

intensity map extracted from all X-ray events in 3×3 RPs for Mo-L X-rays. There is no

signiﬁcant variation in each image, demonstrating the uniform detection eﬃciency of the

BI CCD. We also conﬁrmed uniformity for Al-K and Ti-K X-rays. The non-uniformities

in detection eﬃciency are ≃ 2.5, 2.0, and 7.2 % in a standard deviation for Al-K, Mo-L,

and Ti-K X-rays, respectively. This uniformity is a large advantageous point of BI CCDs

over FI CCDs. We should note that the uniformity of Ti-K X-rays is lower than those of

other X-rays. It must be due to the fact that the mean attenuation length of Ti-K X-rays

is long enough for X-ray point of interaction to be aﬀected by electrodes.

5

2.3 Amount of charge collected in a center pixel

When X-rays enter the CCD at the position of (Xp, Yp), the output of the nth pixel of

the CCD, Pn(Xp, Yp), is written as

Pn(Xp, Yp) =

Xn+1

Yn+1

Z

Xn

dX

Z

Yn

dY f (X − Xp, Y − Yp)

where (Xn, Xn+1, Yn, Yn+1) denotes the boundary of the nth pixel and f (X, Y ) is the

charge cloud shape just before the collection by the potential well. The actual output of

nth pixel, Dn(Xin, Yin), is a convolution between Pn(Xp, Yp) and the mesh hole, which can

be described by

Dn(Xin, Yin) =

dXp Z

Z

dYp Pn(Xp, Yp) H(Xin − Xp, Yin − Yp)

Xn+1

Yn+1

=

Z

Xn

dX

Z

Yn

dY f ⊗ H(X − Xin, Y − Yin)

(2.1)

(2.2)

where (Xin, Yin) is the center of mesh hole, H(X, Y ) is a typical hole shape of the mesh,

and f ⊗ H represents the convolution between f and H.

We can experimentally measure Dn(Xin, Yin) by using the RP generated with all X-ray

events. Figure 7 show the surface proﬁles and projected proﬁles of Dn in 3×3 pixel regions

where the center pixel is nth pixel for Mo-L, Al-K, and Ti-K X-rays.

Hiraga et al.3) measured Dn for the FI CCD for the ﬁrst time and found a ﬂat-top

feature around the center of nth pixel. This is due to the fact that the charge collected

in the nth pixel is almost constant, forming single-pixel events, when a mesh hole is well

within the pixel. Dn obtained with Ti-K for the BI CCD has relatively ﬂat top at the

center of pixel. On the other hand, Dn shows a sharp structure even near the center of

pixel in Mo-L and Al-K X-rays, suggesting that a charge splits into neighboring pixels

even if X-rays enter near the center of the pixel. We can again expect that a charge cloud

size produced in the BI CCD is much larger than that of the FI CCD. It is interesting

to note that a ﬂat-top feature obtained only with Ti-K X-rays suggests that a size of the

charge cloud of Ti-K X-rays is smaller than those obtained with Mo-L and Al-K, which

is in contrast to those obtained with FI CCDs.10)

6

2.4 Charge cloud shape

Hiraga et al.3) calculated a charge cloud shape by diﬀerentiating Dn (we hereafter

refereed to the diﬀerential method). As shown in Fig 7, however, we cannot obtain a

charge cloud shape with the diﬀerential method since Dn does not show a ﬂat-top feature

for the BI CCD. We then employed a diﬀerent approach to obtain a charge cloud shape.

As written in eq 2.1, Dn is an integration of convolution between a charge cloud shape

and a mesh hole within a CCD pixel. We directly calculate their convolution to reproduce

Dn for each energy assuming a charge cloud shape to be a two-dimensional axial-symmetric

Gaussian function3) (the integral method, hereafter). We should note that we have applied

the integral method to the FI data and obtained consistent results to those obtained by

the diﬀerential method. We found, however, a diﬃculty to reproduce Dn with the integral

method. The problem is that our method cannot reproduce a sharp component and a tail

component, simultaneously. Such a tail component is detected for all energies whereas it

was not detected with FI CCD.3) The presence of an tail component suggests a large size

of a charge cloud which must be much larger than that forming a sharp component. As

shown in Fig 5 (e), the events spreading more than 4 pixel is uniformly distributed within

a pixel. These events should account for such tail components.

We thus introduce an extra component to ﬁt the data. We employed two components

in the charge cloud shape having diﬀerent size in both axes: a narrow component for

the sharp structure and a broad component for the tail structure. In this way, we found

that the two-component model in the integral method well reproduced Dn obtained. The

model functions of Dn are shown in Fig 8. Table I summarizes the charge cloud sizes

of two components for all energies. Figure 9 shows the size of the charge cloud for both

components as a function of the X-ray attenuation length in Si.

The broad component of the charge cloud is 2.5 − 5 times larger than that of the nar-

row component. The size of the narrow component decreases as the attenuation length

increases whereas that of the broad component is relatively constant of ∼ 13 µm. Com-

paring the FI results,10) the sizes for the narrow and the broad component are 2−8 times

larger and an order of magnitude larger, respectively. The number of X-ray events of the

broad component is ∼ 3 times larger than that of the narrow component.

7

3. Discussion

3.1 Non-linearity of pulse height versus energy

As shown in Fig 3, the pulse height of each characteristic X-ray line does not linearly

increase with energy. Figure 10 shows their relationship between the pulse height and the

incident X-ray energy. The pulse height of Mo-L is ≃ 30 % lower than that expected from

the linear relationship based on Al-K and Ti-K X-rays as shown by a solid line. This is

quite a diﬀerent characteristics of the BI CCD to the FI CCD.

The attenuation length of Mo-L X-rays is only 2.2 µm that is the shortest among X-rays

employed. Therefore, most of Mo-L X-rays are absorbed close to the accumulation region,

where the density of impurities is an order of magnitude larger than that in the depletion

region, leading to the recombination between impurities and signal charge. We thus

suppose that the non-linearity of pulse height versus energy is caused by an incomplete

collection of the signal charge produced in the accumulation or some part of the ﬁeld-free

region.

3.2 Origin of the two components of charge cloud

We found that there were two components in a charge cloud shape generated by the

BI CCD. A narrow components has a σ of 2.8 − 5.7 µm which strongly depends on the

incident X-ray energy. The size of a broad component is relatively constant of ≃ 13 µm

having less dependence on the X-ray energy whereas such a component is not appeared

in the FI CCD.3)

As to BI CCDs, X-rays entering from the back surface of the CCD form a primary

charge cloud far from the electrodes. The primary charge cloud expands through diﬀusion

process until they reach the potential well which is just below the electrodes. Therefore,

a diﬀusion time for the charge cloud produced by low energy X-rays is longer than that

by high energy X-rays, resulting a larger size of charge cloud shape for low energy X-rays.

This relation is consistent with that obtained for a narrow component. However, we found

that the size of the broad component is almost independent of the incident X-ray energy.

As shown in Figs 1 (b) and 2 (b), the potential proﬁles of FI and BI CCDs are diﬀerent

in the ﬁeld-free region. A charge generated in the ﬁeld-free region can be collected only

8

through the diﬀusion process in FI CCDs. On the other hand, the potential created by the

accumulation drives the charge generated in the ﬁeld-free region toward electrodes in the

BI CCD. Therefore, a charge generated both in the depletion region and in the ﬁeld-free

region can be collected in the BI CCD. With taking into account the diﬀerence in the

charge cloud size for both components, we suppose that an X-ray photo-absorbed in the

depletion region can be detected as a narrow component whereas an X-ray photo-absorbed

in the ﬁeld-free region can be detected as a broad component.

Miyata et al.8) measured the thickness of the depletion depth of FI CCD having similar

wafer as that of the BI CCD employed to be ≃ 4 µm. Since the thickness of the BI

CCD employed is 20 µm, thickness of the ﬁeld-free region is ≃ 16 µm. This value is in

good agreement with the charge cloud size of the broad component if the charge cloud

expands spherically in the ﬁeld-free region. Moreover, as shown in Table I, the fraction

of the broad component obtained is ∼ 3 times larger than that of the narrow component,

which is also consistent with the ratio of thickness between the ﬁeld-free region and the

depletion region. These facts strongly support that a broad component is originated in

the ﬁeld-free region.

3.3 Asymmetry of the charge cloud shape

The charge cloud size obtained with the BI CCD is shown in Table I. Both for the

narrow and broad components, the charge cloud shapes are almost point symmetric. The

diﬀerence in both directions is less than 5 %. This is also noticed that Dn obtained for

three energies shown in Fig 7 show a quite point-symmetric shape.

Hiraga et al.3) pointed out that a charge cloud shape obtained for the FI CCD shows

an asymmetric shape. The size in unit of the standard deviation for the x-direction

was 1.4 µm whereas that for the y-direction was 0.7 − 0.8 µm. Tsunemi et al.14) further

investigated the possible explanations about the asymmetry of the charge cloud shape.

They conclude that the asymmetry is due not to the experimental setup, such as the

asymmetric mesh hole, but to the asymmetry of the electric ﬁeld inside the CCD. Similar

asymmetry has obtained for some other FI CCDs.10, 11) Therefore, the asymmetric shape

of the charge cloud is commonly found in FI CCDs.

9

On the other hand, we obtained a symmetric shape of the charge cloud generated inside

the BI CCD for all three X-rays. The back surface of CCDs are uniform and is normally

applied to be zero voltage. At the front side, there are four electrodes per pixel in our

case and they are slightly overlapped to each other as shown in Fig 1 (a). Moreover,

at the front side, there is another gate structure, “channel stop”, which forms the pixel

boundary along the y-direction. All these gate structures generate the electric ﬁeld not to

be uniform near the front electrodes as pointed out by Tsunemi et al.14) The symmetry of

the charge cloud obtained with BI CCD suggests that a charge cloud must not be aﬀected

by the electrodes signiﬁcantly because it is generated far from the electrodes.

4. Conclusion

We have performed the mesh experiment with the BI CCD and measured the charge

cloud size for the ﬁrst time. We found that there are two components of the charge cloud

shape to reproduce the data obtained all for Mo-L, Al-K and Ti X-rays: a narrow com-

ponent and a broad component. The narrow component possesses a σ of 2.8 − 5.7 µm

which strongly depends on the attenuation lengths of incident X-ray energies. The broad

component, on the other hand, possesses much larger σ than that of the narrow compo-

nent. It is ≃ 13 µm and almost independent of the attenuation length of X-rays. The

accumulation technique to fabricate BI CCDs is not employed in the FI CCDs and the

charge produced even in the ﬁeld-free region can be collected toward electrodes. We thus

suppose that the narrow and the broad components are originated in the depletion region

and the ﬁeld-free region, respectively. This hypothesis is consistent with both by the

design value of the CCD and by the fraction of X-ray events for both components.

We have found that the linearity between the incident X-ray energies and the pulse

height is not good. The pulse height of Mo-L X-rays is ≃ 30 % lower than that expected.

This might be explained by the fact that the eﬀect of the recombination with the impurities

is signiﬁcant in the accumulation region since the attenuation length of Mo-L is shortest

among those X-rays employed.

10

Acknowledgement

J.H. is partially supported by JSPS Research Fellowship for Young Scientists, Japan.

This work is partly supported by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research by the Ministry

of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (13874032, 13440062).

11

References

1) T.E. Everhart and P.H. Hoﬀ: J. Appl. Phys. 42 (1971) 5837.

2) H. Tsunemi, K. Yoshita and S. Kitamoto: Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 36 (1997) 2906.

3) J. Hiraga, H. Tsunemi, K. Yoshita, E. Miyata and M. Ohtani: Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.

37 (1998) 4627.

4) H. Tsunemi, J. Hiraga and E. Miyata: Nucl. Instrum. and Method, 477 (2002) 155.

5) J. Janesick, T. Elliott, T. Daud and J. McCarthy: Proc SPIE 570 (1985) 46.

6) M. Muramatsu, H. Akahori, K. Shibayama, S. Nakamura and K. Yamamoto: Proc

7) E. Miyata, C. Natsukari, D. Akutsu, T. Kamazuka, M. Nomachi and M. Ozaki: Nucl.

SPIE 3019 (1997) 2.

Instrum. and Method, 459 (2001) 157.

8) E. Miyata, C. Natsukari, T. Kamazuka, H. Kouno, H. Tsunemi, M. Matsuoka, H.

Tomida, S. Ueno, K. Hamaguchi and I. Tanaka: Nucl. Instrum. and Method, (2002)

in press.

2734 .

9) H. Tsunemi, J. Hiraga, K. Yoshita and S. Kitamoto: Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 37 (1998)

10) H. Tsunemi, J. Hiraga and E. Miyata: Nucl. Instrum. and Method, 436 (1999) 32.

11) K. Yoshita, H. Tsunemi, E. Miyata, K.C. Gendreau and M.W. Bautz: IEEE Trans.

Electron Devices, 46 (1999) 100.

12) M. J. Pivovaroﬀ, S. Jones, M. W. Bautz, S. Kissel, G. Prigozhin, G. Ricker, H. Tsunemi

and E. Miyata: IEEE Trans. NS, 45 (1998) 164.

13) J. Hiraga, H. Tsunemi, A.D. Short, A.F.Abbey, P.J. Bennie and M.J.L. Turner: Nucl.

Instrum. and Method, 465 (1999) 384.

14) H. Tsunemi, J. Hiraga, K. Yoshita and E. Miyata: Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 38 (1999) 2953.

12

Figure captions

Fig. 1.

(a) Cross-section and (b) potential proﬁle of a FI CCD.

Fig. 2. Same as Fig 1 but for a BI CCD.

Fig. 3. X-ray spectra obtained with targets of (a) Al, (b) Mo, and (c) Ti. Each charac-

teristic emission lines are identiﬁed. The dotted lines show the ranges employed for

analysis.

Fig. 4. A part of the raw image (200 × 200 pixels) extracted from the single-pixel events

of Mo-L X-rays. Each dot shows an X-ray event. A clear Moire pattern can be seen.

Since the pitch of the mesh hole is two times that of the CCD pixel, we ﬁnd X-ray

events appeared in every 2×2 pixels.

Fig. 5. X-ray intensity map of (a) single-pixel events, (b) horizontally two-pixel split

events, (c) vertically two-pixel split events in 3×3 RPs, (d) three- and four-pixel split

events, and (e) more extended events with the subpixel resolution. The dotted lines

show the pixel boundary.

Fig. 6. X-ray intensity map extracted from all X-ray events in 3×3 RPs for Mo-L. The

uniform detection eﬃciency can be found for BI CCD. Projected proﬁles onto X- and

Y-axes are also shown. The dotted lines show the pixel boundary.

Fig. 7. Amount of charge collected in the nth pixel, Dn, is shown in 3×3 pixels for (a)

Mo-L, (b) Al-K, and (c) Ti-K X-rays. Upper panel of each ﬁgure shows the 3-d picture

of Dn and projected proﬁles are shown in lower panel.

Fig. 8. Model of Dn for (a) Mo-L, (b) Al-K, and (c) Ti-K X-rays.

13

Fig. 9. Charge cloud size as a function of the X-ray attenuation length in Si for (a) the

narrow component and (b) the broad component.

Fig. 10. Relationship between the pulse height and incident X-ray energy. The solid line

shows the linear relationship between them to reproduce Ti-K X-rays.

14

Table I. Charge cloud shape obtained with the BI CCD for Mo-L, Al-K, and Ti-K X-rays.

Energy [keV]
Attenuation length [µm]
Narrow component

Broad component

σnx
σny
Snx
Sny

σwx
σwy
Swx
Swy

Mo-L
2.3
2.2

5.3 ± 0.3
5.8 ± 0.3
5.3 ± 0.3
5.7 ± 0.3

13.4 ± 0.3
13.9 ± 0.3
13.4 ± 0.3
13.9 ± 0.3

Al-K
1.5
7.9

4.3 ± 0.2
4.4 ± 0.2
4.2 ± 0.1
4.3 ± 0.2

13.2 ± 0.3
13.8 ± 0.3
13.2 ± 0.3
13.8 ± 0.3

Ti-K
4.5
13.5

2.91 ± 0.08
2.99 ± 0.09
2.83 ± 0.08
2.91 ± 0.09

11.9 ± 0.1
12.5 ± 0.1
11.9 ± 0.1
12.5 ± 0.1

Fraction of narrow component

0.25 ± 0.02

0.32 ± 0.01

0.32 ± 0.01

15

This figure "f1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f3a.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f3b.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f3c.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f5a.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f5b.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f5c.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f5d.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f5e.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f6.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f7.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f8.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f9a.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f9b.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

This figure "f10.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0206021v1

