2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
5
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

X-ray multi-energy radiography with
“scintillator-photodiode” detectors

V.D. Ryzhikov, S.V. Naydenov, B.V. Grinyov,
E.K. Lisetskaya, A.D. Opolonin, D.N. Kozin
Institute for Single Crystals of NAS of Ukraine,
60 Lenin ave., 61001 Kharkov, Ukraine

November 10, 2012

Abstract

For reconstruction of the spatial structure of many-component objects, it
is proposed to use multi-radiography with detection of X-ray by combined de-
tector arrays using detectors of “scintillator-photodiode” type. A theoretical
model has been developed of multi-energy radiography for thickness mea-
surements of multi-layered systems and systems with defects. Experimental
studies of the sensitivity, output signal of various inspection systems based on
scintillators ZnSe(T e) and CsI(T l), and object image reconstruction (with
organics and non-ogranics materials singled out) have been carried out.
Key-words: multi-radiography, non-destructive testing
PACS numbers: 07.85.-m ; 81.70.Jb ; 87.59.Bh ; 95.75.Rs

1. The radiographic method (with signal conversion to digital form) is one of
the main directions of modern non-destructive testing (NDT) [1, 2]. As radiation
sources, X-ray tubes are generally used, with characteristic radiation energy from
tens to hundreds keV . When this radiation is absorbed in the studied objects,
the processes that dominate are photo eﬀect and Compton scattering. Linear at-
tenuation coeﬃcients µ(E) at medium radiation energies are well known for most
substances and materials. In introscopy of the objects of large thickness, radioactive
sources with higher energies of penetrating X-ray and gamma-radiation can also be
used.

Inspection and technical diagnostics (TD) are based on scanning (linear or pla-
nar) and subsequent topography of the three-dimensional structure of the object. It
is often needed to carry out quantitative analysis of the internal structure of mate-
rials. When the geometry is complex, as well as for systems of variable thickness,
multi-layered, multiply connected or multi-component structure, conventional NDT
methods (”one-energy”, but non-monochromatic) could be insuﬃcient. The use of
more informative and more complex tomographic methods is not always possible
due to technical or economical reasons. Important progress can be achieved here
in relationship with a multi-energy approach. Radiographic monitoring with sep-
arate detection of radiation (in diﬀerent ranges of the energy spectrum) at several

1

selected energies can give additional information on the internal structure of the
studied object. A block diagram of such method is presented in Fig.1.

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of multi-energy radiography of thickness.

2. In developing of the said aspect of multi-energy radiography (MER), espe-
cially eﬃcient are simple schemes of two- and three-energy monitoring. Fig.2 shows
characteristic cases of mutual position of simple objects A, B and C as parts of
a “complex” object or overlapping in the projection the defects A and B on the
main background C. In this case, carrying out of structuroscopy (determination of
thickness or defectoscopy) is equivalent to solution of the inverse problems for 2- and
3-MER, respectively. It follows from the theory that in the general case the number
of reconstructed thicknesses is the same as the multiplicity of radiography, i.e., the
number of separately detected radiation ranges). Consequent local scanning of the
object allows us to reconstruct the proﬁle of its internal three-dimensional structure
also in the case of variable cross-section of the components that form it. To deter-
mine thickness of separate components or size of inclusions, one has to assume their
chemical composition to be approximately known. This refers to the two param-
eters that are principal for radiography – eﬀective atomic number Z and densityρ
of each speciﬁc material. Or, linear attenuation coeﬃcients should be speciﬁed for
corresponding substances. For independent determination of these Z and ρ, it is
also possible to use means of MER [3].

Figure 2: Schematic diagram of reconstruction of three-dimensional structure for
many-component and multiply connected (i.e., with defects) objects under linear
scanning using 2- and 3-MER.

2

3. Theoretical model for thickness reconstruction by means of MER uses the
universal character of exponential attenuation of the quantized radiation in mon-
itoring objects and detectors. Passing over to logarithmic (arbitrary) units of the
detected signal normalized to the background value (when the object is absent),
radiography equations can be presented in a simple form

Ri =

µijDj

;

M

X
j=1

(1)

(3)

(4)

(5)

µij = ρj(cid:2)τ (Ei) Z 4

j + σ (Ei) Zj + χ (Ei) Z 2

j (cid:3) ;

i = 1, . . . , m; j = 1, . . . , M ,

(2)

where R (Ei) ≡ Ri are reﬂexes (registration data) at corresponding maximum ab-
sorption energies within each monitoring range. Unknown are thicknesses Di. Ma-
trix µij (of linear attenuation coeﬃcients) will be speciﬁed, with energy dependencies
on photo-eﬀect τ , Compton scattering σ and pair generation eﬀect χ. In the medium
energy range up to 0.5 MeV , the latter scattering channel can be neglected. Solving
the linear system is the inverse problem of MER. To obtain its univalent solution
and to determine the thicknesses, the number of layers m should correspond to the
order M of multi-energeticity, m = M. The general solution has the form

Di =

µ−1
ij Rj ;

det µij 6= 0 ,

m

X
j=1

where µ−1
ij
down explicit formulas

is the inverse matrix. In the case of 2-MER, it is convenient to write

D1 =

µ22R 1 − µ12R2
µ11µ22 − µ12µ21

; D2 =

µ11R2 − µ21R1
µ11µ22 − µ12µ21

.

We do not present here the somewhat clumsy expressions for 3-MER case. In the
general case, for determination of Di it is necessary and suﬃcient that determinant
det µij 6= 0. This implies a physical condition for MER feasibility:

∀i 6= j ⇒ |Ei − Ej| ≫ δEnoise

,

where δEnoise is the total noise level in the system expressed in energy units. For
one-energy radiography, separation of the reconstructed “images” of the composed
object by scanning at one camera angle is not possible. This experimentally and
theoretically proven fact corresponds to the uncertainty of expressions (4) when their
denominator becomes zero at E1 = E2.

4. For practical developments of MER, an important factor is detector sen-
In the Concern “Institute for Single Crystals”,
sitivity of the inspecting system.
combined detectors of “scintillator-photodiode” type have been developed, which
are characterized by improved sensitivity (contrast and detecting). The two-energy
system was realized on the basis of a “sandwich” structure comprising two detectors
It includes a low-energy detector (LED) based
of “scintillator-photodiode” type.

3

on ZnSe(Te) and a high-energy detector (HED) based on CsI(Tl). Both theoretical
calculations and experiments show that such combination is the most eﬃcient for
multi-radiographic inspection. In experiments on determination of the detector sen-
sitivity S = dI /dD (Fig.3) and output signal I (Fig.4), the X-ray source used had
anode voltage Ua = 40 ÷ 180 kV and current Ia = 0.4 mA (a tube with a W -shaped
anode). Sensitivity S and output signal I (E) ∝ exp [−R (E)] was determined in
arbitrary units.

In choosing detectors, the following features were accounted for. Scintillator
ZnSe(Te) has relatively small atomic number Zef f = 32, but its density is high
enough to ensure eﬃcient absorption of the ionizing radiation in the low energy
region. Light output of ZnSe(Te) can reach 100-130% with respect to CsI(Tl) at
absorbing thickness of 0.1−1 mm. As a result, all this ensures substantial advantages
of zinc selenide for radiation detection in the 20 ÷ 80 keV range as compared with
other scintillators and good ﬁltration of this part of the X-ray radiation spectrum.
Our calculations have also shown that optimum thickness values of scintillators for
the two-energy radiograph with Ua = 140 kV are: for LED ZnSe(Te) – 0.6 mm; for
HED CsI(Tl) – 4 mm.

Fig.3 and Fig.4 show results of our measurements of the relative detecting sensi-
tivity and the output signal (reﬂex) for combined scintielectronic detector arrays of
diﬀerent types. The data obtained conﬁrm advantages of the chosen type and de-
sign of the 2-energy inspection system. This physical conﬁguration has been realized
in the Polyscan-4 two-energy introscope [4]. Images of a multi-component object
obtained using this inspection system are shown in Fig.5. This system also allows
distinction between images corresponding to materials with high and low atomic
number, e.g., to detect organic materials against the background of inorganics.

Figure 3: Energy dependence of the detector sensitivity in a two-level system with
various combinations of scintillators.

4

Figure 4: Output signal of HED with LED active ﬁlter and various combinations of
scintillators as function of the tube voltage.

5. The developed scheme of multi-radiography can be directly used for diﬀer-
ent control evaluations, especially in topography of several surimposed “layers”(or
defects) or when analysis under diﬀerent camera angles is impossible. Quantitative
determination of thicknesses in a many-component structure makes it possible to
physically discern between physically surimposed parts of one and the same piece
or object. This substantially increases contrast sensitivity of MER as compared
with conventional methods, which is important not only for technology, but also for
medical applications (separate diagnostics of soft and bone tissues). Therefore, the
proposed radiographic method of multi-energy reconstruction of geometrical struc-
ture of the objects can be useful for many applications in the ﬁeld of NDT and TD.
This conclusion is also supported by the already achieved positive results in indus-
trial production of 2- and 3-energy detectors of diﬀerent types and modiﬁcations,
e.g., [5, 6].

[1] 15th Word Conference on NDT, Rome (Italy), 15-21 Oct., 2000, Abstracts

Book, 800 p.

357-360 (2002).

[2] R.M. Harrison, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A310, pp. 24-34 (1991).
[3] S.V. Naydenov, V.D. Ryzhikov, Technical Physics Letters, vol. 28, # 5, pp.

[4] The X-Ray Introscopy System of Luggage Customs Control ”Poliscan-4”,
Prospects, developed by STC RI & SCB ”Polisvit” PO ”Kommunar”; e-mail:
stcri@isc.kharkov.com .

[5] Rapiscan Prospects. USA. - 2002, http://www.rapiscan.com .
[6] Heimann Prospects. Germany. - 2002, http://www.heimannsystems.com .

5

a)

b)

c)

Figure 5: Object images obtained using the two-energy introscope: a) general
shadow picture of the object; b) shadow picture with inorganic material singled
out; c) shadow image with organic material singled out.

6

