2
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
0
7
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Scintillator-photodiode type detectors for multi-energy scanning
introscopy

V.D. Ryzhikov, S.V. Naydenov, D.N. Kozin,
E.K. Lisetskaya, A.D. Opolonin, V.M. Svishch, T.V. Kulik

Concern ”Institute for Single Crystals” of the National Academy of
Sciences of Ukraine

Results of experimental studies of detector arrays S-PD (scintillator-
photodiode) and PRD (scintillator-photoreceiving device) used for X-ray dig-
ital radiography have shown that there exist further possibilities to increase
spatial resolution of this system up to 2-3 line pairs per mm. Theoretical
analysis and experimental studies show that the two-energy detection method
not only allows one to detect organics on the background of metal, but also
substantially increases (by 3-5 times) the detection ability of the system as
a whole, especially if parameters of the S-PD pair are optimized, in par-
ticular, when ZnSe(Te) is used in the low-energy circuit. A possibility to
distinguish, in principle, between substances with insigniﬁcant diﬀerences in
atomic number has been theoretically proven – by transition to multi-energy
radiography. 3D-imaging has been realized using S-PD detector arrays.

1 Introduction

X-ray digital radiography is a rapidly expanding and one of the most impor-
tant methods of modern non-destructive testing [1]. In this method, alongside
with the use of luminescent screens with subsequent transformation of the
image onto SCS-matrices (spatial charged systems), one of the main techni-
cal solutions is conversion of the penetrating X-ray radiation by the detector
array of ”scintillator-photodiode” (S-PD) type with its subsequent ampliﬁ-
cation and digitalization of the signal.

Advantages of SCS-devices are instant imaging of all the object and high
spatial resolution (3-5 line pairs per mm). Their disadvantage is a limited
energy range, consequently, limited steel thickness of the inspected object,
as well as higher costs, as compared with S-PD arrays.

1

In non-destructive testing systems using S-PD arrays it is possible to use
scintillators of diﬀerent atomic number, density and element length, which
allows working in the energy range from 20 keV to 16 MeV , i.e., steel equiv-
alent thickness is from 100 µm to 300 mm. The use of two-energy detection
systems solves the problem of distinguishing between substances of similar
density, but diﬀerent eﬀective atomic numbers. Both these qualities are not
attainable for SCS-matrices.

Our task in developing this method consisted in the maximum use of
its advantages. Speciﬁcally, we aimed at increased sensitivity and detecting
ability due to optimization of parameters of the S-PD pair and an extensive
use of the features of two-energy radiography. Transition to multi-energy
radiography was envisaged for detection of substances with close values of
the eﬀective atomic number. The resolution was to be increased due to
modernization of the design and making smaller the detector aperture. And,
ﬁnally, passing from two- to three-dimensional imaging was also essential.

The above-listed directions in the system improvement were the aims of

our studies in this work.

2 Experimental procedures

Measurements of the detector sensitivity and light output of the crystals were
carried out on a testing board using X-ray sources IRI (Ua = 40 − 200kV ,
Ia = 0.4 − 1.0mA, W-anode) and REIS (Ua = 5 − 45kV , Ia = 5 − 50µA,
Ag-anode) and an optical power meter ”Kvarts-01”. Time characteristics
were measured using a testing board designed for afterglow measurements
[2].

To obtain shadow X-ray images, we used testing boards ”Poliscan” (a
128-channel array of photodiode-based detectors) and “Photocell” (for 32-,
64-, 128- and 1024-channel detectors based on PRD). Using the Photocell
board, sixty 2D-images of a small object were obtained at diﬀerent angles
(with step 6), from which a 3D image was reconstructed.

For detection of X-ray radiation, we used detector arrays of types S-PD
and PRD. Detectors of PRD type includes an array of photodiodes (32, 64,
128 and 1024 channels), ampliﬁer and commutator mounted on one silicon
crystal.

We used standard scintillation crystals CsI(Tl), CdWO4 and an original
scintillator ZnSe(Te) developed by STC ”Institute for Single Crystals” [2].

2

Parameter
Conversion eﬃciency
Decay time τ , µs
Density, g/cm3
Eﬀective atomic number, Zef f
Luminescence maximum λm at
300 K, nm
Afterglow, % (after 10 µs)
Absorption coeﬃcient at λm,
cm−1
Refraction coeﬀ. at λm
Total internal reﬂection angle γ
for
n1=1,4
n2=1,5
Spectral matching coeﬃcient
with Si-PD, KSC
Radiation stability limit, rad
Energy of K-jumps, keV

ZnSe(Te) CsI(Tl)
19,4
5-7
5,4
33
610

15
1
4,5
52
570

CdWO4
3,5
5-7
7,9
66
490

0,05
0,1-0,3

1-8
0,05

0,05
0,02-0,05

2,4
37˚
40˚

0,49

108
9,7
12,6

1,79
57,17˚
63,25˚

2,25
42,75˚
16,45˚

0,34

104
33,2
35,9

0,27

107
26,1
69,5

Table 1: Characteristics of scintillators used in ”scintillator-photodiode” sys-
tem.

The photodiodes used were obtained from producers CCB Ritm, SPO Bit,
Ukraine, and Hamamatsu, as well as PRD from SPO Bit.

Main parameters of scintillation materials for S-PD and S-PRD detectors

are presented in Table 1.

3 Theoretic analyze of multi-energy radiog-

raphy

In the recent years, an important role in the modern digital radiography has
been taken by the so-called multi-energy method [1-3].
Its application in
X-ray introscopy systems [4-5] is promoted by new inspection possibilities
that are provided by this method as compared with conventional radiogra-

3

phy means. Thus, two- and three-energy introscopy systems can not only
distinguish between organics and inorganics, but also discern one organic
compound from another.

A physical model of the multi-energy radiography is based on the prop-
erty of exponential attenuation of hard ionizing radiation in the inspected
object. An important element of multi-energy systems is digital processing of
data arrays that are coming simultaneously from detectors of diﬀerent types.
The computer does also allow presentation of the output signal in the most
convenient form (logarithmic and normalized). Theoretically, multi-energy
radiography is described by a system of linear equations [3]

Rγ =

Mγ δXδ; Mγ δ = ˆM (Eγ; Eδ)

(1)

M

Xδ=1

where Rγ = R (Eγ) = ln [F0 (Eγ) /F (Eγ) ] is the system reﬂex; F0 and F
– output signals from the background (in the absence of an object) and
from the object Eγ one of the selected radiation energies; M – the order of
multi-energeticity. For two-energy radiography, γ = 1, 2; δ = 1, 2 and Eγ =
{E1; E2}. The unknown X correspond to physical parameters under control.
The monitoring matrix ˆM does not depend upon properties of the studied
object.
Its components are determined after calibration measurements on
samples of the known composition (eﬀective atomic number Zδ and density
ρδ) and thickness Lδ: Cγ δ = R (Eγ; Zδ, ρδ, Lδ).

In the two-energy radiography, the eﬀective atomic number of an unknown
material can be reconstructed using the formula obtained from the general
equations system (1)

Zef f = Z (Y ) = Z1

1/3

Y − ∆1
Y − ∆2 (cid:21)

(cid:20)

;

Y =

C12R2 − C22R1
C11R2 − C21R1

(2)

3

2

(ρ2L2 /ρ1L1 ); ∆2 =
Here auxiliary values are introduced: ∆1 = (Z2 /Z1 )
∆1 (Z1 /Z2 )
; Y is the reduced (relative) output signal. The expressions ob-
tained depend only on radiographic measurement data R1,2 = R (E1,2) from
the detector pair and the calibration (reference) data C11, C12, C21, C22 and
∆1, ∆2. It should be stressed that this is a direct method for determination
of the eﬀective atomic number.

We have to note that all the existing developments in the ﬁeld of two-
and even three-energy radiography involve only qualitative methods of eﬀec-
tive atomic number determination. Their accuracy does not exceed 50% for

4

compounds with large Zef f . Within these limits, it is possible only to distin-
guish between organics and inorganics, or heavy alloys (of iron, Zef f ≈ 26)
from light alloys (of aluminum, Zef f ≈ 13). However, possibilities of the
two-energy radiography have not yet been fully studied and used.

Our analysis have shown that the eﬀective atomic number of the material
can be reconstructed with the accuracy of 5-10% using the formula (3) (see
Fig.1a). This is by an order of magnitude better than the highest level ob-
tained by now. Obviously, such an improvement in diagnostics will allow one
to identify inorganic and inorganic materials with much higher probability
(up to 80-90% ). This increase in sensitivity of eﬀective atomic number deter-
mination is suﬃcient to allow detection of, say, explosives on the background
of organic substances (and not just inorganics). Among practical application
of this method is detection of plastic explosives inside postal parcels and
letters, transported goods and merchandise, etc.

Thus, remaining within the limits of two-energy radiography, one can
carry out quantitative diagnostics of the eﬀective atomic number and density
of materials with accuracy of 5-10% . There will be two controlling param-
eters, not one, which also contributes to the inspection eﬃciency. Moreover,
transition from two- to three-energy radiography ensures better control not
only of the eﬀective atomic number, but also of atomic (molar) concentra-
tions of a complex chemical compound. The number of reconstructed param-
eters corresponds to the order of multi-energeticity. In the case of organic
compounds, it is possible to determine the relative content of two or three
“heaviest” simple elements – carbon (Z = 6), nitrogen (Z = 7) and oxygen
(Z = 8). As a result, there is a high probability to clearly distinguish between
an explosive (with higher content of the latter two elements [7]) and other
organic compounds. Combination of diagnostics involving atomic numbers
and that involving concentrations of predominant atomic components seems
to be a key factor in the solution of this important problem.
It is essen-
tial that practical realization of the outlined approach is based upon the use
of mobile multi-energy X-ray inspection systems for non-destructive testing,
and not of large-sized and expensive installations of neutron technologies.

In X-ray customs inspection systems, distinction between organic and
inorganic substances is made by the two-energy method, which consists in
the following. The X-ray tube has a continuous spectrum (Fig.1b). Passing
through the inspected object, the initial ﬂux of X-ray radiation is partially
absorbed, and in the luminescence spectrum the ratio of low-energy and high-
energy contributions is changed. The higher is the eﬀective atomic number

5

Zef f of a substance, the smaller is fraction of the low-energy radiation. To
determine the ratio between high- and low-energy parts of the spectrum, a
”two-energy” detecting array is used, which consists of two detector arrays
of S-PD type placed one after another. The array that is closer to the X-ray
source is optimized for detection of low-energy (30-50 keV ) radiation, and
the second array, which is placed behind the ﬁrst, is optimized for detection
of high-energy (80-120 keV ) radiation. The total signal from the low- and
high-energy detectors is characterized by the product ρ l, where ρ is density
of the inspected object, l is its radiation length. The ratio of these detector
signals depends upon Zef f .

We have carried out theoretical calculations for the following model of
the two-energy system. As initial radiation spectrum, we took the spectrum
of an X-ray tube at constant anode voltage (150 kV ); the anode material
is tungsten (Fig.1b). As inspected object, we selected sugar (C17H22O11 –
organics) and iron (Fe – inorganics). Two-energy detector arrays include
two types of scintillators: the ﬁrst one (closer to the radiation source) –
ZnSe(Te) of thickness 0.5 mm, and the second one (behind the ﬁrst) – CsI(Tl)
of thickness 4 mm. Fluxes of optical quanta emerging in the scintillators
under X-ray irradiation are considered as output signals. The calculated
signal was normalized and conditionally transformed by a 12-digit analog-
to-digit converter. Conﬁdence intervals related to the quantum noises were
calculated. The results are presented in Fig.1c.

4 Spatial resolution and detector sensitivity

Transition from the ﬁlm radiography to the digital radiography has al-
ready resulted in important improvements in many ﬁelds as for productivity
and quality of X-ray non-destructive testing. However, medical and non-
destructive testing applications requiring detection of non-homogeneities of
less than 0.5 mm size are related to the need to improve spatial resolution
at least to 5-8 line pairs per mm .

Among principal ways to solve this problem, one could note – 1) devel-
opment of multi-channel detector arrays with small step and low aperture;
2) using principles of geometrical optics to obtain expanded shadow images
of the inspected object; 3) the use of various methods of mathematical pro-
cessing for image analysis.

The ﬁrst method is the most preferable, as it allows one to obtain a

6

shadow image of the object with the least possible geometrical distortions.
However, this way to improve the resolution encounters signiﬁcant techno-
logical and technical diﬃculties. Our experience in developing S-PD and
S-PRD detectors, as well as detector arrays based thereon, have shown that
development and production of multi-channel diode arrays with step ∼ 25µ
(up to one thousand channels on one silicon crystal) does not evoke major
technological problems. However, compact placement of a large number of
pre-ampliﬁers close to the diode array (a separate ampliﬁer is required for
each photodiode) becomes problematic already at the detector step of 0.8-0.4
mm . A solution to this problem could be found by placing PD, pre-ampliﬁers
and the commutator upon one silicon crystal. On the basis of such photore-
ceiving devices (PRD), we have developed multi-channel detecting modules.
A multi-channel detection module is a multi-channel (16,32, 64, 1024 chan-
nels) photoreceiver (PD or PRD), upon the photosensitive area of which a
scintillator plate is attached by means of an optical adhesive [6].

Scintillator plates of the following types were tested:

• Plates of discrete scintillation elements (DSE) – one element per chan-

nel.

• Continuous solid plates of a single crystal (SCP) – by the size of the

photosensitive area of a multi-channel photoreceiver.

• Plates of dispersed scintillator (DSP) – made of tiny calibrated parti-
cles of ZnSe(Te) crystals arranged into a monolayer and optical epoxy
adhesive UP4-20-3M [3].

Fabrication of plates composed of DSE at the step of photosensitive ele-
ments in the array less than 0.8-0.5 mm is limited by technological diﬃculties.
Therefore, with the aim of looking for alternative ways to improve the res-
olution, we studied properties of SCP and DSP. The plates were compared
by two main parameters – light output and interference of the neighboring
channels.

Comparative measurements have shown (Fig.2) that serious competition
to DSE plates can come only from DSP. Interference of neighboring channels
was studied for DSP prepared from ZnSe(Te) grains of diﬀerent size (Fig.3).
It is obvious that with smaller grain size the interference of neighboring
channels is reduced. However, the DSP light output is also dependent upon
grain size and has maximum at the grain size ∼ 0.5mm (Fig.4). Thus, using

7

DSP, it is possible to make detector modules with step of the photosensitive
elements 0.2 − 0.5mm for detection of X-ray radiation in the energy range
20 − 80keV . Resolution of 1-2 line pairs per mm can be achieved.

The use of laws of geometrical optics, namely, placing the inspected object
much closer to the source of sharp focus than to the detector array, allows
one, using DSE with step 0.8 mm, to achieve detecting abilities of 10-15 µm
(Fig.5, microchip). Mathematical processing of the digitalized signal using
a modern software can substantially increase the informativity of the image
(Fig.6, the same chip).

The image quality is also determined by the choice of a scintillator.
Accounting for much higher, as compared with CsI(Tl), quantum yield of
ZnSe(Te) (by 20-30% ), it has clear advantages for low-energy detectors.
With higher energies (Fig.7), CsI(Tl) becomes preferable because of its high
transparence. However, if there are requirements for low afterglow level or
high radiation stability, ZnSe(Te) can be used up to the energies of 150-200
keV . At energies above 1MeV , superiority goes to CdWO4.

5 Discussion

Results of our studies have shown that in S-PD detectors for digital radiog-
raphy the most preferable scintillators for the high energy region are CWO
(0.5-1.0 MeV ), CsI(Tl) (0.08-0.5 MeV ), while in the low-energy region (20-
60 keV ) ZnSe(Te) is unchallenged.

Accounting for a trend in the modern digital radiography (both in the
inspection and medical instruments) to use two-energy detector arrays, the
combination of ZnSe(Te) and CsI(Tl)/CWO results in a new quality.

Eﬀective atomic number Z of ZnSe is the same as of copper, which is
usually used as a ﬁlter of the high-energy array. Therefore, if a detector
with ZnSe(Te) as ﬁlter is placed before the high-energy array, this simpliﬁes
the design and improves technical characteristics of the detecting circuit as
a whole [9].

A unique combination of properties characterizing the original scintilla-
tor ZnSe(Te) – high light output, fast response, radiation stability, rather
low eﬀective atomic number together with suﬃciently high density – makes
this material the best among known scintillators for the low-energy detec-
tor. Combination of crystals ZnSe(Te)/CsI(Tl) in the two-energy detector
array has substantially improved the sensitivity of equipment designed for

8

detection of organic inclusions.

Theoretical estimates show that transition from the two-energy to multi-
energy detection system will allow distinguishing between substances that
diﬀer in their eﬀective atomic number insigniﬁcantly. In the applied aspect,
this means a possibility to reliably (close to 100% ) identify dangerous sub-
stances (explosives, drugs) on the background of metal or organics.

A logical way to better resolution in digital radiography is decreasing
the aperture of a unit detector. Experimental data obtained in this work
show that with the existing standard production technology of the arrays
and the S-PD detector as a whole it would be very diﬃcult to make them
with step less than 0.8-1 mm. At the same time, if there is a discrete am-
pliﬁer for each channel, requirements to the photodiode-preampliﬁer system
become more complex. In this relationship, for detector arrays of step 0.05-
0.8 mm that have been studied in the present work, it is desirable to pass
over to a solid scintillation plate (single crystal or dispersed scintillator) and,
in parallel, to replace the photodiode with a photoreceiving unit with an
ampliﬁer-commutator at the back side. This allows the use of just one am-
pliﬁer channel after a photoline of 32-1024 channels of the photoreceiving
device.

Limitations imposed upon detectors ”scintillator plate – photoreceiving
device” are, from the one side, the requirement for the plate to be thin as
to decrease interference of the neighboring channels, which limits the energy
range of the detector. From the other side, low radiation stability of modern
PRD requires their shielding from radiation, i.e., their use at low dose loads,
which is just the conditions used in inspection equipment and medicine. For
systems of technical digital radiography and tomography, the preferable so-
lution is discrete arrays S-PD, with ZnSe(Te) and CWO crystals of high
radiation stability being the recommended scintillators, and photodiodes as
p-n structures, desirably in the photogalvanic mode. Using such structures,
after ampliﬁcation under the laws of geometrical optics, we have obtained, in
the tomographic mode with transition to 3D image, suﬃciently high spatial
resolution (Fig.8).

9

6 Reference

[1] R.M. Harrison, ”Digital radiography – a review of detector design”, Nucl.
Instr. and Meth. A310, 24-34 (1991).
[2] V.D. Ryzhikov, N.G. Starzhinskiy, L.P. Gal’chinetskii, D.N. Kozin,
V.P. Sokhin, A.D. Opolonin, V.M. Svishch, E.K. Lisetskaya, ”Scintillator-
photodiode detecting systems for two-level X-ray inspection systems”, 15th
World Conference on Non-Destructive Testing, Rome (Italy), 15-21 October,
2000, Abstracts Book, p. 466.
[3] S.V. Naydenov, V.D. Ryzhikov, ”Determining Chemical Compositions by
Method of Multi-Energy Radiography”, Technical Physics Letters 28, # 5,
357-360 (2002).
[4] Heimann, Prospects, 2002, http://www.heimannsystems.com.
[5] The X-Ray Introscopy System ”Poliscan-4”, Prospects, stcri@isc.kharkov.com.
by
[6] L.V. Atroshchenko, B.V. Grinev, V.D. Ryzhikov et al.
V.D. Ryzhikov), Scintillator crystals and detectors of ionizing radiation on
their base, Kiev, Naukova Dumka, 1988 (in Russian).
[7] V.G. Volkov, B.V. Grinev, V.D. Ryzhikov et. al., ”Small-crystalline de-
tectors of ionizing radiation on the basis of ZnSe(Te)”, Pribory i Tekhnika
Eksperimenta (Moscow), No. 6, p. 37-42 (1999).
[8] Detection system for X-ray introscopy, Patent of Ukraine, No. 2001053401
from 21.05.2001.

(ed.

10

(a)

(b)

11

(c)

Figure 1: Two-energy method for determination of eﬀective atomic number
Zef f . (a) Theoretical plots of the eﬀective atomic number Z (R) as function
of the ratio R = R1 /R2 of two output signals in the two-energy radiography
inspection of Zef f in diﬀerent ranges: 1 – [Z1; Z2] = [10; 1]; 2 – [18; 10]; 3 –
[40; 18]; 4 – [40; 1]. (b) Spectrum of X-ray tube with W-anode at 150 kV .
(c) Calculated dependence of R = R1 /R2 ratio on thickness of the studied
object (for sugar and Fe ) accounting for quantum noises of the analog-to-
digit converter.

12

Figure 2: Mutual interference of neighboring channels for diﬀerent scintil-
lators and types of scintillation elements: 1 – single crystal plate ZnSe(Te)
with h = 0.8mm; 2 – single crystal plate ZnSe(Te) with h = 0.6mm; 3 –
composite small-crystalline plate ZnSe(Te) (grain size 0.4mm); 4 – individ-
ual single elements for each channel; 5 – single crystal plate CsI(Tl) with
h = 0.8mm .

13

Figure 3: Interference of neighboring channels in 16-element detectors for a
dispersed scintillation plate as function of ZnSe(Te) scintillator grain size.

14

Figure 4: Light output dependence upon grain size.

Figure 5: Internal connection wire pattern from the semiconductor crystal
in a microchip.

15

Figure 6: Microchip in plastic tank.

16

Figure 7: Sensitivity of detectors using CsI(Tl) and ZnSe(Te) as function of
the radiation energy.

17

Figure 8: Tomographic image of the lighter friction head.

18

