2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
0
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

GIANT MAGNETO-IMPEDANCE AND ITS APPLICATIONS

C. Tannous and J. Gieraltowski
Laboratoire de Magn´etisme de Bretagne, CNRS UMR-6135,

Universit´e de Bretagne Occidentale, BP: 809 Brest CEDEX, 29285 FRANCE,

Tel.: (33) 2.98.01.62.28, FAX:(33) 2.98.01.73.95 E-mail: tannous@univ-brest.fr

The status of Giant Magneto-Impedance effect is reviewed in Wires, Ribbons and Multilayered Soft Ferro-

magnetic Thin Films. After establishing the theoretical framework for the description of the effect, and the

constraints any material should have in order to show the effect, experimental work in Wires, Ribbons and Mul-

tilayered Thin Films is described. Existing and potential applications of the effect in Electronics and Sensing

are highlighted.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Magnetoimpedance (MI) consists of a change of total impedance of a magnetic conductor (usually ferromagnetic) under
application of a static magnetic ﬁeld Hdc. When an ac current, I = I0ejωt of magnitude I0 and angular frequency ω (=
2πf , with f the ordinary frequency) ﬂows through the material, it generates, by Amp`ere’s Law, a transverse magnetic ﬁeld
inducing some magnetization. At low frequency, the change in the transverse magnetization generates an additional inductive
voltage VL across the conductor: V = RI + VL where R is the resistance. Hence MI can be written as Z = R + jωφ/I,
where the imaginary part is given by the ratio of ﬂux to ac current and MI ﬁeld dependence is dictated by the static transverse
permeability. When frequency increases the current gets distributed near the surface of the conductor, changing both resistive
and inductive components of the total voltage V . The ﬁeld dependence of MI is dictated by skin depth and the current distri-
bution is governed not only by the shape of the conductor and frequency but also the transverse magnetization depending on Hdc.

Typically MI increases with frequency, attains a maximum at frequencies for which the skin effect is strong (δs << a where

a is a characteristic length scale) and then decreases since a high frequency permeability becomes insensitive to the ﬁeld.

MI effect is ordinarily weak and did not attract much attention in the past. Interest in MI was sparked in the early 90’s
[2] and Panina et al. [3] reported a very large (Giant) MI effect in amorphous ferromagnetic FeCoSiB
when Beach et al.
wires with small magnetic ﬁelds and at relatively low frequencies. Later on, Machado et al. [7] observed a smaller effect in
Fe4.6Co70.4Si15B15 thin ﬁlms.
The dramatic variation of the MI (that can reach in some cases 800%) with small magnetic ﬁelds (a few Oersteds) and at
relatively low frequencies (tens of MHz) in widely available materials is the crux of the interest in the Giant MagnetoImpedance
(GMI) effect.

GMI materials share the property of being magnetically soft (easy to magnetize) and are now available as wires (typical
diameter of the order of a mm), microwires (typical diameter of the order of a micron), ribbons, magnetically coated metallic
(usually nonmagnetic) wires (tubes), thin ﬁlms and multilayers, albeit, the effect itself occurs with widely differing magnitude
depending on the geometry, the constituent materials and their layering.

In order to set the stage and clearly identify GMI, several observations should be made:

1. A very large change (of the order of at least 100% variation) of the impedance should occur with an external dc mag-

netic ﬁeld Hdc. The change expressed in % is deﬁned by the largest value of the ratio r(Hdc) = 100
/
Z(Hsat)
|

−
where Z(Hdc) is the impedance measured in the presence of the dc magnetic ﬁeld and Z(Hsat) is

Z(Hsat)
|
|

Z(Hdc)

× |

2

the impedance measured at the saturation limit when the magnetization does not change any longer with the applied ﬁeld.

2. The external dc magnetic ﬁeld should be on the order of a few Oersteds only (see Table I on Magnetic units and quantities).

3. The frequency range is on the order of MHz or tens of MHz (excluding any effect based on Ferromagnetic Resonance
where the frequencies are typically in the GHz range). In many materials this means that the skin depth δs (typically
microns at these frequencies) is larger than the thickness of the material (typically a fraction of a micron). When the
frequency is in the GHz, δs is generally very small with respect to the thickness. It should be stressed that in ordinary
metals, the skin depth does not depend on permeability, whereas in magnetic materials, the behavior of the permeability
on geometry, temperature, stress, composition and so on, is reﬂected in the skin depth.

GMI is a classical phenomenon that can be explained thoroughly on the basis of usual electromagnetic concepts in sharp
contrast with Giant Magnetoresistance (GMR) effect where resistance is changed by a magnetic ﬁeld. GMR requires Quantum
Mechanical concepts based on the spin of the carriers and their interactions with the magnetisation of the magnetic material.
Several general conditions must be satisﬁed by any material in order to show a GMI.

1. The material should be magnetically soft. That is, it should be easily magnetised or in other words must have a relatively

narrow hysteresis curve implying, in general, small losses in the course of the magnetization cycle.

2. The coercive ﬁeld Hc must be small (fraction of an Oersted) and the hysteresis loop thin and narrow. Since Hc and the
shape of the hysteresis loop change (see Fig. 1) with the angle the magnetic ﬁeld makes with the Easy axis (or Anisotropy

axis) of the material, these are taken at the reference point when the ﬁeld is along the Easy axis.

3. The material should have a well deﬁned anisotropy axis. That means there must be a direction along which the magneti-
zation of the material lies on the average (Easy axis). However the value of the anisotropy ﬁeld Hk (see Fig. 1) should be
relatively small (on the order of a few Oersteds). The typical ratio of Hk to Hc must be about 20. That insures observation
of large magnetoimpedance effects, typically.

4. The ac current, injected in the material, should be perpendicular to the anisotropy direction and the magnetic ﬁeld it creates

Hac should be small with respect to Hk (See Table I on Magnetic units and quantities).

5. The material must have a small resistivity (
magnetic materials have large resistivities.

≤

100µΩ.cm ) since it carries the ac current. This is important, since many

6. The material should have a large saturation magnetization Ms in order to boost the interaction with the external magnetic

ﬁeld.

7. Above arguments are equivalent to a very large permeability at zero frequency (given approximately by the ratio Ms/Hk).

This means several 1000’s (see Table II).

8. The material should have a small magnetostriction (MS). This means, mechanical effects caused by application of a
magnetic ﬁeld should be small. Mechanical stress due to MS alters the soft properties of the material by acting as an
effective anisotropy. This alters the direction of the anisotropy, displacing it from the transverse case and thereby reducing
the value of the MI. Typical case materials are displayed along with their MS coefﬁcient in Table II.

Material permeability depends on sample geometry, nature of exciting ﬁeld (longitudinal, perpendicular, transverse such as

Fig. 2), temperature, frequency, stress distribution in the material as well as internal conﬁguration of the magnetisation that
might be altered by processing or frequency. For instance, some materials should be annealed under the presence of a magnetic
ﬁeld or a mechanical stress in order to favor some direction for the magnetisation or to release the stress contained in them.

3

Regarding frequency, when it is large enough ( > 1MHz is sufﬁcient in many materials) Domain Wall Displacements are
considerably reduced (DWD) by eddy-currents and therefore magnetisation varies by rotation (see Fig. 1). As a consequence,
the rotation of the magnetisation controls the behaviour of the permeability, this being reﬂected in the skin depth.

Considering a as a typical thickness (in the case of ﬁlms/ribbons) or radius (in the case of wires or microwires), frequencies in
the tens of MHz, lead to δs > a for the observation of GMI. This condition depends strongly on geometry. For instance, δs > a
in 2D structures like ﬁlms is satisﬁed at much higher frequencies (GHz) than in 1D structures like wires. This is simply due to
the optimal circular shape of wires that contains in an optimal fashion the ﬂux while, simultaneously, carrying the ac current.

In terms of GMI performance, multilayered ﬁlms are preferred with respect to single layered ﬁlms since they permit one to
inject the ac electric current in the metallic layer and sense the magnetic ﬂux in neighbouring or sandwiching magnetic layers.
These can be in direct contact with the metallic layer or separated from it by an insulator or a semiconductor. Flux closure
occurs when the width of the ﬁlm (transverse with respect to the ac current) is large or that the metallic layer is entirely buried

in the magnetic structure to trap the ﬂux.

The progress of GMI is thrusted towards the increase of the largest value of the ratio r(Hdc) and the sensitivity given by the

derivative of the ratio with respect to the ﬁeld (see Table III for some illustrative values).

Applications of GMI range from tiny magnetic ﬁeld detection and sensing (such as magnetic recording heads) to magnetic
ﬁeld shielding (to protect Hard Disks or degauss CRT monitors (Cathode Ray Tubes)). The reason is that GMI materials, being
soft, possess large permeabilities that are required in magnetic shielding.

This work is organised as follows: In section II, a general discussion on soft materials is presented; in section III, GMI in
wires is described. In section IV, GMI in ﬁlms and ribbons is dicussed. Section V highlights potential applications of GMI effect
in Electronic ans Sensing devices while Section VI bears conclusions and perspectives of GMI.

II. SOFT FERROMAGNETIC MATERIALS

Soft ferromagnetic materials (SFM) play a key role in power distribution, make possible the conversion between electrical
and mechanical energy, underlie microwave communication, and provide both the transducers and the active storage material

for data storage in information systems. The ﬁngerprint of any magnetic material is its hysteresis loop (HL) whose characteristic
shape stems from two essential properties of magnetic materials: Non-linearity and delay between input and output signals.
Non-linearity is given by the shape of the loop whereas the delay is given by the width of the HL. The quantities associated with
the HL are displayed in Fig. 1 where only magnetization rotation is considered. In general, magnetic materials being anisotropic
their HL width varies with the angle the external magnetic ﬁeld makes with some given direction. The easy axis direction is
deﬁned as the direction for which the HL width (or coercive ﬁeld Hc) is largest.

The coercive ﬁeld Hc represents the effort to demagnetise any magnetic material. For instance, Hard magnetic materials
exhibit large resistance to demagnetization and are therefore used in materials requiring permanent magnets whereas SFM
are used in devices demanding little effort to demagnetise or remagnetise. Hard magnets are used as permanent magnets for
many electrical applications. Some rare-earth alloys based on SmCo5 and Sm(Co,Cu)7.5 are used for small motors and other
applications requiring an extremely high energy-product magnetic materials. Fe-Cr-Co alloys are used in telephone receivers
and Nd-Fe-B is used for automotive starting motor.

4

In contrast, SFM possess a narrower loop than Hard materials and the area within the hysteresis curve is small. This keeps

the energy losses small, during each magnetic cycle, in devices based on these materials.

In order to qualify the different requirements for read heads and storage media in magnetic recording, an area belonging to

the application portfolio of SFM (besides sensing and shielding), Table IV displays the desired characteristics.

SFM have high permeability (i.e. easily magnetized) with a low coercivity (i.e. easily demagnetized). Examples of soft
ferromagnetic materials include Fe alloys (with 3 to 4% Si) used in motors and power transformers and generators. Ni alloys
(with 20 to 50% Fe) used primarily for high-sensitivity communications equipment. This illustrates the versatility of SFM
applications that range from mechanical to electrical and from power to communications systems.

SFM exhibit magnetic properties only when they are subject to a magnetizing force such as the magnetic ﬁeld created when
current is passed through the wire surrounding a soft magnetic core. They are generally associated with electrical circuits where

they are used to amplify the ﬂux generated by the electric currents. These materials can be used in ac as well as dc electrical
circuits.

Several types of SFM exist other than the standard soft ferrites:

1. Powder Composite Materials

2. Rapidly Quenched Materials

3. Amorphous Magnetic Materials

4. Nanocrystalline Magnetic Materials

The soft ferromagnetic behavior in these materials arises from a spatial averaging of the magnetic anisotropy of clusters of
randomly oriented small particles (typically < fraction of a micron). In some cases, the MS of these materials is also reduced to
near zero.

Metallic glasses obtained by rapid quench (e.g. splat-cooling) are magnetically very soft. This property is used in multilayered

metallic glass power transformer cores.

Amorphous magnetic alloys such as CoP ﬁrst reported in 1965 and splat-cooled materials with attractive soft ferromagnetic
properties are based either on 3d transition metals (T) or on 4f rare-earth metals (R). In the ﬁrst case, the alloy can be stabilized
in the amorphous state with the use of glass forming elements such as boron, phosphorus and silicon: Examples include Fe80
B20, Fe40 Ni40P14 B6, and Co74 Fe5 B18 Si3 (Tx M1
x,with 15 < x < 30 at %, approximately). The transition metals of late
order (TL where TL=Fe, Co, Ni) can be stabilized in the amorphous state by alloying with early order transition metals (TE)
x TLx, where x is

of 4d or 5d type (TE= Zr, Nb, Hf): examples include Co90 Zr10 , Fe84 Nb12 B4 , and Co82 Nb14 B4 (TE1
roughly 5 < x < 15 at %).

−

−

Nanocrystalline soft magnetic materials are derived from crystallizing amorphous ribbons of a speciﬁc composition such
as the (Fe, B)-based alloy family. This class of materials is characterized by 10-25 nm sized grains of a body-centered-cubic
(Fe,X) phase consuming 70-80 dispersed in an amorphous matrix.

Two families of alloys show the best performance characteristics and have emerged as the best candidates to major appli-

cations: Fe-Cu-Nb-B-Si (the ”Finemet” family, see Table III) and Fe-Zr-(Cu)-B-(Si) (the ”Nanoperm” family). The Finemet
family is characterized by an optimum grain size of about 15 nm, exhibits good properties at high frequencies and is comparable
to some of the best (and relatively costly) Co-based amorphous materials. On the other hand, the grain sizes consistent with
optimum performance are larger, around about 25 nm, in the Nanoperm family. The distinguishing feature of the Nanoperm

family of alloys is the very low energy loss exhibited at low frequencies (60 Hz), offering the potential for application in
electrical power distribution transformers.

A typical amorphous alloy with a small MS coefﬁcient λs, is Co70.4 Fe4.6 Si15 B 10. It is obtained by alloying FeSiB that
6 coefﬁcient. Some materials that result from this
7 that can be considered
10−
6. This was obtained by varying systematically the concentration x in
6 decreases steadily to a near

6 with CoSiB that has a negative λs =
has a positive λs = 25.10−
alloying can reach a very small value of λs. For instance, (Co0.8 Fe0.06)72.5 Si12.5 B 15 has λs
as zero since typical values of λs are units or tens of 10−
the compound (Co1
zero value λs =

x Fex)72.5 Si12.5 B15. Starting with x = 0 the MS coefﬁcient λs =
7 for x = 0.06.

3.10−

3.10−

−
10−

∼ −

−

−

−

III. GMI IN WIRES

The search for GMI in soft magnetic wires, microwires, tapes, and ﬁlms is a topic of interest related to possible applications

as tiny ﬁeld sensors.

At low frequencies (weak skin effect), the ﬁrst order expansion term of the impedance Z = R(ω) + jX(ω) versus frequency
is responsible for the voltage ﬁeld dependence. This term is represented by an inductance, which is proportional to the static
transverse permeability. When the skin effect is strong, the total impedance including resistance R and reactance X is ﬁeld
dependent through the penetration depth.

The general theory of the MI effect in a long cylinder is widely available in classic textbooks [1] and it has been shown
experimentally that a large MI often occurs at frequencies of a few MHz. Changing the dc biasing ﬁeld Hdc, the maximum
can occur at
Z
|
Hdc = 0 or Hdc
possesses a single or a double peak as the frequency increases. When
the direction of the anisotropy ﬁeld is well deﬁned the peaks are sharp (Fig. 2).

can be as large as a few times of Rdc for amorphous wires, Rdc being the dc resistance. The maximum

Hk, the anisotropy ﬁeld. Hence

∼ ±

Z
|

Z
|

|

|

|

While GMR is usually attributed to the differential scattering of conducting electrons whose spins make particular angles
with the local magnetization of different scattering centers, it was believed, like GMR, this effect also resulted from the electron
scattering by ac current-induced domain wall oscillations. Many different models exist for the ac permeability of metallic
samples. Such models ﬁrst assumed a constant scalar dc permeability throughout the sample, which are referred to as classical

models, and then considered certain domain structures with a magnetization process of DWD or domain magnetization rotations
(DMR). In the case of ac impedance, standard quantitative models are used without considering domain structures. Therefore,
some current explanations of MI have to be made based on usual considerations with some additional modiﬁcations to include
concepts of DWD, DMR, ferromagnetic resonance, and magnetic relaxation. For a straight wire of radius a, conductivity σ and
scalar dc permeability µdc (see Fig. 3) the expression for impedance is given by [1]:

. c is the speed of
where Ji is the i-th order Bessel function and k = (1 + j)/δs where the skin depth is given by δs =
light and σ the conductivity. Since the ac current is applied along the wire axis perpendicularly to the anisotropy (Fig. 3), it is
the transverse permeability that is considered here. When δs << a or ka >> 1 (taking a
1µ m, we can
expand the Bessel function to obtain:

1mm whereas δs

∼

∼

c
√2πωσµdc

Z
Rdc

=

R + jX
Rdc

=

ka
2

J0(ka)
J1(ka)

Z
Rdc

= (1 + j)a

ωσµdc
2

r

5

(1)

(2)

6

∼

This indicates that Z

Rdc could reach a value of several 1000’s at high frequencies. The same result is obtained in the case of
1µ m). It should be pointed out that since the ac current
microwires by rescaling all lengths (since we have, in this case, a
is along the wire axis, the magnetic ﬁeld produced is circular along or against the rotational magnetisation proﬁle (see Fig. 3).
Hence, the circular permeability is considered since at the frequencies of interest ( > 1MHz), eddy-currents heavily damp DWD.
In wires, the magnetization and anisotropy ﬁeld Hk run in a circular fashion in a plane transverse to the ac current as illustrated
in Fig. 3. The dc ﬁeld Hdc acts to realign the magnetization along its direction, decreasing therefore the transverse permeability.
The skin depth dependent classical formula does not account for the presence of domain walls that can alter the scattering of
the carriers. Panina et al. [3] and Chen et al. [8] accounted for domain wall scattering and showed that the latter is efﬁcient when
1MHz or greater. Introducing a
the inter-domain distance λ (see Fig. 3) to the wire radius a ratio λ/a
parameter θ = a√σµdcω, they argue that a change of MI by a factor of 10 (assuming a change of θ2 by a factor between 7 and
700) yields a change of µdc/µ0 by a factor of 100 to 10,000. Using a resistivity ρ = 1/σ =125 µΩ.cm and 2a=0.124 mm, the
. Chen et al. [8] proved also that the classical limit is recovered
frequency f
|
∼
when λ/a
0.01. The interpretation of a single or a double peak in the MI versus Hdc is interpreted as resulting from scattering
by DMR. The scattering increases as Hdc gets closer to the anisotropy ﬁeld Hk and then decreases after reaching its maximum
for Hdc
0.
Frequency effects produce the same result as seen in Fig. 2.

Hk. Wires with very small anisotropy possess a single peak since the scattering maximum occurs at Hdc

3.1 MHz yields a factor of 4 to 10 change in

0.1 for frequencies

∼ ±

Z
|

≤

∼

≤

∼

In the case of GMI effect in coated tubes such as the electroplated FeNi, FeNiCo, and CoP microwires, Kurlyandskaya et
al.
[6] found a huge enhancement factor approaching 800% in Fe20Co6Ni74 layers (1 µ m-thick) electroplated onto CuBe
nonmagnetic microwire (100 µm diameter) at a frequency of 1.5 MHz. That shows the way for producing the largest GMI in
these systems.

IV. GMI IN RIBBONS AND THIN FILMS

Sputtered or otherwise produced ﬁlms or ribbons possess several advantages with respect to wires due to the possibilities of
size reduction and increase of efﬁciency. Nevertheless, oblong or elongated ribbon or thin ﬁlm geometries are preferred in order
to emulate the wire case where the largest GMI ratios were obtained.

Since the main ingredients of GMI are a metal that carries an ac current and a nearby magnetic material that must sense
strongly the ﬂux, 2D materials or multilayers offer more ﬂexibility than wires and experimentally, several excitation conﬁgura-
tion become possible when we are dealing with a ribbon or a ﬁlm.

The general MI measurement conﬁguration in ribbons and ﬁlms is shown in Fig. 4.
In ﬁlms and ribbons, the domain wall conﬁguration is similar to what goes on in wires in the sense domain walls are
transverse with respect to the ac current. In Fig. 5 neighbouring domains have magnetisations pointing in different directions
and the magneto-impedance effect result from averaging over transverse domains like in the wire case.

When a probe current I0ejωt is applied to a ﬁlm of thickness 2a, the impedance is written as Z = Rdc jka coth(jka),
where Rdc is the dc resistance of the ﬁlm and k = (1 + j)/δs with δs the skin depth. Since the current is applied (in the ribbon
case) along the ribbon axis, again the transverse permeability is considered. The domain wall conﬁguration (see Fig. 5) permits
to estimate the permeability in the case of weak anisotropy ﬁeld (Hk small but ﬁnite). It should be stressed that domains, Hk
and permeability are all transverse. When Hdc is longitudinal, it plays the role of a Hard axis ﬁeld since it is acting on the
magnetization, to rotate it, hence decreasing the transverse permeability, similarly like in wires.

In order to increase the MI response, multilayers are preferred to single layered ﬁlms/ribbons. If a sandwiched metallic layer

7

carries the ac current that creates the ﬂux in the neighbouring magnetic layers, the MI effect is considerably enhanced (Table
III). Moreover, when the width 2b is large (Fig. 5) the ac ﬂux loop is closed and stray magnetic ﬁelds small [12].

Multilayers of Permalloy (Ni81Fe19 denoted as Py) and Ag of the type [Py(x ˚A)/Ag (y ˚A)]n with thickness x = 107 ˚A and
88 ˚A, y= 7 ˚A and 24 ˚A and the number of layers n=15 and 100 were grown by Sommer et al [5] with Magnetron sputtering
techniques. The case n=100 displayed a GMI effect of the order of 5 to 25 %. The thickness of the Py layer has a strong effect
on the coercive ﬁeld and consequently on the softness of the material. The coercive ﬁeld Hc varies from 0.85 Oersted for x=88
˚A to reach 13.6 Oersted for x=5000 ˚A. As the Ag thickness varied from 7 to 24 ˚A the MI effect changed from single peak to
double peak structure in a fashion akin to the effect of frequency. Sommer and Chien [4] showed also that in the ribbon case, a
double or a single peak structure in the MI results from the direction of the applied magnetic ﬁeld Hdc. When it is longitudinal
(along the ribbon axis, see Fig. 5) a double peak at Hdc
Hkis observed, but when it is transverse the demagnetization factor
perpendicular to the ribbon axis becomes important. That is responsible of an apparent longitudinal permeability that gives birth
to a single peak MI. The ribbon MI is similar to the wire case, however MI in single layer ﬁlms remains small and it is still an

∼ ±

open problem to ﬁnd ways to increase it dramatically like in coated microwires. Nevertheless, when multilayers are used (see
Table III) the GMI ratio may attain 700%. This enhancement is due to the electrical insulation of the metallic layer carrying the
ac current by sandwiching it with SiO2 layers, the outer magnetic layers embodying the ac inductance created by the current.

V. APPLICATIONS OF GMI IN ELECTRONICS AND SENSING

Since GMI uses soft magnetic materials possessing high permeability, the ﬁrst immediate application is in devices related to

Magnetic Shielding since it requires the soft properties of the material. A host of other applications involves the GMI per se.

The ﬁrst of these applications are the detection of very small magnetic ﬁelds. In order to have a general idea of the scale of

current magnetic Fields Table V displays some orders of magnitude of Natural and Artiﬁcial ﬁelds.

Detection of magnetic ﬁeld is also important and magnetic ﬁeld sensors (see Hauser et al. [10]) are broadly classiﬁed in three

categories (see Table VI):

1. Medium to Large ﬁeld detection by Hall and Magnetoresistive devices.

2. Small to Medium magnetic ﬁeld detection by Magnetoimpedance and Flux Gate sensors.

3. Very small to Small magnetic ﬁeld detection by SQUIDS.

The possible devices are recording read heads, magnetic guidance devices in vehicles, boats and planes (with or without
GPS, i.e. Global Positioning System), brain imaging (Magneto-Encephalogram or MEG devices) and heart mapping (Magneto-
Cardiogram or MCG devices) etc...

The detection of the Earth magnetic ﬁeld has a host of applications for instance in Petroleum or minerals exploration or in
shielding used for Degaussing of High performance CRT monitors...
The general features required for sensors are not only high sensitivity, ﬂexibility, large bandwidth and lost cost but linearity
is also a desired feature. In order to increase the sensitivity of GMI devices with respect to the dc magnetic ﬁeld, devices
were developed [11] possessing non-symmetric variation of the MI with respect to Hdc. The materials used are ﬁeld annealed
Co-based amorphous ribbons (Co66 Fe4 Ni B14 Si15) (see Table III). The asymmetry of the MI proﬁle allows a very sensitive
0 and when the asymmetry of the proﬁle is so sharp that it becomes
detection of the magnetic ﬁeld specially around H
step-like, we have a so-called ”GMI valve” based device. In these devices, the sensitivity might be enhanced to reach 1000%/Oe
(compare with values in Table III). Asymmetry may also be induced by torsional stress such as in wires of Fe77.5Si7.5 B 15 [13].

∼

Altering the GMI response with mechanical stress paves the way toward the development of strain sensors that can be used in
several areas of engineering and science.

8

VI. CONCLUSION

Good candidates for GMI are amorphous Cobalt rich ribbons, wires, glass covered microwires and multilayers made of a

metallic layer sandwiched between ferromagnetic materials (with or without intermediate insulating layers).

The current activity in GMI studies is oriented toward the development of devices using a built-in magnetic ﬁeld rather than

an applied external ﬁeld. This is reminescent of the p-n, Schottky, heterojunctions etc... where the built-in ﬁeld is electrical.

The discovery of Magnetic Bias produced a revolution in Magnetism because of the many potential applications in storage,
sensing, spintronics... Nevertheless, there are other ways to produce built-in magnetic ﬁelds. For instance Ueno et al. [9]

produced susch an internal ﬁeld by superposing two sputtered ﬁlms of Co72 Fe8 B 20 with crossed anisotropy axes, i.e. with the
anisotropy axis of the bottom layer making angles of opposite sign with some common direction.

While GMI in wires and ribbons is steadily progressing, the case of single layered ﬁlms is still lagging behind in favor of
multilayered ﬁlms. Ways must be developed in order to increase the sensitivity of single or multilayered structures in order to
reach the level observed in wires and microwires. The range of applications will substantially explode once GMI in thin ﬁlms
will be competitive with wires and ribbons.

Acknowledgement

The authors wish to acknowledge correspondance with P. Ripka and his kind providing of re(pre)prints of his work as well as
friendly discussions with A. Fessant regarding characterisation and impedance measurements.

[1] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Electrodynamics of Continuous Media, Pergamon, Oxford, p.195 (1975).

[2] R. S. Beach and A. E. Berkowitz, Appl. Phys. Lett. 64,3652 (1994).

[3] L. V. Panina and K. Mohri, Appl. Phys. Lett. 65, 1189 (1994).

[4] R. L. Sommer and C. L. Chien, Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 3346 (1995).

[5] R. L. Sommer, A. G¨undel and C. L. Chien, J. Appl. Phys. 86, 1057 (1999) .

[6] G. V. Kurlyandskaya, J. M. Barandiaran, J. L. Munoz, J. Gutierrez, D. Garcia, M. Vazquez, and V. O. Vaskovskiy, J. Appl. Phys. 87, 4822

(2000).

[7] F. L. Machado, B. L. da Silva, S. M. Rezende and C. S. Martins, J. Appl. Phys. 75, 6563 (1994).

[8] D-X Chen, J.L. Munoz, A. Hernando and M. Vazquez, Phys. Rev. 57, 10699 (1998).

[9] K. Ueno, H. Hiramoto, K. Mohri, T. Uchiyama and L. V. Panina, IEEE Trans. Mag. 36, 3448 (2000).

[10] H. Hauser, L. Kraus and P. Ripka, IEEE Inst. and Meas. Mag. 28 (2001).

[11] C.G. Kim, K.J. Jang, D.Y. Kim and S.S. Yoon: Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 2114 (1999).

[12] A. Paton, J. Appl. Phys. 42, 5868 (1971).

[13] G.H. Ryu, S.C. Yu, C. G. Kim, I.H. Nahm and S.S. Yoon, J. Appl. Phys. 87, 4828 (2000).

9

FIGURES AND TABLES

M−H loop

Mr(remanant)

Hr

)
n
o
i
t
a
s
i
t
e
n
g
a
M

 
(

M

Ms(saturation)

Hc(coercive)

Hk(anisotropy)

H (Field)

c
d
R

/
|

Z

|

2.5

1.5

3

2

1

0

0.5

−3

−2

−1

1

2

3

0
Hdc/Hk

Hdc

2a

I

Hac

λ

FIG. 1: General hysteresis loop obtained with magnetization rotation only. It is obtained for an arbitrary angle, α, between the magnetic ﬁeld
and the anisotropy axis. Associated quantities such as coercive ﬁeld Hc, remanent magnetization Mr and ﬁeld Hr are shown. The thick line
is the hysteresis loop when the ﬁeld is along the hard axis (α=90 degrees, in this case) and Hk is the ﬁeld value at the slope break. Quantities
such as Hc, Mr and Hr depend on α.

FIG. 2: Variation of normalised impedance |Z|/Rdc versus magnetic ﬁeld Hdc at ﬁxed low (single peak) and high frequency (double peak).
The rounding of the peaks is due to a distribution of the anisotropy ﬁeld direction.

FIG. 3: Bamboo-like domain wall structure in a cylindrical wire with counter-rotating magnetisation proﬁles. The circular anisotropy axis
(Easy Axis), along the magnetization is perpendicular to the direction of the ac current. Therefore, the dc ﬁeld Hdc plays the role of a Hard
axis that damps magnetization and consequently decreases the permeability.

FIG. 4: General Magnetoimpedance measurement setup in an elongated ribbon. The static ﬁeld Hdc might be longitudinal, transverse or
perpendicular to the ac current I = I0ejωt that creates the alternating transverse Hac. Hk is the anisotropy ﬁeld, transverse to the ac current
direction. When Hdc is longitudinal, it plays the role of a Hard axis ﬁeld like in wires that decreases the transverse permeability.

10

Hdc (perp.)

Hdc (trans.)

Hdc (long.)

Hk

I

Ribbon axis

Hac

2b

F

M
F

I

Hac

Hk

FIG. 5: Domain wall conﬁguration in a multilayered structure. The magnetization direction is shown in every domain. The ac current ﬂows in

the sandwiched metallic layer, producing an ac ﬂux in the surrounding magnetic layers.

11

Polarisation or Magnetisation

µ0Ms

4πMs

Physical Quantity

Bohr Magneton µB
Vacuum permeability µ0
Field Strength H

Example

with saturation value Ms
b
Example Ms
Induction B
Example

Susceptibility

Example

Energy Density of Magnetic Field

Example

Energy of Magnetic matter

in an external ﬁeld

Anisotropy constant K

Anisotropy Field

Example

Exchange Field

Example

Demagnetising ﬁeld in a thin ﬁlm

Energy density of

Demagnetising ﬁeld in thin ﬁlm

Magnetostriction

Coefﬁcient

SI

CGS
0.927 10−23A.m2 0.927 10−20emu a
4π10−7 V.s/A.m
1
−3 Oe
A/m
∼ 1Oe

80 A/m

4π10

1A/m

10−3emu/cm3
B = µ0(H + M ) B = H + 4πM
104G
1 Tesla= 1V.s/m2

M = χH

χ = 4π

BH/2
1J/m3

µ0HdM

µ0Ms

105 J/m3
HK = 2 K
106 A/m
J
µB
109 A/m
−Ms
µ0M 2

s /2

M = χH

χ = 1

BH/8π
10erg/cm3

HdM

106 erg/cm3
HK = 2 K
Ms
4π103 Oe
J
µB
4π106 Oe
−4πMs
2πM 2
s

±λs ∼ 10

−6

±λs ∼ 10

−6

aalso expressed in erg/Oe
bIt is also expressed in Gauss with 1Gauss= 1emu/cm3

TABLE I: Correspondance between magnetic Units in the SI and CGS unit systems. Note that Magnetic ﬁeld units are A/m and Oe and

Induction’s are Tesla and Gauss. In vacuum or non-magnetic materials in CGS values in Oe and Gauss are same.

Alloy

Hc (mOe) µmax at 50 Hz Magnetostriction a Coefﬁcient

Fe80 B20
Fe81 Si3.5 B13.5 C2
Fe40 Ni40 P14 B6
Fe40 Ni38 Mo4 B18
Fe39 Ni39 Mo4 Si6 B12
Co58 Ni10 Fe5 (Si,B)27
Co66 Fe4 (Mo,Si,B)30

40

43.7

7.5

12.5-50

12.5-50

10-12.5

2.5-5

320,000

260,000

400,000

200,000

200,000

200,000

300,000

λs ∼ 30. × 10−6

λs ∼ 10. × 10

−6

λs ∼ 0.1 × 10−6

aIt is deﬁned as λs = δl/l, the largest relative change in length due to application of a magnetic ﬁeld

TABLE II: Examples of Soft Magnetic Materials and their hierarchy according to λs. The main composition is successively based on Fe, NiFe
and ﬁnally Co.

Material

max(r(Hdc)) a max(dr(Hdc)/dHdc) (% /Oe) Frequency (MHz)

12

Amorphous microwire:

Co68.15 Fe4.35 Si12.5 B15
Finemet wire b
Amorphous wire:

Co68.15 Fe4.35 Si12.5 B15
CoP multilayers

electroplated on Cu wire
Mumetal c, stripe
Textured

Fe-3% Si sheet

Amorphous ribbon:
Co68.25 Fe4.5 Si12.25 B15
Ni80 Fe20 electroplated
on non-magnetic CuBe microwire

Sandwich ﬁlm:

CoSiB/SiO2/Cu/SiO2/CoSiB
FeCoNi electroplated

on non-magnetic CuBe microwire

800

56

125

220

230

310

360

400

530

700

58.4

1760

20.8

384

304

0.9

4

0.09

0.09

0.6

0.1

1

5

20

1.5

ar(Hdc) = 100 × |Z(Hdc) − Z(Hsat)|/|Z(Hsat)|
bFe-Cu-Nb-B-Si family
c77% Ni,16% Fe, 5% Cu, 2% Cr

TABLE III: Materials for GMI sensors: Wires and Films adapted from Hauser et al. [10]. The GMI sensitivity with respect to the magnetic

ﬁeld is given by the largest value of the derivative of the ratio (third column).

HL quantity

Head core Recording Media

Ms
Mr

Hc
S = Mr/Ms
Sc = ( dM
S

dH )H=Hc
= 1 − (Mr /Hc)

∗

Sc

Large

Small

Small

Small ∼ 0
Large

Moderate

Large

Large

∼ 1

∼ 1

TABLE IV: Requirements on read head and recording media from HL. The parameters S and S* are the remanant and the loop squareness
respectively. S* represents the steepness of the HL at the coercive ﬁeld, i.e. the slope of the HL at Hc is Sc = ( dM
Hc(1−S∗) . In
practice a fairly square HL has S, S* ∼ 0.85.

dH )H=Hc =

Mr

13

Magnetic induction a occurrence
Type of Induction

Typical Range

Typical Range

(in Gauss)

(in Tesla)

Body or brain of man b, animals... 10−10 - 10−5 Gauss 10−14 - 10−9 Tesla c

Biological

Geological

Inside Earth

On the Earth surface

1010 Gauss
10−4 - 1 Gauss d

106 Tesla

Superconducting Coil

> 25. 104 Gauss

> 25 Teslas

aMagnetic ﬁeld is expressed in Oe and induction in Gauss.
bThe magnetic induction of the Human Brain is about 10−13 Tesla
cHuman heart induction is around 10−10 Tesla
dTransverse Component of the Earth Magnetic induction is 0.5 Gauss

TABLE V: Natural and artiﬁcial magnetic induction in various systems. Note that Magnetic ﬁeld unit is A/m and Oe and Induction is Tesla

and Gauss. In vacuum or non-magnetic materials in CGS values in Oe and Gauss are same.

Sensor type

Magnetic induction typical range Typical sensitivity

Hall

Magnetoresistance

Magnetoimpedance

Flux Gate

SQUID

(in Gauss)
1 - 106
1 - 106
10−6 - 1
10−6 - 1
10−9 - 10−6

(in Gauss)

10.

1.
10−6
10−6
10−10

TABLE VI: Magnetic induction Sensor types, range and typical sensitivity. Note that Magnetic ﬁeld unit is A/m and Oe and Induction is Tesla

and Gauss. In vacuum or non-magnetic materials in CGS values in Oe and Gauss are same.

