2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A modular PC based silicon microstrip beam
telescope with high speed data acquisition

J. Treis a,1, P. Fischer a, H. Kr¨uger a, L. Klingbeil a, T. Lari b,
N. Wermes a

aPhysikalisches Institut der Universit¨at Bonn, Germany
bDipartimento di Fisica di Universit`a di milano e INFN, Sezione di Milano, Italy

Abstract

A PC based high speed silicon microstrip beam telescope consisting of several inde-
pendent modules is presented. Every module contains an AC-coupled double sided
silicon microstrip sensor and a complete set of analog and digital signal process-
ing electronics. A digital bus connects the modules with the DAQ PC. A trigger
logic unit coordinates the operation of all modules of the telescope. The system
architecture allows easy integration of any kind of device under test into the data
acquisition chain.
Signal digitization, pedestal correction, hit detection and zero suppression are done
by hardware inside the modules, so that the amount of data per event is reduced
by a factor of 80 compared to conventional readout systems. In combination with a
two level data acquisition scheme, this allows event rates up to 7.6 kHz. This is a
factor of 40 faster than conventional VME based beam telescopes while comparable
analog performance is maintained achieving signal to noise ratios of up to 70:1.
The telescope has been tested in the SPS testbeam at CERN. It has been adopted
as the reference instrument for testbeam studies for the ATLAS pixel detector de-
velopment.

1 Introduction

For the testing of newly developed detector systems, testbeam facilities are
suitable and frequently used. They create experimental conditions which are
closer to a high energy physics experiment than the conditions in the labora-
tory while permitting access to important experimental parameters. In order

1 Corresponding author. Tel. +49 228 732499,
treis@physik.uni-bonn.de.

fax. +49 228 733220, e-mail

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

Fig. 1. A BAT beam telescope setup with four BAT modules and one BB based
DUT.

to measure properties like eﬃciency and spatial resolution of a device under
test (DUT), a precise reference measurement of the incident particle tracks
is required. This is the task for a beam telescope [1,2,3] measuring intercept
and angle for incident particles on an event by event basis. In order to achieve
position resolutions in the µm and µrad scale silicon microstrip detectors are
commonly used for such telescopes, providing a number of space points for
track interpolation. Such microstrip based telescope systems suﬀer from lim-
ited event rate due to their large number of readout channels and their system
architecture. Additionally, to synchronize such a system is diﬃcult, and merg-
ing a given DUT readout into the system’s data acquisition (DAQ) is a major
task.
As beam time is often limited, speed is also an important requirement for
a telescope system, especially when semiconductor detector devices with a
structure size in the µm scale, for instance ATLAS pixel devices, are to be
tested. The time needed to collect a signiﬁcant number of events for every
sensor element strongly depends on the readout speed of the telescope, as the
DUT readout is very fast.
In this paper, the concept of a fully PC-based beam telescope system, hence-
forth referred to as BAT 2 , is presented, which combines good track measure-
ment accuracy with high event rate and easy DUT integration.

2 An acronym for Bonn ATLAS Telescope.

2

2 System overview

Figure 1 shows a typical BAT setup consisting of four detector modules, a
trigger logic unit (TLU), the data acquisition PC and a DUT. All components
are connected via the purely digital ”blueboard bus” (BB) [8]. Furthermore,
the ”timing bus” connects BAT modules, DUT and TLU.
A raw trigger signal indicating an event is provided by the coincidence of two
scintillation counters. The coincidence signal is fed into the TLU, which then
decides if a trigger is to be given according to the module’s status information
accessible on the timing bus. If so, the TLU generates the trigger signal and
distributes it to the modules.
After receiving a trigger, each module acquires, digitizes and preprocesses
event data autonomously and independent from an external sequencer logic.
The event data is stored in a module-internal memory. When a certain amount
of data is accumulated in a module’s memory, the corresponding module alerts
the data acquisition PC to read the entire data memory content of this mod-
ule.
The DAQ processes running on the PC collect all data from the diﬀerent mod-
ules, assemble the data which belong to one event and store it on the hard
disk. Part of the data is processed, the results are made available to the user
for monitoring purposes.
Several ways of integrating a DUT are feasible. The DUT can be connected di-
rectly to the BB, as shown in ﬁgure 1. For this purpose, a ﬂexible BB interface
is available. For integration of a given VME based DUT and supplementary
measurement equipment, a VME crate can be attached to the DAQ PC using
a commercially available PC to VME interface. And in case an embedded PC
or a VME CPU is to be used for DAQ, a BB to VME interface has been
developed for fully VME based operation of the entire telescope.

3 Module hardware

A BAT module consists of a sensor assembly, an analog telescope card (ATC)
and a digital telescope card (DTC). An overview over a module’s constituents
and their interconnection is given in ﬁgure 2. A photograph of a fully assem-
bled module is shown in ﬁgure 3.
5 front end ICs. The sen-
The sensor assembly consists of the sensor and 2
sor is a commercially available double sided, AC-coupled silicon strip detector
type S6934 with integrated polysilicon bias resistors manufactured by Hama-
matsu photonics [4]. The n-side strips are isolated by p+-stop implantations.
Implant and readout strip pitch are 50 µm on both sides, the nominal stereo
angle is 90◦. The sensitive area is 3.2
3.2 cm2 corresponding to 640 strips on
each side.

×

×

3

Fig. 2. Schematic layout of a BAT module.

The front end IC used is the VA2 manufactured by IDE AS, Oslo [5]. The VA2
is a 128 channel charge sensitive preampliﬁer-shaper circuit with simultaneous
sample and hold, serial analog readout and calibration facilities. Five VA2 ICs
are needed to provide readout for one detector side. They are mounted on a
so-called BELLE hybrid [6,7], a ceramic carrier with an attached PCB pro-
viding support for the VAs and distributing supply, bias and digital control
to them. As VAs on the hybrid are operated in a daisy chain, a hybrid is read
out like one large 640 channel VA. Sensor and hybrids are ﬁxed to a ceramic
support structure, which is attached to a solid aluminum frame for handling.
The ATC is divided into two identical compartments supporting one BELLE
hybrid each. A hybrid’s compartment provides the supply voltages, bias volt-
ages and bias currents required by the hybrid. A fast ADC circuit is used for
digitization of the VA2 output data, and an additional multi-channel ADC al-

4

Fig. 3. Photo of a BAT module.

Fig. 4. Powering and grounding scheme of a telescope module.

lows observation of the most important hybrid parameters during operation.
Only digital signals are transferred between ATC and DTC via digital cou-
plers. The central functional building block of the DTC is the readout se-
quencer . Implemented into the main FPGA, this circuit generates the control
sequence needed to acquire and digitize the analog FE data. Both hybrids are
read out simultaneously. The readout sequencer also controls the data prepro-
cessing logic. Furthermore, the DTC holds a large FIFO for on-module data
buﬀering and a RAM for storing data preprocessing information. A second
FPGA circuit controls access to the BB and the timing bus. It is also capable
of sending interrupt requests (IRQs) on the BB to the PC. Each module has
its own power supply, providing three independent voltage sources needed to
operate the ATC compartments and the DTC. The power supply also gen-
erates the detector bias voltage. The powering and grounding scheme of a
telescope module is shown in ﬁgure 4.

5

Fig. 5. Structure of the telescope DAQ.

4 Data acquisition

4.1 Structure

The data acquisition of the BAT is implemented as a two-level process. The
primary level DAQ (DAQ I), controlled by the readout sequencers in every
module, is simultaneously performed inside each module directly after receiv-
ing a trigger signal. The secondary level DAQ (DAQ II) is PC controlled and
common for all modules. Both DAQ levels running independently reduces the
eﬀective system dead time to the DAQ I runtime (see also section 5). The
telescope DAQ structure is shown in ﬁgure 5. An example for DAQ I and
DAQ II interaction is shown in ﬁgure 6.

4.2 Primary level DAQ: Digitizing and preprocessing

When receiving a trigger, a module’s readout sequencer acquires and digitizes
the data residing in the front end ICs and operates the data preprocessing
logic, which performs pedestal correction, hit detection and zero suppression.
Pedestal correction is done by subtracting an individual pedestal value for
each channel. Hits are detected by applying an individual threshold to the
pedestal corrected data. Pedestal and threshold values have to be determined
and stored beforehand in the DTC RAM. Zero suppression is done by stor-
ing only clusters consisting of the information of the 5 neighboring channels
around the hit channel in the DTC FIFO. Enlarged clusters are stored for
two or more hit channels in close proximity. Multiple clusters per event are
possible. The data volume for an event with one hit cluster is 32 byte in total.
Compared to a typical event size of 2.5 kByte for common telescope systems

6

[2], the amount of data is reduced by a factor 1/80.
After ﬁnishing preprocessing an event, end of event data (EOD) is written
to the FIFO, which transmits a module internal trigger number count and
the so-called common mode count (CMC) value. The CMC value is used to
calculate and correct the common mode ﬂuctuation amplitude for this event
in on- or oﬄine analysis. DAQ I has ﬁnished processing an event as soon as
a complete module event data block (MED) including cluster data and EOD
has completely been written to the FIFO.

4.3 Secondary level DAQ: Data readback and event building

While DAQ I is active, MEDs keep accumulating in the modules’ FIFOs until
a certain threshold ﬁll level is exceeded. A module internal interrupt generator
generates an IRQ, forcing DAQ II to become active.
DAQ II, responsible for data transfer to the PC, is controlled by the producer
task, which runs on the data acquisition PC. It controls one shared buﬀer,
a FIFO like structure in PC RAM, for every module. When detecting an
IRQ from a certain module, the producer transfers the data from this mod-
ule’s buﬀer FIFO to the corresponding shared buﬀer. DAQ I operation is not
aﬀected by this data transfer and continues to process events. The writer soft-
ware process collects and assembles MEDs belonging to the same event from
the diﬀerent shared buﬀers and stores them on the hard disk.
The modules’ threshold ﬁll level can be adjusted with respect to the beam
intensity. A single event operation mode for low beam intensities is also avail-
able.

5 Trigger logic

As each module takes data autonomously, trigger control is necessary to pre-
vent the trigger synchronization from getting lost. Every device is therefore
connected to the trigger logic implemented in the TLU, receives its trigger
signal from the TLU and has a dedicated busy line on the timing bus, which
indicates DAQ I activity. The TLU generates a gate signal for the raw trigger
from the coincidence of all devices’ busy signals, which only sends triggers if
all devices are not busy. The system’s dead time is therefore determined by
the busy signal from the slowest device. The timing of gate and busy signals
is shown in ﬁgure 6.

7

Fig. 6. Example for TLU, DAQ I and DAQ II timing. In this example, module 2
generates an IRQ right after the ﬁrst event was fully processed. The producer starts
the data transfer immediately afterwards, while DAQ I processes the second event.

Fig. 7. Structure of the BATDAQ software package. The online monitoring (OMO)
process allows monitoring of telescope module data. The DUT OMO is responsible
for monitoring of DUT data.

6 Software

The DAQ PC is a commercial PC equipped with a dual Pentium II processor
running the Windows NT 4.0 operating system and the DAQ software package
written in C++. It is connected to the BB via a BB to PCI interface card [8]. In
addition to the DAQ processes mentioned, online monitoring processes allow
an overview about the device performance during operation. An overview over
the diﬀerent processes and their tasks is given in ﬁgure 7.

8

Fig. 8. Dependency of event rate on trigger coincidence rate.

7 System performance

7.1 Event rate

The mean event rate of the telescope system is determined by the dead time of
the slowest device, being the BAT modules in most applications due to their
serial readout. A BAT module’s dead time tdt is dominated by the DAQ I
runtime 3 , which is 132 µs. The event rate actually observed also depends on
the trigger coincidence rate ΦT, and is given by:

1
v max
e

= tdt +

1
e−ΦT)

(1

−

(1)

assuming Poisson statistics. The dependence of event rate and trigger coin-
cidence rate is shown in ﬁgure 8. At the H8 testbeam at CERN, a system
consisting of 4 BAT modules and one BB based DUT has been operated with
an eﬀective event rate of 4.5 kHz. This is an event rate larger than the event
rate of conventional VME-based systems by factors of 40 [1] to 75 [2].

7.2 Analog performance

Figure 9 shows a hit map and source proﬁles of a 90Sr β source scan using a
PIN diode as trigger device. Only one dead channel on the N-side and a few

3 The readout sequencer has to read 640 channels with a serializer clock frequency
of 5 MHz.

9

Fig. 9. Experimental setup, hit map and source proﬁles for N- and P- side for a
source scan of a module using a 90Sr β source with about 2500000 events. The
number of entries in each bin is grey coded.

noisy channels on the P-side are observed. The system operates stably. No
pedestal drift was observed during a 32-hour run. Thus taking pedestals only
once at the beginning of each run is suﬃcient. Common mode noise is also
tolerable.
Figure 10 shows a typical pulse height distribution together with the noise
histogram of N- and P-side of the same module. One ADC count corresponds
to an ENC of 20 e− on P and 24 e− on N-side, as can be calculated from
the position of the peak in the respective pulse height distribution. Thus, the
mean ENC value for all channels is 706 e− for the N-side and 340 e− for the
P-side. Comparing these values with the most probable charge deposition for
a minimal ionizing particle in 300 µm thick silicon, which is 23300 e−, yields
signal to noise ratios of 33 for the N- and 69 for the P-side, which is compa-
rable to the results obtained with other telescope systems [1,2,3]. Figure 11
shows the correlation between the pulse heights observed on N- and P- side
of the detector for an event. The pulse height correlation can be used to solve
strip data ambiguities, which can occur at high beam intensities.

10

Fig. 10. Landau-shaped pulse height distributions of a module in a 70 GeV pion
beam for N-side (solid line) and P-side (dashed line). The insert shows the channel
noise histograms for the same module.

Fig. 11. Pulse height correlation between N- and P-side of the same detector module.
The number of entries in each bin is grey coded.

Charge sharing between detector strips can be used for a more exact recon-
struction of the position of a hit on a module, as the BAT provides analog
cluster readout. The normalized pulse heights of the three central strips of
a cluster can conveniently be displayed in the form of a triangle plot (ﬁgure
12). Using the diﬀerent normalized amplitudes of the three central strips of a
cluster as distances from the sides of an equilateral triangle, the triangle plot
is a way to display the distribution of the signal charge among the three cen-

11

Fig. 12. Principle of a triangle plot and triangle plots for both detector sides of one
module. The al, am, ar are the pl, pm pr values normalized on the sum of the values.
The number of entries in each bin is grey coded.

tral channels. Events in which most of the charge is deposited in the central
cluster channel lie at the top of the triangle, events in which the charge is di-
vided between two cluster channels lie on the sides of the triangle. Events with
signiﬁcant amounts of charge on all three central channels lie in the central
area of the triangle. Entries outside the triangle area are due to ”negative”
signal amplitudes after pedestal subtraction caused by noise. In most cases the
charge is deposited only in the central cluster strip or in two strips. Charge
distribution over three or more channels, mostly due to δ-electrons, are rare;
thus an algorithm using only two cluster charges for reconstruction is appro-
priate. The commonly used η-algorithm [9] uses the pulse heights of the two
central cluster channels which carry the largest signals within the cluster:

η =

c1
(c1 + c2)

with c1, c2 being the amplitude of the left and the right central cluster channel.
Assuming a uniform distribution of hits and charge sharing independent from
the total pulse height, the integral of the η-distribution can be used to calculate
a position correction value ∆x by

(2)

(3)

∆x(η) =

p
N0

η

Z
0

dN

dη′ dη′

12

Fig. 13. Distributions of η for both detector sides.

with p being the strip pitch and N0 the total number of entries in the η distri-
bution histogram. The correction value is then added to a reference position
to obtain the absolute position of the hit. Typical η distributions for a single
module are displayed in ﬁgure 13. The diﬀerences in shape of the η distribu-
tion between N- and P- side are mostly due to diﬀerent interstrip capacitances
on the detector sides. The asymmetry of the distribution for one detector side
is due to parasitic capacitances in the analog readout of the strips. They can
be corrected by applying a deconvolution algorithm. Their inﬂuence on the
spatial resolution of the detectors is, however, small.

7.3 Spatial resolution

The telescope tracking performance has been studied using test beam data
taken with a 180 GeV/c pion beam at the CERN H8 testbeam at the SPS.
The raw event data is processed by a program developed by the Milano AT-
LAS group which performs event reconstruction and alignment of the telescope
planes.
A straight line ﬁt is applied to the strip hits, and the residuals between the
hits and the ﬁtted track are computed for the strip planes. Then, an analytical
alignment algorithm is applied to the strip planes, which minimizes the resid-
uals and their dependence on position and angle of the tracks. The alignment
and the tilt angle are calculated for all strip planes using the ﬁrst strip plane as
reference plane. Examples of the resulting residual distributions for the strip
planes in one direction after alignment are presented in ﬁgure 14, showing the
quality of the alignment algorithm. The distributions are properly centered
around zero, which indicates the absence of systematic errors. Their widths,
which are determined by the intrinsic resolution of the strip planes, multiple
scattering and the alignment algorithm, lie between 6.3 and 4.2 µm.
As the data from the strip planes, however, is used in the track ﬁt, the width
of the strip plane residuals can not be taken to determine the spatial resolu-
tion of the telescope. For this purpose, the residual distributions in the DUT
planes have to be considered.

13

×

The telescope setup included two DUTs, which were hybrid pixel detectors.
Sensor and front end electronics were developed by the ATLAS pixel collab-
oration [12,13]. The sensor has no ineﬃcient area, the pixel cell size was 50
400 µm corresponding to the pixel pitch, and the front end electronics
µm
provides for zero-suppressed readout, reporting both pixel position and charge
deposition for those pixels only, for which the charge deposition exceeds a cer-
tain threshold.
The spatial resolution of the telescope system was measured using the residu-
als between the position determined from the DUT data and the extrapolation
to the DUT plane of the tracks ﬁt to the strip data. For this purpose, the rel-
ative alignment of the DUT to the strip planes is calculated. Events with a
χ2-probability of the track ﬁt greater than 0.02 were selected from data taken
with the beam along the normal to the pixel plane. In ﬁgure 15, the residuals
along the short (50 µm) pixel cell direction are shown for events, for which
only one pixel reported a hit (upper histogram) and events, for which two
neighboring pixels reported a hit (lower histogram). The reconstructed posi-
tion on the DUT of the single pixel hits is the centre of the hit pixel cell, while
for two pixel hits an interpolation algorithm is used to determine the hit po-
sition using the charge deposition information [10,11]. The latter distribution
can be used to give an estimation of the telescope resolution.
A gaussian ﬁt to the two pixel residual distribution yields σ = 5.5 µm. This
is the convolution of the telescope resolution and the pixel detector intrinsic
resolution. The latter can be estimated as follows. As tracks are uniformly
distributed, the width L of the region in which charge division between two
pixels occurs can be estimated using the ratio between the number of two pixel
and one-pixel hits. This yields L
10 µm. The expected r.m.s. of the residual
distribution for these tracks is σ = L/√12 = 2.9 µm. Thus, the width of the
actual residual distribution is dominated by the telescope resolution, which
can be estimated conservatively to be better than σ = 5.5 µm in the DUT
plane.

≃

8 Summary

A high speed modular PC based beam telescope using double sided silicon
microstrip detectors with on module data preprocessing has been built and
successfully taken into operation. Telescope hard- and software are capable of
stand-alone operation and easy to handle; integration of an additional ”device
under test” is straightforward. Pedestal subtraction, hit detection and zero
suppression are done inside every module, reducing the data volume by a
factor of 1/80. With its two level data acquisition scheme, the system can
process event rates up to 7.6 kHz. The telescope is a factor of 75 (40) [2]
([1]) faster than conventional VME based systems while providing comparable

14

Fig. 14. Residual distributions between the strip hits and the ﬁtted track.

performance. Signal to noise ratios of up to 70 were achieved. The spatial
resolution in the DUT plane has been determined to be better than 5.5 µm.

Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge the help obtained from Walter Ockenfels and Og-
mundur Runolfsson when encountering problems concerning mechanics, case
design and handling and bonding of silicon detectors. We would also like
to thank the members of the ATLAS pixel collaboration, in particular John
Richardson from LBNL, Berkeley, and Attilio Andreazza, Francesco Ragusa
and Clara Troncon from the Milano ATLAS group, for providing help and
know-how in testbeam data taking and data analysis.

15

Fig. 15. Residual distributions between the pixel hits and the extrapolation of the
track to the pixel detector plane along the short direction of the pixel cell. The upper
histogram is for single pixel clusters, the lower histogram for two pixel clusters with
a gaussian ﬁt superimposed.

References

[1] C. Eklund et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth., A 430, (1999) 321.

[2] P. Fischer et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth., A 364, (1995) 224.

[3] L.Celano et al., CERN-PPE/95-106, CERN, Geneva (1995).

[4] Catalog Si photodiodes and charge sensitive ampliﬁers

scintillation
counting and high energy physics, Published by Hamamatsu, catalog number
KOTH00020E05 (1997).

for

[5] The VA 2. Speciﬁcations & Manual. Version 1.4. Published by IDE AS, Oslo,

Norway (1997).

[6] BELLE SVD hybrid. Conceptual design report. Version 2.3. Published by IDE

AS, OSLO, Norway. (1997).

16

[7] Bjørn Magne Sundal, Technical design report for BELLE SVD readout hybrid.

Published by IDE AS, OSLO, Norway. (1997).

[8] BB-PCI 20. PCI

Interface-Karte f¨ur das BlueBoard ASIC Testsystem.

Documentation. Published by Silicon Solutions, Bonn (1999).

[9] E. Belau et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth., A 214, (1983) 253.

[10] T. Lari, Nucl. Instr. and Meth., A 465 (2001) 112-114.

[11] T.Lari, Study of silicon pixel sensors for the ATLAS detector, CERN-THESIS-

2001-028, CERN, Geneva (2001).

[12] N. Wermes

for the ATLAS pixel collaboration, Designs and prototype

performance of the ATLAS pixel detector, BONN-HE-99-07, Bonn (1999).

[13] Alam M.S. et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth., A 456, (2001) 217.

17

