3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
9
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical Communication Noise Rejection

Using Correlated Photons

Deborah Jackson, George Hockney, Jonathan Dowling

Quantum Computing Technologies Group

Jet Propulsion Laboratory

California Institute of Technology

4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, California 91109-8099

Deborah.Jackson@jpl.nasa.gov

This paper describes a completely new way to perform noise rejection using

a two-photon sensitive detector and taking advantage of the properties of

correlated photons to improve an optical communications link in the presence

of uncorrelated noise. In particular, a detailed analysis is made of the case

where a classical link would be saturated by an intense background, such

as when a satellite is in front of the sun, and identiﬁes a regime where the

quantum correlating system has superior performance. c(cid:13) 2014 Optical Society

of America

1.

Introduction

The last few years have brought rapid advances in the understanding and application of

quantum entangled photons. Exploitation of quantum correlations is important in various

1

applications, including teleportation,1 quantum lithography,2 clock synchronization,3 and

optical communications.4 To date, most of this work has focused on characterizing quantum

correlation eﬀects at low intensities due to the lack of bright sources of correlated photon

pairs. However, Lamas-Linares et al.’s5 recent report of the laser-like production of po-

larization entangled photons now opens up the possibility that one can take advantage of

correlated eﬀects for communications. In addition, the demonstration of eﬃcient parametric

down conversion using a diode laser and a pair of solid state parametric conversion chips,6

demonstrates that parametric generation technology is rapidly approaching the fabrication

thresholds where economies of scale can be achieved. Earlier attempts, by Mandel,4 to apply

correlated photons to improving the signal to noise ratio in a communications link depends

on coincidence counters, which, because of the detector dead time, are limited to low rates.

Our approach depends on the development of a special detector that is intrinsically sensitive

to two-photons.7 This single detector replaces the coincidence counters, gating electronics,

ampliﬁers, and the computer interface employed in that earlier eﬀort. Consequently, it is im-

portant to do a link analysis to determine whether there is an advantage to using correlated

photons and two photon detectors for conveying information in an optical communications

channel.

The answer is yes, but only for the special situation where the signal strength is swamped

by in-band background noise. We refer speciﬁcally to situations where free space high band-

width of optical communications are desired, but in-band solar background radiation ham-

pers the signal to noise. The other situation of interest would be in ﬁber networks operating

under conditions of a large background of incoherent in-band scattering, which adversely

impacts recovery of the signal at the receiver. For shot noise limited telecom links there is

2

generally no advantage to using correlated photons as opposed to classical photons for the

carrier. Our approach is predicated on the development of a two photon sensitive photode-

tector which eliminates the need for separate coincidence electronics. Consequently, one can

deﬁne the required ﬁgure of merit that must be met for a performance advantage to be

realzied of the corrrelated 2-photon link over a classical uncorrelated photon link in terms of

the two photon and single photon quantum eﬃciencies of the detectors. Besides introducing

a new method for performing the coincidence measurement, this paper deﬁnes the conditions

under which one can expect to the two-photon correlated detection to realize and advan-

tage when compared to classical uncorrelated signal recovery. Finally, it brieﬂy examines the

eﬀect of diﬀraction on the 2-photon collection eﬃciency in the free space application.

2. Near-Field Optical Communications Links

The near ﬁeld communication link is deﬁned as an architecture for which the full output

power of the transmitter is subtended and collected by the detector. The schematics in

Figures 1(a) and 1(b) depict the key diﬀerences between the classical and the correlated-

photon near ﬁeld telecom links. In this analysis, a classical link, using photons of frequency,

ω1, is compared with a correlated-photon link transmitting photon pairs of approximate

frequency, ω1, but actual frequency ωa + ωb = 2ω1 = ω2. The power received at the detector

is given by the following expression

Pr(ωi, t) = µPt(ωi, t)L(ωi).

(1)

where Pt(ωi, t) is the modulated output power of the communications laser at carrier fre-

quency ωi, µ represents conversion losses suﬀered after emission from the transmitter, and

3

L represents any losses that occur during transit through the communications channel. This

expression assumes that the collimating optics at the transmitter and the collecting optics

at the receiver are suﬃciently large that the footprint of the transmitted beam is completely

subtended by the receiver aperture. This would be a reasonable assumption at optical fre-

quencies over free space transmission ranges up to 1000 km. To facilitate comparison of the

performance of both links, we assume that the initial laser output power of the classical link

is identical to the laser output power of the correlated photon link,

Pt(ω1, t) = Pt(ω2, t).

(2)

The link designs diﬀer by the conversion loss factor, µ, and the carrier frequency used to

transmit the signal information through the channel. In the classical telecom link, µ = 1 and

the carrier frequency is ω1. Thus the signal current generated at the receiver for the classical

link is given by:

current.

I0 = ηdetPr(ω1, t) = ηdetPt(ω1, t)L(ω1),

(3)

where ηdet is the receiver eﬃciency for converting input photons to carriers in the signal

In contrast, the value of µ in the correlated photon link is determined by the method used

to produce the correlation. Furthermore, we assume that the modulated output of the laser

transmitter is passed through a nonlinear parametric down conversion crystal and correlated

photons are generated with eﬃciency, µ = ηP DC. The following additional properties apply.

• Both photons were created at the same point in time.

4

• Both photons were created at the same spatial point.

• Energy is conserved → ω2 = ωa + ωb.

• Momentum is conserved → ~k2 = ~ka + ~kb.

where one assumes that the daughter photons from the down conversion process are degener-

ate with ωa + ωb = 2ω1 = ω2. After down conversion, the output is modulated with the signal

waveform before being sent through the transmission medium for collection at the receiver.

Therefore in the correlated link, the signal current generated at the receiver is proportional

to the signal power and is given by

0 = η2−ph(2ω1)[P ′
I ′

t (ωa, t)L(ωa, t) + P ′

t (ωb, t)L(ωb)] = η2−ph(2ω1)ηP DCPt(ω2, t)L(ω1).

(4)

Even though we do not know exactly when or where any pair of twin photons are born

within the down conversion crystal, the fact that they are simultaneously created means

that standard geometrical imaging optics can be exploited in a straightforward matter to

reunite these photon pairs in coincidence at the receiver. The ﬁgure of merit for comparing

the ultimate link performance is given by the signal to noise ratio of each approach;

SNRclassical =

SNRcorrelated =

I0
i σ2

i

,

qP

I ′
0
i σ2

i

,

qP

5

where

(5)

(6)

σ2
i = σ2

thermal + σ2

shot + σ2

laserRIN + σ2

background

(7)

i
X

is the sum of the variances of all noise contributions, thermal noise, shot noise, relative

intensity noise due to the laser, and in-band background noise arriving with the signal at

the detector. These factors are deﬁned for each link in Table 1 below. The expression for the

correlated SNR is optimized when the source has been imaged onto the detector so that the

correlated pairs, that are collected by the imaging lens, arrive at the same time and overlap

at the same point of the detector. This means that correlated telecom links are practical for

short range links where the foot print of the transmitters output beam are fully subtended

by the receiver collection aperture.

Here k is Boltzmans constant, B is the circuit bandwidth, T is the ambient absolute

temperature, Ri is the detector input impedance, e is the electric charge, FRIN is the relative

intensity noise factor, and Pr−B is the power level of the background noise at the receiver. To

compare the relative eﬃciencies of classical signal recovery with the signal recovery process

of correlated photons, we assume similar links are established for the classical photon signal

recovery and correlated photon signal recovery. Pt, At, Ri, L, Ar, and ω1 are chosen to be

identical for both links, where At is the area of he transmiter aperture and Ar is the area

of the receiver collection aperture. They diﬀer in the choice of down conversion eﬃciencies,

detector eﬃciencies, and the background noise contribution to the signal to noise ratio (SNR).

The diﬀerences between these two types of links are summarized a follows. The corre-

lated photon transmitter design can never be as eﬃcient as the classical transmitter due to

the parametric down conversion factor, ηP DC < 1. But an advantage can be obtained if one

6

employs a detector that is speciﬁcally designed to have a poor single photon detection eﬃ-

ciency, and a two-photon detection eﬃciency that is signiﬁcantly larger such that η2−ph(2ω1)

>> η1−ph(ω1). To illustrate this point, we will compare the correlated photon signal to noise

to the classical signal to noise. The ideal communications link is often designed so that the

shot noise is dominant. Which yields,

(8)

(9)

SNRcorrelated
SNRclassical

=

η2−ph(2ω1)ηP DCL(ω1)
ηdet

s

< 1.

Clearly the ratio in the expression above will always be less than 1, largely because the

down conversion eﬃciency will never be 100%. Alternatively, if one examines the case where

the background noise exceeds the signal current, IB > I0, the ratios change to

SNRcorrelated
SNRclassical

=

η2−ph(2ω1)ηP DCL(ω1)

> 1.

ηdetη1−ph(ω1)

q
Here we assume that ηaccident(2ω1)Pr−B shown in Table 1 is negligible compared to η1−ph(ω1).

Equation 9 says that the correlated photon link has a performance advantage as long as

η2−ph(2ω1) >> η1−ph(ω1), in accordance with this relation.

3. Conclusions

Certain communications channels need to operate in the presence of severe background noise,

such as when the Sun is positioned near the line of sight (LOS) between the transmitter

and the receiver. In such situations noise-immune coding techniques are of limited help

due to saturation of the detector. Narrow-band ﬁlters can limit the background but with

a suﬃciently intense source the detectors can still be saturated by noise. In this situation

two-photon correlated detection can avoid the noise in an entirely diﬀerent way, where a

7

two-photon detector does not see it, or only sees “accidental” coincidences which are small

for incoherent sources like the Sun. If this is the case a quantum-correlated communication

channel can out-perform other techniques because it eliminates the background before a

detector signal is generated.

In telecom links for which the footprint of the of the beam is larger than the collection

aperture, quantum-correlated telecom links are essentially non competitive against classical

communications links because the correlation cross section of the product, Pt(ωa, t)Pt(ωb, t),

falls oﬀ at a rate proportional to 1/R4 while the classical link has a 1/R2 dependence.

However, over ranges of about 1000 km realizable communications links using 1 to 2-meter

mirror optics permit the design of links that collect most of the emitted photons, thereby

making free space links under this range superior if the conditions of Equation 9 are met. In

addition, ﬁber optic links, which intrinsically permit one to image all the incident photons

onto the receiver, may ﬁnd an advantage in using correlated photons when the in-band

background noise exceeds the signal level.

In summary, one will observe a performance advantage for correlated photon links when

the classical link is limited by an intense source of uncorrelated background noise. The

requirements for using this technique are (1) that an intrinsically two-photon detector be

developed (this rejects noise without being saturated by it) and (2) that most of the trans-

mitted photons be collected (which can be done in free space over distances up to about

1000km).

8

Acknowledgements

The research described in this paper was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory,

California Institute of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space

Administration, and was supported by a contract with the Oﬃce of Naval Research.

9

References

Lett 70 (1995) 1985.

A 63, (2002) 063407.

(2001).

108-110.

1. C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Crepeau, R. Jozsa, A. Peres, and W.K. Wooters, Phys. Rev.

2. P. Kok, A.N. Boto, D.S. Abrams, C.P. Williams, S.L. Braunstein, and J.P. Dowling, Phys. Rev.

3. R. Jozsa, D.S. Abrams, J.P. Dowling, and C.P. Williams, ”Quantum Clock synchronization

Based on Shared Prior Entanglement”, quant-ph/0004104 (2000): V. Giovannetti, S. Lloyd, L.

Maccone, and M.S. Shahriar, ”Physical Limits to Clock Synchronization”, quant-ph/0110156

4. C.K. Hong, S.R. Friberg, and L. Mandel, ”Optical Communications Channel Based on Coin-

cident Photon Pairs”, Applied Opitcs 24 (1985) 3877-3882; L. Mandel, ”Proposal for Almost

Noise-Free Optical Communication Under Conditions of High Background”, JOSA B (1984)

5. A. Lamas-Linares, J.C. Howell, and D. Bouwmeester, “Stimulated Emission of Polarization-

Entangled Photons”, Nature, 412, 887 - 890 (2001).

6. K. Sanaka, K. Kawahara, and T. Kuga, ”New High-Eﬃciency Source of Photon Pairs for

Engineering Quantum Entanglement”, Physical Review Letters, 86, (2001) 5620-5623.

7. J. Kim, S. Takeuchi, Y. Yamamoto, and H. Hogue, ”Multiphoton detection using visible light

10

photon counter”, Applied Physics Letters 74 (1999) 902-904.

11

Signal

Laser

Signal

Laser

Optical Path

Detector

Modulated

Output P(w

1, t)

Down
conversion
crystal

Filter

(a)

Optical Path

Coincidence
Detector

Modulated

Output P(w

2, t)

Filter

(b)

Figure 1, D.J. Jackson et. al.

12

Table 1. Deﬁntion of Noise Sources in Classical and Correlated Telecom Links

Noise Source

Classical Photons

Correlated Photons

σ2
thermal

σ2
shot

σ2
laserRIN

σ2
background

8kT B
Ri

4eI0B

2BFRIN I 2
0

4eηdetPr−BB

8kT B
Ri

4eI ′

0B

2BFRIN (I ′

0)2

4eη1−ph(ω1)Pr−BB† + 4eηaccidental(2ω1)P 2

r−BB‡

† η1−ph(2ω1) is the single photon detection eﬃciency.

‡ ηaccidental(2ω1) is the two photon absorption eﬃciency for statistically random detection

events.

13

