3
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
5
0
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The 28th International Cosmic Ray Conference

1

ANTARES Status Report

Teresa Montaruli1 for the ANTARES Collaboration2
(1) Universit´a di Bari and INFN, Via Amendola, 173, I-70126, Bari
(2) http://antares.in2p3.fr

Abstract

The ANTARES Collaboration is building a neutrino telescope 2400 m be-
low the Mediterranean sea close to the Southern French coast. The site is already
linked to the shore station by a 40 km-long electro-optical cable (EOC) which
transmits power and data. A prototype line and an instrumentation line for mon-
itoring environmental parameters have been successfully deployed and connected
to the EOC via the junction box, using the IFREMER manned submarine. The
Collaboration, after years of dedicated R&D and deployments of prototype lines,
is now ready to deploy the detector starting in spring 2004.

1. The ANTARES neutrino telescope

The ANTARES (Astronomy with a Neutrino Telescope and Abyss environ-
mental RESearch) project started in 1996 and involves physicists and engineers
from France, Germany, Italy, Russia, Spain, The Netherlands and the United
Kingdom. ANTARES aims to detect neutrinos with Eν & 10 GeV in order to
investigate ν astrophysics, dark matter in the form of weakly interacting massive
particles (WIMPs), monopoles and ν oscillations. Cherenkov light produced by
relativistic charged particles is detected by a 3D-array of optical modules (OMs),
pressure resistant glass spheres containing phototubes (PMTs). Photon arrival
times and PMT charge amplitudes allow track and energy reconstruction.

Current predictions and upper limits from previous generation and cur-
rently running telescopes indicate that the expected signal from cosmic neutrino
sources require very large detectors to be observed. About 200 ν-induced upward-
going muons/km2/yr are expected for a diﬀuse ﬂux from an isotropic distribution
of optically-thin extra-galactic sources equal to the Waxman & Bahcall limit of
4.5 · 10−8E−2 GeV−1 cm−2 s−1 sr−1 [9]. Galactic source luminosities & 1035 erg/s,
achievable in the presence of compact accelerators and intense magnetic ﬁelds, are
required to produce a rate larger than 10 events/yr from 100 TeV neutrinos in a
km2 array. In 1 year of data-taking the ANTARES expected sensitivity will sur-
pass that of current arrays and that expected for 600 live-days of AMANDA II [2].
The success of this experiment, with an eﬀective area > 0.02 km2 for Eν > 10 TeV

pp. 1–4

c(cid:13)2003 by Universal Academy Press, Inc.

2

and well reconstructed events, will be a milestone demonstrating the feasibility
of an underwater km3 detector in the Mediterranean, complementing a similar
array in the South Polar ice. Two km3-size detectors, one in each hemisphere,
are needed to cover the whole sky (including the Galactic Centre which is not
accessible from the South Pole using upward-going neutrinos), and guarantee a
cross-check of systematic errors arising from diﬀerent Cherenkov media properties.
The ANTARES site (42◦ 50’N, 6◦ 10’E) is well-shielded from the atmo-
spheric muon background by 2400 m of sea water and has been selected after
an intense program of sea campaigns dedicated to measurements of water trans-
mission properties. The absorption length is about 60 m at 470 nm and mainly
determines the size of the instrumented region and the PMT spacing. The eﬀec-
tive scattering length ∗ is more than 200 m, this is considerably larger and less
depth dependent than that of ice. The optical background, which is absent in
ice, is due to β decays of 40K and to a continuous bioluminescence rate which
combine to give a rate of about 60 kHz on a 10” PMT. Occasional, short biolumi-
nescence bursts momentarily increase the rate up to MHz. These bursts induce
a dead-time of 5% per PMT, however the detector dead-time from this source is
far less due to the requirement for coincidences. The average light transmission
loss of an OM due to bio-fouling and sedimentation is < 2% at its equator after
1 year from deployment, this saturates with time [1].

Twelve lines will be deployed each with 75 OMs mounted in 25 triplets
(storeys). Each OM has a 10” Hamamatsu PMT [10] oriented at 45◦ from the
vertical. Storey separation is 14.5 m giving a total implemented height of about
350 m which starts 100 m above the sea bed. Lines are kept taut by buoys and are
at an average distance of ∼ 65 m from one another in an octagonal conﬁguration.
The production of the 900 OMs started in spring 2002. The readout of each PMT
signal is shared by 2 Analog Ring Sampler ASICs which provide the analog signal
time and charge digitization. The ARS implements a waveform (WF) shape-
sensitive discrimination to distinguish single photoelectron-like pulse shapes (more
than 98% of events) from larger pulses. Tests have shown that an overall time
resolution of ∼ 1 ns can be achieved mainly limited by the transit time spread
(TTS) of the PMTs [4]. The ARS’s together with a compass and tilt meters or
hydrophones for the line positioning are located inside a titanium container which
is common to each storey. Considering a singles rate of 70 kHz from 40K and
bioluminescence rate of 2% of WF events, the typical data rate to shore will be
∼ 7 MB/s/PMT; a ∼ 100 PC farm on shore will process data. The DAQ system
design is given in [3]. Time calibrations are critical for the ANTARES experiment:
a system of LED and laser beacons and a clock calibration system [6] will allow
a relative time precision between OMs of ∼ 0.5 ns and the absolute time will be
∗Eﬀective means that the scattered photon distribution, forward peaked in sea water, is

accounted for.

3

determined with an accuracy of ∼ 1 ms. The present planning indicates that the
full detector will be installed by 2005.

From Nov. 1999 to June 2000 the Collaboration achieved a signiﬁcant
milestone in the deployment and operation of a “demonstrator line”, instrumented
with 7 PMTs at a depth of 1100 m and connected to shore with a 37 km-long
EOC. The shape of the atmospheric muon zenith angular distribution was repro-
duced, despite the small number of PMTs and their 1D-layout. The ANTARES
relative and absolute positioning acoustic system of rangemeters, compasses and
tilt miters was tested. Relative distances and absolute positioning were measured
with an accuracy of ∼ 5 cm and of ∼ 1 m, respectively.

In Oct. 2001, the 40 km-long EOC for power and data transmission be-
tween the detector and the shore station in La Seyne sur Mer was deployed. Since
Dec. 9, 2002, the heart of the forthcoming array, the junction box (JB), has been
in communication with the shore station. It was deployed during a sea operation
requiring the dredging and lifting of 2.5 km of the undersea EOC. On March 17,
2003 the ﬁrst data were received from a prototype detection line equipped with
15 OMs (5 storeys corresponding to 1/5 of an ANTARES line). The line was
deployed in Dec. 2002 and connected in Mar. 2003 to the underwater JB using
the Nautile manned submarine of the French IFREMER oceanographic research
agency. During the same mission, the Nautile connected a prototype instrumen-
tation line (deployed on Feb. 12, 2003) incorporating instrumentation to monitor
underwater environmental parameters (a pulsed laser calibration system, a deep-
sea Doppler current meter, detectors to measure sound velocity, salinity and water
transparency). The success of the submarine connections has proved the viability
of the ﬁnal detector conﬁguration with 12 line inter-connections radiating from
the JB. Data are currently being acquired from PMTs, tilt meters and compasses
of the prototype line and from the instrumentation line. They are consistent with
the expected single counting rate of around 60 kHz due to 40K β decays and peaks
in excess of 250 kHz from bioluminescence bursts. The status and results of the
prototype lines are described in [4]. Fig. 1 shows the layout of the future 12 line
detector and underwater photographs of the prototype lines.

2. Expected physics performances

The ANTARES angular resolution is about 0.2◦ for Eν > 10 TeV, where
pointing accuracy is not limited by the ν − µ kinematics, but by the PMT TTS
and by light scattering in water. The ANTARES sensitivity (90% c.l.) for point-
like source searches to the upgoing µ ﬂux induced by a typical E−2 diﬀerential ν
ﬂux is in the range between 4 ÷ 50 · 10−16 cm−2 s−1 after 1 yr. Search strategies
and discovery potential are discussed in [5]. The energy resolution and methods
to reconstruct muon energy and parent neutrino spectra are discussed in [7].
The sensitivity (90% c.l.) to E−2 diﬀuse diﬀerential neutrino ﬂuxes achieved by

4

Fig. 1. The ANTARES layout: the positions of the deployed prototype lines (squares,
PSL = Prototype Sector Line and IL = Instrumentation Line), the cables connecting
them to the JB, the 40 km EOC and the future 12 lines are indicated. Underwater
photographs of the 2 lines, JB and seismometer are shown.

rejecting the background with an energy cut of Eµ ≥ 50 GeV is 8 · 10−8 GeV cm−2
s−1 sr−1. The sensitivity of ANTARES in the search of WIMPs is given in [8].
The upper limit on ν-induced muon ﬂuxes (90% c.l.) from neutralino annihilation
in the Sun is at the level of 400 km−2 yr−1 for mχ & 200 GeV.

3. References
1. Amram P. et al. 2003, Astrop. Phys. 19, 253
2. Barwick S.W. et al., astro-ph/0211269
3. Bouwhuis M. et al., A data acquisition system for the ANTARES neutrino

4. Circella M. et al., Toward the ANTARES neutrino telescope: results from a

telescope, this conference

prototype line, this conference

this conference

scope, this conference

5. Heijboer A. et al., Point source searches with the ANTARES neutrino telescope,

6. Hern´andez-Rey J. et al., Time Calibration of the ANTARES Neutrino Tele-

7. Romeyer et al., Muon energy reconstruction in ANTARES and its application

to the diﬀuse neutrino ﬂux, this conference

8. Thompson L. et al., Dark matter searches with the ANTARES neutrino tele-

9. Waxman E., Bahcall J.N. 1999, Phys. Rev. D59 (1999) 023002
10. Zornoza J. et al., Study of photomultiplier tubes for the ANTARES neutrino

scope, this conference

telescope, this conference

