A Textured Silicon Calorimetric Light Detector

P. C. F. Di Stefano∗, T. Frank, G. Angloher, M. Bruckmayer, C. Cozzini,

D. Hauﬀ, F. Pr¨obst, S. Rutzinger, W. Seidel, and L. Stodolsky

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik, F¨ohringer Ring 6, D-80805 Munich, Germany

J. Schmidt

Institut f¨ur Solarenergieforschung Hameln/Emmerthal,

Am Ohrberg 1, D-31860 Emmerthal, Germany

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

We apply the standard photovoltaic technique of texturing to reduce the reﬂectivity of silicon

cryogenic calorimetric light detectors. In the case of photons with random incidence angles, absorp-

tion is compatible with the increase in surface area. For the geometrically thin detectors studied,

energy resolution from athermal phonons, dominated by position dependence, is proportional to

the surface-to-volume ratio. With the CaWO4 scintillating crystal used as light source, the time

constants of the calorimeter should be adapted to the relatively slow light-emission times.

PACS numbers: 29.40, 84.60.Jt, 85.25.Oj, 95.55.Vj, 95.35.+d

3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
7
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ E-mail: distefano@ipnl.in2p3.fr, Permanent address : Institut de Physique Nucl´eaire de Lyon, 4 rue Enrico

Fermi, F-69622 Villeurbanne Cedex, France

1

INTRODUCTION

Cryogenic calorimeters, in which the phonons created by incoming particles are read out,

now rival longer-established techniques of particle detection such as ionization in semicon-

ductors and scintillation. They boast excellent thresholds and resolutions which can be

enhanced by measuring athermal phonons in addition to the thermal ones. Another of their

advantages, exploited by rare-event searches for which radioactive background is an issue, is

the ability to distinguish between particles interacting with electrons in matter (e.g. photons

and electrons) and those interacting with nuclei (e.g. neutrons and putative dark matter

particles). Until now this has been achieved mainly through a simultaneous measurement of

charge in semiconducting calorimeters [1, 2, 3]. Another technique is a simultaneous mea-

surement of scintillation, with a principal calorimeter made out of a scintillating material

which emits photons read in a secondary calorimeter [4, 5] (or some other light sensitive

device [6]). For instance, the next phase of the CRESST (Cryogenic Rare Event Search

with Superconducting Thermometers) dark-matter search will deploy up to 33 such mod-

ules with CaWO4 as the main calorimeter [7]. The challenge is that the emitted light is but

a small fraction of the deposited energy, and not all of it necessarily reaches the secondary

calorimeter. We report on optimization of these light detectors.

In the case of main calorimeters like CaWO4 emitting light in the visible spectrum, and

for optical sources in general, silicon would appear well suited as an absorber for the light-

detection calorimeter, because of its band gap around 1 µm (1.17 eV at mK temperatures).

Moreover, Si has already been successfully used as an absorber in cryogenic calorimeters

(e.g. Ref. [8]). Its advantages include a high speed of sound (≈ 5760 m/s) which gives good

phonon properties, and a high melting point (≈ 1690 K) which facilitates deposition of thin

ﬁlms made from materials with high melting temperatures, such as tungsten, when they are

chosen as thermometers. However, polished silicon has a high visible reﬂectivity. A similar

problem has been encountered in the ﬁeld of photovoltaics, and solved by a combination

of texturing the surface of the silicon and coating it with anti-reﬂective layers [9]. The

texturing squares the reﬂectivity for normal incident photons by providing them with two

chances to be absorbed. We ﬁrst describe preparation of our textured light detectors before

discussing experimental results obtained.

2

PREPARATION OF THE LIGHT DETECTORS

Two 4 inch diameter, 525 ± 35 µm thick, ﬂoat-zone p-type silicon wafers with a resistivity

of between 10200 and 71030 Ωm were used. Orientation of both wafers was (100) for the

purpose of texturing. One side of each wafer was polished, the other lapped and etched.

A natural silicon oxide layer is assumed to have been present on all Si surfaces. A 150 nm

thick SiNx layer was deposited by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition through an

Al mask into 5 mm diameter disks on the polished surface of one of the wafers. This wafer
was then etched in a KOH-isopropanol mix at 75 ◦C in order to texture the exposed Si

into a random pyramid structure [10]. Typical height of the pyramids is 2–5 µm, while
the pyramid angle of 70.5◦ given by the crystalline structure of Si means that the textured

surface area is about 1.74 times greater than the original, planar, surface area. The SiNx

remained unaﬀected by the texturing.

Samples of size 20 × 20 mm2 and 30 × 30 mm2 were cut from both wafers. Tungsten

transition-edge sensors of the type depicted in Figure 1 were next deposited onto the samples

using a standard procedure developped by the CRESST collaboration [11] : tungsten ﬁlms
about 300 nm thick were evaporated at 550 ◦C under 10−10 mbar onto the samples; the W

was structured by photolithography and a KH2PO4 - KOH - K3Fe(CN)6 - H20 solution to
sizes of 2 × 2 mm2 or 2 × 3 mm2. Electrical contact pads made of 200 nm thick aluminum

were then sputtered onto the tungsten for the readout, as was a 200 nm thick gold thermal

contact. Similar aluminum pads were deposited as contacts for a ﬁlm heater used to stabilize

the operating temperature of the thermometer and to send periodic heat pulses to monitor

the stability of the detector response. Gold or aluminum wires of 25 µm diameter were

ultrasonically bonded to the pads to provide the thermal or electrical links. The W ﬁlms

were placed near the center of the Si absorbers, and on the SiNx in the case of the textured

samples. On silicon, the tungsten reliably gave superconducting transitions near 20 mK,

once it was realized this transition appears to depend on the natural oxide on which the W

is deposited : when the W was evaporated onto samples which had been etched in HF just

before mounting in the deposition chamber, the transition temperature was of the order of

1 K; when the time lapse between HF bath and W deposition was of the order of a week

the transition was at about 60 mK. This is presumably linked to some chemical interaction

between Si and W which is inhibited by the presence of natural oxide. Such interactions

3

also appear to have been blocked by the SiNx layer in the case of the textured absorber, as

a transition temperature near 20 mK was obtained.

Three detectors were selected for testing : 20 × 20 mm2 and 30 × 30 mm2 planar Si
absorbers, and a 20 × 20 mm2 textured Si one. Their characteristics are summarized in

Table 1.

EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS

Preliminary tests and setup

All three light detectors were ﬁrst cooled in a standard copper holder inside a dilution
fridge and exposed to a collimated 55Fe source (5.9 keV photons) to estimate their intrinsic

energy resolution. Resolution, estimated as the full width at half the maximum (FWHM)

of the 5.9 keV line, was 350 eV for the textured detector and 180 eV for the smooth ones.

However, detector responses in terms of pulse height varied with the position of the colli-

mated spot. It is quite likely that these resolutions, especially that of the textured detector,

contain a contribution from the ﬁnite size of the collimated hole.

Next, the three detectors were each placed in a setup inside the fridge to measure their

light absorption. The setup (Figure 2), described in detail elsewhere [12, 13], consisted of

a CaWO4 scintillating crystal of cylindrical shape (35 mm high with a 40 mm diameter)

placed in a concentric 50 mm diameter light collector lined with a polymer reﬂective foil [14].
The CaWO4 crystal had a non-functioning 5 × 6 mm2 W ﬁlm on it. Both ends of the light

collector were lined with the same foil; however one of the ends had four Teﬂon pegs to hold

the light detector. In this manner, both sides of the light detector should have been exposed

to any available scintillating light. Care was taken to minimize thermal leaks between

the calorimeters and their environment while avoiding spurious light traps in the setup.
To provide an absolute energy reference, a 55Fe source illuminated the light detector from

outside the light collector foil, through a hole in the light collector’s Cu structure behind

the light detector (for mechanical reasons, the whole large light detector was exposed to the

source, whereas the small detectors where illuminated through a 14 mm diameter hole). An
external 60Co source (main photon lines at 1.17 MeV and 1.33 MeV) was used to stimulate

scintillating light from the CaWO4 (peak of emission ≈ 440 nm, FWHM ≈ 100 nm [15]).

4

The detectors were operated in their superconducting transition by stabilizing their base-

line temperature through the ﬁlm heaters. This proved a challenge at ground level because

the high rate of cosmic-ray-induced background interacting in the 266 g scintillator led to

pile-up in the light detector, especially in the large one. Pile-up, a nuisance in itself, can

also degrade the temperature stabilization of transition-edge sensors. The large device was

therefore operated with active thermal feedback [16] to shorten pulse times in some runs.

Stability of the small detectors was monitored with a pulser.

Pulse shapes in light detector

Two classes of light detector events were recognizable from their time constants (Fig. 3).
Fast pulses were caused by direct hits in the light detector (mainly due to the 55Fe source).

Slower pulses were events of scintillating light (due to interaction in the CaWO4 of the
cosmic background and 60Co when present). That the slow pulses originate in the scintillator

was previously veriﬁed by the coincidences between the light detector and an instrumented

CaWO4 calorimeter.

The direct events in the detectors have been ﬁtted with a model assuming an exponen-

tial rise (collection and thermalization of athermal phonons in the thermometer), a fast

exponential decay (relaxation of thermal phonons in the thermometer through its heat sink,

referred to as the athermal signal), and a slower exponential decay (relaxation of the entire

detector, referred to as the thermal signal) [8]:

R(t) = H(t)

Aath
h

e−t/τath − e−t/τrise
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

+ Ath

e−t/τth − e−t/τrise
(cid:16)

(cid:17)i

(1)

where H(t < 0) = 0 and H(t ≥ 0) = 1 and, to simplify, the pulses are assumed to start at

t = 0. Direct 5.9 keV hits gave typical rise times of τrise ≈ 60 µs with a FWHM of 15 µs for
the distribution of these events. Both the athermal (τath ≈ 0.7 ms) and thermal (τth ≈ 6 ms)

components were clearly present, with the athermal component making up between 40 and

90 % of the total pulse amplitude. All these parameters depended on the detector and to a

certain extent the operating temperature.

Scintillation-induced hits with similar energy deposits in the light detector had typical

rise times of 250 µs with a FWHM of 50 µs for the distribution. This slow rise time

is interpreted as indicative of a relatively slow scintillation component in CaWO4. The

5

athermal component of the scintillating pulses was suppressed. Thus the light detectors

appear to have been too fast for the scintillator, and were not quite in a calorimetric mode

where they would fully integrate the energy of the individual photons emitted by an event

in the scintillator [8]. Light detector response was therefore not optimal. To understand the

scintillation pulse shapes, an exponential decay with time constant τscint of the light emitted

from the CaWO4 scintillator has been assumed :

E(t) = H(t)

e−t/τscint

"

τscint #

(2)

In this form,

∞
0 E(t) dt, the total energy emitted in scintillation, is normalized to unity

whatever the time constant. Convolution with the response of the light detector for direct

R

hits yields the expected shape of the scintillation-induced pulses :

S(t) =

E(u) R(t − u) du

∞

0
Z
= H(t)

Aath
(cid:20)

τath
τscint − τath

e−t/τscint − e−t/τath

−

(cid:16)

+ H(t)

(cid:26)
Ath
(cid:20)

τth
τscint − τth

(cid:17)
e−t/τscint − e−t/τth

(cid:17)(cid:27)(cid:21)
(3)
(cid:17)(cid:27)(cid:21)
Should the scintillation time constant be equal to one of the phonon time constants τ , the
τ e−t/τ . Should τscint be much smaller than all the phonon time
constants, Eq. 3 would simplify to Eq. 1 : S = R. Fits have been performed independently

relevant term would become t

e−t/τscint − e−t/τrise

−

(cid:26)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

τrise
τscint − τrise
τrise
τscint − τrise

e−t/τscint − e−t/τrise
(cid:16)

on the direct hits using Eq. 1 and on the scintillation events using Eq. 3. For each detector,

the common calorimetric parameters are found to be compatible within the error bars of both

sets of ﬁts. The resulting scintillation time constant is τscint = 0.4

sys
± 0.1 ms, where the error

quoted is systematic. When the parameters of the direct ﬁt are imposed on the scintillation

ﬁt, the result is degraded. This indicates that there may in fact be several scintillation

time constants. The scintillation emission written in Eq. 2 can be generalized to two or

more scintillation constants, for instance H(t)

α e−t/τscint
τscint
(cid:20)
of Eq. 3 is linear. With the direct-ﬁt parameters set, ﬁts yield a fast time constant of

+ (1 − α) e−t/τ
τ ′
scint

. Generalization

(cid:21)

′
scint

0.3

sys
± 0.1 ms making up α = (70

sys
± 15) % of the emitted scintillation energy, and a slow

constant of 2.5

sys
± 1 ms. More complicated emission time structures are possible but have

not been investigated.

We note also that because the light detectors are not fully calorimetric for the scintillat-

ing light, pulse height is a biased estimator of the actual energy of the scintillation-induced

6

pulses. Compared to the energy scales provided by the direct hits (Eq. 1), the energy of the

scintillation pulses (Eq. 3) may be greatly underestimated. To correct for this, pulse param-

eters are obtained from the ﬁt with a single scintillation time constant and all parameters

left free. These parameters are used to build a numerical pulse model based on Eq. 3. The

correction factor is deﬁned as the ratio of the amplitude of this model pulse, assuming a

scintillation time constant much shorter than the other time constants (i.e. Sτscint→0 = R,

ideal calorimetric response), divided by the amplitude of the model pulse with the ﬁtted

time constant (i.e. Sτscint, actual response). Because each detector has its own phonon time

constants, the correction factor varies from one detector to the next. The correction factors

sys
± 0.15 for the textured detector, 1.7

are 1.45
sys
± 0.1 for the large planar detector. The main errors are systematic and come from the

sys
± 0.2 for the small planar detector, and

1.2

estimation of the scintillation time. Most of the loss in amplitude comes from the ather-

mal component, because of its shorter time constant. For the three detectors, the athermal

correction factors are respectively 1.55

only 1.17

sys
± 0.05, 1.45

sys
± 0.1 and 1.12

sys
± 0.15, 2.1
sys
± 0.03 for the slower thermal component. One way

sys
± 0.1, whereas they are

sys
± 0.3 and 1.4

to improve the detector design might be to slow down the relaxation time of the athermal

component, with a weaker coupling of the thermometer to the heat bath.

Detector resolutions

Resolutions for the direct 55Fe hits and the scintillating 60Co hits are given in Table 2.
These 55Fe resolutions are worse than the spot resolutions, conﬁrming that the response of

the light detector depends on the position of the interaction in it. This is because in the

thin absorber crystal used, to reach the thermometer, phonons created far from it must

bounce oﬀ the crystal surfaces and thus risk decay more often than phonons created near it.

Moreover, in the case of the non-textured silicon detectors, which have similar volume-to-

surface ratios (0.25 mm), the resolutions are close to one another (about 0.62 keV FWHM).

The resolution of the textured detector, however, is noticeably worse. We attribute this

to the lower volume-to-eﬀective-surface ratio (0.15 mm) of the light detector, which causes

extra scattering of the athermal phonons on the crystal surface before they are absorbed in

the thin-ﬁlm [8].

60Co resolution is comparable in all three detectors. Given an energy of ≈ 2.8 eV per

7

scintillating photon, this resolution is not compatible with simple Poisson photon statistics.

Rather, it appears to result from ﬂuctuations in the light escaping the crystal depending on

the position of the interaction in the scintillator because of ﬂaws in the latter. This eﬀect

may be more or less pronounced from one CaWO4 crystal to another.

Lastly, the 5σ baseline noise, also reported in Tab. 2, varies between 40 eV and 70 eV.

This gives an indication of detector threshold, though the high background from cosmic rays

interacting in the scintillator has thwarted attempts to verify it directly.

Light absorption properties

Thanks to the combined use of the 55Fe and 60Co sources, it was possible to measure the

absolute amount of light detected by each silicon calorimeter in this particular setup. The

energy deposited by a photon in the CaWO4 scintillator can go into three channels:

Edep = Ephonon + Escint + Elost

(4)

where Ephonon is transferred to phonons in CaWO4 (either directly or by absorption of some

scintillation photons). Escint represents the energy of scintillation photons that are eventually
seen in the light detector. It can be measured absolutely thanks to the 55Fe calibration of

the light detector. Elost is energy lost, probably mainly in the form of scintillation photons

escaping or absorbed in the light collector. Edep itself is known in the case of a photon source
like 60Co by identiﬁcation of the photon lines. This method does not provide a means of

estimating Ephonon and Elost, though the former is thought to represent the majority of the

deposited energy.

Results for the three detectors are summarized in Table 3 in terms of ε = Escint
Edep

, the

fraction of the energy deposited by a photon in the scintillator that is converted to light

and eventually seen in the light detector. The main uncertainty, discussed previously, is of a

systematic nature and comes from the diﬃculty of estimating the true pulse energy because

the response of the light detector is rather fast for the scintillating time structure. A smaller

systematic eﬀect comes from possible non-linearities in detector response due to irregular

transition curves. An upper limit on this eﬀect has been estimated using the ﬁlm pulser in

the case of the small detectors, and diﬀerent operating points on all detectors. The eﬀect

was also reduced in the case of the large detector through the active thermal feedback [16]

8

for some runs.

The non-textured silicon detectors absorb comparable amounts of light per unit area.

This indicates that detector size could still be increased before the quantity of absorbed

light reaches a limit for this combination of light collector and scintillator. The textured

detector has a signiﬁcantly better light absorption per unit area. Light absorption of the

textured detector is in line with its eﬀective surface area, though the estimation of Sef f is

rough and assumes that light falls uniformly on both faces of the detector, and that the

small SiNx and W structures on the front face of the detector have reﬂectivities similar to

Si.

Lastly, we note that the absolute amount of light seen in the light detector depends on the

eﬃciency of the light collector, and also on the quality of the scintillator. Indeed, signiﬁcant

variations have been observed between CaWO4 crystals leading to values of ε of up to about

1.3 % for conﬁgurations similar to those described here [12].

CONCLUSION

The absorptivity in the visible wavelengths of cryogenic silicon calorimeters with a given

size has been enhanced through the standard photovoltaic technique of texturing. The

increase is compatible with the extra surface created by the texturing (a factor of 1.74), as

expected for photons with random incidence angles. We presume that for normal-incident

photons, the gain would be greater due to photons having two chances to be absorbed

between surface pyramids as is the case for solar cells.

Response of the cryogenic light detector has been corrected for the mis-adaptation be-

tween its time constants and the scintillation time structure of the CaWO4 crystal used as

light source at 20 mK. The latter is estimated to contain at least a fast (≈ 0.3 ms) compo-

nent and a slow (≈ 2.5 ms) one. A slower light detector than the one used here would allow

a better estimation of the scintillation energies. Conversely, a faster one might provide more

insight into the time structure of the scintillator, and, at energies high enough to yield a

statistically signiﬁcant number of photons, could make it possible to check if the time struc-

ture depends on the nature of the interaction in the scintillator.

Indeed diﬀerences have

already been observed between the time constants of alpha particles and those of gammas

interacting in CaWO4 at 20 mK [13].

9

Energy resolution for a monochromatic source, which in the case of two-dimensional

athermal silicon devices is dominated by the correlation between response and position of

the interaction, is degraded by the decrease in volume-to-surface ratio caused by texturing,

which induces extra phonon scattering.

It may be possible to improve the sensitivity of

the light detector through the use of smaller thermometers with phonon collector pads [17].

Another option might be to exploit the Neganov-Luke eﬀect [18, 19], the semiconducting

analogue of resistive heating, which can amplify the phonon signal.

Finally, for low-radioactivity applications, contaminations from the naturally occurring
unstable isotope 40K should be avoided. The tungsten thermometer etch used here would

therefore be replaced by a potassium-free one such as HF or H2O2. It may also be possible

to replace the KOH texturing bath with NaOH or an organic one [20].

This work was funded by European TMR Network for Cryogenic Detectors ERB-FMRX-

CT98-0167, and is dedicated to the memory of Marie Folkart.

10

List of references

[1] N. J. Spooner, A. Bewick, G. Homer, P. Smith, and J. Lewin, Phys. Lett. B 273, 333 (1991).

[2] T. Shutt, B. Ellman, P. D. Barnes, Jr., A. Cummings, A. Da Silva, J. Emes, Y. Giraud-H´eraud,

E. E. Haller, A. E. Lange, R. R. Ross, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 3425 (1992).

[3] L. Berg´e, I. Berkes, B. Chambon, M. Chapellier, G. Chardin, P. Charvin, M. De J´esus,

P. Di Stefano, D. Drain, L. Dumoulin, et al., Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl.) 70, 69 (1999),

[4] C. Bobin, I. Berkes, J. P. Hadjout, N. Coron, J. Leblanc, and P. de Marcillac, Nucl. Instrum.

astro-ph/9801199.

Methods A 386, 453 (1997).

[5] P. Meunier, M. Bravin, M. Bruckmayer, S. Giordano, M. Loidl, O. Meier, F. Pr¨obst, W. Seidel,

M. Sisti, L. Stodolsky, et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 1335 (1999), physics/9906017.

[6] A. Alessandrello, V. Bashkirov, C. Broﬀerio, C. Bucci, D. Camin, O. Cremonesi, E. Fiorini,

G. Gervasio, A. Giuliani, A. Nucciotti, et al., Phys. Lett. B 420, 109 (1998).

[7] C. Bucci, M. Altmann, M. Bruckmayer, C. Cozzini, P. Di Stefano, T. Frank, D. Hauﬀ,

F. Pr¨obst, W. Seidel, I. Sergeyev, et al. (2001), MPI-PhE/2001-02.

[8] F. Pr¨obst, M. Frank, S. Cooper, P. Colling, D. Dummer, P. Ferger, G. Forster, A. Nucciotti,

W. Seidel, and L. Stodolsky, J. Low Temp. Phys. 100, 69 (1995).

[9] R. A. Arndt, J. F. Allison, J. G. Haynos, and A. Meulenberg, Jr., in 11th IEEE Photovoltaic

Specialists Conf. (Phoenix, Arizona) (1975), pp. 40–43.

[10] J. B. Price, in Semiconductor Silicon Symposium (1973), The Electrochemical Society Series,

[11] P. Colling, A. Nucciotti, C. Bucci, S. Cooper, P. Ferger, M. Frank, U. Nagel, F. Pr¨obst, and

W. Seidel, Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 354, 408 (1995).

[12] T. Frank, M. Bruckmayer, C. Cozzini, P. Di Stefano, D. Hauﬀ, F. Pr¨obst, W. Seidel, G. An-

gloher, and J. Schmidt, in 7th Int. Conf. Advanced Tech. and Part. Phys. (Villa Olmo, Como,

pp. 339–353.

Italy) (2001).

[13] T. Frank, Ph.D.

thesis, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen and Max-Planck-Institut

f¨ur Physik, Werner-Heisenberg-Institut, Munich

(2002),

http://tumb1.biblio.tu-

11

muenchen.de/publ/diss/ph/2002/frank.pdf.

[14] M. F. Weber, C. A. Stover, L. R. Gilbert, T. J. Nevitt, and A. J. Ouderkirk, Science 287,

2451 (2000).

[15] M. J. Treadaway and R. C. Powell, J. Chem. Phys. 61, 4003 (1974).

[16] O. Meier, M. Bravin, M. Bruckmayer, P. Di Stefano, T. Frank, M. Loidl, P. Meunier, F. Pr¨obst,

G. Safran, W. Seidel, et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 444, 350 (2000).

[17] M. Loidl, S. Cooper, O. Meier, F. Pr¨obst, G. S´afr´an, W. Seidel, M. Sisti, L. Stodolsky, and

S. Uchaikin, Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 465, 440 (2001).

[18] B. S. Neganov, V. N. Troﬁmov, and V. Stepankin, J. Low Temp. Phys. 93, 417 (1993).

[19] P. Luke, J. Beeman, F. S. Goulding, S. E. Labov, and E. H. Silver, Nucl. Instrum. Methods

[20] J. S. You, D. Kim, J. Y. Huh, H. J. Park, J. J. Pak, and C. S. Kan, Sol. En. Mat. & Sol. Cells

A 289, 406 (1990).

66, 37 (2001).

12

Tables

TABLE 1: Silicon light detectors. S is the total surface area of both faces of the light detectors.

Eﬀective surface Sef f encompasses eﬀect of texturing. Volume is V. All devices were 0.5 mm thick.

Type

Size

S

Sef f

V

(mm2) (mm2) (mm2) (mm3)

Planar–Small 20 × 20

800

800

Planar–Big

30 × 30

1800

1800

Textured

20 × 20

800

1377

200

450

200

13

TABLE 2: Resolutions of detectors for direct 55Fe and scintillating 60Co calibrations, and baseline
noise. 55Fe resolution is mainly due to inhomogeneous response of light detector. This is exac-

erbated in the case of the textured detector, which has a lower volume-to-eﬀective-surface ratio.
60Co resolutions, expressed in units of energy deposited in the scintillator, are comparable for the

three detectors, and probably dominated by inhomogeneous response of the scintillator. Baseline

noise, an indicator of threshold, is also comparable in all detectors.

Detector

FWHMFe FWHMCo 5σnoise FWHMFe × V/Sef f
(keV mm)

(MeV ee)

(keV)

(eV)

Planar–Small

Planar–Big

Textured

0.65

0.61

1.25

0.26

0.30

0.28

68

73

39

0.16

0.15

0.18

14

TABLE 3: Light absorption properties of Si light detectors. ε is the fraction of energy deposited by
60Co photons in the scintillator and eventually detected in the light detector. Non-textured silicon

detectors exhibit comparable absorption per unit area. This indicates that total light absorption

could still be improved by a larger surface area in this particular setup. Textured light detector has

greater absorption per unit area. Taking into account eﬀective area brings results into line, though

estimating Sef f precisely is not straightforward. Errors are systematic and come mainly from the

estimate of the scintillation energy, based on pulse amplitude, which depends on knowledge of the

scintillation time structure.

Detector

103 × ε

ε/S
−2

)

(m

ε/Sef f
−2

(m

)

Planar–Small 3.0 ± 0.3

3.8 ± 0.4

3.8 ± 0.4

Planar–Big

7.8 ± 0.8

4.3 ± 0.5

4.3 ± 0.5

Textured

5.4 ± 0.5

6.7 ± 0.7

3.9 ± 0.4

15

Figure captions

FIG. 1: Schematic of thermometers deposited on the Si cryogenic detectors. Typical dimension of

tungsten ﬁlm is 2 mm. Thick lines are Au wire, used for thermal contacts and resistive heaters;

thin lines are Al wire, used as electrical contacts.

FIG. 2: Exploded view of copper holder, scintillator and light detector (adapted from [12]). Holder

is lined with reﬂective foil, omitted here for clarity. Light detector is exposed to direct photon
hits coming from a 55Fe source and from scintillation photons coming from the CaWO4 excited by
cosmic rays and a 60Co source. The combination of direct and scintillating events makes it possible

to measure the absolute amount of light detected for a given setup.

FIG. 3: Examples of averaged direct and scintillation-induced pulses from a detector (continuous

lines) along with their ﬁts (dashed lines). Pulses here have been averaged over some thirty events.

Fits have been performed leaving all parameters free in both cases and assume a single scintillation

time constant. The common, calorimetric parameters, are found to be compatible. When the ﬁt

parameters from the direct ﬁt are imposed on the scintillation ﬁt, the result is degraded. This

indicates there is in fact more than one scintillation time constant.

16

To heater
control

Al

To readout

Al

Au

Al

W

Al

To thermal
ground

17

18

 

)
s
t
i
n
u
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
a
(
 

e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

2.5

3

2

1

0

1.5

0.5

Direct Hit
Scintillation Event

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6
Time (ms)

19

