3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Physics in Collision - Zeuthen, Germany, June 26-28, 2003

CMS BARREL RESISTIVE PLATE CHAMBERS - TESTS AND
RESULTS

Borislav Pavlov
on behalf of the CMS RPC Barrel Collaboration
Bari(Italy), Naples (Italy), Pavia (Italy),
Peking University (China), Soﬁa University (Bulgaria), INRNE (Bulgaria)

ABSTRACT

CMS experiment will use Resistive Plate Chambers (RPCs) as dedicated muon trig-
ger detectors. The ﬁrst 24 RPCs for the barrel muon system of the CMS experiment
have been assembled and tested. A brief description of the cosmic muon telescope
used for the tests is given. The preliminary results for the chamber performance are
presented.

1 Introduction

CMS (Compact Muon Solenoid) is a general purpose detector for the new coming
LHC accelerator at CERN. Detailed description of CMS can be found elsewhere [1].
RPCs [2] are gaseous parallel-plate detectors with time resolution comparable to
that of scintillators (∼ 1 ns) and good spatial resolution (∼ cm)[1].
An RPC single gap consists of two parallel plates made of Bakelite and is ﬁlled with
gas. The outer Bakelite surfaces are coated with graphite to form HV and ground
electrodes. Two single gaps glued together form the double gap structure. The
copper read-out strips are situated between the single gaps and are separated from
the graphite coating by an insulating ﬁlm.
A charged particle passing through an RPC initiates an electron avalanche due to
ionisation in the applied electric ﬁeld. The drift of electrons towards the anode

1

induces a “fast” charge (signal) on the pick-up electrode. The developed more
complex front-end electronics [3] allows to operate the RPCs in avalanche mode [4].
To increase the signal (at a ﬁxed voltage) or to reduce the voltage (at a ﬁxed signal),
double gap design is implemented by CMS (two gas gaps are mechanically assembled
together in one parallel double gap structure with common read-out strips) [4], [5].
Prototype RPCs have already been build and successfully tested [4], [5]. The results
presented in this paper refers to double gaps design.

2 Test Set-Up

The ﬁrst 24 RPCs were tested using cosmic muons in Bari. The test set-up consists
of the following systems:
Trigger System. The RPCs are situated between two upper and two lower large
trigger scintillators. The trigger signal is formed by taking the logical “AND” of the
four large scintillators. Two additional small “veto” scintillators are used in order
to suppress the contribution from electromagnetic avalanches. The chambers under
tests have two double gaps (“forward” and “backward”) which are tested separately.
HV System. Chamber’s up and down single gaps are supplied separately.
DAQ System. The front-end boards accepts signals from the chamber electrodes
and after ampliﬁcation and discrimination forms a LVDS signal for every strip. RPC
signals are read-out at a ﬁxed frequency of 40 MHz and are stored in a temporary
memory. When the trigger arrives the information is passed to the PC for further
processing.
Gas System. The gas system allow as to use up to four component gas mixture.

Figure 1: Distribution of the 95% eﬃciency voltage (left). Cluster size (middle) and
noise rate (right) versus the chamber number for diﬀerent voltages.

2

3 RPC tests and results

The eﬃciency, cluster size, noise rate and electric current were measured for diﬀerent
voltages in the range 9.0 - 9.8 kV. The chamber front-end electronics threshold
was ﬁxed during the tests to accept the charge above 125 fC. Temperature and
atmospheric pressure corrections have been made. Freon-based gas mixture has
been used (96.2% C2H2F4, 3.5% i-C4H10, 0.3% i-SF6).
Eﬃciency. The eﬃciency is deﬁned as a ratio between the RPC responses (at least
one ﬁred strip) and the number of recorded triggers, with correction for spurious
hits. All chambers have achieved desired eﬃciency of 95% and above (ﬁg. 1). Long
and stable eﬃciency plateaus are observed.
Cluster size. Cluster size is deﬁned as the number of simultaneously ﬁred adjacent
strips. The average cluster size for the voltages in the range 9.4-9.6 kV is between 1.5
and 3 (ﬁg. 1). This is higher than expected, but is still acceptable. The cluster size
can be reduced by changing the front-end electronics thresholds to optimal value.
Noise rate. Noise rate is deﬁned as the total chamber noise normalised to its
active surface. A noise rate of up to 10 Hz/cm2 is considered acceptable within the
detector speciﬁcations. However, the test results show an even improved noise rate
of less than 5 Hz/cm2, (ﬁg. 1). Only one chamber has unacceptable noise rate (CH
9) and will be reassembled.

The ﬁrst 24 RPC chambers for muon station RB3 were produced and tested. All of
them reach the desired high eﬃciency (above 95%). The cluster size and noise rate
at high voltages 9.4-9.6 kV fully satisfy CMS requirements (except CH 9).

4 Conclusions

References

1. CMS collaboration, Technical Proposal, CERN/LHCC 94-38, (1994)

2. R. Santonico et al, NIM 187, 377 (1981)

3. M. Abbrescia et al, New developments on front-end electronics for the CMS Resistive

Plate Chambers NIM A 456, 143-149 (2000)

4. M. Abbrescia et al, Local and global performance of double gap RPCs operated in

avalanche mode, NIM A 434, 244-253 (1999)

5. M. Abbrescia et al, Recent result and developments on double-gap RPC for CMS,

NIM A 409, 43-45 (1998)

3

