A design outline for a Cherenkoﬀ neutrino observatory

E.P. Bonvin ∗1 and S. T. Hatamian †1

1California Institute of Technology Pasadena CA 91125 USA

(Dated: December-1991)

Abstract

An economical procedure to upgrade the existing Fairport water Cherenkoﬀ detector is described.

The detector will lower its energy threshold by increased photocoverage and light yield. Further-

more, by addition of a Gd salt it will become sensitive to neutrons produced by the inverse beta

decay of anti-neutrinos on protons. The new detector can then take advantage of the existence of the

Perry power nuclear reactor, located 12.9km away, as a large source of anti-neutrinos. The present
gap in the exclusion plot of the neutrino oscillation parameters (∆m2 from 2 × 10−4 to 10−2eV 2)

may be explored and closed within 12-18 months of run-time. The detector will be able to observe

other types of neutrino sources (Boron-8 solar, atmospheric, and supernova) with unprecedented

advantages. The low threshold also will allow searching for exotic modes of proton-decay.

PACS numbers:

3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
1
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ Now at: Queens University at Kingston, Sudbury Canada
† Now at: Mathematicus Laboratories, Sound Beach, NY, email:tsh@MathematicusLabs.com

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The physics of neutrinos has been of increasing import among the high energy community.

This has been especially true in the last ten years due in main part to the so called solar-

neutrino puzzle: the measurement[1] in which the number of observed solar neutrinos is

signiﬁcantly lower than that expected from the ”standard solar model”. This has given rise to

a surge of interest in the neutrino-oscillation hypothesis. The oscillation hypothesis suggests

that the weak interaction neutrino eigenstates are a superposition of the mass eigenstates,

which therefore, whence massive, may oscillate into one another. This oscillation may in

turn be responsible for the apparent deﬁcit in the expected electron neutrino ﬂux, during

its traversal of solar matter or in the vacuum.

Terrestrial oscillation experiments have been carried out with reactor neutrinos, acceler-

ator generated (muon-)neutrino beams, cosmic ray neutrinos, and atmospheric neutrinos.

The upper limits for the oscillation parameters are summarized in ﬁg-1. Oscillation experi-

ments are usually analyzed in terms of a two-parameter model (assuming only two neutrino
ﬂavors) characterized by the mass parameter ∆m2 =| m2
1 | line, and the mixing strength
parameterized by an angle: sin2 2θ . The probability that a neutrino νl of energy Eν will

2−m2

change into νm after travelling a distance L (in vacuum) is given by:

Pνml = sin2 2θ sin2 1.27∆m2[eV 2]L[m]

.

Eν[MeV ]

(1)

While, the probability that νl will remain unchanged is given by Pνll = 1 − Pνml.

In order to explore smaller mixing angles(sin2 2θ) one must increase the count rates of any
given oscillation experiment. To reach smaller mass parameters(∆m2), however, one must

either search for longer neutrino oscillation wavelengths (implies longer separation from the

source, hence less ν-ﬂux), or carry out the search for lower and lower energy neutrinos(Eν),

or both. Particularly for the latter approach, the low energy reactor neutrinos are the most

attractive choice, in addition to their relatively large ﬂux, and an unrivaled understanding

and control of their source. In order to cover the gap in mass parameter of the exclusion

plot(ﬁg-1), and given the energy spectrum of a typical power reactor, the separation of the

detector from the reactor is then ﬁxed to a value just over 10 Kilometers.

The Fairport facility (formerly used as a proton-decay detector) is located 12.9km away

from the Perry (3.8 GWatt) power reactor. Though not designed as a neutrino detector,

2

this fortunate ”accident” makes the Fairport facility a prime candidate for an inexpensive

and powerful neutrino detector.

In this article we delineate a method for upgrading of

the Fairport detector to, not only take advantage of the large source of neutrinos at the

perfect distance, but to in fact, serve as a neutrino observatory to explore a host of neutrino

related questions. These include detection of not only reactor neutrinos, but also Solar,

atmospheric, and supernovae neutrinos. Moreover, the design can make possible searching

for proton decay via supersymmetric or other exotic modes. Since the main point of the

upgrade is a lowering of the threshold of the detector, possible future experiments with

(Fermilab) accelerator neutrino beams are not precluded.

Another proposal[2] has sought to take advantage of the proximity of the Perry nuclear

power reactor, but using liquid scintillator as the light producing medium. Though the

light produced by all forms of energetic particles is enhanced over 50-fold, many technical

problems (relating to cost, handling, containment, ppt-puriﬁcation, and Gd-loading of the

liquid scintillator), make this alternative approach a challenge quite diﬀerent from the design

obstacles tackled in the water detector, described here.

In 1991, the IMB detector was decommissioned due to a leak which resulted in the loss

of much of the water, and some structural damage. The discussion of this needed repair

(albeit quite major), as well as other necessary civil engineering considerations are beyond

the scope of our detector design synopsis, and will not be addressed here. Here we will only

assume that the structure can be restored to a similar state as the original.

In fact the

necessary reconstruction is an opportunity to re-build a much better facility using the 12-

years of operational experience, and indeed better suited to the new design. Alternatively,

the design and the accumulated expertise may be transported to a whole new location at

the proper distance from a nuclear reactor in a new underground, or submontane facility.

II. AN OUTLINE AND THE PHYSICS FOCUS

The Fairport detector is a large tank which contains a total mass of 8Ktons of water,

puriﬁed through reverse osmosis. The present ﬁducial mass is 3.3Ktons at a depth 1570

meters of water equivalent(mwe).

It is located at a Morton-Thiokol corp.

salt mine in

Fairport, Ohio(41.7oN, 81.3oW ). The tank is 18m high, 17m on the N-S side and 22.5m

along the E-W direction. Presently, it is designed to hold 2048 photomultipliers(PMT) of

3

8-inch diameter to give a photocoverage of approximately 6% of the walls, for an eﬀective

threshold of just under 20MeV of electron energy.

Our proposal will make the primary mode of detection, the inverse beta decay of anti-

neutrinos on protons in the water. This reaction produces a positron and a neutron. After

thermalization, the neutron via a large capture cross section on a nucleus such as Gd-157

(=240Kb) is converted into gamma rays, and hence becomes detectable. The threshold for

a clean trigger must be reduced to a few Mev gamma rays from the present 20 MeV recoil

electrons. This enables the detector to see reactor anti-neutrinos whose spectrum ranges

from 0 to 8 MeV.

The low energy of the neutrinos observed will allow limits on smaller mass parameters

on the mixing exclusion plot. The high ﬂux of the reactor is another attractive feature: at
2 × 107/cm2s (at 12.9km) this is larger than any atmospheric, accelerator or solar source.

The backgrounds in this mode of anti-neutrino detection are made very small by requiring

a coincidence between the positron and the neutron signal, as the deﬁnitive signature of the

anti-neutrino. Moreover, the ability to turn the source oﬀ and on, aﬀords an unparalleled

advantage in measuring backgrounds. In this manner, the proposed upgrade should inexpen-
sively and speedily cover the exclusion plot gap between the mass parameter of 2 × 10−2eV 2
to 10−4eV 2 . If the parameters of the present proposal are successfully implemented, the

expected rate of detected neutrinos will be around 10/day. This would allow to close the gap

in a matter of a year’s running time. Background (reactor oﬀ) and systematic runs should

take of order months. The detector may concurrently, as well as later on, observe neutrinos

from other sources with much advantage over other techniques (presently in operation), as

will be discussed later in this paper.

III. DISCUSSION OF THE UPGRADE TASK

The upgrade project may be summarized in a list of 3 items: 1. Create sensitivity

to neutrons. 2. Lower the detector threshold to 5 Mev. 3. Reduce sources of potential

backgrounds in this energy regime. Each of these tasks will be discussed in detail in this

section.

4

A. Neutron Sensitivity

1. The choice of target nucleus

The best candidate for detection of neutrons is the gadolinium(Gd) nucleus. The ﬁrst use

of Gd additives as a detecting agent (particularly in liquid scintillators) dates back to early

1950’s (see for example Ref-7 for an early mention in the context of large detectors). Gd is

a naturally occurring element comprised of(15.7%) Gd-157 and (14.7%) Gd-155 (among its

other isotopes). The average thermal neutron capture cross section for natural Gd is 49Kb.

The radiative capture reaction will release approximately 8Mev of energy in an average of

3.5 gamma rays with one quantum guaranteed to have at least 5.6Mev of energy. Cherenkoﬀ

light is then produced by electrons from the Compton scattering of these gamma rays. The

feasibility of a similar process has been demonstrated by Kamiokande-II [3] who used a Cf-

252 source as a neutron emitter embedded in a block of Nickel as the capturer. Of the 9MeV

of released gamma rays, they observed 7.8MeV deposited well above backgrounds, which also

agreed well with their Monte-Carlo simulations. The actual case of Gd was simulated by

researchers in Sudbury Neutrino Observatory(SNO)[4] Their results shows that nearly 60% of

the Gd gamma rays would be detectable with a threshold of 4.5Mev at(40% of 4π -steradian

light-coverage). These studies suggest that as a rule, in this energy range, gamma rays

convert some 85% of their energy into electron energy (Cherenkoﬀ light). Based on SNO’s

study, the eﬃciency of neutron detection is plotted as a function of detector threshold (or

photocoverage), in ﬁg-2. A threshold of approximately 5MeV at 44% photocoverage seems

a reasonable goal. The above value for photocoverage is not unreasonable: Kamiokande-II

already has a 20% photocoverage and a threshold of about 8MeV or less, but they are not

fortunate enough to be near a nuclear power reactor (see also photocoverage below).

Further candidates (see table-1) for the neutron capture target may be natural Cd which

yields slightly over 9MeV of gamma rays, but at 2.5Kb cross section, one would need 20

times more Cd nuclei to match the eﬀect of Gd. Large concentration of additives might

reduce the light transmission of the water. Another candidate is natural Sm which has an

average cross section of 5.8Kb, and 8MeV of gamma rays, in return its fast neutron capture

cross section might help with the timing of positron coincidence and thus increase signal to

noise.

5

Target Mass(amu) σthermal(barn) Concentr.(wt.%) N(1020/cm3) Capt.Time(µS) γ signal (Mev)

H

Cl

Cd

Sm

Gd

1.008

35.45

112.4

150.4

157.3

0.33

33.5

2450

5,800

49,000

15

20

1

0.42

0.05

773

34.3

0.472

0.150

0.017

177

39.5

39.3

43.6

46.0

2.2

8.6

8.9

8.0

8.0

Table-1: Summary of candidate neutron capture nuclei and their properties.

2. Containment of the Gd loaded water

Due to the need to continuously ﬁlter the water that is in contact with the electronics and

cables, one may not allow the Gd loaded ﬁducial water to mix with the non-ﬁducial water.

This necessitates the need for a transparent containment vessel or bag in which the water-Gd

solution is contained, and is never routed to the reverse osmosis ﬁlters. These ﬁlters will

very eﬀectively extract the Gd-salt dissolved in the water. Fig-3 is a sketch of the proposed

scheme: A cube of 13m (2.2Kton) on a side made of(1-2 cm thickness), transparent Teﬂon is

suspended at the center of the detector. This bag (or vesssel) will contain highly puriﬁed(of

pollutants and radioactivity) water, loaded with a Gd-salt(and possibly wavelength shifters,

discussed later). Note that the transparent bag needs only to contain the ﬁducial mass.

In case of a breakage, all is not lost. The water may be puriﬁed and the Gd is recovered,

and the ﬁducial volume may be reconstructed. Alternatively, one can consider a solid,

transparent vessel (e.g. of Acrylic) to contain the ﬁducial water. The vessel material can

potentially cause, a large loss of light within it. For example, SNO’s 5cm thick Acrylic

vessel is meant to securely contain the very expensive heavy water, but it is responsible for

a 21% loss of light[4]. Light loss can only be compensated by larger, costly photocathode

area, or smaller detector volume (closer-in walls). Another consideration is the radiopurity

of the bag or vessel material, This can become a major contributor in the case of acrylic[4].

A thin Teﬂon layer however can be made at signiﬁcantly lower levels of U and Th and

contamination.

6

Teﬂon can also can help to bring the ﬁducial mass (with the added weight of Gd-salt) to

neutral buoyancy. It is, furthermore, a good choice due to its physical stability, and lack of

chemical interaction with other material. However, careful studies of the growth of bacteria

on the Teﬂon are of paramount import in the present design. The growth of such bacteria

on glass and plastic media has been observed, and has proven quite a nuisance despite

countermeasures in the water puriﬁcation process. Light loss due to bacteria growth is a

universal problem which all large water-based detectors such as SNO and Kamiokande must

contend with. In our case, the presence of Gd salt(s), and possibly the complex molecules

of wavelength shifters (if used) may signiﬁcantly aﬀect the growth rate of these parasites.

The complete lack of fresh air ﬂow in the sealed bag may prove a favorable factor.

3. Photocoverage

In order to lower the threshold of the detector, more light coverage is necessary. For a

5MeV threshold, this amounts to an eﬀective 44% photocoverage. This may be achieved by

simply increasing the area of the photocathode coverage. Alternatively, with a reasonable

design for light-collecting reﬂectors, it seems feasible to lower the photocathode coverage

requirement to below 35%. These ﬁgure are not unreasonable: we note that SNO and

SuperKamioka proposals call for similar or even larger ﬁgures compared to 44%.

The PMT’s are mounted on a rigid outer shell, moved inward 2m from the walls to increase

photocoverage, as well as to allow a buﬀer region to shield from low-energy radioactivity of

the rock, salt, etc. of the walls. Another purpose of the 2m region is to install a small number

of the PMT’s, facing out, to act as veto triggers. Another 1m is allowed in between the

containment bag (ﬁducial volume) and the PMT structure, to shield against radioactivity

from the glass in the PMT’s, other electronics, and objects on the mounting structure. The

PMT’s will need to be magnetically shielded. However, a mu-metal grid for instance, can cut

the light transmission by up to 10%[3] This spells out further need for added light collection

by a reﬂector around the PMT’s.

7

4. On Adding a Wavelength Shifter to Increase Light-yield

Since the bulk of the cost of the proposed upgrade is expected to be that of the PMT

price tag, further reduction in the required photocathode coverage is desirable. One method

is suggested by noting that the Cherenkoﬀ light spectrum has a signiﬁcant component in the

UV[5], a region that is not detected by ordinary photocathodes. Water soluble chemical addi-

tives, called wavelength shifters, exist whose molecules will absorb the higher energy photons

and re-emit lower energy(visible) photons. While this process will increase the light collected

from the Cherenkoﬀ process, its shifted component will be isotropic and will not have the

directionality of the Cherenkoﬀ cone; this light may be used in a calorimetric mode only.

Unfortunately, some ( 20%) of the visible(directional) light from the Cherenkoﬀ process may

also be absorbed and re-emitted thus resulting in dilution of the original directionality[6].

While This loss does not aﬀect the energy-threshold, it will dilute the ability to reconstruct

particle tracks. The latter becomes a concern, mainly in the search for proton-decay events.

A candidate for this task is beta-methylumbellapherone[5]. This liquid will shift light from

the wavelength range of 250-350nm to 380-540nm, by absorbing light in the former range

and re-emitting in the latter range. At a concentration of 50ppm, the average absorption

length(α) is 5cm for λ ∈[250,350]nm (α > 20m for [400,700]nm). At this level, a factor

of 1.74 in light-yield has been shown to be gained from the addition of the wavelength

shifter[6]. Although the loss of directionality of light is an important concern, the use of a

wavelength shifter could prove a major improvement in the eﬀective photocoverage of the

detector. Perhaps the development of a customized wavelength shifter may prove worthy of

the investment to address the problem of loss of directional portion of the light for better

track reconstruction. To summarize, a factor of 1.74 improvement in the light yield, will

reduce the ﬁnal photocathode-coverage needed to 25% (and even lower with light collectors),

while retaining an eﬀective photocoverage of 44%.

5. Detection of neutron-positron coincidence: Electronics

The sequence of events following a neutrino interaction on a proton is as follows: ﬁrst a

positron (0-5.5MeV, median 1.5MeV) and a neutron are released. The positron will soon

stop, giving a weak Cherenkoﬀ signal below threshold. Given the 0.05% concentration of

8

Gd, by 100 microseconds later, the thermal neutron is radiatively captured. The gamma

cascade will last about 100 nSec. The mean neutron capture time is 46 microseconds[7].

Although it is conceivable that the detection of the thermal neutron’s radiative capture

will be suﬃcient to signify a neutrino event, a much cleaner signal would be the observation

of the neutron-positron delayed coincidence. For the latter purpose, one would require an

on-line (hardware) trigger on all neutron events, via the emission of nuclear gamma rays.

Thereupon, the output of a system of high rate waveform digitizers, with a memory depth

of approximately 100 microseconds, will be frozen for oﬄine(software) acceptance, or veto

of the subsequent neutron event. At the proposed levels of photocoverage, a neutrino event

will be accepted if a 20-25 photoelectron event was preceded by a 6-7 photoelectron burst

in its immediate past 100 microseconds. The accidental backgrounds for this event will be

shown to be very small indeed in the following section.

A digitizing system (8 bit dynamic range) with quite similar characteristics as that needed

here, has been demonstrated with a memory depth of 500 microseconds operating at 500

MHz in ref[8].

B. Background Considerations

1. Uncorrelated Background

Uncorrelated backgrounds are comprised of the accidental coincidences of relatively large

singles rates. These are estimated and listed in table-2, assuming a 2.2Kton ﬁducial volume,

and 5 MeV threshold. The sources labeled ”internal” are due to radioactivity within the

ﬁducial volume and hence mostly dependent on the purity of the water. The ﬁgures are

scaled based on SNO’s careful computations at 0.02 ppt water (U and Th content), and

at 40% photocoverage. In SNO’s actual case, this class of noise is some 10 times larger[4],

simply due to the radioactivity in the acrylic containment vessel. A mass spectroscopic

analysis of the Fairport water yielded the U+Th content of 20 ppt. Thus the ﬁducial water

must be 1000 times purer than the Cleveland city water before it is sealed in the containment

bag.

9

Type

Source

Reaction

INTERNAL Water

Th+U at 0.02 ppt

Rate

10/day

Water

Spontaneous ﬁssion

≪ 1/day

PMT’s

(α ,pγ) at 30ppb U+Th

10/day

EXTERNAL Walls

Muon spallation on NaCl

0.01/day

Walls (α ,pγ) on Na at 30ppm U+Th

3/day

(α ,pγ) on Al in concrete

5(x%Al)/day

COSMIC Muons

Walls

Walls

Muons

Muons

(α,n) and(n,γ) on Na
µO16 → νµN 16

muon decay

spallations

0.03/day

30/day

2000/day

600/day

Table-2: Estimated rates of singles events in the proposed detector. Figures are based on

2.2Kton ﬁducial water and 5MeV threshold.

The ”external” class of backgrounds is referred to all sources of radioactivity which orig-

inate outside of the water. These sources are negligibly small, thanks to the large buﬀer

regions allowed in between the ﬁducial volume and the walls.

Noise due to cosmic ray muons that interact directly with the ﬁducial volume are by far

the largest source of uncorrelated background. These are primarily due to decay of muons

inside the ﬁducial volume. Muons also cause break-up of nuclei present in the water. A

small number of muons will convert O-16 into N-16 which will beta decay(Q=10.4 MeV)

with a mean-life of 7-Seconds. Muons may decay inside the ﬁducial volume at a large rate.

The released electron has an energy up to 100MeV. Muon induced spallations are rarer but

more complex, as a variety of beta decay isotopes with A < 16 may be created; they have

lifetimes ranging from 10-3 to 1 second, and Q > 10MeV.

Given the rates above and the coincidence window of a positron-neutron coincidence, the

uncorrelated backgrounds pose little concern for the detector’s signal to noise. This is so,

even without the constraint that the neutron and the positron events must appear within
an approximately 8m3 volume due to ﬁnite travel time of the thermalized neutron.

10

2. Correlated Background

Of much greater concern, are correlated sources of noise: Non-neutrino events that mimic

a positron-neutron coincidence signature. This is particularly problematic in the case of

muon spallations: often a neutron is knocked free in addition to the creation of beta/neutron

emitters(see table-3). As the result, the two ingredients of a genuine neutrino event are mim-

icked. The solution to this problem is the existence of the strong muon track that precedes

the electron-neutron event. In addition, if not missed, the (one or more) freed spallation

neutrons will precede the beta event, which will make the event even more distinguished as

a spallation reaction.

Isotope Lifetime Qβ

Branching ratio

Li9
Li11
C 16

0.2 sec 13 MeV

10 msec 21 MeV

35%

61%

0.7 sec 4 MeV

100%

Table-3: Spallation isotopes that decay via prompt beta-neutron emission. The expected

rate of these events are estimates around 35/day before rejection due to proximity to a strong

muon track.

The detector’s larger photocoverage should further pay oﬀ here: the improved tracking

of trajectories is needed to reject spallation events. The precise rate of these muon related

events will also be measured during the reactor-oﬀ periods. In all, a high signal to noise

ratio is in principle, achievable for detecting 10-15 reactor neutrinos per day.

IV. NON-REACTOR NEUTRINO PHYSICS

A host of new neutrino physics questions may be explored using the proposed low thresh-

old water Cherenkoﬀ detector. Perhaps the most important is the case of the Boron-8 solar

neutrinos. To date, the foremost electron-neutrino scattering experiment has been that of

Kamiokande-II which has a threshold of around 8MeV. Fig-4 shows the energy spectrum

of these neutrinos as transformed into recoil electrons. Clearly a threshold of 5MeV will

vastly improve the observation of the Boron-8 neutrino ﬂux. Based on extrapolations from

11

Kamiokande rates, the proposed detector will observe over 6 events per day of Boron-8

neutrinos, some 20 times larger than the present leader in this ﬁeld, Kamiokande. For com-

parison, the proposed Super-Kamiokande detector[9] will expect to see about 23 events per

day.

eﬀect.

Atmospheric neutrinos are another handle on possible oscillation phenomena. The obser-

vation of relative deﬁciency of muon neutrinos to electron neutrinos is fairly well established.

Similarly to the case of the Boron-8 spectrum (ﬁg-4), the upgraded Fairport detector with a

low threshold, will improve observed rates over those achieved by Kamiokande-II. Moreover,

there will be less diﬃculty with systematic errors in energy calibration, as it easily avoids

very steep parts of the atmospheric neutrino energy spectra starting at just above 10MeV of

electron recoil energy. With improved rates and less systematic eﬀects, more precise com-

parisons of up-going vs. down-going neutrinos may be made, to search for terrestrial MSW

If to occur during the life of the upgraded detector, supernovae neutrinos will yield

unprecedented insight into mechanisms of stellar explosions. This is achieved because both of

the expected neutrino and anti-neutrino bursts may be observed, and distinguished from one

another. Neutrinos will be observed via electron scattering. The expected ﬂux spectrum of

each of these bursts are plotted in ﬁg-5. Note that during the 1987A super-nova, Kamiokande

(0.68Kton) had a threshold of about 8MeV and the Fairport (IMB-) detector (3.3Kton) had a

threshold of about 20MeV. In addition, both could only observe the lower curve of neutrino-

electron scattering. Whether or not there are two bursts of neutrinos, and how far apart

they are in time, will conﬁrm or refute entire classes of supernova theories[10].

Finally, search for supersymmetric proton decay could continue. In supersymmetric the-

ories the proton may, for example, decay into a neutrino and a kaon, or a pion. Previously,

The neutrino-kaon branch was searched for by looking for the muon decay of the kaon. Many

new lower energy decays may be sought with a lower threshold detector. For example, one

could consider the proposed recombination of nucleon-hole pairs as put forward in Ref[11].

This mode may only be investigated with a detector threshold of order 5MeV or lower.

Acknowledgments

Much of the work on the details of the present proposal was done by E.Bonvin. I also

12

wish to thankfully acknowledge numerous useful discussions with the members of the IMB

group, especially: F.Reines, H. Sobel, W.Kropp, C.McGrew, And P.Halverson. This work

was supported by the US Department of Energy.

[1] See for example, R. Davis jr.: Seventh Workshop on Grand Uniﬁcation,(ICOBAN 1986,

Toyama, Japan), p.237 (1986).

[2] R. Steinberg, C.Lane, M.Mittelbrunn, and F.Wang: The Fermilab meeting DPF92, ed.

C.Albright, Vol.2, p.1296 (World Scientiﬁc, 1992). See also, R.Steinberg: 5th Int’l. workshop

on neutrino telescopes, Venice, March-1993.

[3] M. Nakahata(Doctoral Thesis): Search for Boron-8 Neutrinos at KAMIOKANDE-II (unpub-

lished, University of Tokyo 1988). See also A Suzuki: Ionizing Radiation 15, no.1(1988), and

K.Hirata et al.,Phys. Rev. D38,448(1988).

[4] Sudbury Neutrino Observatory: Annexes to Proposal SNO-87-12, Natl. Res. Council of

Canada (1987). See also for example, J.Zwinkels, U.Davidson, and C.Dodd, Appl. Opt.

29,3240(1990).

[5] N.Porter, Nuovo Cim. 5,526(1957). See also, H.H.Ross: Int’l. Conf. on Organic Scintillators

and Liquid Scintillator Counting, ed. D.Harrocks and C.Peng, p.757,(Acad. Press, 1971).

[6] D.Kielczewska/The IMB Group at UC-Irvine, Internal report: A simulation of the IMB de-

tector. See also R.Claus et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A261,540(1987), for a report of wavelength-

shifters embedded in solid acrylic plates attached to the PMT’s. While this design has lower

eﬃciency, it does eliminate the loss of directionality. Combination of the plates with the liquid

wavelength shifter has been calculated to improve light yield by the factor 1.9 [op. cit.] com-

pared to 1.74 for the liquid alone. IMB also suggested placing the wavelength shifter liquid

and the PMT’s in individual enclosures at their respective sites. This way the shifting is done

just before the light hits the photocathode.

[7] F.Boehm, E.Bonvin, S.Hatamian, H.Henrikson, and S.Ludtke, Nucl. Instrum. & Meth.

A300,395(1991). See also T.A. Gabriel et al., Op. Cit. 221,474(1984).

[8] M.Atyia, M.Ito, J.Haggerty, C.Ng, and F.W.Sippach, Nucl. Intrum. & Meth. A279,180(1989).

[9] T.Kitamura, T.Nakatsuka, Il Nuovo Cimento 103A,1443(1990). See also, T. Kajita: Third

Workshop on Elementary Particle Picture of Universe, ed. Fuji-yoshida, Japan 1988.

13

[10] A. Burrows, The Astrophys. J. 283,848(1984), and R.Mayle, J.R.Wilson, and D.N.Schramm,

op. Cit. 318,288(1987).

[11] H.Ejiri, Phys. Rev. C48,1442(1993).

14

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Fig-1. Exclusion limits for neutrino oscillation from experiments to date. The lower

hollow region is the expected range of parameters for the MSW eﬀect in Boron-8 solar

neutrinos. The dashed curve outlines the goal of the upgraded Fairport detector.

Fig-2. Plot of neutron capture eﬃciency as a function of detector threshold, from ref.[4].

Fig-3. Schematic of the basic design proposed. The ﬁducial volume is deﬁned by the

transparent Teﬂon bag.

Fig-4. The recoil electron spectrum of solar Boron-8 spectrum. Kamiokande-II has a

threshold around 8 MeV. Note the extent of improvement with a threshold at 5MeV and

with three times the ﬁducial volume.

Fig-5. The theoretical recoil electron spectrum of a supernova[10]. Both Kamiokande and

Fairport/IMB were sensitive to the lower curve only, during the SN1987a. Fairport/IMB

had a threshold of around 20MeV.

15

