3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
1
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

The CDF Calorimeter Upgrade for Run IIb
S. Kuhlmanna, H. Frischb, M. Cordellic, J. Hustond, R. Millerd, S. Lamie∗, R. Paolettif, N. Turinif ,
M. Iorig, D. Tobackh, F. Ukegawai

aArgonne National Laboratory, Illinois 60439, USA
bUniversity of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA
cLaboratori Nazionali di Frascati, INFN, I-00044 Frascati, Italy
dMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA
eINFN Pisa, I-56127 Pisa, Italy, and Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021, USA
f INFN Pisa, I-56127 Pisa, and University of Siena, I-53100 Siena, Italy
gUniversity of Roma 1 and INFN, I-00185 Roma, Italy
hTexas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA
iUniversity of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305, Japan

The physics program at the Fermilab Tevatron Collider will continue to explore the high energy frontier of
particle physics until the commissioning of the LHC at CERN. The luminosity increase provided by the Main
Injector will require upgrades beyond those implemented for the ﬁrst stage (Run IIa) of the Tevatron’s Run II
physics program. The upgrade of the CDF calorimetry includes: 1) the replacement of the slow gas detectors
on the front face of the Central Calorimeter with a faster scintillator version which has a better segmentation,
and 2) the addition of timing information to both the Central and EndPlug Electromagnetic Calorimeters to
ﬁlter out cosmic ray and beam related backgrounds.

thick tungsten bar, has been checked for large
pulse heights in all the rare events CDF has ob-
served in Run I. The φ-cracks cover about 8% of
the central detector, and in events with multiple
electromagnetic objects, the possibility of one ob-
ject hitting the crack is quite high.

The present slow CPR and CCR gas detectors

1. THE CENTRAL PRESHOWER AND

CRACK DETECTORS

The CDF Central Preshower (CPR) and Cen-
tral Crack (CCR) detectors will be replaced at the
time the silicon detector is replaced for Run IIb.
In 1992 the CDF Collaboration installed gas
detectors on the front face of the central calorime-
ter in order to sample early showers and cover the
φ-cracks between calorimeter wedges, as shown
in Fig. 1. The CPR has been extensively used
in electron identiﬁcation (ID), providing about a
factor 2-3 more rejection of charged pions that
pass all other cuts. This extra rejection has been
crucial in soft electron ID for b-jet tagging, as
was shown in the ﬁrst top evidence paper [1]. The
CPR has been used in several publications involv-
ing photon ID. By using conversion rates, which
are energy independent,
it extended the QCD
measurement of direct photons by more than 100
GeV in photon transverse momentum PT [2].

The CCR, located after a 10 radiation length

∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-212-327-8832; fax: +1-
212-327-7786. E-mail address: lami@fnal.gov (S. Lami)

Figure 1. The central calorimetry wedges and the
location of the preshower and crack detectors.

2

will suﬀer the luminosity increase foreseen for
Run IIb.
In order to maintain the same Run
I capabilities, they will be replaced by scintilla-
tor counters read out by Wave-Length Shifting
(WLS) ﬁbers. The new CPR will also have a bet-
ter segmentation and will be used to improve the
jet energy resolution by both correcting for en-
ergy loss in the dead material in front of it and
adding its information in jet algorithms incorpo-
rating charged tracking.

1.1. The Detector Design fron Run IIb

The new CPR will be based on 2cm thick
scintillator tiles segmented in η and φ and read
out by a 1mm diameter WLS ﬁber running into
a groove on the surface of each tile. Six tiles
(12.5x12.5 cm2 each) will cover the front face of
each calorimeter tower, and the tiles will be as-
sembled in 48 modules like the one shown in Fig. 2
covering the 48 central calorimeter wedges. After
leaving the tiles, the WLS ﬁbers will be spliced
to clear ﬁbers which will terminate into plastic
connectors at the higher η edge of each mod-
ule. There ∼5m long optical cables will trans-
mit the light to 16-channel PhotoMultiplier Tubes
(PMTs) at the back of the wedge. A current
prototype, consisting in scintillator tiles provided
by the CDF JINR Dubna group and Pol.Hi.Tech
ﬁbers, provided a light yield of ∼20 (12) photo-
electrons at the exit of the tile (after all the opti-
cal chain), exceeding the design requirement.

The new CCR will use the same technique but
the available space will limit the scintillator thick-
ness to 5mm. Ten tiles, ∼5cm wide, will cover
each φ-crack with the same calorimeter segmen-
tation of 10 towers/wedge.

Figure 2. View of the CPR upgrade design.

2. THE EM TIMING PROJECT

The CDF Collaboration is adding timing infor-
mation into the readout of the Central and Plug
electromagnetic calorimeters (CEM and PEM)
using a technique similar to the hadron TDC sys-
tem. This upgrade would signiﬁcantly improve
the potential of the CDF detector to do high-PT
searches for new physics in data samples with
photons in the ﬁnal state by: 1) reducing the
the cosmic ray and beam halo sources of back-
ground; 2) checking that all photons in unsual
events are from the primary interaction. With
suﬃcient calibration data, there is even the pos-
sibility of searching for very long-lived particles
which decay (1-10ns) into photons.

2.1. The Hardware Project

The signal from the PMT goes to a Transition
Board on the back of a calorimeter readout VME
crate. All the lines are passed through the VME
backplane into an Ampliﬁer Shaper Discriminator
(ASD) which eﬀectively turns the signal into an
LVDS digital pulse suitable for use by a TDC.

While the 960 PEM PMTs already have a dyn-
ode output designed into the base, a custom split-
ter is used for the output of the 960 CEM PMTs.
The splitter is a fully passive element, completely
connectorized, which works by inductively cou-
pling the primary line (for the energy measure-
ment) to the secondary output. The primary out-
put loses a negligible amount of the charge and
the secondary line only takes ∼15% of the output
voltage for use to ﬁre the ASD/TDC system.

Several tests of the splitter, both on the test
bench and on the detector itself, show no dif-
ference between the input shape and height be-
fore and after inserting the splitter into the sys-
tem. For energies > 4 (2) GeV for the CEM
(PEM), the splitter ﬁres the ASD/TDC system
with 100% eﬃciency. The intrinsic timing resolu-
tion, measured using the CEM LED and a splitter
into a TDC channel of the hadron calorimeter, is
∼1.1ns, dominated by the 1ns TDC resolution.

REFERENCES

1. F. Abe et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 (1994) 225.
2. F. Abe et al., Phys. Rev. D 48 (1993) 2998;

Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 (1994) 2662.

