3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
6
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
0
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Vertex Tracker at Future e+e− Linear Colliders
M. Battaglia
University of California, Berkeley CA, USA and
CERN, CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland

Abstract

The physics program of high energy e+e− linear colliders relies on the accurate identiﬁcation of fermions to study
in details the proﬁle of the Higgs boson, search for new particles and later probe the multi-TeV mass region by
direct searches and precision electro-weak measurements. This paper reviews the requirements, conceptual design
and sensor R&D for the Vertex Tracker.

Key words: vertex detector; linear collider

1. Introduction

The LHC collider at CERN represents the next
step in the study of the high energy frontier in
particle physics. We expect that the data collected
in pp collisions will provide evidence of the Higgs
bosons and of Supersymmetry, or of other New
Physics signals. The Higgs bosons observation will
be a decisive breakthrough in our understanding
of the origin of mass and electro-weak symmetry
breaking. Signals of New Physics will clarify the
solution to the hierarchy problem of the Standard
Model. But neither the precision study of the Higgs
proﬁle nor the investigation of New Physics will be
completed at the LHC. There are measurements
which will be limited in accuracy, while others may
not be feasible at all.

A high energy, high luminosity linear collider
(LC), able to deliver e+e− collisions at center-of-
mass energies √s = 0.3-0.5 TeV with luminosity
in excess to 1034 cm−2s−1, later upgradeable to
about 1 TeV, is considered as the next large scale

project in accelerator particle physics. Present
projects focus on warm RF (mostly X-band as for
the NLC and JLC projects) or super-conducting
cavities (proposed by the TESLA collaboration)
to achieve the needed gradients (1). Beyond it,
multi-TeV collisions appear to be achievable at a
linear collider, using a novel two-beam accelera-
tion scheme at high frequency, developed in the
CLIC study (2).

The Vertex Tracker is expected to provide the jet
ﬂavor identiﬁcation capabilities and the accurate
event reconstruction that make the linear collider
unique and allow its physics program.

If the Higgs boson exists and it is light, as the
present data indicates, its couplings to fermions of
diﬀerent ﬂavor, and hence of diﬀerent mass, must
be accurately measured as a fundamental proof
of the Higgs mechanism of mass generation, as
well as its self-coupling. Eﬃcient ﬂavor tagging in
multi-jet events and determination of heavy quark
charge will be instrumental to study signals of
New Physics both through the direct production

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

8 August 2013

of new heavy particles, coupled predominantly to
b and t quarks, and by precise electro-weak data
at the high energy frontier. Physics requirements
push the vertex tracker speciﬁcations to new lev-
els. While much has been learned in two decades
of R&D on Si detectors for the LHC experiments,
the LC motivates today new and complementary
directions. Its experimental environment, with its
lower event rate and radiation ﬂux, admits Si sen-
sors that are substantially thinner, more precise
and more segmented than at the LHC. Technolo-
gies which have not been applicable in the high
radiation environment of proton colliders are also
available, as well as sensors of new concept. But
signiﬁcant R&D is required. CCD vertex detectors
have already demonstrated very high resolution
and segmentation with low multiple scattering at
SLD (3). But for the CCD technology to be appli-
cable to the LC improved radiation hardness and
a factor 100-1000 increase in readout speed are
required. Technologies successfully developed for
the LHC program, such as hybrid pixel sensors,
are suﬃciently radiation hard and can be read
out rapidly. But they now need to be developed
into much thinner devices with smaller cell size
to improve their position resolution. Finally new
technologies, such as MAPS, SOI and DEPFET
sensors, are emerging as other potentially attrac-
tive solutions. But they need to be demonstrated
on large scales and be tailored to the LC appli-
cations. These developments need to be guided
by a continued program of physics studies and
detailed simulations to deﬁne the optimal design
and technology choices.

Several Vertex Tracker designs have been pro-
posed, relying on diﬀerent sensor technologies.
They all share the use of pixel devices, due to the
high particle density which disallows the use of
microstrip detectors. Emphasis is placed on mini-
mizing the material budget, to improve track ex-
trapolation performances also at small momenta
in multi-jet ﬁnal states.

2. Experimental Conditions

The Vertex Tracker at the LC will be exposed to
background and radiation levels and to track den-
sities unprecedented for e+e− collider machines,
though still lower compared to proton colliders.
The main source of background in the interaction
region is due to e+e− pairs produced and bent in
the intense electro-magnetic interaction of the col-
liding beams. Such pairs set the most stringent
constraint on the Vertex Tracker geometry. The
radius and maximum length of the innermost sen-
sitive layer are deﬁned by the envelope of the de-
ﬂected pairs. The radial and longitudinal position
of the point of crossing of the pair envelope can be
approximated as function of the number of parti-
cles in a bunch, N , the solenoidal magnetic ﬁeld,
B, and the bunch length, σz by:

R[cm] = 0.35

N
1010

1
B[T esla]

s

z[cm]

1
σz[mm]

z[cm] = 8.3 R2B[T esla]σz[mm]

1010
N

.

≃

Warm RF technology requires σz to be small, while
the ﬁeld strength B is limited by the optic and
quadrupole requirements at the ﬁnal focus. The
inward bound on the detector radius is thus set at
1.5 cm, up to 1 TeV. This radius appears safe
≃
also for the collimation of syncrotron radiation. At
a multi-TeV collider the innermost radius must be
pushed to

3 cm.

Particle tracks in highly collimated jets also
signiﬁcantly contribute to the local track den-
sity in physics events. This is expected to be
0.2-1.0 hits mm−2 at 500 GeV, to reach 0.5-
2.5 hits mm−2 at 3.0 TeV. These ﬁgures are com-
parable to, or even exceed, those expected at the
LHC: 0.03 hits mm−2 for proton collisions in AT-
LAS and 0.9 hits mm−2 for heavy ion collisions in
ALICE. The dose due to charged particles is ex-
50 krad y−1. On the
pected to be manageable:
contrary, the neutron background may be impor-
tant for the sensor technology choice. Neutrons are
produced in electromagnetic interactions of the
spent beams and radiated particles. The resulting

≃

(1)

(2)

2

ﬂuxes are in principle large. However, they are re-
duced by several orders of magnitude by the masks
at the vertex tracker position. Still, the estimated
ﬂuxes reaching the Si detectors are expected of
order 109 n (1 MeV) cm−2 y−1 for TESLA (4) and
NLC and about one order of magnitude larger for
CLIC at 3 TeV (5).

3. Vertex Tracker Conceptual Design

The Vertex Tracker will likely consist of a multi-
layered barrel section, directly surrounding the
beam-pipe, complemented by forward disks to
ensure tracking down to small angles. Five layers
should ensure standalone pattern recognition and
tracking capabilities as well as redundancy.

→

→

The strongest requirements on the impact pa-
rameter resolution are set by the need of eﬃciently
b¯b from H 0
disentangling H 0
c¯c Higgs boson
decays (6). This can be best done by exploiting the
diﬀerence in invariant mass and multiplicity of the
decay products. But for this method to be eﬃcient,
secondary particle tracks need to be identiﬁed by
their signiﬁcantly large impact parameter down to
low momenta. The charm jet tagging eﬃciency de-
grades by a factor 1.5-2.0, at constant purity, if
the impact parameter resolution σip changes from
5 µm
30 µm/pt. Since jets
are tagged in pairs, such loss corresponds to 2 to
4 times the equivalent data statistics. Several other
physics processes support these requirements. A
multi-layered vertex tracker with the ﬁrst sensi-
tive layer at 1.5 cm from the interaction region and
1% X0 of total thickness can provide the target
5 µm/pt. Single point resolution of
σip =5 µm
5 µm, or better, has been achieved with diﬀerent
techniques.

5 µm/pt to 10 µm

⊕

⊕

⊕

The main challenge comes from the limit on
the material budget. Several solutions are being
studied ranging from 20 µm thick CCD ladders
(0.06% X0/layer) supported only at their ends to
back-thinned hybrid pixel sensors (0.3% X0/layer).
Extracting the heat dissipated by the sensors and
their electronics is another important issue in the
engineering design of the vertex tracker and the
material budget may be driven by the power dissi-

3

pation. The typical value is of order of 15 µW/pixel
for CCDs, 40 µW/channel for HPS and 4 µW/pixel
for MAPS. The total power for CCD sensors may
be lowered to about 10 W if 1 V clocks are fea-
sible. The additional dissipation from the driver
and read-out electronics is less critical being con-
ﬁned outside the sensitive part of the detector. In
addition CCDs may need to operate at low tem-
perature to improve their radiation tolerance. The
heat management may also depend on the bunch
structure of the collider and will need to be studied
in details. In particular pulsed power operation is
being considered to proﬁt of the collider low duty
cycle and tests have started.

Finally suppression of noise and RF pick-up is

essential, due to the large number of channels.

4. Si Sensor Technology and R&D

4.1. Charge Coupled Devices

≃

≃

CCD sensors have characteristics which match
in principle the main LC performance require-
ments. Their pixel size is small, giving single point
resolution better than 4 µm, and the sensors are
20 µm. Two main limitations remain: the
thin,
read-out timing and the neutron radiation dam-
age. At a collider with the TESLA bunch struc-
ture, the
3 M pixels in the ﬁrst layer, need to
be read-out in not more than 50 µs to ensure a
background hit density below 5 mm−2. Therefore
a read-out clock of about 50 MHz is necessary. A
novel column parallel read-out (CPCCD) scheme
is being developed by the LCFI Collaboration (7).
Prototypes have been designed and produced and
are presently being tested, which operate with
low-voltage clock amplitudes to reduce power dis-
sipation. The most important radiation damage
in CCDs is bulk Si displacements caused by heavy
particles causing charge carrier trapping. Deep
level bound states have lifetime longer than the
inter-pixel transfer time and the charge is lost re-
sulting in a drop of the charge transfer eﬃciency
(CTE). This becomes particularly important since
charges need to be transported over lengths of
order of cm. Two possible techniques to improve

the CTE are being studied: cooling the detector to
increase the trapping lifetime and keep the trap-
ping centers ﬁlled and ﬁlling traps with light pulse
ﬂushing to avoid further charge loss. Tests have
been performed (8) and indicate that the signal
loss can be lowered with light pulses. First results
give a signal loss reduction from 29% to 18% after
109 n cm−2 and can be improved
integrating 6.5
with an optimsed setup.

×

4.2. Hybrid Pixel Sensors

Hybrid pixel sensors (HPS) have provided a
reliable solution to 3D tracking from LEP 2 to
LHC. Their main limitations, due to the total
sensor plus chip thickness and the limited single
point resolution, may be overcome with a dedi-
cated R&D program. Beside the vertex tracker,
HPS detectors oﬀer a suitable technology also for
forward tracking with good resolution and fast
time-stamping. A scheme with interleaved nodes,
extending that usefully applied to microstrip de-
tectors, was proposed to improve the point ac-
curacy by interpolating the charge sharing on
neighboring read-out nodes. Test structures have
been produced and successfully tested, providing
a proof of principle (9). A single point resolution of
3 µm can be achieved, if tracks are suﬃciently
≃
isolated. Now a dedicated R&D program on back-
thinning and bump-bonding represents the main
focus, to reduce the detector thickness.

4.3. MAPS Sensors

Monolithic Active Pixel Sensors (MAPS) exploit
the epitaxial layer of the CMOS wafer as detector
substrate, to integrate the detector and the front-
end readout electronics on the same silicon wafer,
using standard VLSI CMOS technology. The de-
velopment of MAPS detectors started with ap-
plication as photon detectors where they are be-
coming increasingly popular. Their application to
detection of m.i.p. signals was initiated as a LC
R&D (10; 11) and the ﬁrst vertex tracker based
on this technology is under construction for the
STAR detector upgrade at RHIC (12). The sig-
nal is collected from the undepleted bulk or epi-

4

taxial layer where the charge carriers spread by
thermal diﬀusion. Small pixel size and integrated
electronics oﬀer a good solution to the problems
of resolution and layer thickness. Detector have
been tested on particle beams and after irradia-
tion. Tolerance to neutron ﬂuxes has been estab-
lished up to 1012 n/cm2, which is well beyond the
LC requirements. A full scale 1 M pixel sensors
has proved that MAPS oﬀer full eﬃcient detectors
with 2 µm accuracy and excellent two-track reso-
lution. New developments are addressing the read-
out speed and providing increased functionality,
including data sparsiﬁcation and integrated corre-
lated double sampling. Test structures in 0.35 µm
technology with 5 MHz column parallel readout
are being evaluated.

4.4. Other Options

The variety of technologies for applications at
the linear collider is further enriched by new con-
cepts currently being investigated.

Another route toward monolithic sensors is the
realization of FET devices integrated in high-
resistivity fully depleted n bulk which amplify
the charge at the point of collection, avoiding
losses. This scheme, adopted by DEPFET devices,
provides full bulk sensitivity and the low input
capacitance ensures low noise and have robust
correlated double sampling capabilities. DEPFET
sensors have been developed primarily for X-ray
imaging. A dedicated R&D for the LC vertex
tracker has started (14).

Another attractive architecture for a monolithic
pixel sensor is Silicon on insulator (SOI), where a
Si ﬁlm sits on a thin insulator over a high resistivity
Si substrate acting as detecting volume. The read-
out is built in the thin layer. There are a number
of technological issues to be addressed in matching
the pixel manufacturing technique with the CMOS
processing. SOI test structures have been fabri-
cated 0.8 AMS technology (13) and characterized.
Recently signals from ionizing particles have been
recorded, providing a ﬁrst proof of principle of this
design.

Emerging ion etching technologies have enabled
the development of a new 3D detector scheme (15).

[5] Physics at

the CLIC multi-TeV Collider,
M. Battaglia, A. De Roeck, J. Ellis, D. Schulte
(editors), to appear as CERN Report.

[6] M. Battaglia and K. Desch, in AIP Conf. Proc.
578 (2001), 163 [arXiv:hep-ph/0101165].
[7] K.D. Stefanov, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 501

[8] J.E. Brau and N. Sinev, IEEE Trans. Nucl.

(2003) 245.

Sci. 47 (2000) 1898.

[9] M. Battaglia et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 48

(2001) 992 [arXiv:hep-ex/0101020].

[10] G. Claus et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 465

[11] R. Turchetta et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A

[12] H.S. Matis et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 50

(2003) 1020 [arXiv:nucl-ex/0212019].

[13] M. Amati et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 511

[14] R.H. Richter et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A

(2000) 120.

501 (2003) 251.

(2003) 265.

511 (2003) 250.

[15] S.I. Parker, C.J. Kenney and J. Segal,

in
Proc.of the 28th Int. Conf. on High-energy
Physics, World Scientiﬁc, 1997, vol. 2, 1743.
[16] P. Jarron, A. Shah, N. Wyrsch, to appear on

Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A.

In these detectors small diameter holes are drilled
through the silicon wafer. Carriers drift perpen-
dicular to the wafer thickness and normal to the
particle trajectory. 3D sensors are characterized
by good radiation tolerance and very fast time re-
sponse, owing to their geometry. This makes them
interesting for applications at small radius in the
forward region.

In a farther future, the deposition of hydro-
genated amorphous Si layer on ASIC may also
become a competitive technology, bringing advan-
tages both in terms of fast signals and, possibly,
productions costs (16).

5. Conclusions

An active and diversiﬁed R&D program on Si
sensors for LC applications is presently ongoing
world-wide. It addresses issues which are comple-
mentary to the developments tailored to the LHC,
while other aspects of detector engineering, ser-
vices and read-out electronics will largely proﬁts
from the LHC experience. At present several de-
tector architectures appear promising. However, it
will be important to extend the R&D phase, until
the time of project approval and ﬁnal detector de-
sign. As pixel sensors have a wide, interdisciplinary
ﬁeld of applications, ranging from structural biol-
ogy to medical imaging and astrophysics, the lin-
ear collider R&D eﬀort is also signiﬁcantly nested
to those broader developments.

References

385.

[1] G. Loew, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 117 (2003)

[2] A 3 TeV e+e− Linear Collider Based on CLIC
Technology, G. Guignard (editor), CERN-
2000-008.

[3] K. Abe et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 400

(1997) 287.

[4] G. Wagner, LC-DET-2001-048

5

