Trends in Pixel Detectors: Tracking and Imaging

Norbert Wermes

(Invited Paper)

4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— For large scale applications, hybrid pixel detectors,
in which sensor and read-out IC are separate entities, constitute
the state of the art in pixel detector technology to date. They
have been developed and start to be used as tracking detectors
and also imaging devices in radiography, autoradiography, protein
crystallography and in X-ray astronomy. A number of trends and
possibilities for future applications in these ﬁelds with improved
performance, less material, high read-out speed, large radiation
tolerance, and potential off-the-shelf availability have appeared
and are momentarily matured. Among them are monolithic or
semi-monolithic approaches which do not require complicated
hybridization but come as single sensor/IC entities. Most of
these are presently still
in the development phase waiting to
be used as detectors in experiments. The present state in pixel
detector development including hybrid and (semi-)monolithic pixel
techniques and their suitability for particle detection and for
imaging, is reviewed.

Index Terms— pixel detector, hybrid pixels, monolithic pixels,

tracking, imaging

I. INTRODUCTION

Albeit being similar at ﬁrst sight,

the requirements for
charged particle detection in high energy physics compared to
imaging applications with pixel detectors can be very differ-
ent. In particle physics experiments charged particles, usually
triggered by other subdetectors, have to be identiﬁed with
high demands on spatial resolution and timing. In imaging
applications the image is obtained by the un-triggered accumu-
lation (integrating or counting) of the quanta of the impinging
radiation, often also with high demands (e.g. > 1 MHz per pixel
in certain radiography or CT applications). Si pixel detectors for
high energy charge particle detection can assume typical signal
charges collected at an electrode in the order of 5,000-10,000
electrons even taking into account charge sharing between cells
and detector deterioration after irradiation to doses as high as
60 Mrad. In 3H-autoradiography, on the contrary, or in X-
ray astronomy the amount of charge to be collected with high
efﬁciency can be much below 1000 e. The spatial resolution is
governed by the attainable pixel granularity from a few to about
10µm at best, obtained with pixel dimensions in the order of
50µm to 100µm. The requirements from radiology are similar.
Mammography (∼ 80µm pixel dimensions) is most demanding
with respect to space resolution. Some applications in autora-
diography, however, require sub-µm resolutions, not attainable

N. Wermes is with Bonn University, Physikalisches Institut, Nussallee 12,

D-53115 Bonn, Germany, email: wermes@physik.uni-bonn.de

Work supported by the German Ministerium f¨ur Bildung, Wissenschaft,
Forschung und Technologie (BMBF) under contract no. 05HA8P D1, by
the Ministerium f¨ur Wissenschaft und Forschung des Landes Nordrhein–
Westfalen under contract no. IV A5 − 106 011 98, and by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG

with present day semiconductor detectors. For applications with
lower demands on the spatial resolution (P SF ∼5-10µm)
but with requirements on real time and time resolved data
acquisition, semiconductor pixel detectors are very attractive.
Very thin detector assemblies are mandatory for vertex detec-
tors at collider experiments, in particular for the planned linear
e+e− collider. This imposes high demands on the detector
development. While silicon is almost a perfect material for
particle physics detectors, allowing the shaping of electric ﬁelds
by tailored impurity doping, the need of high photon absorption
efﬁciency in radiological applications requires the study and
use of semiconductor materials with high atomic charge, such
as GaAs or CdTe. For such materials the charge collection
properties are much less understood and mechanical issues in
particular those related to hybrid pixels are abundant, most
notably regarding the hybridization of detectors when they are
not available in wafer scale sizes. Finally, for applications in
high radiation environments, such as hadron colliders, radiation
hard sensors are developed using either Si with a dedicated
design or CVD-diamond.

II. HYBRID PIXELS: THE STATE OF THE ART IN PIXEL
DETECTOR TECHNOLOGY

In the hybrid pixel technique sensor and FE-chips are sepa-
rate parts of the detector module connected by small conducting
bumps applied by using the bumping and ﬂip-chip technology.
All LHC-collider-detectors [1], [2], [3] ALICE, ATLAS, and
CMS, LHCb for the RICH system [4], as well as some
ﬁxed target experiments (NA60[5] at CERN and BTeV[6] at
Fermilab) employ the hybrid pixel technique to build large
scale (∼m2) pixel detectors. Pixel area sizes are typically 50µm
×400µm as for ATLAS or 100µm ×150µm as for CMS. The
detectors are arranged in cylindrical barrels of 2 − 3 layers and
disks covering the forward and backward regions. The main
purpose of the detectors at LHC is (a) the identiﬁcation of short
lived particles (e.g. b-tagging for Higgs and SUSY signals), (b)
pattern recognition and event reconstruction and (c) momentum
measurement. The detectors need to withstand a total (10 yr)
particle ﬂuence of 1015neq corresponding to a radiation dose
of about 50 Mrad. The discovery that oxygenated silicon is
radiation hard with respect to the non-ionizing energy loss of
protons and pions [7] saves pixel detectors at the LHC for
which the radiation is most severe due to their proximity to the
interaction point. n+ electrode in n-bulk material sensors have
been chosen to cope with the fact that type inversion occurs
after about Φeq = 2.5×1013cm−2. After type inversion the pn-
diode sits on the electrode side thus allowing the sensor to be

operated partially depleted. Figure 1(a) shows the development
of the effective doping concentration and the depletion voltage
Vdep as a function of the ﬂuence expected for 10 years of
operation at the LHC (see also [8]). Figures 1(b) and (c) show
the ATLAS pixel sensor wafer with 3 tiles [9] and the detector
response after irradiation over two adjacent pixels showing a
very homogeneous charge collection except for some tolerable
loss at the outer edges and in an area between the pixels. These
are due to the bump contact and a bias grid, respectively, which
has been designed to allow testing of the sensors before bonding
them to the electronics ICs.

The chip and sensor connection is done by ﬁne pitch bump-
ing and subsequent ﬂip-chip which is achieved with either PbSn
(solder) or Indium bumps at a failure rate of < 10−4. Figure 3
shows rows of 50µm pitch bumps obtained by these techniques.

Fig. 2
(LEFT) INDIUM (PHOTO AMS, ROME) AND (RIGHT) SOLDER (PBSN,
PHOTO IZM, BERLIN) BUMP ROWS WITH 50µM PITCH.

Indium bumping is done using a wet

lift-off technique
applied on both sides (sensor and IC) [12]. The connection
is obtained by thermo-compression. The Indium joint is com-
paratively soft and the gap between IC and sensor is about
6µm. PbSn bumps are applied by electroplating [13]. Here the
bump is galvanically grown on the chip wafer only. The bump
is connected by ﬂip-chipping to an under-bump metallization
on the sensor substrate pixel. Both technologies have been
successfully used with 8” IC-wafers and 4” sensor wafers.

In the case of ATLAS a module of 2.1x6.4 cm2 area consists
of FE-chips bump-connected to one silicon sensor. The I/O lines
of the chips are connected via wire bonds to a kapton ﬂex circuit
glued atop the sensor. The ﬂex houses a module control chip
(MCC) responsible for front end time/trigger control and event
building. The total thickness at normal incidence is in excess of
2% X0. Figure 3 shows a 241Am (60 keV γ) source scan of an
ATLAS module with 46080 pixels and an amplitude spectrum
obtained using the ToT analog information without clustering
of pixels.

The modules are positioned by dedicated robots on carbon-
carbon ladders (staves) and cooled by evaporation of a ﬂuorinert
liquid (C3F8) at an input temperature below −20oC in order
to maintain the entire detector below −6oC to minimize the
damage induced by radiation. This operation requires pumping
and the cooling tubes must stand 16 bar pressure if pipe block-
ing occurs. All detector components must survive temperature
cycles between −25oC and room temperature. The LHC pixel
detectors are presently in production. A sketch of the ﬁnal
ATLAS pixel detector is shown in ﬁg. 4.

III. TRENDS IN HYBRID PIXEL DETECTORS

To improve the performance of Hybrid Pixel detectors in cer-
tain aspects several ideas and developments are being pursued.

A. HAPS

Hybrid (Active) Pixel Sensors (HAPS) [14] exploit capacitive
coupling between pixels to obtain smaller pixel cells and pixel

Fig. 1

(A) EFFECTIVE DOPING CONCENTRATION AND DEPLETION VOLTAGE AS A
FUNCTION OF THE FLUENCE, (B) ATLAS SILICON PIXEL WAFER WITH 3

TILES, AND (C) CHARGE COLLECTION EFFICIENCY IN TWO ADJACENT
PIXELS AFTER IRRADIATION.

The challenge in the design of the front-end pixel electronics
[10], [11] can be summarized by the following requirements:
low power (< 50µW per pixel),
low noise and threshold
dispersion (together < 200e), zero suppression in every pixel,
on-chip hit buffering, and small time-walk to be able to assign
the hits to their respective LHC bunch crossing. The pixel
groups have reached these goals in several design iterations
using ﬁrst radiation-soft prototypes, then dedicated radhard
designs, and ﬁnally using deep submicron technologies [11].
While CMS uses analog readout of hits up to the counting
house, ATLAS obtains pulse height information by means of
measuring the time over threshold (ToT) for every hit.

(TOP) SCAN OF AN ATLAS PIXEL MODULE (46080 PIXELS) WITH A

241 AM

(60 KEV γ) SOURCE AND (BOTTOM) THE CORRESPONDING AMPLITUDE

Fig. 3

SPECTRUM OBTAINED USING THE SIGNAL AMPLITUDE VIA

TIME-OVER-THRESHOLD (TOT) WITHOUT CLUSTERING.

Fig. 4
VIEW OF THE ATLAS PIXEL DETECTOR IN ITS PRESENT DESCOPED

VERSION WITH TWO BARREL LAYERS AND 2X3 DISKS.

pitch with a larger readout pitch resulting in interleaved pixels.
The pixel pitch is designed for best spatial resolution using
charge sharing between neighbors while the readout pitch is
tailored to the needs for the size of the front-end electronics
cell. This way resolutions between 3µm and 10µm can be
obtained with pixel (readout) pitches of 100µm (200µm) as
is shown in ﬁg. 5(b) together with the layout of a prototype
sensor in ﬁg. 5(a).

B. MCM-D

The present hybrid-pixel modules of the LHC experiments
use an additional ﬂex-kapton ﬁne-print layer on top of the Si-
sensor (ﬁg. 6(a)) to provide power and signal distribution to

Fig. 5

(LEFT) LAYOUT OF A HAPS SENSOR WITH DIFFERENT PIXEL AND

READOUT PITCHES, (RIGHT) MEASURED SPATIAL RESOLUTIONS BY
SCANNING WITH A FINE FOCUS LASER.

and from the module front-end chips. An interesting alternative
to the ﬂex-kapton solution is the so-called Multi-Chip-Module
Technology deposited on Si-substrate (MCM-D) [16]. A multi-
conductor-layer structure is built up on the silicon sensor. This
allows to bury all bus structures in four layers in the inactive
area of the module thus avoiding the kapton ﬂex layer and
any wire bonding at the expense of a small thickness increase
of 0.1% X0. In addition, the extra freedom in routing makes
it possible to design pixel detectors which have the same
pixel dimensions throughout the sensor, i.e. without larger edge
pixels usually necessary to accommodate the sensor area which
remains uncovered by electronics in between chips. Figure 6(b)
illustrates the principle and ﬁg. 6(c) shows scanning electron
microphotographs (curtesy IZM, Berlin) of a via structure made
in MCM-D technology.

C. Active edge 3-D silicon

The features of doped Si allow interesting geometries with
respect to ﬁeld shapes and charge collection. So-called 3D
silicon detectors have been proposed [17] to overcome sev-
eral limitations of conventional planar Si-pixel detectors, in
particular in high radiation environments, in applications with
inhomogeneous irradiation and in applications which require a
large active/inactive area ratio such as protein crystallography
[18]. A a 3D-Si-structure (ﬁg. 7(a)) is obtained by processing
the n+ and p+ electrodes into the detector bulk rather than
by conventional implantation on the surface. This is done
by combining VLSI and MEMS (Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems) technologies. Charge carriers drift inside the bulk
parallel to the detector surface over a short drift distance of
typically 50µm. Another feature is the fact that the edge of the
sensor can be a collection electrode itself thus extending the
active area of the sensor to within about 10µm to the edge.
This results from the undepleted depth at this electrode. Edge
electrodes also avoid inhomogeneous ﬁelds and surface leakage

Fig. 6

(A) SCHEMATIC VIEW OF A HYBRID PIXEL MODULE SHOWING ICS BONDED
VIA BUMP CONNECTION TO THE SENSOR, THE FLEX HYBRID KAPTON

LAYER ATOP THE SENSOR WITH MOUNTED ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS,

AND THE MODULE CONTROL CHIP (MCC). WIRE BOND CONNECTIONS ARE
NEEDED AS INDICATED. (B) SCHEMATIC LAYOUT OF A MCM-D PIXEL

MODULE. (C) SEM PHOTOGRAPH OF A MCM-D VIA STRUCTURE (TOP)

AND A CROSS SECTION AFTER BUMP DEPOSITION (BOTTOM).

currents which usually occur due to chips and cracks at the
sensor edges. This is seen in ﬁg. 7(b) which shows the two
structures in comparison. The main advantages of 3D-silicon
detectors come from the fact that the electrode distance is
short (50µm) in comparison to conventional planar devices at
the same total charge, resulting in a fast (1-2 ns) collection
time, low (< 10V) depletion voltage and, in addition, a large
active/inactive area ratio of the device.

The technical fabrication is much more involved than for
planar processes and requires a bonded support wafer and re-
active ion etching of the electrodes into the bulk. A compromise
between 3D and planar detectors, so called planar-3D detectors
maintaining the large active area, use planar technology but
with edge electrodes [19], obtained by diffusing the dopant
from the deeply etched edge and then ﬁlling it with poly-silicon.
Prototype detectors using strip or pixel electronics have been
fabricated and show encouraging results with respect to speed
(3.5 ns rise time) and radiation hardness (> 1015 protons/cm2)
[20].

D. Diamond Pixel Sensors

Diamond as a potentially very radiation hard material has
been explored intensively by the R&D collaboration RD42 at
CERN [21]. Charge collection distances up to 300µm have
been achieved. Diamond pixel detectors have been built with
pixel electronics developed for the ATLAS pixel detector and
operated as single-chip modules in testbeams [22]. A spatial
resolution of σ = 22µm has been measured with 50µm pixel
pitch, compared to about 12µm with Si pixel detectors of the
same geometry and using the same electronics. This reveals

Fig. 7
(TOP) SCHEMATIC VIEW OF A 3D SILICON DETECTOR, (BOTTOM)

COMPARISON OF THE CHARGE COLLECTION IN 3D-SILICON AND
CONVENTIONAL PLANAR ELECTRODE DETECTORS.

the characteristic systematic spatial shifts observed in CVD
diamond due to the crystal growth. Grain structures are formed
in which trapped charges at the boundaries produce polarization
ﬁelds inside the sensor which cause the observed spatial shifts
of the order of 100-150 µm.

IV. HYBRID PIXELS IN IMAGING APPLICATIONS

A. Counting Pixel Detectors for (Auto-)Radiography

A potentially new route in radiography techniques is the
counting of individual X-ray photons in every pixel cell. This
approach offers many features which are very attractive for
X-ray imaging: full linearity in the response function and a
principally inﬁnite dynamic range, optimal exposure times and
a good image contrast compared to conventional ﬁlm-foil based
radiography. It thus avoids over- and underexposed images.
Counting pixel detectors must be considered as a very direct
spin-off of the detector development for particle physics into
biomedical applications. The analog part of the pixel electronics
is in parts close to identical to the one for LHC pixel detectors
while the periphery has been replaced by the counting circuitry
[23].

The challenges to be addressed in order to be competitive
with integrating radiography systems are: high speed (> 1
MHz) counting with a range of at least 15 bit, operation with
very little dead time, low noise and particularly low threshold
operation with small threshold dispersion values. In particular
the last
item is important in order to allow homogeneous
imaging of soft X-rays. It is also mandatory for a differential

IMAGE OF A

55FE POINT SOURCE TAKEN WITH THE MEDIPIX2 COUNTING
CHIP AND A SILICON SENSOR (14X14 MM

2)[26].

B. Protein Crystallography

Fig. 8

Fig. 9

(LEFT) 2X2 MULTI-CHIP CDTE MODULE WITH COUNTING PIXEL
ELECTRONICS USING THE MPEC CHIP ON A USB BASED READOUT BOARD

[27], (RIGHT) IMAGE OF A COGWHEEL TAKEN WITH 60 KEV X-RAYS.

Hybrid Pixel detectors as counting imagers lead the way
to new classes of experiments in protein crystallography with
synchrotron radiation [34]. Here the challenge is to image,
with high rate (∼1-1.5 MHz/pixel) and high dynamic range,
many thousands of Bragg spots from X-ray photons of typically
the 1 ˚A
12 keV or higher (corresponding to resolutions at
range), scattered off protein crystals. The typical spot size of a
diffraction maximum is 100 − 200µm, calling for pixel sizes in
the order of 100−300µm. The high linearity of the hit counting
method and the absence of so-called ”blooming effects”, i.e. the
response of non-hit pixels in the close neighborhood of a Bragg
maximum, makes counting pixel detectors very appealing for
protein crystallography experiments. A systematic limitation
and difﬁculty is the problem that homogeneous hit/count re-
sponses in all pixels, also for hits at the pixel boundaries
or between pixels where charge sharing plays a role must
be maintained by delicate threshold tuning. Counting pixel
developments are made for ESRF (Grenoble, France) [35]
and SLS (Swiss Light Source at the Paul-Scherrer Institute,
Switzerland) beam lines. The PILATUS 1M detector [36] at
the SLS (217µm ×217µm pixels) is made of ﬁfteen 16-
chip-modules each covering 8 × 3.5 cm2, i.e. a total area of
40 × 40cm2. Figure 10(a) shows a photograph of this detector
with 15 modules and close to 106 pixels covering an area of
20×24 cm2 [37]. It is the ﬁrst large scale hybrid pixel detector
in operation. Figure 10(b) shows a Bragg image of a Lysozyme
with 10s exposure to 12 keV sychrotron X-rays [37]. Many
spots are contained in one pixel which is the limit of the
achievable point spread resolution.

In summary hybrid pixel detectors are the present state
of the art in pixel detector technology. For tracking as well
as for imaging applications large (∼m2) detectors are being
built or already in operation (PILATUS). On the negative side
are the comparatively large material budget, the complicated
assembling (hybridization) with potential yield pitfalls, and
the difﬁculty to obtain high assembly yields with non-wafer
scale high-Z sensor materials. As trends within this technology,

energy measurement, realized so far as a double threshold with
energy windowing logic [24], [25]. A differential measurement
of the energy, exploiting the different shapes of X-ray spectra
behind for example tissue or bone, can enhance the contrast
performance of an image. Finally, for radiography high photon
absorption efﬁciency is mandatory, which renders the not easy
task of high Z sensors and their hybridization necessary.

Progress with counting pixel systems have been reported at
this conference [26], [27], [28]. The MEDIPIX chip developed
by the MEDIPIX collaboration [29], [25] uses 256 × 256,
55×55µm2 pixels fabricated in 0.25µm technology, energy
windowing via two tunable discriminator thresholds, and a 13
bit counter. The maximum count rate per pixel is about 1 MHz.
Figure 8 shows an image of a 55Fe point source obtained with
the Medipix2 chip bonded to a 14x14 mm2, 300µm thick Si
sensor [26]. A similar image with a single chip CdTe detector
and a higher energy 109Cd source (122 keV γ) has also been
taken and the capability to detect low energy beta decays from
tritium has been demonstrated [26].

A Multi-Chip module with 2x2 chips using high-Z CdTe
sensors with the MPEC chip [27] is shown in ﬁg. 9. The MPEC
chip features 32 × 32 pixels (200×200µm2), double threshold
operation, 18-bit counting at ∼1 MHz per pixel as well as
low noise values (∼120e with CdTe sensor) and threshold
dispersion (21e after tuning) [30], [27]. A technical issue here
is the bumping of individual die CdTe sensors which has been
solved using Au-stud bumping with In-ﬁlling [31].

A challenge for counting pixel detectors in radiology is to
build large area detectors. Commercially available integrating
pixellated systems such as ﬂat panel imagers [32], [33] consti-
tute the levelling scope.

Linear e+e− Collider [38]. Very low (≪1% X0) material per
detector layer, small pixel sizes (∼20µm×20µm) and a good
rate capability (80 hits/mm2/ms) is required, due to the very
intense beamstrahlung of narrowly focussed electron beams
close to the interaction region which produce electron positron
pairs in vast numbers. High readout speeds of 50 MHz line rate
with 40µs frame time are necessary.

Fig. 11

(A) SKETCH OF A MONOLITHIC PIXEL DETECTOR USING A HIGH

RESISTIVITY BULK WITH PMOS TRANSISTORS AT THE READOUT (AFTER
[39]), (B) PRINCIPLE OF AN MONOLITHIC ACTIVE PIXEL SENSOR (MAPS)

[41] TARGETING CMOS ELECTRONICS WITH LOW RESISTIVITY BULK
MATERIAL. THE CHARGE IS GENERATED AND COLLECTED BY DIFFUSION IN

THE FEW µM THIN EPITAXIAL SI-LAYER.

Among the developments of monolithic or semi-monolithic
pixel devices perhaps the following classifying list can be made.

- Non-standard CMOS on high resistivity bulk

The ﬁrst monolithic pixel detector, successfully operated
in a particle beam already in 1992 [39], used a high
resistivity p-type bulk p-i-n detector in which the junction
had been created by an n-type diffusion layer. On one
side, an array of ohmic contacts to the substrate served as
collection electrodes (ﬁg. 11(a)). Due to this only simple
pMOS transistor circuits sitting in n-wells were possible
in the active area. The technology was certainly non-
standard and non-commercial. No further development
emerged.

- CMOS technology with charge collection in epi-layer

Commercial CMOS technologies use low resistivity
silicon which is not suited for charge collection. However,
in some technologies an epitaxial silicon layer of a few
to 15µm thickness can be used [40], [41], [42]. The
generated charge is kept in the epi-layer by potential wells
at the boundary and reaches an n-well collection diode
by thermal diffusion (ﬁg. 11(b)). The signal charge is
therefore very small (<1000e) and low noise electronics
is a real challenge. As this development uses standard
processing technologies it
is potentially very cheap.
Despite using CMOS technology the potential of full
CMOS circuitry in the active area is not available (only
nMOS) because of
the n-well/p-epi collecting diode
which does not permit other n-wells.

Fig. 10
2

(TOP) PHOTOGRAPH OF THE 20X24 CM

LARGE PILATUS 1M DETECTOR

FOR PROTEIN CRYSTALLOGRAPHY USING COUNTING HYBRID PIXEL

DETECTOR MODULES, (BOTTOM) IMAGE OF LYSOZYME TAKEN WITH
PILATUS [37], THE INSERT SHOWS THAT BRAGG SPOTS ARE OFTEN

CONTAINED IN ONE PIXEL.

interleaved pixels and MCM-D promise better resolution and
more homogeneous modules, while 3D-silicon detectors can
address applications in high radiation environments or those
where a large active/inactive area ratio is mandatory.

V. MONOLITHIC AND SEMI-MONOLITHIC PIXEL
DETECTORS

Monolithic pixel detectors, in which amplifying and logic
circuitry as well as the radiation detecting sensor are one entity,
produced in a commercially available technology, are the dream
of semiconductor detector developers. This will not be possible
in the near future without compromising. Developments and
trends in this direction have much been inﬂuenced by R&D
for vertex tracking detectors at future colliders such as a

(A) CROSS SECTION THROUGH A MONOLITHIC CMOS ON SOI PIXEL

DETECTOR USING HIGH RESISTIVITY SILICON BULK INSOLATED FROM THE

LOW RESISTIVITY CMOS LAYER WITH CONNECTING VIAS IN BETWEEN

[15], [47], (B) CROSS SECTION THROUGH A STRUCTURE USING
AMORPHOUS SILICON ON TOP OF STANDARD CMOS VLSI ELECTRONICS

Fig. 12

[48], [49].

- CMOS on SOI (non-standard)

In order to exploit high resistivity bulk material,
the
authors of [47] develop pixel sensors with full CMOS
circuitry using the Silicon-on-Insulator (SOI) technology.
The connection to the charge collecting bulk is done
by vias (ﬁg. 12(a)). The technology offers full charge
collection in 200–300µm high resistive silicon with full
CMOS electronics on top. At present the technology is
however deﬁnitely not a commercial standard and the
development is still in its beginnings.

- Amorphous silicon on standard CMOS ASICs

Hydrogenated amorphous-Silicon (a-Si:H), where the
H-content is up to 20%, can be put as a ﬁlm on top
of CMOS ASIC electronics. a-Si:H has been studied
as a sensor material long ago and has gained interest
again [48], [49] with the advancement in low noise, low
power electronics. The signal charge collected in the
<30µm thick ﬁlm is in the range of 500-1500 electrons.
A cross section through a typical a-Si:H device is shown
in ﬁg. 12(b). From a puristic view it is more a hybrid
technology, but the main disadvantage of the hybridization
connection is absent. The radiation hardness of these
detectors appears to be very high >1015cm−2 due to
the defect tolerance and defect reversing ability of the
amorphous structure and the larger band gap (1.8 eV).
The carrier mobility is very low (µe = 2-5 cm2/Vs, µh =
0.005 cm2/Vs), i.e. essentially only electrons contribute to
the signal. Basically any CMOS circuit and IC technology
can be used and technology changes are uncritical for
this development. For high-Z applications poly-crystalline
HgI2 constitutes a possible semiconductor ﬁlm material.
The potential advantages are small thickness, radiation
hardness, and low cost. The development is still in its
beginnings and – as for CMOS active pixel sensors – a
real challenge to analog VLSI design.

- Ampliﬁcation transistor implanted in high resistivity bulk
In so-called DEPFET pixel sensors [50] a JFET or MOS-

FET transistor is implanted in every pixel on a sidewards
depleted [56] bulk. Electrons generated by radiation in the
bulk are collected in a potential minimum underneath the
transistor channel thus modulating its current (ﬁg. 13). The
bulk is fully depleted rendering large signals. The small
capacitance of the internal gate offers low noise operation.
Both together can be used to fabricate thin devices. The
sensor technology is non-standard and the operation of
DEPFET pixel detectors requires separate steering and
ampliﬁcation ICs (see below).

Fig. 13

PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION OF A DEPFET PIXEL STRUCTURE BASED ON A

SIDEWARDS DEPLETED DETECTOR SUBSTRATE MATERIAL WITH AN

IMBEDDED PLANAR FIELD EFFECT TRANSISTOR. CROSS SECTION (LEFT) OF

HALF A PIXEL WITH SYMMETRY AXIS AT THE LEFT SIDE, AND POTENTIAL
PROFILE (RIGHT).

Because CMOS active pixels and DEPFET pixels are most
advanced in their development, they are discussed in more
detail below.

A. CMOS Active Pixels

The main difference of CMOS monolithic active pixel sen-
sors [40] to CMOS camera chips is that they are larger in
area and must have a 100% ﬁll factor for efﬁcient particle
detection. Standard commercial CMOS technologies are used
which have a lightly doped epitaxial layer between the low
resistivity silicon bulk and the planar processing layer. The
epi-layer is – technology dependent – at most 15µm thick and
can also be completely absent. Collaborating groups around
IReS&LEPSI [42], [43], RAL [44] and Irvine-LBNL-Ohio [45]
use similar approaches to develop large scale CMOS active
pixels also called MAPS (Monolithic Active Pixel Sensors)
[41]. Prototype detectors have been produced in 0.6µm, 0.35µm
and 0.25µm CMOS technologies [54], [52].

In the MAPS device (ﬁg. 11(b)) electron-hole pairs created
by ionization energy loss in the epitaxial layer remain trapped
between potential barriers on both sides of the epi-layer and
reach, by thermal diffusion, an n-well/p-epi collection diode.
The sensor is depleted only directly under the n-well collection
diode where full charge collection is obtained;
the charge
collection is incomplete in all other areas. With small pixel cells
collection times in the order of 100ns are obtained. The signal

is small, some hundred to 1000e, depending on the thickness
of the epi-layer. A chip submission using a process with no
epi-layer, but with a low doped substrate of larger resistivity
has also been tried (MIMOSA-4) [53] which proved to function
with high detection efﬁciency for minimum ionizing particles.
This renders the uncertainty and dependence on the future of the
epi-layer thickness in different technologies less constraining.
Matrix readout performed using a standard 3-transistor cir-
cuit (line select, source-follower stage, reset) commonly em-
ployed by CMOS matrix devices, but can also include cur-
rent ampliﬁcation and current memory [54]. For an image
two complete frames are subtracted from each other (CDS)
which suppresses switching noise. Noise ﬁgures of 10-30e and
S/N ∼20 have been achieved with spatial resolutions below
5µm. The radiation hardness of CMOS devices is always a
crucial question for particle detection in high intensity colliders.
MAPS appear to sustain non-ionizing radiation (NIEL) to
∼1012neq while the effects of ionizing radiation damage (IEL)
are at present still unclear [55]. Apart from this the focus of
further development lies in making larger area devices and
in increasing the charge collection performance in the epi-
layer. For the former, ﬁrst results in reticle stitching, that is
electrically connecting IC area over the reticle border, have
been encouraging (ﬁg. 14(a)) [52]. Full CMOS stitching over
the reticle boarder still has to be demonstrated. The poor charge
collection by thermal diffusion is another area calling for ideas.
Approaches using more than one n-well collecting diode [44], a
photo-FET [54], [42], [43], or a photo-GATE [46] are currently
investigated. The photo-FET called technique (ﬁg. 14(b)) has
features similar to those of DEPFET pixels (see below). A
pMOS FET is implanted in the charge collecting n-well and
signal charges affect its gate voltage and modulate the transistor
current.

Fig. 14

(A) SEAMLESS STITCHING IN BETWEEN WAFER RETICLES TO OBTAIN
LARGE AREA CMOS ACTIVE PIXELS, (B) SCHEMATIC OF A PMOS

PHOTO-FET TO IMPROVE CHARGE COLLECTION IN MAPS.

Above all, the advantages of a fully CMOS monolithic device
relate to the adoption of standard VLSI technology and its
resulting low cost potential (potentially ∼25$ per cm2). In turn
the disadvantages also come largely from the dependence on
commercial standards. The thickness of the epi-layer varies for

different technologies. It becomes thinner for smaller processes
and with it also the number of produced signal electrons
vanishes. Only a few processing technologies are suited. With
the rapid change of commercial process technologies this is an
issue of concern. The fact that good detector performance has
been seen with non-epi wafers material provides some relief.
Furthermore, in the active area, due to the n-well collection
diode, no CMOS (only nMOS) circuitry is possible. The voltage
signals are very small (∼mV), of the same order as transistor
threshold dispersions requiring very low noise VLSI design.
The radiation tolerance of CMOS pixel detectors for particle
detection beyond 1012 neq is still a problem although the
achieved tolerance should be sufﬁcient for a Linear Collider.
Improved readout concepts and device development for high
rate particle detection at a linear collider is under development
[38]. For the upgrade of the STAR microvertex detector the use
of CMOS active pixels is planned [54].

B. DEPFET Pixels

The Depleted Field Effect Transistor structure (DEPFET)
[50] provides detection and ampliﬁcation properties jointly and
has been experimentally conﬁrmed and successfully operated as
single pixel structures and as large (64x64) pixel matrices [51].
The DEPFET detector and implanted ampliﬁcation structure is
shown in ﬁg. 13. Sidewards depletion [56] provides a parabolic
potential which has – by appropriate biasing and a so-called
deep-n implantation – a local minimum for electrons (∼ 1µm)
underneath the transistor channel. The channel current can be
steered and modulated by the voltage at the external gate and
- important for the detector operation - also by the deep-
n potential (internal gate). Electrons collected in the internal
gate are removed by a clear pulse applied to a dedicated
CLEAR contact outside the transistor region or by other clear
mechanisms. The very low input capacitance (∼ few fF) and
the in situ ampliﬁcation makes DEPFET pixel detectors very
attractive for low noise operation [57]. Ampliﬁcation values of
400 pA per electron collected in the internal gate have been
achieved. Further ampliﬁcation enters at the second level stage
(current based readout chip).

DEPFET pixels are currently being developed for three very
different application areas: vertex detection in particle physics
[58], [59], X-ray astronomy [60] and for biomedical autoradio-
graphy [57]. Figure 15 summarizes the achieved performance
in noise and energy resolution with single pixels structures (ﬁg.
15(a)) and in spatial resolutions with 64x64 pixels matrices (ﬁg.
15(b)). With round single pixel structures noise ﬁgures of 2.2e
at room temperature and energy resolutions of 131 keV for 6
keV X-rays have been obtained. With small (20x30 µm2) linear
structures fabricated for particle detection at a Linear Collider
the noise ﬁgures are about 10e. The spacial resolution read off
from ﬁg. 15(b) in matrices operated with 50 kHz line rates is
[59]

σxy = (4.3 ± 0.8)µm or
σxy = (6.7 ± 0.7)µm or

57 LP
mm
37 LP
mm

for 22 keV γ
for 6 keV γ

The capability to observe tritium in autoradiographical ap-

plications is shown in ﬁg. 15(c).

Fig. 15
(A) RESPONSE OF A SINGLE DEPFET PIXEL STRUCTURE TO 6KEV X-RAYS

FROM AN

55FE SOURCE, (B) IMAGE OBTAINED WITH

55FE AND A TEST
CHART, THE SMALLEST STRUCTURES HAVE A PITCH OF 50µM AND ARE
25µM WIDE, (C) 3H LABELLED LEAF.

The very good noise capabilities of DEPFET pixels are very
important for low energy X-ray astronomy and for autora-
diography applications. For particle physics, where the signal
charge is large in comparison, this feature is used to design
very thin detectors (∼50µm) with very low power consumption
when operated as a row-wise selected matrix [59]. Thinning of
sensors to a thickness of 50µm using a technology based on
deep anisotropic etching has been successfully demonstrated
[61]. For the development of DEPFET pixels for a Linear
Collider matrix row rates of 50 MHz and frame rates for
520x4000 pixels of 25 kHz, read out at two sides, are targeted.
Sensors with cell sizes of 20x30µm2 have been fabricated and
complete clearing of the internal gate, which is important for
high speed on-chip pedestal subtraction, has been demonstrated
[59]. A large matrix is readout using sequencer chips for row
selection and current based chip for column readout [59]. Both
chips have been developed at close to the desired speed for
a Linear Collider. The estimated power consumption for a
ﬁve layer DEPFET pixel vertex vertex detector is only 5W
rendering a very low mass detector without cooling pipes
feasible. The most recent structures use MOSFETs as DEPFET
transistors for which the radiation tolerance still has to be
investigated.

VI. SUMMARY

Driven by the demands for high spatial resolution and high
rate particle detection in high energy physics, semiconductor
pixel detectors have started to also become exploited for
imaging applications. Hybrid pixel detectors, in which sensor
and electronic chip are separate entities, connected via bump
bonding techniques represent today’s state of the art for both,
particle detection and imaging applications. New trends include
interleaved pixels having different pixel- and readout-pitches,
MCM-D structures and 3D-silicon detectors with active edges.

Monolithic or semi-monolithic detectors, in which detector and
readout ultimately are one entity, are currently developed in
various forms, largely driven by the needs for particle detection
at future colliders. CMOS active pixel sensors using standard
commercial technologies on low resistivity bulk and SOI pixels,
a-SI:H, and DEPFET-pixels, which try to maintain high bulk
resistivity for charge collection, classify the different ways to
monolithic detectors which are presently carried out.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The author would like to thank W. Dulinski, M. Caccia, P.
Jarron, P. Russo, C. da Via’, and S. Parker for providing new
material and information for this presentation.

REFERENCES

[1] Technical Design Report
CERN/LHCC/98-13 (1998);
N. Wermes, Design and Prototype Performance of the ATLAS Pixel
Detector, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A447 (2002) 121-128.

the ATLAS Pixel Detector,

of

[2] CMS,

the Tracker System Project, Technical Design Report,

CERN/LHCC/98-006 (1998);
W. Erdmann, The CMS pixel detector, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A447
(2000) 178-83.

[3] ALICE Technical Design Report, CERN/LHCC 99-12 (1999);

P. Chochula et al., The ALICE Silicon Pixel Detector, Nucl. Phys.
A 715 (2003) 849-852.

[4] T. Gys, The pixel hybrid photon detectors for the LHCb-RICH

project, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A465 (2001) 240-246.

[5] A. Baldit et al., CERN-SPSC-2000-010 (2000);

C. Lourenco, E. Radermacher, CERN-SPSC-2002-025 (2002).
[6] S. Kwan (BTeV Collaboration), The BTEV Pixel and Microstrip

Detectors, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A511 (2003) 48-51.

[7] ROSE Collaboration, G. Lindstr¨om et al., Nucl. Inst. Meth. A466

(2001) 308-326;
G. Lindstr¨om, Radiation Damage in Silicon Detectors, Nucl. Inst.
Meth. A512 (2003) 92.

[8] O. Krasel et al., Measurement of the trapping time constants in
Proton-Irradiated Silicon Pad Detectors, IEEE Nuclear Science
Symposium Portland 2003, these proceedings.

[9] M. S. Alam et al., The ATLAS Silicon Pixel Sensors, Nucl. Inst.

Meth. A456 (2001) 217-232.

[10] L. Blanquart et al. Analog front-end cell designed in a commercial
IEEE Trans.

0.25 m process for the ATLAS pixel detector at LHC,
Nucl. Sci. vol.49(4), (2002) 1778-1782

[11] L. Blanquart et al., FE-I2: A Front-End Readout Chip Designed in a
commercial 0.25 µm Process for the ATLAS Pixel detector at LHC,
IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium Portland 2003, these proceedings.
[12] C. Gemme, Study of Indium bumping for the ATLAS pixel detector,

Nucl. Inst. Meth. A465 (2001) 200–203.

[13] G. Engelmann, J. Wolf, L. Dietrich, S. Fehlberg, O. Ehrmann and
H. Reichl, Proc. 1999 Joint International Meeting of the Electro-
chemical Society, Hawaii 1999, Vol. 99-2 p. 907;
J. Wolf, PbSn60 Solder Bumping by Electroplating, Pixel2000
Workshop, Genova, Italy, June 2000.

[14] W. Kucewicz, G. Deptuch, A. Zalewska, M. Battaglia, K. Oster-
berg, R. Orava, M. Caccia, C. Meroni, G. Vegni, P. Grabiec, B.
Jaroszewicz, J. Marczewski, Capacitively coupled active pixel sen-
sors with analog readout for future e+e- colliders, Acta Phys.Polon.
B30 (1999) 2075–2083.

[15] M. Amati, M. Baranski, A. Bulgheroni, M. Caccia, K. Domanski, P.
Grabiec, M. Grodner, B. Jaroszewicz, W. Kucewicz, K. Kucharski,
S. Kuta, W. Machowski, J. Marczewski, H. Niemiec, M. Sapor, D.
Tomaszewski, Hybrid Active Pixel Sensors and SOI Inspired Option,
Nucl. Inst. Meth. A511 (2003) 265–270.

[16] P. Gerlach, C. Linder, K.H. Becks, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A473 (2001)

102-106 and references therein;
M. T¨opper, Intl. Conf. on High Density Packaging and MCMs,
Denver, Colorado, April 1999.

[17] C. Kenney, S. Parker, J. Segal, C. Storment, Silicon detectors with 3-
D electrode arrays: fabrication and initial test results, IEEE Trans.
Nucl. Sci. vol.46(4), (1999) 1224–1236;
C.J. Kenney, S.I. Parker, B. Krieger, B. Ludewigt, T.P. Dubbs, H.
Sadrozinski, Observation of beta and X rays with 3-D-architecture
silicon microstrip sensors, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. vol.48(2), (2001)
189-193;
C.J. Kenney, S. Parker, E. Walckiers, Results from 3-D silicon sen-
sors with wall electrodes: near-cell-edge sensitivity measurements as
a preview of active-edge sensors, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. vol.48(6),
(2001) 2405.

[18] E. M. Westbrook, Pixels and Proteins: Better Detectors for Bi-
ological Crystallography, Review given at IEEE Nuclear Science
Symposium, Portland Oct. 2003, these proceedings;
S.I. Parker, C.J. Kenney, J.D. Segal, E. Westbrook, J. Hasi, C. Da
Via’, E. Mandelli, G. Meddeleer, J. Morse, Direct X-ray Detector
with 3D Silicon Pixel Sensors for Structural Molecular Biology,
IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium Portland 2003, these proceedings.
[19] C.J. Kenney, E. Westbrook, J.D. Segal, S.I. Parker, J. Morse, J.
Hasi, C. Da Via’, First Results from Active-Edge, Planar radiation
Sensors, IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium Portland 2003, these
proceedings.

[20] S.I. Parker, A. Kok, C. Da Via’, J. Hasi, G. Anelli, P. Jarron, C.J.
Kenney, J.D. Segal, Measurements of Fast Rise-time Pulses from 3D
Silicon Sensors, IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium Portland 2003,
these proceedings;
C.J. Kenney, E. Westbrook, J.D. Segal, E. Perozzielo, S.I. Parker,
J. Hasi, C. Da Via’, J. Morse, First Results from Active Edge 3D
Architecture radiation Sensors, IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium
Portland 2003, these proceedings.

[21] RD42 Collaboration, Diamond as a particle detector, Proc. Itatial

Phys. Socienty, Torino, vol. 52 (1996), 105;
R. Wedenig et al., CVD Diamond Pixel Detectors for LHC Experi-
ments, Nucl. Phys. B. (Proc. Suppl.) 78 (1999) 497.

[22] M. Keil et al., New Results on Diamond Pixel Sensors using ATLAS
Frontend Electronics, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A501 (2003) 153-159.
[23] P. Fischer, An area efﬁcient 128 channel counter chip, Nucl. Inst.

Meth. A378 (1996) 297–300.

[24] P. Fischer, A. Helmich, M. Lindner, N. Wermes, L. Blanquart, A
IEEE Trans. Nucl.

Photon Counting Chip with Energy Windowing,
Sci. vol.47(3), (2000) 881–884;
M. Lindner, L. Blanquart, P. Fischer, H. Kr¨uger, N. Wermes, Medical
X-ray imaging with energy windowing, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A465
(2000) 229–234.

[25] X. Llopart, M. Campbell, R. Dinapoli, D. SanSegundo, E. Pernigotti,
Medipix2: A 64-k pixel readout chip with 55- mu m square elements
IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci.
working in single photon counting mode,
vol.49(5), (2002) 2279–2283.

[26] G. Mettivier, M.C. Montesi, P. Russo, Digital Autoradiography with
a Medipix2 Hybrid Silicon Pixel Detector, Poster given at IEEE
Medical Imaging Conference, Portland Oct. 2003;
G. Mettivier, M.C. Montesi, P. Russo, Tritium digital autoradiog-
raphy with a Medipix2 hybrid silicon pixel detector, submitted to
Nucl. Inst. Meth. A

[27] M. L¨ocker, P. Fischer, M. Kouda, S. Krimmel, H. Kr¨uger, M.
Lindner, K. Nakazawa, T. Takahashi, N. Wermes, Single photon
Counting X-ray Imaging with Si and CdTe Single Chip Pixel
Detectors and Multichip Pixel Modules, IEEE Nuclear Science
Symposium Portland 2003, these proceedings.

[28] F. Edling, R. Brenner, N. Bingefors, K. Fransson, L. Gustafsson, L.
del Risco Norrlid, C. R¨onnqvist, A Hybrid Pixel Detector with Two
Counters for X-ray Imaging, Poster given at IEEE-NS Symposium,
Portland Oct. 2003, these proceedings.

[29] Medipix Collaboration, S.R. Amendiola et al., Nucl. Inst. Meth.

A466 (2001) 74-78.

[30] P. Fischer, J. Hausmann, A. Helmich, M. Lindner, N. Wermes, L.
Blanquart, A counting pixel readout chip and sensor system for X-
ray imaging, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., Vol 46, No. 4 (1999)1070 ;
L. Blanquart, V. Bonzon, G. Comes, P. Delpierre, P. Fischer, J. Haus-
mann, M. Keil, M. Lindner, S. Meuser, N. Wermes, Pixel Readout
Electronics for LHC and Biomedical Applications, Nucl. Inst. Meth.
A439 (2000) 80–90.

[31] P. Fischer, M. Kouda, H. Kr¨uger, M. Lindner, G. Sato, T. Takahashi,

S. Watanabe, N. Wermes, A counting CdTe pixel detector for hard X-
ray and gamma-ray imaging, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. vol.48, (2001)
2401-2404.

[32] T. Ducourant, M. Michel, G. Vieux, T. Peppler, J.C. Trochet, R.F.
Bastiaens, F. Busse, Optimization of key building blocks for a large-
area radiographic and ﬂuoroscopic dynamic digital X-ray detector
based on a-Si:H/CsI:Tl ﬂat panel
technology, Proc. SPIE 3977
(2000) 14-25;
N. Jung et al., Proc. SPIE 3336 (1998) 396-407.

[33] O. Tousignant, M. Choquette, Y. Demers, L. Laperriere, J. Leboeuf,
M. Honda, M. Nishiki, A. Takahashi, A. Tsukamoto, Progress report
on the performance of real-time selenium ﬂat-panel detectors for
direct X-ray imaging, Proc. SPIE 4682 (2002) 503-510.

[34] H. Graafsma, Detector Needs at Current and Future Synchrotron
Sources, Review given at IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium, Port-
land Oct. 2003, these proceedings.

[35] P. Delpierre, J.F. Berar, L. Blanquart, B. Caillot, J.C. Clemens,

IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. vol.48(4), (2001) 987-991;

C. Mouget,
P. Delpierre, J.F. Berar, L. Blanquart, N. Boudet, P. Breugnon,
B. Caillot, J.C. Clemens, I. Koudobine, C. Mouget, R. Potheau,
I. Valin, NSS-MIC/IEEE, San Diego (USA), Nov 4-10, 2001,
accepted for publication in IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., Sept. 2002.

[36] C. Br¨onnimann et al., Journal of Syn. Rad. 7 (2000) 301.
[37] E. Eikenberry, C. Broennimann, G. Huelsen, H. Toyokawa, M.
Suzuki, R. Horisberger, B. Schmitt, C. Schulze-Briese, T. Tomizaki,
The PILATUS X-ray Detector, 13th International Workshop on
Room-Temperature Semiconductor X- and Gamma-Ray Detectors,
Portland 2003.

[38] TESLA Technical Design Report, Vol. IV, DESY-01-011 (2001).
[39] W. Snoeys, J. Plummer, S. Parker, C. Kenney, A new integrated pixel
IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. vol.39,

detector for high energy physics,
(1992) 1263–1269.

[40] B. Dierickx, G. Meynants, D. Scheffer, Near 100% ﬁll factor CMOS
active pixel, Proc. IEEE CDD&AIS Workshop, Brugge, Belgium,
June 1997 ;
G. Meynants, B. Dierickx, D. Scheffer, CMOS active pixel image
sensor with CCD performance, Proceedings SPIE - Int. Soc. Opt.
Eng. (USA), vol.3410 (1998) 68–76, 9.

[41] R. Turchetta, J.D. Bertst, B. Casadei, G. Claus, C. Colledani, W.
Dulinski, Y. Hu, D. Husson, J.-P. Le-Normand, J.L. Riester, G. Dep-
tuch, U. Goerlach, S. Higueret, M. Winter, A monolithic active pixel
sensor for charged particle tracking and imaging using standard
VLSI CMOS technology, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A458 (2001) 677-689;
G. Claus, C. Colledani, W. Dulinski, D. Husson, R. Turchetta, J.L.
Riester, D. Deptuch, G. Orazi, M. Winter, Particle tracking using
CMOS monolithic active pixel sensor, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A465
(2001) 120–124.

[42] G. Deptuch, W. Dulinski, Y. Gornushkin, C. Hu-Guo, I. Valin,
Monolithic Active Pixel Sensor with on-pixel ampliﬁcation and
Double Sampling Operation, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A512 (2003) 299-
309;
G. Claus et al., Monolithic Active Pixel Sensors for a Linear
Collider, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A473 (2001) 83–85.

[43] G. Deptuch et al., Monolithic Active Pixel Sensor with In-pixel Dou-
ble Sampling and Columns-level Disrcrimination, Poster submitted
to this conference.

[44] R. Turchetta et al., Monolithic Active Pixel Sensors (MAPS) for
Particle Physics and Space Science, Proceedings VERTEX 2003,
Lake Windermere, UK, September 2003.

[45] H. Matis, F. Bieser, S. Kleinfelder, G. Rai, F. Retiere, H. Ritter,
K. Singh, S. Wurzel, H. Wiemann, E. Yamamoto, Charged Particle
Detection using a CMOS Active Pixel Sensor,
IEEE Trans. Nucl.
Sci. vol.50, (() 2003)1020-1025.
[46] S. Kleinfelder, F. Bieser, Y. Chen,

I. Kotov, H.S. MAtis, M.
Oldenburg, F. Retiere, K.D. Singh, H.H. Wiemann, E. Yamamoto,
Novel Integrated CMOS Pixel Structures for Vertex Detectors, IEEE
Nuclear Science Symposium Portland 2003, these proceedings.
[47] J. Marczewski, K. Domanski, P. Grabiec, M. Grodner, B.
Jaroscewicz, A. Kociubinski, D. Tomaszewski, W. Kucewicz, S.
Kuta, W. Machowski, H. Niemiec, M Sapor, M. Caccia, SOI Active
Pixel Detectors of Ionizing Radiation - Technology and Design
Development, IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium Portland 2003,
these proceedings.

[48] J.A. Theil et al., a-Si:H photodiode technology for advanced CMOS
active pixel sensor imagers, 19th Intl. Conf. on Amorphous Materials
and Semiconductors, Nice, France, August 2001

[49] P. Jarron, Deposition of amorphous silicon above integrated circuits,
19th Intl. Conf. on Advanced Detectors, Elba, Italy, May 2003
[50] J. Kemmer, G. Lutz, New Semiconductor Detector Concepts, Nucl.

Inst. Meth. A253 (1987) 356.

[51] W. Neeser et al., The DEPFET Pixel BIOSCOPE, IEEE Trans. Nucl.

Sci. vol.47(3), (2000) 1246;
P. Klein et al., A DEPFET Pixel Bioscope for the Use in Autoradio-
graphy, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A454 (2000) 152–157;
J. Ulrici, S. Adler, P. Buchholz, P. Fischer, P. Klein, M. L¨ocker,
G. Lutz, W. Neeser, L. Str¨uder, M. Trimpl, N. Wermes, Spectroscopic
and imaging performance of DEPFET pixel sensors, Nucl. Inst.
Meth. A465 (2001) 247–252.

[52] A. Gay et al., High Resolution CMOS Sensors for a Vertex Detector
at the Linear Collider, Vertex03 Conference, Lake Windermere, UK,
September 2003, Proceedings.

[53] W. Dulinski et al., CMOS Monolithic Active Pixel Sensors for
Minimum Ionizing Particle Tracking using non-epitaxial silicon
substrate, IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium Portland 2003, these
proceedings.

[54] W. Dulisnki et al., CMOS monolithic active pixel sensors for high
resolution particle tracking and ionizing radiation imaging, Frontier
Detectors for Frontier Physics 2003, Elba, May 2003.

[55] W. Dulinksi, private communication.
[56] E. Gatti, P. Rehak, Semiconductor driftchamber-An application of a
novel charge transport scheme, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A225 (1984) 608.
[57] J. Ulrici, S. Adler, P. Buchholz, P. Fischer, P. Klein, M. Lcker, G.
Lutz, W. Neeser, L. Strder, M. Trimpl, N. Wermes, Spectroscopic
and imaging performance of DEPFET pixel sensors, Nucl. Inst.
Meth. A465 (2001) 247 ;
J. Ulrici, P. Fischer, P. Klein, G. Lutz, W. Neeser, R. Richter, L.
Strder, M. Trimpl, N. Wermes, Imaging Performance of a DEPFET
Bioscope system in Tritium Autoradiography, submitted to IEEE
Trans. Nucl. Sci. vol., (2003) .

[58] P. Fischer, et al., Desy Linear Collider Note LC-DET-2002-004

(2002) and Desy PRC R&D 03/01;
M. Trimpl, L. Andricek, P. Fischer, G. Lutz, R.H. Richter, L.
Struder, J. Ulrici, N. Wermes, A fast readout using switched current
techniques for a DEPFET-pixel vertex detector at TESLA, Nucl.
Inst. Meth. A511 (2003) 257–264;
R.H. Richter, L. Andricek, P. Fischer, K. Heinzinger, P. Lechner, G.
Lutz, I. Peric, M. Reiche, G. Schaller, M. Schnecke, F. Schopper, H.
Soltau, L. Struder, J. Treis, M. Trimpl, J. Ulrici, N. Wermes, Design
and Technology of DEPFET Pixel Sensors for Linear Collider
Applications, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A511 (2003) 250–256.

[59] N. Wermes, New Results on DEPFET Pixel Detectors for Radiation
Imaging and High Energy Particle Detection, IEEE Nuclear Science
Symposium Portland 2003, these proceedings.

[60] P. Holl, P. Fischer, P. Klein, G. Lutz, W. Neeser, L. Str¨uder,
N. Wermes, Active Pixel Matrix for X-ray Satellite Missions, IEEE
Trans. Nucl. Sci. vol.47(4), (2000) 1441–1425;
L. Str¨uder et al., Proc. SPIE Vol. 4012 (2000) 200–217;
L. Str¨uder, 13th International Workshop on Room-Temperature
Semiconductor X- and Gamma-Ray Detectors, Portland 2003.
[61] L. Andricek, Processing of Ultra Thin Silicon Sensors for Future
Linear Collider Experiments, IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium
Portland 2003, these proceedings.

