4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
0
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Resonant Polarization Interferometry with Ultrashort Laser Pulses

Andre N. Luiten∗ and Jesse C. Petersen†
School of Physics, The University of Western Australia
Nedlands, Western Australia 6907, Australia
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

We propose a novel technique for the ultra-sensitive detection of optical birefringence using frequency-
stabilized and intense ultrashort laser pulses. We show that the technique has the potential to be the ﬁrst to
detect a ﬁeld-induced birefringence in the quantum electrodynamic vacuum without requiring large-scale liquid-
helium cooled magnetic systems. This approach avoids many of the pitfalls encountered in existing experiments
that are aimed at detecting polarization of the vacuum. We show that by utilizing existing optical technology
it is potentially possible to detect vacuum birefringence in an experimental measurement of just a few days in
duration.

PACS numbers: 42.50.Xa,12.20.Fv,42.62.Eh,42.25.Lc,41.20.Jb

I.

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

∼

A number of physical effects of great interest manifest
themselves as an optically detectable birefringence arising un-
der the application of strong electromagnetic ﬁelds. One ex-
ample is the small degree of magnetically induced birefrin-
gence that arises in the Cotton-Mouton effect [1, 2, 3].
In
this case light traversing a medium exposed to a strong trans-
verse magnetic ﬁeld experiences a different refractive index
for polarization states parallel and perpendicular to the mag-
netic ﬁeld direction. In dilute gases the Cotton-Mouton ef-
fect can be exceedingly small [1, 2, 3]. An analogous, but
even smaller ﬁeld-induced birefringence is predicted to oc-
cur in vacuum because of corrections to Maxwell’s equations
arising under quantum electrodynamics (QED)
[4, 5, 6, 7].
The correction predicts a vacuum birefringence of the order
of ∆n

10−21 for realistic laboratory magnetic ﬁelds.
In this article we propose a novel method for making ex-
tremely sensitive birefringence measurements that is based
on the use of frequency-stabilized mode-locked lasers and
low dispersion optical resonators. This is an approach only
made possible because of recent rapid developments in mode-
locked laser frequency stabilization techniques [8]. We will
measure the birefringence induced by the extremely high in-
tensity ﬁelds that exist within a focussed femtosecond dura-
tion pulse of light. We believe that this technique holds the
promise of state-of-the-art sensitivity while only making use
of a room-temperature table-top apparatus that is reliable and
relatively inexpensive. We complete this article with an anal-
ysis of the technique in terms of a search for vacuum birefrin-
gence but believe that the technique has broader application to
other sensitive birefringence measurements. We will reserve
discussion of application of the technique to vacuum birefrin-
gence measurements until Sect. V.

To date most actual and proposed experiments to detect
weak ﬁeld-induced birefringence make use of high intensity

∗Electronic address: andre@physics.uwa.edu.au
†Now with Department of Physics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British
Columbia, Canada.

−

static or low-frequency oscillating magnetic ﬁelds supplied
by extremely powerful superconducting magnets [1, 2, 3, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. The birefringence induced by the
magnetic ﬁeld is detected by the observation of an elliptic-
ity created in a linearly polarised light beam that is travers-
ing the ﬁeld. These types of magnets supply extremely in-
tense ﬁelds (5
25 T), so that they might create a high level
of polarization, but have a number of key limitations. The
most obvious of these disadvantages is that the magnet sys-
tems are large and operationally expensive, and can only be
modulated at low frequencies. This limitation on modulation
frequency means that any birefringence signals can easily be
buried in the low frequency noise of the detector forcing the
use of more elaborate modulation schemes [1, 10, 12]. Of
even more consequence for highly sensitive experiments are
the unfortunate results of the large volume ﬁelds generated
by the magnets, and the high forces that are intrinsically part
of high-energy superconducting magnet systems. The high
forces result in movement of the optical elements in the de-
tection system which can masquerade as a birefringence sig-
nal [1, 17]. The unconﬁned nature of the magnetic ﬁeld makes
it difﬁcult to properly shield the detection apparatus and this is
problematic because low levels of residual ﬁeld can act on the
detection system components so as to generate a false birefrin-
gence signal [1, 11, 16, 17]. In existing searches for a vacuum
birefringence the experiments were limited by these types of
spurious signals.

On its face an attractive alternative to high energy magnets
would be the use of optical ﬁelds to generate the polariza-
tion necessary for the experiment. A number of authors have
suggested the use of continuous-wave (cw) lasers to gener-
ate the necessary ﬁelds, however, the energy density of these
optical ﬁelds is extremely small in comparison with that of
the superconducting magnet generated ﬁelds [18, 19, 20]. In
this paper we propose to use extremely intense short pulses of
optical radiation to generate the high ﬁelds necessary to po-
larize the media. As has already been noted [16], the peak
magnetic ﬁelds that exist within these intense short pulses
of light (of the order of 105 T for a 1 J, 50 fs pulse focused
into 10−12m2) can greatly exceed the ﬁelds that can be gen-
erated by any other means. The high degree of conﬁnement
of the optical ﬁeld means that although the peak electromag-

netic ﬁelds are still very high, the total energy stored in the
ﬁeld is much smaller than a static magnetic ﬁeld that would
produce an equivalent birefringence signal. The pulsed light
technique thus has twin beneﬁts in that it eliminates any large
forces from the experiment, and also make shielding of the
detection apparatus from the strong ﬁelds very simple. The
obvious disadvantage of this approach is that the high ﬁelds
only persist for a short period of time in any particular loca-
tion, and over a very small volume. To overcome this chal-
lenge one requires a detection technology with a very high
temporal and spatial resolution so as not to average the signal
away. In this paper we propose a novel synchronous detection
technique that satisﬁes both of these requirements and which
uses highly precise frequency metrology techniques [15]. Our
approach will simultaneously resonate the strong ﬁeld for po-
larizing the media together with the ﬁeld that detects any re-
sulting birefringence. This has the advantage of allowing si-
multaneously high intensity ﬁelds as well as a high interaction
rate. The combination of a highly sensitive detection tech-
nique and high magnitude of polarization potentially puts de-
tection of QED vacuum polarization within the grasp of an
all-optical tabletop experiment using existing technology.

II. RESONANT POLARIZATION INTERFEROMETRY

J. Hall et al have reported an experimental technique ca-
pable of measuring birefringence with great precision [15].
We will refer to the device, illustrated schematically in Fig. 1,
as a Resonant Polarization Interferometer (RPI). The basis
of the technique is to frequency lock two continuous-wave
(cw) and orthogonally-polarized lasers to the same longitu-
dinal mode of a resonator using the Pound-Drever-Hall tech-
nique [21, 22, 23]. To ﬁrst order the fractional frequency dif-
ference between the stabilized laser frequencies is equal to the
fractional difference in the optical path length of the resonator
measured in the two polarization states:

νk

ν⊥ −
ν0

=

l⊥

lk −
l0

(1)

(2)

where ν0 is the average frequency of the two modes and l0 is
the average length of the resonator. A path length difference
will arise from any birefringence in the cavity in addition to
that coming from any intrinsic birefringence of the cavity mir-
ror coatings [15]:

ν⊥ −

νk ∼

n⊥

nk −
n0

ν0 +

c
2n0L

δφ
2π

where c/(2n0L) is the longitudinal mode spacing of the res-
onant cavity, δφ is the difference in the reﬂection phase for
the two polarisations, and n0 is the average refractive index
νk, can
in the resonator. The laser frequency difference, ν⊥ −
be extracted by detecting the beat-note between the lasers and
measuring the beat-note frequency with a conventional high
precision frequency counter.

2

beat

PD

45°P

cavity

laser 1
(v. polarized)

laser 2
(h. polarized)

EOM

EOM

lock

lock

PD

PBS

NPBS

PBS

PD

FIG. 1: A Resonant Polarization Interferometer following that
described in reference [15].
PD-photodiode; PBS-polarizing
beamsplitter; NPBS-non-polarizing beamsplitter, EOM-electro-optic
modulator, 45◦P is polarizer at 45◦ to the polarization of lasers

It is apparent from Eq. (2) that the RPI approach gives a po-
tentially high sensitivity since a small fractional difference in
the refractive index is multiplied by the optical frequency ν0
3 x 1014 Hz). In addition, we note that cavity length ﬂuc-
(
∼
tuations that arise from vibration or temperature ﬂuctuations
will be common to both polarizations and hence do not appear
in the measured frequency difference signal. This avoids the
need for high quality vibration isolation or temperature con-
trol of the detection resonator.

If technical noise sources such as laser pointing instabil-
ity and power ﬂuctuations can be adequately reduced, then
the key residual ﬂuctuations in the frequency difference sig-
nal will be due to the inherent noise in the frequency locking
system. With sufﬁcient servo gain and high modulation fre-
quencies, the dominant residual noise source is photon shot
noise. An order of magnitude estimate shows that this will
limit the accuracy of each locked laser frequency to a fraction
of the resonance bandwidth equal to [15, 24]:

δshot ∼ r

hν
Pdetτint

,

where h is Planck’s constant, ν is the laser frequency, Pdet
is the power falling on the feedback photodiode and τint is
the integration time. For a more detailed noise analysis see
Sect. IV below, but as an initial estimate lets us use 800 nm
laser light and photodiodes which accept a few milliwatts of
incident light. In this case, the laser will be locked to one part
in 108 of the cavity bandwidth after 1 second of integration
time. In an optical resonator of length L with ﬁnesse F , the
frequency bandwidth of each resonance is

(3)

(4)

δν 1
2

=

c
2LF

.

For a measurement of the difference between two resonance
frequencies, the expected sensitivity is equal to the residual
frequency instability of each laser multiplied by √2 (because
a comparison is being made between two uncorrelated and
equally noisy signals). This gives a measurement sensitivity

auxilliary
(pump) laser

RPI locking
and measurement
system (Fig. 1)

z

ρ(z)

a

x

θ

C

L

FIG. 2: Measurement scheme for optically-induced birefringence.

(as a fraction of the laser frequency) of

δνrel = √2δshot

δν 1

2

ν

h
2Pdetτintν

c
LF

.

∼ r

(5)

(6)

An indicative overall sensitivity is given for 800 nm lasers
where we have used experimentally realizable parameters as:

105
F

6

×

r

(7)

(cid:19) (cid:18)

(cid:19) r

10−19

4 m
L

δνrel ≈

5 mW
Pdet

1 s
τint (cid:18)
In practice, to attain a shot-noise-limited measurement sensi-
tivity it is necessary to modulate the birefringence at a judi-
cious frequency that is well-removed from electrical or me-
chanical interference, and which is high enough to negate
seismic noise sources. Although it is unlikely to expect shot-
noise limited sensitivity at all frequencies it is certainly ex-
perimentally feasible to achieve this over a limited frequency
band [24, 25, 26, 27, 28].

III. MEASURING OPTICALLY-INDUCED
BIREFRINGENCE

In order to measure a possible birefringence it is necessary
to have an auxiliary ‘pump’ laser beam to interact with the
two pulsed detection beams in the RPI. The detection beams
do not act to produce birefringence upon themselves because
there needs to be a non-zero momentum in the centre of mass
frame to allow photon scattering [19]. It would be in principle
possible to use a coaxial but counter-propagating pair of pump
and detection beams and thus use a single set of mirrors for
both the detection and pump processes. However, it has been
shown that this approach is potentially unsafe since dielectric
mirrors can exhibit a strong photo-refractive effect, which can
masquerade as a spurious birefringence signal by providing a
means for the detection and pump beams to interact [15].

We propose a second optical resonator to enhance the power
of the pump beam, as illustrated in Figure 2, which lies at an
angle, θ, with respect to the detection resonator. An additional
advantage of this twin resonator approach is the ability to in-
dependently optimize the resonator mirror characteristics for
the detection and pump tasks. For the calculations that follow
the resonators are of deﬁned to be of identical length L, and
we assume a separation between the resonator axes of x at the
cavity mirrors of radius, a = x/2 (see Fig. 2).

3

Since the RPI produces a beat frequency corresponding to
the integrated birefringence in the cavity (see Eq. (2)), a key
concern is the limited interaction region between the pump
and detection beams. This length limitation is a imposed
by the crossed cavity design.
It is one of the unique and
key suggestions of this article that both the detection beams
and the pump beam consist of laser pulse trains rather than
continuous-wave (cw) signals. If the timing of the circulating
pulse in each beam is synchronized so that the detection and
pump pulses meet head on at C (see Fig. 2) [29, 30, 31, 32],
and in addition, each of the pulses is short enough to com-
pletely pass through each other before the beam axes begin to
separate, then essentially all of the light circulating in the RPI
cavity will interact with essentially all of the light circulating
in the pump cavity on every pass. Furthermore, the pulses
pass through each other where the beams are most tightly
focussed, and thus where they are most intense. Although
the use of pulsed lasers will complicate the experimental ar-
rangement there is, in principle, no reason that a mode-locked
laser signal can not be frequency locked with the same accu-
racy as a cw signal. In fact, mode-locked lasers have already
been frequency-locked to resonators with relatively high pre-
cision [33, 34]. A number of other authors have shown that
low-dispersion resonators can allow even very short pulses to
be coupled into the resonator with low power loss and rela-
tively little broadening of the circulating pulse with respect
to the input pulse [35, 36]. An additional advantage of this
pulsed-RPI approach is that we have put energy into many
successive longitudinal modes of the detection and pump cav-
ities. This circumvents the strong low frequency interaction
that is possible between the cw detection beams that was seen
in the experiments of Hall et al [15]. The pulsed-RPI scheme
automatically implements the more complex detection strate-
gies proposed by Hall et al and Lee et al [15, 37]. These other
strategies require frequency shifting of the detection beams in
order to prevent interaction via the optical coatings.

To determine the potential sensitivity of the pulsed-RPI pro-
posal we will consider the case of a birefringence effect which
is proportional to the intensity of the local optical ﬁeld. This is
true for both the Cotton-Mouton effect and the predicted QED
vacuum polarization. First it is necessary to determine the the
average intensity seen by a pulse circulating in the RPI cavity,
which is equal to

1
L

L/2

−L/2

Iav =

I(z) dz

(8)

Z
where I(z) is the intensity as a function of longitudinal po-
sition in the cavity. When short pulses are used, it is merely
the region where the pulses pass through each other that con-
tributes signiﬁcantly to the above integral. This interaction re-
gion is approximately half the length of the pulses themselves,
extending a distance

z′
0 =

c τ
4

.

(9)

either side of point C on Fig. 2 where τ is the full width at half
maximum pulse duration. As long as the separation, ρ(z), be-
tween the beam axes remains signiﬁcantly less than the beam

radii in the interaction region, the beams can be treated as ap-
proximately coaxial when calculating Iav. The separation be-
tween the beam axes, in terms of beam radii, can be expressed
as:

ρ(z)
w(z) ≈

z θ

.

2

w0

1 +

λz
πw2
0

(10)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

r
where we are only interested in a range of z that falls within
the interaction region as given by Eq. 9, w0 is the beam waist
size, and λ is the wavelength of the stored radiation. The min-
imum separation, x, between the mirror centers, as shown on
Fig. 2, is equal to twice the cavity mirror radius, a. The mirror
radius must in turn be a factor of α larger than the laser mode
spot radius evaluated at the mirror location, w(L/2), where
α is determined by the extent to which aperture losses can be
tolerated for a particular application. Thus x is given by

x = 2a = 2 α w (L/2) .

(11)

Since we wish to maximize the induced birefringence we
choose detection and pump cavity conﬁgurations that are
close to the concentric stability limit [38], so as to minimize
the waist size in the cavity, and hence maximize the pump en-
ergy density. In the limit of a small waist size, w0, we can
calculate the spot size at the mirrors as:

which determines θ, the angle between the beams as

200fs, a
For reasonable assumptions of a pulse duration
≤
5λ, then we ﬁnd that the
500 nm and w0 ≥
wavelength λ
pulse length is less than one Rayleigh range, πw2
0/λ, and we
can simplify Eq. (10) and use Eqs. (9) and (13) to give the
following approximation for the relative separation:

≥

x

≈

αLλ
πw0

,

θ =

2αλ
πw0

.

ρ(z)
w(z) ≈

2z αλ
πw2
0

,

ρ(z′
0)
w(z′
0) ≈

cτ αλ
2πw2
0

.

which becomes a maximum at the beginning and end of the
interaction zone, z = z′

0 = c τ /4,

0)/w(z′

If the relative separation is small at this point, then the beams
may be treated as coaxial over the entire region. As an ex-
ample, if ρ(z′
0) = 0.3, then I(z′
0) is only about 6%
less on the detection axis than it is on the pump axis. The
reduction in average intensity when integrated over the entire
interaction region is even smaller than this value. To give a
rough criterion for the minimum waist radius that can be used
without encountering signiﬁcant beam separation inside the

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

interaction region, we set Eq. (15) equal to 0.3 and rearrange,
obtaining

w0 & 10µm

τ
200 fs

1
2

1
2

α
4

1
2

.

λ
800 nm

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)
We note that if the interaction region is smaller than the
Rayleigh range of the beam, the beams will be of approxi-
mately constant radius as the pulses pass through each other.
A waist radius which is too small, though, will cause the
beams to begin to diverge while still inside the interaction re-
gion and reduce Iav. Equating the Rayleigh range to z′
0 as
given in (9) and rearranging yields the following expression
which must be satisﬁed in order to prevent signiﬁcant beam
divergence inside the interaction region.

(17)

w0 & 2µm

τ
200fs

1
2

λ
800nm

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

1
2

.

(cid:17)
For realistic values of α, adhererence to (16) automatically
satisﬁes (17).

(cid:16)

So long as the inequalities in Eq. (16) and (17) hold, cal-
culation of Iav is straightforward. Each time a detection pulse
passes through the interaction region, it sees a burst of light
which carries the effectively the entire energy Epulse of the
pulse circulating in the pump cavity. During the entire inter-
action time the pulses are approximately coaxial, with beam
radii equal to that at the waist. Thus

L/2

P (z) dz

Iav ≈

≈

1
L
c
L

log 2
πw2
log 2
πw2
0

−L/2

0 Z

Epulse.

The circulating pulse energy, Epulse is determined by the
average input power Pav, the repetition rate, R, of the input
pulse train, the resonator ﬁnesse F , and an efﬁciency factor
kcav which allows for mode-matching, impedance matching
and dispersion related losses [35, 36]:

Epulse = kcav

F
π

Pav
R

.

In addition, for the circulating pulse to be efﬁciently rein-
forced on each pass by the incident pulse train it is necessary
that the free spectral range of the cavity is identical to the rep-
etition rate of the laser, R [34, 35, 36]:

In a time domain view this is equivalent to setting the inter-
pulse time of the pulse train equal to the round trip time of the
resonator. The combination the above expressions gives:

R =

c
2L

.

Iav ≈

2 log 2
(πw0)2 F Pav.

According to Eq. (22), Iav is determined solely by the pump
oscillator average power, the pump resonator ﬁnesse and the

4

(16)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

size of the beam waist. The beam waist, in turn, depends on λ,
α and τ via Eq. (16). This results in the following indicative
numerical expression for Iav.

given by [38]:

Iav ≈

F
52 000

Pav
20 W

200 fs
τ

4
α

kcav
1

800 nm
λ

1.5

×

PW
m2 . (23)

The scaling factors chosen in Eq. (23) reﬂect realistic ex-
perimental parameters. A ﬁnesse of 52 000 corresponds to a
reﬂectance of 99.994% which is available in a custom low dis-
persion mirror coating [39]. These coatings have sufﬁciently
low dispersion to allow 200 fs incident laser pulses to be di-
rectly coupled into a cavity with near-unity efﬁciency [35, 36].
A mode-locked laser with a 200 fs duration output pulse and
20 W average power has been reported with a repetition rate
of 25 MHz [40]. It is likely that there will be further improve-
ments in the output power of mode-locked lasers given the rel-
atively early stage of development of this technology together
with the rapidly decreasing cost of pump lasers. Thus, using
readily available equipment it should be possible to construct
a pump cavity which gives a measured average intensity in the
detection cavity of 1.5 PW/m2. Such high average intensity
is possible because by pulsing both the detection and pump
beams, we have arranged for the detection pulses to see the
same average applied intensity as if the beams were parallel
and nondivergent throughout the cavity. It is the pulsed and
counter-propagating nature of the two beams that circumvents
the effect of high divergence which would normally under-
mine the use of tightly focussed light beams, and also ensures
that the detection beam sees all the pump light on every round
trip in the cavity. In fact, the pulsed beams show the same
degree of interaction as cw beams that were parallel and non-
divergent throughout the cavity, which is of course impossible
for tightly focussed, non-coaxial beams.

The average intensity given by Eq. (22) is independent of
the length of the cavity, because the increase in energy per
pulse that would occur if we switched to a lower repetition
rate is cancelled by the decrease in the fractional length of
the cavity which falls inside the interaction region. Of course,
this assumes that the average output power of the pump laser
is independent of the repetition rate, which is reasonably well
followed by commercial laser systems. However, it should
be noted that a longer cavity is preferable for the purpose
of increased measurement sensitivity because of the associ-
ated reduction in bandwidth of the detection cavity modes
(see Eq. (7) ). The optimal cavity length in a real experiment
depends largely on the feasibility of constructing sufﬁciently
large mirrors as implied by Eq. (12). For a 3 meter (50 MHz
repetition rate) cavity with α = 4, the mirrors would need to
be approximately 20 cm in diameter. Although this presents
a signiﬁcant challenge, it is not insurmountable, as demon-
strated by the recent construction of even larger diameter, high
quality mirrors for gravitational wave detection interferome-
ters [41].

One of the challenges of the concentric cavity required for
this proposal is its extreme sensitivity to misalignment of the
cavity mirrors and pointing ﬂuctuations of the input beam.
One can show that the waist size in a near concentric cavity is

5

(24)

w0 =

R λ
π

∆L

2 R

∆L

1
4

r
L

(cid:19)

−

−

≪

(cid:18)
where ∆L = 2R
R, and R is the radii of curvature
of the two symmetric mirrors. Thus in order to have a waist
size of order 10 µm in a cavity of length 3 m it is necessary to
tune the length to within 2 x 10−7 m of the instability limit.
In this near-concentric position the input coupling is highly
sensitive to relative angular and translational misalignments
of the cavity and the input beam. The beam displacement on
mirror 1 or 2 given by [38]:

∆x(1,2) =

R2 (

θ1 + θ2)
−
∆L

±

(25)

where θ(1,2) is the angular rotation of mirror 1 or 2. In order to
restrict translation motion of the mode on the mirrors to less
than 1% of the spot size of the beam it is necessary to limit
relative beam-mirror rotations to below 3 x 10−10 rad. The
alignment expression is clearly divergent as the cavity condi-
tion approaches the concentric limit. To meet the challenge
of these alignment requirements one can implement a mode-
cleaning cavity before the detection and pump cavities [42], or
make use of an auto-alignment system [43]. We note that the
requirements for mirror stability stated above are well within
the capacity of such alignment systems [43].

We now turn our attention to the higher order modes in
this concentric cavity system. The transverse mode spacing,
∆νTM, in a near-concentric resonator can be found to be [38]:

∆νTM =

c
1
4R  

2 ∆L
Rπ2

!

− r

(26)

∼

Using the example of a 3 m near-concentric cavity with a
10 µm waist we ﬁnd an
8 kHz frequency splitting between
the fundamental mode and the ﬁrst-order transverse mode.
The higher order modes will be frequency resolved if the ﬁ-
nesse of the cavity is greater than 6,000. In order that pointing
ﬂuctuations do not couple into frequency ﬂuctuations it is nec-
essary to have a ﬁnesse higher than this value. In addition, we
note that the transverse mode spacing can provide a useful di-
agnostic for setting the length of the cavity to obtain a given
cavity beam waist size.

IV. COMPARING PULSED-RPI TO CW-RPI AND
CONVENTIONAL ELLIPSOMETRY

To place the sensitivity of the proposed pulsed RPI tech-
nique in context we should compare it with conventional res-
onant ellipsometry and with continuous-wave RPI (cw-RPI).
In this section we also compare the energy density of an op-
tical pump ﬁeld with that obtainable from a large scale static
magnetic ﬁeld. The local energy density is proportional to the
degree of polarization created in a media of interest.

Conventional resonant ellipsometry relies on ‘tuning’ the
rotational angle of the cavity mirrors to set the intrinsic bire-
fringence of the cavity to nearly zero for the linearly polarized

input radiation [44]. In this case the slow or fast axis of each
of the mirrors is well aligned with the input polarization state
resulting in limited conversion of the input radiation into the
other polarization state by the mirrors. The polarization of the
input beam is set at π/4 with respect to the applied magnetic
ﬁeld direction using a high quality polarizer and will become
elliptically polarized by the birefringence in the cavity. The
change in ellipticity of the beam can be expressed as:

ψ = kL

nk −
2

n⊥

.

(27)

where k is the wavenumber of the input light, and L is the
interaction length of the ﬁeld and the light. The induced ellip-
ticity is measured by a polarization analyser at the output of
the cavity. The analyzer consists of a polarizer that has been
set to pass radiation with polarization orthogonal to the input
radiation. The most sensitive measurements of ellipticity, ψ,
using single-pass ellipsometry (without any resonant cavity)
have reported a ψ detection limit of 10−8/√τint, which is
less than a factor of 2 from the shot-noise imposed limit under
their respective conditions [1, 2, 3]:

δψellips =

2 + 4 σ2/θ2
P ηPD/(h ν)

1
√τint

p

(28)

p

where ηPD is the quantum efﬁciency of the detection photo-
diode and σ2 is the extinction coefﬁcient of the polarizer and
analyzer. In order to linearize the sensitivity of the ellipsome-
ter to small birefringence signals, and to shift the signal of
interest away from zero frequency, it is usual to add a polar-
ization modulation of depth θ using a modulator at the output
of the ellipsometer cavity (if present). In this case the bire-
fringence signal now appears as sidebands about the modula-
tion signal and can be demodulated using synchronous detec-
tion techniques. Unfortunately, the introduction of a resonant
cavity or delay line into the ellipsometer in order to increase
the length of the interaction between the applied ﬁeld and
detection beams (L in Eq. 27), and hence improve the bire-
fringence sensitivity, results in a signiﬁcantly worsened single
pass phase sensitivity [1]. The most sensitive birefringence
measurements with delay lines or a high ﬁnesse cavity incor-
porated into the ellipsometer have a birefringence sensitivity
in the range of ∆n

10−18 [1, 45].

10−17

We now turn our attention to the RPI technique of measur-
ing birefringence. We stated above in Eq. (7) that an order
of magnitude estimate of the shot-noise limited birefringence
sensitivity was below 10−18/√τint where τint is the integra-
tion time of the measurement. A more detailed examination
of the the sensitivity limits under Pound-Drever-Hall (PDH)
locking to a cavity with perfect impedance and mode match-
ing shows that [23, 24]:

∼

−

δψPDH =

√2 π n0

8 F √τint

P ηPD/(h ν)

(29)

p
To compare the sensitivity of the ellipsometer and RPI
approaches we note that Eq. (28) represents the ellipsome-
try sensitivity for a single pass through the interaction zone

6

whereas Eq. (29) naturally refers to a resonant measurement in
a cavity of Finesse, F . The sensitivity of a resonant ellipsome-
ter measurement can be found by adjusting L in Eq. 27 for the
number of passes through the interaction zone, which for a
resonator of ﬁnesse, F , will be a factor of 2 F/π. In the case
where the intentional modulation depth in the ellipsometer
is much greater than the extinction of the polarizer-analyzer
pair (θ
σ) then the sensitivity of the two approaches has
an identical dependence on the main experimental parameters
with the RPI approach being 2√2 more sensitive. It is likely
that subtle technical details will be the ultimate determinant
of which technique is optimal.

≫

As an example of the types of experimental details which
are of importance, the above expressions have excluded the
effects of amplitude noise in the input laser beams. The two
techniques will be sensitive to the amplitude noise in the im-
mediate frequency environment of the modulation frequency.
In the case of the ellipsometer this is the polarization modula-
tion frequency, while the phase modulation frequency inher-
ent in a PDH frequency lock is the relevant parameter in the
other case. In a suitable resonator (where δν 1
2π ) it
is however possible to have both systems deployed simultane-
ously [37].

∆ν δφ

2 ≫

We note the analysis by Chui et al [44] which compares the
sensitivity of a continuous-wave(cw) RPI scheme and con-
ventional resonant ellipsometer to cavity mirror temperature
changes. In both schemes a mirror temperature change gives
rise to a false birefringence signal although it is claimed that
the RPI approach is much more sensitive to these types of
temperature changes [44]. For the ellipsometer approach it is
possible to reduce the sensitivity to temperature changes by
106 times by accurate alignment of the input beam direction
with the intrinsic birefringence axis of the mirror surfaces. In
the worst case the cw-RPI technique will require the intrin-
sic birefringence of the mirrors to be stable to 1 part in 1011
during the measurement period, which corresponds to a tem-
perature stability for the mirrors in the nanoKelvin range. Al-
though this appears to be an extreme challenge for the RPI ap-
proach we point out two important differences in our scheme
in comparison to that considered by those authors. First, it
is possible to choose birefringence matched mirrors and align
the slow axis of one mirror with the fast axis of the other mir-
ror in construction of the detection cavity.
In this case the
frequency difference between the two polarisation modes of
the cavity will be much reduced, and reduce the temperature
stability requirements by the same large factor (if the tempera-
ture ﬂuctuations of the mirrors are correlated). In addition, as
will be pointed out below, in the case of a pulsed RPI system
it is possible to modulate the effective ‘pump’ intensity at a
high frequency (> 10 kHz) (unlike the magnet produced ﬁeld
1 mHz).
of Chui et al. which has modulation frequencies of
Slow temperature changes of the mirrors will be very strongly
suppressed by this modulated measurement technique.

∼

We now turn our attention to the magnitude of the polariz-
ing ﬁeld (the ‘pump’ beam). An average detected intensity of
1.5 PW/m2 corresponds to an energy density of 5 MJ/m3, a
little lower than the 39 MJ/m3 produced by a 10 T laboratory
magnetic ﬁeld. This small decrease in energy density requires

an improvement in detection sensitivity in order to compete
with the static magnetic ﬁeld approaches, or an improvement
in pump resonator mirror quality and mode-locked laser out-
put power. We note in passing that extremely high intensity
ﬁelds (much higher than can be generated by any macroscopic
magnetic ﬁeld technique) can be created by tightly focussing
the output of a high energy laser pulse ampliﬁer [16]. The
difﬁculty with this approach lies in constructing a detection
system with sufﬁcient sensitivity to probe inside these short
pulses given the tight temporal and spatial restrictions [16].

Finally, we comment that one of the very great advantages
of pulsed-RPI over cw-RPI is the ability to modulate the ef-
fective strength of the pump ﬁeld at a high and almost arbi-
trary rate without varying the energy load or distribution on
the mirror surfaces. This enables detection of the birefrin-
gence signal in a frequency domain where there is minimal
noise interference without giving rise to potentially false sig-
nals. We achieve this effective power modulation by tempo-
rally delaying or advancing the pump pulse with respect to the
detection pulse and thus varying the degree of energy overlap
at the crossing point of the two cavities. This type of power
modulation results in no change on the thermal load of the
mirrors and thus eliminates many potential spurious effects
that could otherwise masquerade as the effect of interest. This
technique can be implemented as part of the control system
that synchronizes the detection and pump pulses [29, 30, 31].

V. DETECTING VACUUM BIREFRINGENCE

A birefringence effect of signiﬁcant interest at this time is
that arising from a scattering of photons from a static electric
or magnetic ﬁeld, or even from other real photons. Although it
was predicted almost seventy years ago that virtual positron-
electron pairs in the quantum electrodynamic vacuum could
mediate interactions between photons [4, 5, 6, 7], this effect
has yet to be observed directly in the laboratory as a refrac-
tance or birefringence of the vacuum. However, there is evi-
dence of scattering of photons from extremely strong electric
ﬁelds and inelastic photon-photon scattering in high-energy
physics experiments [46, 47, 48]. It is believed that these types
of processes play an important role in extreme astrophysical
environments such as exist at the surfaces of pulsars [49].

The QED-mediated interaction between a polarized ﬁeld
and a photon gives rise to a photon polarization-dependent op-
tical refractance of the vacuum. For the effect to be induced
by an optical ﬁeld, a linearly polarized ‘pump’ beam must
interact with a counter-propagating ‘detection’ beam. The de-
tection beam can then be regarded as moving in the mean ﬁeld
of the pump beam. The refractive indices of the vacuum for
light polarized parallel and perpendicular to the polarization
of the pump beam are denoted as nk and n⊥, and are given by
[18]

nk = 1 +

n⊥ = 1 +

(30)

16
45

α2U
Ue

;

28
45

α2U
Ue

where α is the ﬁne structure constant, U is the energy den-
sity in the optical ﬁeld and Ue = m4
1024 is

1.44

ec5/~3

≈

×

7

τint

R, %
F
99.97 1.0×104 2.6 years
99.994 5.2×104 1.7 days
99.997 1.0×105 2.5 hours

TABLE I: Resonator ﬁnesse F and required integration times for the
detection of vacuum birefringence with a 20 W, 200 fs pump laser in
a 3 m long resonator, tabulated as a function of the resonator mir-
ror reﬂectance (it is assumed the mirrors of the pump and detection
cavities are identical).

the Compton energy density of the electron (me is the elec-
tron rest mass). Equation (30) demonstrates that the induced
refraction is polarization dependent and hence the vacuum ex-
hibits both a change in the phase velocity of the detection light
because of the presence of the pump beam but also a birefrin-
gence given by

∆n =

4
15

α2U
Ue

=

4
15

α2Iav
cUe

.

(31)

Although these expressions only strictly hold for inﬁnite plane
waves, they give a birefringence of the correct order of magni-
tude so long as the beams remain well-collimated over the in-
teraction region. Substituting the maximum average intensity
which can be applied in the detection cavity of the pulsed RPI
from Eq. (23) into Eq. 31 gives an estimate of the expected
birefringence.

Various extremely challenging technical issues must be ad-
dressed in order to implement this experiment although we
note that many of the elements of this experiment have been
demonstrated elsewhere. For example, the pulse trains must
be appropriately synchronized so that the pulses meet where
the beam axes cross [29, 30, 31]. In addition, the offset fre-
quency and repetition rate of the outputs of the pulsed lasers
must be controlled to match the cavity resonance frequencies
and free spectral range of both cavities [33], while both the
detection and pump cavities must have the same free spectral
range. The ﬁnal hurdle will be the duration of the experiment
observation time in order to unambiguously detect the effect.
We calculate these integration times by equating the expres-
sion for shot-noise limited measurement sensitivity in Eq. (29)
with the expected vacuum birefringence signal in Eq. (31)
and present them in Table I. The ﬁrst two lines predict the
performance available from existing low dispersion mirrors.
The ﬁrst line of the table show the performance capability of
the best ”off-the-shelf” commercially available low dispersion
mirrors while the second line shows the capability of the best
custom built mirrors. Resonators built from these mirrors are
capable of accepting 200 fs pulses without signiﬁcant tempo-
ral distortion [35, 36]. The last line of the table predicts that
performance that would be available if present-day low disper-
sion mirrors could have their reﬂectivity improved to match
that of the best commercially-available super-mirrors.

The measurement time required to detect vacuum birefrin-
gence scales with the inverse fourth power of the ﬁnesse be-
cause the ﬁnesse affects both the measurement sensitivity and
the average intensity in the pulsed RPI approach. Compet-

ing techniques that rely on a macroscopic magnetic ﬁeld to
create the vacuum polarization have an integration period that
decreases only as the square of the ﬁnesse of the detection
cavity. Thus improvements in mirror technology will result
in the pulsed RPI technique soon outpacing competing strate-
gies. If low dispersion mirrors could be improved to the point
that 99.997% reﬂectivity mirrors become available (as good
as existing super-mirrors) then the corresponding increase in
ﬁnesse would allow vacuum birefringence to be detected in
just a few hours. This analysis neglects the likely increases
in available laser power over the next few years which also
reduces the required measurement time.

Despite the difﬁculties that could be expected in operating
an optical system based on near-concentric cavities of such
a large size, an all-optical device should be smaller, cheaper,
easier to operate and more reliable than systems using helium-
cooled superconducting magnets. In addition, there are a cou-
ple of extremely important beneﬁts accruing from the use of
an optical pump ﬁeld. First, there is the possibility to mod-
ulate the effective strength of the pump ﬁeld at high rates as
mentioned above, without changing the thermal load on the
mirror system. Second, the low forces and power necessary
for generation of high intensity optical ﬁelds, combined with
the high conﬁnement of optical ﬁelds enables the elimination
of many effects in the detection system which masquerade as
a vacuum birefringence signal in current experiments [1, 17].
Finally, we would suggest that there will be a rapid develop-
ment of optical and laser technology over the next few years,
especially in low dispersion mirrors with high reﬂectance and
the development of higher average power mode-locked lasers.
These developments will directly feed into an improvement
in the performance of vacuum birefringence detection system

based on these types of technology. We would not expect the
same rate of development in superconducting magnetic ﬁeld
technology.

8

VI. CONCLUSION

We propose a completely new approach to the experimen-
tal detection of very low levels of ﬁeld-induced birefringence.
In particular, we analyze the system for its applicability in
direct detection of the QED vacuum nonlinearity. The sys-
tem is based on the intersection of two concentric and high
ﬁnesse short-pulse resonant cavities, one of which pumps the
QED vacuum to produce the birefringence, while the other
detects this induced birefringence using highly sensitive fre-
quency metrology techniques. Current limits in mode-locked
laser technology and low-dispersion mirrors already allow de-
tection of the predicted vacuum nonlinearity after a measure-
ment period of just a few days. Readily forseeable advances
in laser output power and mirror coating technology should
reduce the required integration time for such an experiment to
just hours.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank the Australian Research Council (ARC) for ﬁnan-
cial support of this research. We would like to thank all the
members of the Frequency Standards and Metrology Group
which make it such a pleasant and stimulating environment
in which to work. In particular, we would like to thank John
Winterﬂood, John McFerran and Sam Dawkins for reading the
manuscript and providing useful feedback to the authors.

[1] R. Cameron, G. Cantatore, A.C. Melissinos, G. Ruoso, Y.
Semertzidis, H.J. Halama, D.M. Lazarus, A.G. Prodell, F.
Nezrick, C. Rizzo and E Zavattini, Phys. Rev. D 47, 3707
(1993).

C. Rizzo, G. Trenec and J. Vigu´e, in Quantum Electrodynamics
and the Physics of the Vacuum, edited by G Cantatore, (Amer-
ican Institute of Physics, 2001), p. 115.

[12] Jeah-Sheng Wu, Wei-Tou Ni, and Sheng-Jui Chen, arXiv:

[2] K. Muroo, N. Ninomiya, M. Yoshino, Y Takubo, J. Opt. Soc.

physics/0308080v2, (2003).

Am. B 20, 2249 (2003).

[13] Sheng-Jui Chen, Hsien-Hao Mei, Wei-Tou Ni and Jeah-Sheng

[3] K Muroo, M Namikawa, and Y Takubo, Meas. Sci. tech. 11, 32

Wu, arXiv: hep-ex/0308071v3, (2003).

(2000) .

[4] H. Euler, and K. Kochel, Naturwissenschaften , 23, 246 (1935).
[5] W. Heisenberg and H. Euler, Z. Phys. 38, 714 (1936).
[6] V. Weisskopf, Kong. Dans. Vid. Selsk. Math-fys. Medd. XIV,
6 (1936), reprinted in Quantum Electrodynamics, edited by J.
Schwinger (Dover, New York, 1958).
[7] J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 82, 664, (1951).
[8] S.A. Diddams, D.J. Jones, J. Ye, S.T. Cundiff, J.L Hall, J.K.
Ranka, R.S. Windeler, R. Holzwarth, T. Udem, T.W. H¨ansch,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5102 (2000).

[9] E. Iacopini and E. Zavattini, Phys. Lett. B85, 151 (1979).
[10] D. Bakalov, F. Brandi, G. Cantatore, G. Carungno, S. Carusotto,
F. Della Valle, A. De Riva, U. Gastaldi, E Iacopini, P. Micossi,
E. Milotti, R. Onofrio, R. Pengo, E. Perrone, G. Petrucci, E.
Polacco, C. Rizzo, G. Ruoso, E. Zavattini and G. Zavattini, Hy-
perﬁne Interactions 114, 103 (1998).

[11] S. Askenazy, J. Billette, P Dupr´e, P. Ganau, J. Mackowski, J.
Marquez, L. Pinard, O. Portugall, D. Ricard, G.L.J.A. Rikken,

[14] D. Boer and J-W. van Holten, arXiv:hep-ph/0204207v1, (2002).
[15] J.L.Hall, J. Ye and L.-S Ma, Phys. Rev. A 62, 013815 (2000).
[16] S.A. Lee and W.M Fairbanks, in Laser Physics at the Limits,
edited by H Figger, D. Meschede, C Zimmermann, (Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 2002), p.189.

[17] M. Bregant, G. Cantatore, S. Carusotto, G. Di Domenico, F.
Della Valle, U. Gastaldi, E. Milotti, G. Petrucci, E. Polacco,
G. Ruoso, E. Zavattini, G. Zavattini, in Review of Quantitative
Nondestructive Evalutation CP657, 22, (American Institute of
Physics, 2003), p. 635

[18] E.B. Aleksandrov, A.A. Ansel’m and A.N. Moskalev, Sov.

Phys. JETP 62, 680 (1985).

[19] M. Hossein Partovi, arXiv:hep-ph/9308293v1, (1993).
[20] W. Becker, Laser and Particle Beams 9, 603 (1991).
[21] R.W.P. Drever, J.L. Hall, F.V. Kowalski, J. Hough, G.M. Ford,
A.J. Munley and H. Ward, Appl. Phys. B 31, 97 (1983).
[22] D. Hils and J.L Hall, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 58, 1406 (1987).
[23] E.D. Black, Am. J. Phys 69, 79, (2001).

(1988).

strum. 68, 223 (1997).

tron. 28, 1106 (1992).

582(1996).

[24] C. Salomon, D. Hills and J.L. Hall, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 5, 1576

[25] N. Uehara and K. Ueda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 33, 1628 (1994)
[26] S. Kawamura, A. Abramovici and M.E. Zucker, Rev. Sci. In-

[27] T. Day, E.K. Gustafson and R.L. Byer, IEEE J. Quantum Elec-

[28] F. Bondu, P. Fritschel, C.N. Man and A. Brillet, Opt. Lett. 21,

[29] L.S. Ma, R.K. Shelton, H.C. Kapteyn, M.M. Murnane, J. Ye,

Phys. Rev. A, 64, 021802(R) (2001)

[30] K.W. Holman, D.J. Jones, J. Ye, E.P. Ippen, 28, Opt. Lett. 2405

[31] D.J. Jones, K.W. Holman, M. Notcutt, J. Ye, J. Chandalia, L.A.
Jiang, E.P. Ippen, H. Yokoyama, Opt. Lett. 28, 813 (2003)
[32] T.M. Fortier, D.J. Jones, J. Ye, S.T. Cundiff, R.S. Windeler, Opt.

Lett. 27, 1436 (2002)

[33] R.J. Jones and J.-C. Diels, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3288 (2001).
[34] Y.Vidne, M. Rosenbluh, T.W. H¨ansch, Opt. Lett. 28, 2396,

[35] J.C. Petersen and A.N. Luiten, Optics Express 11, 2975(2003)
[36] R.J. Jones and J. Ye, Opt. Lett. 27, 1848 (2002)
[37] S.A. Lee, W.M. Fairbank, W.H. Toki, J.L Hall, P. Colestock, V.
Cupps, H. Kautzky, M. Kuchnir, F. Nezrick, R. Noble, Fermi
National Accelerator Laboratory proposal P-877, 1998, unpub-
lished.

[38] A.E. Siegman, Lasers. (University Science Books, Sausalito,

(2003)

(2003)

1986).

[39] Layertec GmBH, Ernst-Abbe-Weg 1, D-99441, Melingen, Ger-
many (www.layertec.de) (private communication).
[40] F. Brunner, T. Sudmeyer, E. Innerhofer, F. Morier-Genoud,

9

R. Paschotta, V.E. Kisel, V.G. Shcherbitsky, N.V. Kuleshov,
J. Gao, K. Contag, A. Giesen, U. Keller, Opt. Lett. 27, 1162
(2002).

[41] C.J. Walsh, A.J. Leistner, J. Seckold, B.F. Oreb and D.I. Farrant,

Appl. Opt. 38, 13, 2870 (1999).

[42] S. Goßler, M.M. Casey, A. Freise, A.Grant, H. Grote, G.
Heinzel, M. Heurs, M.E. Husman, K.K¨otter, V. Leonhardt, H.
L¨uck, M. Malec, K. Mossavi, S. Nagano, P.W. McNamara, M.
V. Plissi, V. Quetschke, D.I. Robertson, N.A. Robertson, A.
R¨udiger, R. Schilling, K.D. Skeldon, K.A. Strain, C.I. Torrie,
H. Ward, U Weiland, B. Willke, W. Winkler, J. Hough, K Danz-
mann, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 74, 3787 (2003)

[43] N.M. Sampas and D.Z. Anderson, Appl. Opt. 29, 394 (1990)
[44] T.C.P. Chui, M. Shao, D. Redding, Y. Gursel, A. Boden, Mod-

ern Phys. Lett. A 10, 2125 (1995)

[45] E. Zavattini, F. Brandi, M. Bregant, G. Cantatore, S. Carusotto,
F. Della Valle, G. Di Domenico, U. Gastaldi, E. Milotti, R.
Pengo, G. Petrucci, E. Polacco, G. Ruoso, and G. Zavattini,
in Quantum Electrodynamics and the Physics of the Vacuum
CP564, edited by G Cantatore (American Institute of Physics,
2001), p. 77.

[46] F. Rohrlich and R.L. Gluckstern, Phys. Rev. 86, 1, (1952).
[47] R.R. Wilson, Phys. Rev. 90, 720 (1953).
[48] D.L. Burke, R.C. Field, G. Horton-Smith, J.E. Spencer, D.
Walz, S.C. Berridge, W.M. Bugg, K. Shmakov, A.W. Weide-
mann, C. Bula, K.T. McDonald, E.J. Prebys, C. Bamber, S.J.
Boege, T. Koffas, T. Kotseroglou, A.C. Melissinos, D.D. Mey-
erhofer, D.A. Reis, W. Ragg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1626 (1997).
[49] J.S. Heyl, L. Hernquist, J.Phys.A: Math. Gen. 30 6485 (1997).

