4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
0
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reading a GEM with a VLSI pixel ASIC used
as a direct charge collecting anode

R. Bellazzini a, F. Angelini a, L. Baldini a, F. Bitti a, A. Brez a,
L. Latronico a, M.M. Massai a, M. Minuti a, N. Omodei a,
M. Razzano a, C. Sgr`o a, G. Spandre a, E. Costa b, P. Soﬃtta b
aINFN Pisa, Via Buonarroti 2, 56127 Pisa, Italy
bIstituto di Astroﬁsica Spaziale del CNR, Area di Ricerca di Roma, V. Fosso del
Cavaliere, 00131 Rome, Italy

Abstract

In MicroPattern Gas Detectors (MPGD) when the pixel size is below 100 µm and
the number of pixels is large (above 1000) it is virtually impossible to use the con-
ventional PCB read-out approach to bring the signal charge from the individual
pixel to the external electronics chain. For this reason a custom CMOS array of
2101 active pixels with 80 µm pitch, directly used as the charge collecting anode of
a GEM amplifying structure, has been developed and built. Each charge collecting
pad, hexagonally shaped, realized using the top metal layer of a deep submicron
VLSI technology is individually connected to a full electronics chain (pre-ampliﬁer,
shaping-ampliﬁer, sample & hold, multiplexer) which is built immediately below it
by using the remaining ﬁve active layers. The GEM and the drift electrode window
are assembled directly over the chip so the ASIC itself becomes the pixelized anode
of a MicroPattern Gas Detector. With this approach, for the ﬁrst time, gas detec-
tors have reached the level of integration and resolution typical of solid state pixel
detectors. Results from the ﬁrst tests of this new read-out concept are presented.
An Astronomical X-Ray Polarimetry application is also discussed.

1 Introduction

The most interesting feature of the Gas Electron Multiplier (GEM) is the
possibility of full decoupling of the charge ampliﬁcation structure from the
read-out structure. In this way both can be independently optimized. Indeed,
by organizing the read-out plane in a multi-pixel pattern it is possible to get
a true 2D imaging capability. At the same time a high granularity of the read-
out plane would also allow to preserve the intrinsic resolving power of the
device and its high rate capability that otherwise would be unavoidably lost

Preprint submitted to the Xth VCI 2004

2 February 2008

by using a conventional projective read-out approach. However, when the pixel
size is small (below 100 µm) and the number of pixels is large (above 1000) it
is virtually impossible to bring the signal charge from the individual pixel to
a chain of external read-out electronics even by using an advanced, ﬁne-line,
multi-layer, PCB technology. The fan-out which connects the segmented an-
odes collecting the charge to the front-end electronics is the real bottleneck.
Technological constraints limit the maximum number of independent electron-
ics channels that can be brought to the peripheral electronics. Furthermore,
the crosstalk between adjacent channels and the noise due to the high input
capacitance to the preampliﬁers become not negligible. In this case, it is the
electronics chain that has to be brought to the individual pixel. We have im-
plemented this concept by developing and building a CMOS VLSI array of
2101 pixels with 80 µm pitch which is used directly as the charge collecting
anode of the GEM. A description of the read-out ASIC for a MPGD and of
its advantages is given in the next section. Section 3 describes the coupling of
the chip die to the amplifying electrode, the assembly of the full detector and
the results of laboratory tests obtained with a 5.9 keV X-ray source. The use
of this new detection concept for Astronomical X-Ray Polarimetry and other
applications are discussed in the last section.

2 The CMOS VLSI chip

Fig. 1. The actual ASIC layout as seen from the top (active pixels are pink,
guard-ring and I/O pads are blue)

A drawing of the ASIC layout as seen from the top metal layer is shown in
ﬁg.1. The active matrix in pink is surrounded by a passive guard ring of 3÷4

2

pixels set to the same potential of the active pixels. The chip has been re-
alized using a 0.35 µm 3.3 V CMOS technology. No speciﬁc ESD protection
other than the parassitic capacitance of the drain-to-bulk junctions have been
foreseen for the pixel pads. The table below summarizes the electrical char-
acteristics of the chip. Each microscopic pixel is fully covered by a hexagonal

ASIC Operating Characteristics

Parameter

Limit value (unit)

3.6 (V)

3.0 (V)

Vdd+0.3 (V)

Vdd-0.3 (V)

200 (mW)

1 (kV)

100 (pC)

5 (Ω)

0.5 (fC)

5 (%)

100 (µs)

Max supply voltage (Vdd-Vss)

Min supply voltage (Vdd-Vss)

Max voltage at any pin

Min voltage at any pin
Continuous total dissipation (T <60 ◦C)

ESD tolerance of standard I/O

ESD tolerance of pixel pads

Analog output voltage

Vss+0.3÷ Vdd-0.5 (V)

Analog output impedance (0.5V<Vout<2.5V)

Integral non linearity

Average input sensitivity

100 (mV/fC)

Pixel-to-pixel gain variation

Recovery time after hold

Analog calibration input sensitivity, Qin/(Vtest-Vss)

10 (fC/V)

metal electrode realized using the top layer of a 6 layers CMOS technology.
Each pad is individually connected to a full chain of nuclear type electronics
(pre-ampliﬁer, shaping-ampliﬁer, sample & hold, multiplexer) which is built
immediately below it by making use of the remaining ﬁve active layers. Fig.2
shows the layout and the simpliﬁed equivalent scheme for one pixel. Upon acti-
vation of an external asynchronous trigger (in our case provided by amplifying
and discriminating the fast signal obtained from the top GEM electrode) and
within a 10 µs window the automatic search of the maximum of the shaped
signal starts. If the MaxHold signal is set, the maximum is held for subsequent
read-out which is accomplished by sequentially connecting the output of each
pixel to a common analog bus (ﬁg.3). A pixel is selected by introducing a to-
ken into the shift register and can be electrically stimulated at the rising edge
of the Write signal, injecting a charge -Qin (10fC/V typical response) propor-
tional to the voltage diﬀerence betwen Vtest and Vss. Tokens are shifted one
cell forward at the falling edge of the input clock. If several tokens are present
in the shift register then the analog output corresponds to the sum of the se-

3

Fig. 2. A drawing of the pixel layout with underlying electronics and its simpliﬁed
equivalent electronic scheme
lected pixels, up to the saturation level of ∼ 30f C. A useful feature of the chip
is the possibility to work both in Hold or Track mode. The shaped pulse from
a pixel can be individually observed at the analog out by keeping the MaxHold
signal low. Fig.4 shows the signals of a single strobed pixel observed on the
digital scope in the two diﬀerent operating modes: Tracking mode (MaxHold
oﬀ) and Peak & Hold (MaxHold on in red). Requested speciﬁcations for the

Fig. 3. Serial read-out architecture

ASIC prototype are:

• low noise (typical ENC ∼ 100 electrons at 0.1 pF input capacitance),
• ∼ 3.5µs shaping time,
• 60µW typical power consuption per pixel,
• 5MHz maximum system clock (i.e. serial analog read-out at 200 ns/pixel

corresponding to ∼ 400µs total read-out time for 2100 pixels),

• 0.2-20 fC dynamic range.

4

Fig. 4. Shaped output signal in the two operating modes:Track mode (MaxHold oﬀ)
and Peak & Hold (MaxHold on)

In ﬁg.5 three diﬀerent shaped signals obtained injecting a charge of 1000, 6000
and 60000 electrons, respectively, in the calibration capacitance are shown.
This read-out approach has the advantage, respect to similar ones (TFT ([1]
or CCD ([2] read-out) of being fully asynchronous and externally triggerable.
Furthermore it supplies a complete analog information of the collected charge
allowing to image the energy deposition process of the absorbed radiation. A
photo of the actual ASIC bonded to a ceramic CLCC68 package and a zoom
over the hexagonal pixel pattern is shown in ﬁg.6.

Fig. 5. A photo of the shaped signals for three diﬀerent value of input charge

5

Fig. 6. A photo of the chip bonded to the CLCC68 ceramic package and a zoomed
view of the pixel matrix

3 The MPGD assembly

A single GEM MPGD with an active gas volume of less than 1 cm3 has been
assembled directly over the chip die, so the ASIC itself has become the pix-
elized collecting anode of the detector. With this approach, for the ﬁrst time,
gas detectors have reached the level of integration and resolution typical of
solid state pixel detectors. Diﬀerent phases of the assembly are shown in ﬁg.7.
In the actual prototype a drift region (absorption gap) of 6 mm above the GEM

Fig. 7. Assembly phases of the MPGD over the chip: a) all the mechanical details
of the top section of the detector are glued together while the chip is still protected
by a metallic cover, b) the chip is exposed and the mechanics glued upon it, c) the
MPGD is ready for test

foil has been chosen, while a 1 mm spacer deﬁnes the collection gap between
the bottom GEM and the pixel matrix of the read-out chip. The GEM has a
standard thickness of 50 µm and holes of 50 µm at 90 µm pitch on a triangular
pattern. The entrance window is a 25 µm Mylar foil, aluminized on one side.
An artistic exploded view of the micro-mechanics of the detector is shown in
ﬁg.8. The gas mixture used to ﬁll the detector is 80% Neon, 20% DME. Such
a low Z gas mixture has been chosen for the high stopping power/scattering
ratio and a still reasonable detection eﬃciency at low X-ray energy. Typical
voltages applied to the drift electrode and to the GEM are respectively: -1000
V, -500 V (Top GEM), -100 V (Bottom GEM), the collecting electrodes being
at ∼zero voltage. In this condition the detector operates at a typical gain of
1000. Thanks to the very low pixel capacitance at the preampliﬁer input, a
noise level of 1.8 mV corresponding to ∼ 100 electrons has been measured. The

6

Fig. 8. Exploded view of the detector assembled over the VLSI ASIC

rms value of the pedestals distribution for each read-out channel is reported
in ﬁg.9. With a gas gain of 1000 and the measured noise level the detector has
signiﬁcant sensitivity to a single primary electron. Strobing each pixel with

Fig. 9. Noise measurement: rms value of the pedestals distribution for each elec-
tronics channel
1 V signal (∼1000 ADC counts) a uniformity of response of 3% rms for all
the 2101 channels has been observed (ﬁg.10a). Because all the processing oc-
curs within the pixel a negligible crosstalk has been measured in the channels
adjacent to the ones pulsed with 1 V signal (see ﬁg.10b). The addressing ca-
pability of each individual pixel has been checked with the internal calibration
system. The detector response to 20 mV (∼ 1000 electrons) signal injected in
a subset of pixels suitably chosen to create the experiment Logo is shown in
ﬁg.11. The ﬁrst application of this new MPGD concept is for an Astronomi-
cal X-ray polarimeter in the low energy band 1÷10 keV. Information on the
degree and angle of polarization of astronomical sources can be derived from
the angular distribution of the initial part of the photoelectron tracks when
projected onto a ﬁnely segmented 2D imaging detector. As reported in previ-
ous papers ([3],[4]) the algorithm for the reconstruction of the photoelectron
path starts from the evaluation of the barycenter of the charge distribution on

7

Fig. 10. Gain uniformity (a) and Xtalk measurement (b)

Fig. 11. Response of a set of selected pixels to 20 mV signal (3 σ cut on the noise).
The corresponding raw signals (pedestal subtracted) are shown on the left

the read-out pixels and the maximization of the second moment (M2) of the
charge distribution to deﬁne the principal axis of the track. In a further step
the asymmetry of the charge release along the principal axis (third moment
M3) is computed and the conversion point derived by moving along this axis in
the direction of negative M3, where the released charge is smaller, by a length
≈ M2. The reconstruction of the direction of emission is then done by taking
into account only the pixels in a region weighted according to the distance
from the estimated conversion point. The morphology of a real track obtained
by illuminating the device with a low energy radioactive source (5.9 KeV X-
ray from 55Fe) is shown in ﬁg.12. The small cluster due to the Auger electron
and the initial part of the track are well distinguishable from the larger Bragg
peak. The projection of the charge distribution along the principal axis is also
shown. The plot of the raw signals of all the channels for the same event shows
the optimal signal to noise ratio obtained with this detector (ﬁg.13). Around
50000 electrons from the gas ampliﬁed primary photoelectrons are subdivided
on 53 pixels. Two real events, included a double track, are shown in Fig.14.

8

Fig. 12. Reconstructed track of a 5 KeV photoelectron. Track direction reconstruc-
tion algorithm: red line, ﬁrst step; blue line, second step. (Read-out frequency 5MHz)

Fig. 13. The raw signals relative to the event shown in ﬁg.12

4 Conclusions

A system in which the GEM foil, the absorption gap and the entrance window
are assembled directly over a custom CMOS chip die has been developed. The
transfer of charge from the amplifying region to the collection and read-out
region occurs via electric ﬁelds. The ASIC itself becomes at the same time,
the charge collecting anode and the pixelized read-out of a MicroPattern Gas
Detector. For the ﬁrst time the full electronics chain and the detector are
completely integrated without the need of complicated bump-bonding. At a
gain of 1000 a high sensitivity to single primary electron detection is reached.
No problems have been found up to now in operating the system under HV and

9

Fig. 14. Real reconstructed tracks

in a gas environment. An astronomical X-ray Polarimeter application has been
presented. Final design will have 16÷32 k channels and 60÷70 microns pixel
size (≃ 1cm2 active area). Depending on pixel and die size, electronics shaping
time, analog vs. digital read-out, counting vs. integrating mode, gas ﬁlling,
many others applications can be envisaged. This would open new directions
in gas detector read-out, bringing the ﬁeld to the same level of integration of
solid state detectors.

References

[1] J.K. Black, P. Deines-Jones, S.E. Ready, R.A. Street, X-ray polarimetry with
an active-matrix pixel proportional counter. Submitted for publication on Nucl.
Instr. and Meth. A.

[2] M.B¨ogner, G. Buschhorn, R. Kotthaus, R.Oberhuber, M. Rzepka, K.H.
Schmidt, X-ray polarimetry - a novel application of CCDs. Nucl. Instr. and
Meth. A 377 (1996) 529.

[3] E. Costa, P. Soﬃtta, R. Bellazzini, A. Brez, N. Lumb, G. Spandre, An eﬃcient
photoelectric X-ray polarimeter for the study of black holes and neutron Stars.
Nature, Vol. 411 (2001) 662.

[4] R. Bellazzini, F. Angelini, L. Baldini, A. Brez, E.Costa, L.Latronico, N. Lumb,
M.M. Massai, N. Omodei, P. Soﬃtta, G. Spandre, X-Ray Polarimetry with a
Micro Pattern Gas Detector with Pixel Read Out. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci Vol.
49, No. 3 (2002).

10

