4
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
1
8
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LC-DET-2004-015

High Magnetic Field Performance
of a GEM-TPC

Peter Wienemann

Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY,
Notkestr. 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany

Abstract

A large volume time projection chamber (TPC) has been proposed as
main tracking device for a detector at a future linear e+e
collider.
Gas electron multipliers (GEMs) are studied as potential replacement
of the conventional wire based gas ampliﬁcation system of TPCs. This
talk presents recent results from R&D activities with a small GEM-TPC
prototype. The spatial resolution was measured for diﬀerent magnetic
ﬁelds up to 4 T.

−

Proceedings of the International Conference on Linear Colliders (LCWS 04)
Paris, April 19-23, 2004

HIGH MAGNETIC FIELD PERFORMANCE OF A GEM-TPC

PETER WIENEMANN
Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY,
Notkestr. 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany

A large volume time projection chamber (TPC) has been proposed as main track-
ing device for a detector at a future linear e+e− collider. Gas electron multipliers
(GEMs) are studied as potential replacement of the conventional wire based gas
ampliﬁcation system of TPCs. This talk presents recent results from R&D activ-
ities with a small GEM-TPC prototype. The spatial resolution was measured for
diﬀerent magnetic ﬁelds up to 4 T.

1 Introduction

The ambitious physics program of a future linear e+e− collider poses stringent
requirements on the precision of its tracker as part of a precise overall detector.
The measurement of the Higgs properties e. g. requires excellent momentum
resolution for mass reconstruction and good dE/dx accuracy for particle iden-
tiﬁcation for branching ratio measurements. A large volume time projection
chamber (TPC) is considered a good candidate as a tracking device for this
detector. Contrary to conventional TPCs with a multiwire proportional cham-
ber (MWPC) technique for gas ampliﬁcation, future TPCs are likely to make
use of micro pattern gas detectors (MPGDs). The best known representatives
of such MPGDs are the gas electron multiplier (GEM) 1 and micromegas 2.
MPGDs have ampliﬁcation structures of order 100 µm giving rise to only tiny
~E × ~B eﬀects, they provide a fast and narrow electron signal and have intrinsic
ion feedback suppression – all features making them good candidates for a gas
ampliﬁcation system in TPCs.

2 The DESY TPC Prototype

To study the potential of TPCs with GEM foils for gas ampliﬁcation, a small
TPC prototype has been built at DESY. The chamber has a length of 800 mm
with a diameter of 270 mm. The diameter has been chosen such that the
chamber ﬁts into a superconducting 5 T magnet with a 280 mm aperture
available for detector R&D at DESY. The chamber is equipped with 24 × 8
= 192 readout pads of size 2.2 × 6.2 mm2. The maximal drift distance is
680 mm. Gas ampliﬁcation is provided by a triple GEM structure with two
2 mm transfer gaps and a 3 mm induction gap. The readout of the chamber
is based on electronics built for the ALEPH experiment at LEP.

1

3 Single Point Resolution in High Magnetic Fields

One of the important questions which are addressed by the present TPC R&D
activities is the achievable single point resolution of a TPC with a GEM based
ampliﬁcation system in magnetic ﬁelds as high as 4 T as proposed in the
technical design report for TESLA 3. The single point resolution is a useful
number to compare the resolutions obtained from diﬀerent prototypes and to
extrapolate from small prototypes to the performance of a large scale device.
To ﬁnd an answer to this question a number of measurements with cos-
mic muons was carried out in the 5 T magnet at DESY. Data were taken at
magnetic ﬁelds of 0 T, 0.75 T, 1 T and 4 T. The reconstruction of the track
parameters from the data is done in three steps. First, in each of the planes
spanned by a pad row and the drift direction, clusters are reconstructed from
the hits of the various channels. The x coordinate, describing the position
along a pad row, is obtained using a center-of-gravity method. For each pad
row the vertical position of the pad center is assigned to the y coordinate. The
z coordinate of a cluster, describing the drift distance, is set to the position of
the inﬂection point of the rising edge of the corresponding cluster. In a sec-
ond step the reconstructed three-dimensional points are combined into tracks
using a three-dimensional track following algorithm. Finally track parameters
are ﬁtted to the points belonging to the various tracks using a χ2 technique.
The track parameters are ﬁtted independently in the xy and the yz plane. The
ﬁtted parameters are the intersection of the track with the xz plane at y = 0,
the slope in the xy and yz plane and the curvature in the xy plane.

To determine the single point resolution, the following procedure is used:
Remove the track point in row i and re-ﬁt the x axis intercept of the track
without point i. The distance of point i to the re-ﬁtted track is called residual
for row i. The resolution is obtained from the standard deviation of the residual
distribution of the four central rows for the whole track sample.

Fig. 1 shows the transverse single point resolution versus drift distance
obtained with this technique for the gas mixture Ar-CH4-CO2 (93-5-2). For
the data collected up to 1 T, an increase of the resolution with drift distance
is observed. In these cases the spatial resolution is limited by the diﬀusion
in the drift region of the TPC. At 4 T the situation is diﬀerent. Up to the
maximal drift distance of 680 mm the resolution is ﬂat as a function of the drift
distance. With the present preliminary analysis a resolution of ≈ 160 µm is
achieved which is not yet suﬃcient to fulﬁll the TESLA technical design report
speciﬁcations. This indicates that the magnetic ﬁeld suppresses the diﬀusion in
the drift region to an extent that it is not the limiting factor anymore. Possible
reasons might be either an inappropriate ratio of the charge distribution width

2

)

m
m

(
 

 

X
n
o
i
t
u
o
s
e
R

l

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

DESY

preliminary

Gas:

Pad size:

Ar-CH
·2.2 

-CO4
 (93-5-2)
2
2
 6.2 mm

0 T

 T

3
4

1 T

4 T

TDR

100 200 300 400 500 600

Drift distance Z (mm)

Figure 1: The single point resolution versus drift distance for diﬀerent magnetic ﬁelds 4.

to the pad width or analysis systematics. Further investigations are ongoing
to understand the measurements.

4 Conclusion

A small TPC prototype with GEM foils for gas ampliﬁcation has been suc-
cessfully built to measure the single point resolution in high magnetic ﬁelds.
Cosmic muon runs were carried out in B ﬁelds up to 4 T. A transverse res-
olution of 160 µm has been achieved with the present preliminary analysis.
Further studies are under way to understand the limiting factors and to im-
prove the performance.

References

1. F. Sauli, Nucl. Instrum. Methods A, 386 (1997) 531.
2. Y. Giomataris et. al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A, 376 (1996) 29.
3. T. Behnke, S. Bertolucci, R.-D. Heuer, and R. Settles, TESLA Technical
Design Report, DESY, Hamburg, Germany, DESY 2001-011 and ECFA
2001-209 (2001).

4. M. E. Janssen, Auﬂ¨osungsstudien an einer Zeit-Projektions-Kammer mit

GEM-Auslese, Diploma thesis, University of Dortmund (2004).

3

