4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
9
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
1
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient at high
electric ﬁeld

Yu.I. Davydov ⋆

TRIUMF, 4004 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 2A3

and
RRC ”Kurchatov Institute”, Kurchatov sq. 1, Moscow, 123182, Russia

Abstract

For the ﬁrst time it is shown and experimentally conﬁrmed that gas gain in wire
chambers at very low pressure become higher on thicker wires at the same applied
high voltage. This is a consequence of the fact that the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient at
high reduced electric ﬁeld depends almost entirely on the electron’s mean free path.

Key words: Townsend coeﬃcient, gas gain, low pressure

1 Introduction

lnM =

α(r)dr,

r2

Z
r1

An electron drifting between two points r1 and r2 under the inﬂuence of an
electric ﬁeld gains energy and produces secondary electrons due to inelastic colli-
sions. When attachment, photoproduction and space charge eﬀects are negligible, the
multiplication factor M over that path is expressed by

(1)

where α(r) is the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient. The Townsend coeﬃcient is a function of
reduced electric ﬁeld strength S= E/P, i.e. α/P = f (E/P ). There are several forms of
ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient [1]. Most of them satisfactorily describe experimental data

⋆ E-mail address: davydov@triumf.ca (Yuri Davydov)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

29 September 2004

on some ranges of electric ﬁeld with correctly determined parameters. The generalized
form of reduced ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient is given by the expression

α
P

= Aexp(

−BP
E

),

where A and B are parameters depending on gas type and electric ﬁeld range. It has
been shown [2] that this generalized form of ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient is a satisfactory
description of experimental data in a wide range of electric ﬁeld. This form of the
ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient will be used hereafter as well.

2 Townsend coeﬃcient at high reduced electric ﬁeld

Let λ represent an electron’s path between two consecutive collisions, λm is the
mean free path in the ﬁeld direction between two collisions with atoms, and λi is
an ionization path, i.e. the distance required to gain enough energy for successful
ionization. It is obvious that for each gas λm and λi depend on pressure. λi is a
function of local electric ﬁeld as well.

In gases, distances between two consecutive collisions of electrons and atoms

have a Poisson distribution. In general, the mean free path in gases is deﬁned as

λm =

xp(x)dx =

1
nσ

,

∞

Z
0

where n is the gas density (number of atoms per unit volume) and σ is the cross
section for electron collision with atoms. Generally, cross section is a function of
electron velocity (energy) σ = σ(v).

The ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient in the generalized form expressed by eq.(2) is valid
at relatively low values of electric ﬁeld. By deﬁnition the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient is
the number of secondary electrons produced per unit length. When distances between
two collisions become greater than the electron path required to gain enough energy
to ionize atoms, i.e. λ ≥ λi, the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient is expressed very simply as

α =

1
λ

Therefore the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient can be expressed as a combination of two
components:

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

α1 = AP exp(

−BP
E
α2 = 1/λ, λ ≥ λi

), λ < λi

2

with the general gas multiplication factor of eq.(1) expressed now as

lnM =

(α1(r) + α2(r))dr.

r2

Z
r1

The ﬁrst term in eq.(5) describes events when there are several collisions between
two consecutive ionizations. The second one should be taken into account for the cases
when there are no elastic collisions between two consecutive ionizations.

Consider the hypothetical simpliﬁed case when free paths between two collisions
of electrons with atoms are constant at a given pressure and equal to 1/nσ. In that
case λ in eq.(5) should be replaced by λm.

An electron drifting at electric ﬁeld E over the distance λm gains energy eE λm.
For any gas under all conditions there exists an electric ﬁeld strength Em where the
electron gains enough energy to ionize the gas over the path λm, i.e.

where I0 is the gas ionization potential. For this case eq.(5) could be re-written as

eEmλm = I0,

α1 = AP exp(

−BP
E
α2 = nσ, E ≥ Em

), E < Em

3 Applications to PPAC and wire chambers

There are very interesting consequences from the last equations both for PPAC

and wire chambers.

In case of the PPAC the electric ﬁeld is homogenous and the multiplication factor

over the cathode-anode distance is expressed, according to eq.(8), as

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

lnM =

(AP exp(

)dr

−BP
E

c

Z
a

c

Z
a

when E < Em or

lnM =

(nσ)dr

when E ≥ Em.

3

This means that in the simpliﬁed case of constant free paths when λ ≡ λm
there is a limit of an electric ﬁeld strength Em where further voltage increase does
not increase gas multiplication (assuming that electric ﬁeld and gas pressure have
values where electrons gain energy which is not enough to produce double electron
ionizations). This ﬁeld Em is given by eq.(7) with λm deﬁned by eq.(3).

The same limitation could aﬀect operation of gas electron multipliers (GEM) at

low pressure, although the electric ﬁeld in the GEM is non-uniform.

At standard conditions for an ideal gas the number of atoms in a unit volume is
n = 2.687·1019 cm−3 (Loshcmidt number). Generally, the cross section is a function of
electron energy and the typical value is the order of 10−15 cm2 [3]. Typical ionization
potentials for diﬀerent gases are in the range 10-15 eV. Substituting values for σ, n and
I0 into the eq.(7) gives Em ≃ 270 − 400 kV /cm which is far beyond a reachable value.
However, the situation changes at low pressure. At a gas pressure of 20 Torr, n ≃
7·1017 cm−3, and eq.(7) gives an electric ﬁeld value in the range Em ≃ 7−10.5 kV /cm,
or Sm ≃ 350 − 520 V /cm · T orr in terms of reduced electric ﬁeld. These values are in
the range where PPACs are used at low pressure [4].

More important consequences from the consideration of eq.(8) appear for wire

chambers. The electric ﬁeld in a cylindrical wire chamber is deﬁned as

E =

V
rln(b/a)

,

(11)

where a and b are wire and cathode radii, and r is the distance from the wire center.
The electric ﬁeld strength has a maximum value on the wire surface and sharply
drops oﬀ moving away from the wire. As result, at atmospheric pressure the gas gain
mainly takes place within 3-5 wire radii.

Real gas ampliﬁcation starts when the electric ﬁeld becomes greater than some
critical level Ec. This critical value is characteristic of the gas and is in the range 40-
70 kV/cm for diﬀerent gases at atmospheric pressure or Sc ≃ 50 − 90 V /cm · T orr in
terms of reduced electric ﬁeld. Reduced critical electric ﬁeld Sc = Ec/P is a constant
for a given gas and independent of its pressure.

In wire chambers with the same geometry and diﬀerent anode wire diameters at
atmospheric pressure one needs to apply much lower voltage to chambers with a thin
wire in order to get the same gas gain. At lower pressure the voltage diﬀerence required
to get the same gas gain between two diﬀerent anode wire sizes becomes smaller. Now
recall that there exists an electric ﬁeld Em where an electron gains enough energy
between two consecutive collisions to ionize the gas. Although the ﬁeld near the wire
is non-uniform, for simplicity one can consider an average electric ﬁeld over the path
between two consecutive collisions. We found that for gases at standard conditions
this ﬁeld is in the range Em ≃ 270 − 400 kV /cm or Sm ≃ 350 ÷ 520 V /cm · T orr in
terms of reduced electric ﬁeld. Like a critical reduced electric ﬁeld strength Sc, the
Sm is a constant for a given gas and is independent of pressure.

Let us consider two single wire chambers with cathode diameters 10 mm and
wire diameters 10 µm and 50 µm. Fig.1 presents reduced electric ﬁeld value near the
10 µm and 50 µm wires as a function of distance from the wire surface. 1200 V applied

4

Fig. 1. Reduced electric ﬁeld strength as function of distance from the
wire surface for single wire chambers with cathode diameters 10 mm and
wire diameters 10 and 50 µm. Both wires are at 1200 V at 100 Torr and
at 900 V at 20 Torr.

to both wires at pressure 100 Torr and 900 V at 20 Torr. We will use typical values of
Sc = 65 V /cm·T orr and Sm = 500 V /cm·T orr in further consideration. These values
Sc and Sm are shown on the ﬁgure as well. For each wire let rc be the point where
E = Ec, i.e. the point where the gas avalanche starts, and rm be the point where
E = Em. Fig.1 shows that at 100 Torr the avalanche starts about 0.2 mm away from
the 50 µm wire surface and about 0.18 mm away from the 10 µm wire. At 20 Torr
these values are 1.6 mm and 1.3 mm respectively.

With the same chamber geometry and applied voltages the electric ﬁeld strength
is much higher on the surface of the thin wire. It drops oﬀ faster on the thin wire
and eventually the ﬁeld strength becomes higher near the thick wire as can be seen
on ﬁg.1. Fig.2 shows details of the same ﬁeld strengths with a linear vertical scale.

The gas gain on each wire is deﬁned by eq.(1) by integrating the ﬁrst Townsend
coeﬃcient from the avalanche start point rc to the wire surface ra. Considering again
the simpliﬁed case where free paths are constant and λ ≡ λm we can divide that
integral into two parts. One part includes the path from rc to rm where S < Sm, and

5

Fig. 2. Details of reduced electric ﬁeld strength from ﬁg.1 within 0.3 mm
from the wire surfaces. Note the linear vertical scale. Both wires are at
1200 V at 100 Torr and at 900 V at 20 Torr.

the second one is from rm to the wire surface ra. So, the gas gain is deﬁned as

lnM =

α1(r)dr +

α2(r)dr,

rm

Z
rc

ra

Z
rm

(12)

where α1(r) and α2(r) are deﬁned by eq.(8).

In the simpliﬁed case λ ≡ λm at reduced electric ﬁeld strength S > Sm between
any two consecutive collisions with atoms, electrons gain enough energy to ionize the
gas. As result, the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient becomes independent of the electric ﬁeld
strength (although this is not exactly correct since the cross section σ is a function
of electron energy).

Let us consider in detail the electric ﬁeld strengths at a pressure of 100 Torr and
1200 V an applied voltage. The gas gain starts earlier on the 50 µm wire. However,
the ﬁeld is very weak here and the contribution to the total gain is insigniﬁcant.
Eventually the electric ﬁeld strength becomes higher on the 10 µm wire. Everywhere

6

after the ﬁeld crossing point the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient for 10 µm wire is higher
or equal (after electric ﬁeld strength on 50 µm wire exceed the Em value) to that on
the 50 µm wire. As a result, the gas gain on the 10 µm wire is higher than on the
50 µm wire at this pressure.

At 20 Torr pressure and 900 V applied to both chambers the situation is diﬀerent.
As usual, at distances far from the wire surfaces the electric ﬁeld strength is higher
on the thick wire and gas gain starts earlier on that wire. However unlike the previous
case the electric ﬁeld strength lines cross above the Sm = 500 V /cm · T orr line. This
means that the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient is higher on the 50 µm wire everywhere
until the electric ﬁeld strength near the 10 µm wire reaches the value S = Sm =
500 V /cm·T orr. After that point both wires have the same ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcients.
As a result, at pressure 20 Torr and 900 V applied high voltages the gas gain on the
50 µm wire is higher than that on 10 µm wire.

We considered the simpliﬁed case with constant electron free path lengths. In real
gases the electron free paths have a Poisson distribution with mean value expressed by
eq.(3). Also, the ionization cross section σi is only a fraction of the total cross section σ
at electron energies just above ionization level. The ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient at each
point can be deﬁned through the mean free path [5] multiplying it by the probability
that the path is longer than the local λi(r) and by the ratio of ionization cross section
to the total cross section σi/σ, i.e.

α(r) =

exp(−

σi
σ

1
λm

λi(r)
λm

),

The ﬁrst term in eq.(8) should be multiplied by the probability that path is shorter
than the local ionization path λi(r) = I0/eE(r). Finally, eq.(8) transforms to

α(r) = AP exp(

)(1 − exp(−

λi(r)
λm

)) +

σi
σ

1
λm

exp(−

λi(r)
λm

)

or, using deﬁnitions of λi and λm

α(r) = AP exp(

)(1 − exp(−

)) + nσiexp(−

I0nσ
eE(r)

I0nσ
eE(r)

)

−BP
E

−BP
E(r)

(13)

(14)

(15)

Unlike the simpliﬁed case where paths between two consecutive collisions of elec-
trons and atoms are constant, in real gases there will be no sharp transition from the
ﬁrst term of the Townsend coeﬃcient to the second one. The ﬁrst term in eq.(15) will
dominate at relatively low reduced electric ﬁeld. This term vanishes at high reduced
electric ﬁeld and the Townsend coeﬃcient will almost entirely depend on the second
term.

Values Sc and Sm are constant for each gas and vary from gas to gas. As a result,
diﬀerent gases will have diﬀerent pressures and applied high voltages where gas gain
becomes higher on the thick wire at the same chamber geometry and applied voltages.

7

Fig. 3. Measured charge spectra on single wire chambers with cell size
12x12 mm and 15, 25, 50 and 100 µm diameter anode wires ﬁlled with
pure iso − C4H10 at 12 Torr. All chambers are at 800 V and irradiated
with 55Fe x-rays. The bigger the wire diameter, the higher the gas gain.

A set of measurements of gas gain in single wire chambers with 12x12 mm cell
cross sections with diﬀerent wire diameters (15, 25, 50 and 100 µm) have been made
in order to check the gas gain behaviour. Chambers were ﬁlled with pure iso − C4H10
at pressures either 92, 52, 32 or 12 Torr and irradiated with 55Fe x-ray particles. Most
of the electrons released by the photoabsorption process in the gas volume, leave the
chamber cell. A small fraction of them lose their entire energy inside of the cell and
give full signals and these photoabsorption peaks were used to calculate gas gain. The
intensity of these full photoabsorption peaks drops with decreasing gas pressure due
to the increasing electron range in the gas. Taken data show that at 92 Torr gas gain
on thinner wires are higher at the same applied voltage. However, gain become higher
on the 50 µm wire compared with that on 15 and 25 µm wires already at 32 Torr at
the same applied high voltage on wires. Results clearly demonstrate that a decrease
of gas pressure leads to a higher gas gain on thicker wires compared to that on thinner
ones. Detailed results of these measurements will be published separately [6].

Figure 3 presents one result from these measurements, namely the charge spec-
tra taken from single wire chambers at a pressure of 12 Torr, with 800 V applied
to all chambers. Electrons released by the photoabsorption of 55Fe x-ray particles
have a range of about 45 mm in pure iso − C4H10 at 12 Torr. Most of them leave
the chamber cell before losing all of their energy and there is no evidence of pho-

8

toabsorption peaks. The resulting charge spectra from the chambers have continuous
distributions. However, all chambers have the same initial ionization distribution and
the edges of the spectra do indicate the gas gain on each wire. The ﬁgure clearly
demonstrates that in pure iso − C4H10 at 12 Torr and applied 800 V the thicker
wires have higher gas gain. Taking a collected charge on each wire at the half maxi-
mum on the edge of the spectra as a reference gives the ratio of gas gains on all these
wires as M15 : M25 : M50 : M100 ≃ 1 : 1.35 : 1.85 : 3.15.

It should be noticed that a chamber simulation program Garﬁeld [7] with Mag-
boltz [8] interface shows a similar tendency on gas gain at low pressure. Although
Garﬁeld overestimates the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient and as a result gas gain, one
can compare the gas gain ratios on diﬀerent diameter wires. The Garﬁeld estima-
tion of avalanche sizes due to single electrons on the same wire chambers under
the same conditions as in the above mentioned example gives the ratio of gas gains
M15 : M25 : M50 : M100 ≃ 1 : 2.18 : 4.79 : 6.47.

4 Conclusion

We have shown that at high reduced electric ﬁeld, where drifting electrons gain
enough energy to ionize gas atoms in one free path, the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient
should almost entirely depend on the electron’s mean free path. The generalized
formula for the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient at high reduced electric ﬁeld should include
the measured gas data as parameters.

For the ﬁrst time, it is experimentally shown that gas gains in wire chambers at
very low pressure become higher on thicker wires at the same applied high voltage.
The reason for this is that at high reduced electric ﬁeld the ﬁrst Townsend coeﬃcient
has weak dependence on the electric ﬁeld. Thinner wire has much higher electric ﬁeld
in the vicinity of the wire surface at the same applied high voltage. However, the ﬁrst
Townsend coeﬃcient here stays almost the same as on the thick wire. Thicker wires
should be used in wire chambers operating at very low pressure where scattering on
the wires is not critical.

In PPAC’s at some value of reduced electric ﬁeld strength for the simpliﬁed case
of constant free paths there is a limit for gas gain, which is deﬁned by gas density,
i.e. electron’s free paths. These values vary from gas to gas and are in the range
Sm ≃ 340 − 500 V /cm · T orr. In real gases the free paths have a Poisson distribution,
and there will be no sharp transition when the electric ﬁeld reaches the value Sm. It
should asymptotically approach to its limit instead. One can expect similar behaviour
in GEMs operated at low pressure.

The author wishes to thank R. Openshaw and V. Selivanov for fruitful discussions

and remarks.

9

References

therein.

[1] See for example: T. Aoyama, Nucl. Instr.&Meth. A234(1985), p.125 and references

[2] A. Zastawny, Nucl. Instr.&Meth. A385(1997), p.239.

[3] V. Palladino and B. Sadoulet, Nucl. Instr.&Meth. 128(1975), p.323.
G. Schultz and J.Gresser, Nucl. Instr.&Meth. 151(1978), p.413.
S. Biagi, Nucl. Instr.&Meth. A273(1988), p.533.

[4] J. Sernicki, Nucl. Instr.&Meth. A288(1990), p.555.

[5] A. von Engel, Ionized gases (Oxford, 1955), p.155.

[6] Yu.I. Davydov et al. Gas gain on single wire chambers ﬁlled with pure isobutane at low

pressure. (In preparation)

[7] R. Veenhof, GARFIELD, a drift chamber simulation program, Version 7.10.

[8] S. Biagi, Magboltz, program to compute gas transport parameters, Version 2.09.

10

