4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
1
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Phase boundary detection for dilution refrigerators

E. ter Haar∗ and R. V. Martin
DFMT, Instituto de F´isica, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, C.P. 66.318, 05315-970 S˜ao Paulo, SP, Brazil
(Dated: July 22, 2013)

We describe a device to conveniently measure the positions of the phase boundaries in a dilution
refrigerator. We show how a simple modiﬁcation of a standard capacitive level gauge (segmentation
of one of the electrodes) permits a direct calibration of the capacitance versus phase boundary
position. We compare this direct calibration with the indirect procedure that must be adopted for
a conventional capacitive level gauge. The device facilitates the correct adjustment of the 3He/4He
fraction in the dilution refrigerator.

PACS numbers: 07.20.Mc,
Keywords: Dilution Refrigerators, Phase-boundary detection

I. BACKGROUND

Dilution refrigerators (DR) have made the temperature
region below 0.5 K widely available to the research com-
munity. While the continuing development of the tech-
nologies involved have made these machines very reliable,
good diagnostic devices are essential for their continuing
and reliable operation.

Various problems can impede the correct operation of
a dilution refrigerator. Leaks to vacuum, blockages and
thermal shorts usually lead to catastrophic failure, and
are easy to diagnose, but diﬃcult to solve. In contrast,
not having the right amounts of 3He and 4He in the sys-
tem is easily solved, but may not be readily recognized.
For optimal performance of the DR, the total amount
of mixture, and the 3He/4He fraction of the mixture must
be tuned, which means putting the phase boundaries
in the still (between the diluted liquid and the vapour
phase) and in the mixing chamber (between the concen-
trated 3He and the 3He diluted in 4He phases) at the
correct positions. The still level is determined by the to-
tal quantity of mixture in the DR. If this level is too low
(below the still heater or in the heat exchanger) it will be
diﬃcult to pump and circulate the 3He. If the level is too
high (in the pumping line of the still) again it will be dif-
ﬁcult to pump the 3He and large amounts of 4He may be
circulated. Both circumstances will degrade the perfor-
mance of the DR. At the phase boundary in the mixing
chamber level the dilution cooling takes places and it is
the coldest position in the mixing chamber. This phase
boundary must not be up in the heat exchangers, since
the cooling power of the DR will suﬀer. It may be advan-
tageous in some cases to be able to control the position
of the phase boundary to put it close to the sample.

Tuning the amounts of 3He and 4He is not a one time
operation because changes may occur over time, lead-
ing to degraded performance. If the sample is mounted
in the mixing chamber, the mixing chamber volume will
depend on the sample size, which will lead to a diﬀerent

∗Electronic address: ewout@if.usp.br

optimal quantities of 3He and 4He. For small DR´s with
large 3He circulation pumps (to get high ﬂow rates and
cooling powers) the large fraction of dead volume behind
the pumps makes the 3He/4He fraction in the DR de-
pend on the operating conditions. If the circulation rate,
and therefore the inlet pressure of the 3He return line, is
varied the amount of 3He in the DR will change too.

For all of these reasons, a good measurement of the
positions of the phase boundaries in the still and in the
mixing chamber is very useful for ﬁnding optimal work-
ing conditions of the DR. Although it is possible to infer
the positions of the phase boundaries using only ther-
mometers at strategic places [1], it is preferable to have
real level gauges in the still and the mixing chamber,
providing a direct measurement.

II. PHASE BOUNDARY LEVEL GAUGES

We focus here on capacitive level gauges [2] which may
be parallel plates or concentric cylinders. The principle
of operation is simplicity itself: the capacitance is given
by

C(x) = Cs + C(0)[ǫa + x(ǫb − ǫa)]

(1)

with x the fractional level, ǫa,b the relative dielectric con-
stants of the phases above and below the phase boundary
at x, and Cs the inevitable stray capacitance. Because of
this stray capacitance, the most convenient mode of op-
eration is to measure simply C(0) and C(1), the ‘empty’
(x = 0) and ‘full’ (x = 1) capacitance readings. Af-
ter these measurement the device is fully calibrated: the
sensitivity of the device, dC/dx = C(1) − C(0) and a
ﬁxed point (e.g. C(0)) are known.

In the case of phase-boundary detection in dilution re-
frigerators, it is diﬃcult to perform this simple calibra-
tion under operating conditions. We may not be will-
ing to ﬁll up the still, since it is diﬃcult to remove the
excess 4He later. Usually it is also not feasible to add
enough 3He to the mixture so that the phase boundary
lowers enough to cover the whole level gauge in the mix-
ing chamber.

One can then resort to an indirect calibration using
phases with a known dielectric constant and Eq. 1 (one
can use 4He and vacuum in the still or 3He/4He mix-
ture and vacuum in the mixing chamber). But the di-
electric constants are a function of temperature (through
the density), which must be accurately measured during
the calibration. The stray capacitance may not be con-
stant over the course of the experiment; it may vary with
the level of the helium bath or with the temperature of
the level gauge itself. The electrodes may not be exactly
parallel, invalidating Eq. 1. In the mixing chamber small
calibration errors are exacerbated because the diﬀerence
between the dielectric constants of the phases is ﬁve times
less than in the still.

These kind of diﬃculties may be the reason that de-
spite being extremely useful diagnostic devices, capaci-
tive phase boundary detectors are not widely used, es-
pecially in the mixing chamber. To solve the calibration
problem we have used a segmented capacitor as shown
in Figure 1. It is constructed from two pieces of stan-
dard circuit board separated by ≈ 0.5 mm. One of the
electrodes is segmented horizontally, by etching away a
number of 4 mm wide “ﬁngers” leaving only a thin strip
of copper at the edge for electric contact. In eﬀect, we
have a stack of small capacitors, connected in parallel.
When a phase boundary moves up or downwards in the
device, the capacitance will change in steps. A calibra-
tion of the device can now be done by moving the phase
boundary only one or two segments upward or down-
wards. The sensitivity dC/dx around the position where
the phase boundary was varied follows immediately. The
advantage of this scheme is that it is a direct calibration
of the sensitivity, which does not involve knowledge of
the dielectric constants. In the still a segmented capaci-
tor is especially convenient. As soon as the ﬁrst segment
is covered during the condensation, as indicated by the
ﬁrst plateau in the capacitance reading, the level gauge
is calibrated and ready for use.

For a mixing chamber phase boundary level gauge, the
phase boundary between the concentrated 3He phase and
the diluted phase in the mixing chamber can be varied by
adjusting the amount of 3He in the DR. One can perform
a so-called ‘one-shot’, achieved by temporarily closing oﬀ
the returning 3He, while continuing to pump 3He out
of the still. In this situation the amount of 3He in the
DR will diminish, and the phase boundary in the mixing
chamber will move upwards. On the other hand, con-
densing more 3He will move the phase boundary down-
wards. For the calibration to succeed, it is necessary
to move the phase boundary monotonically up or down-
wards, but this is not diﬃcult to achieve.

III. RESULTS

We have performed an experiment with the level gauge
depicted in Figure 1 in the mixing chamber of one of
In addition to the
our plastic dilution refrigerators.

2

 

 

FIG. 1: The two electrodes of the capacitive level gauge. One
of the electrodes is segmented, leading to capacitance steps
as the phase boundary moves.

30.06

30.04

)
F
p
(
 

C

30.02

30.00

 

 

30.0

)
F
p
(
 

C

29.9

29.8

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20

step number

73000

73500

74000

 time (s)

FIG. 2: Capacitance of the level gauge during removal of
3He out of the dilution refrigerator.
Inset: the step capac-
itances were recorded for a range of phase boundary posi-
tions. A linear ﬁt gives a calibration of 0.0162 pF/segment
(≈ 0.0042 pF/mm).

present device, there were four vibrating wire viscome-
ters (horizontal stretched wires) at known positions in
the region of the phase boundary. For the purposes
of this experiment they served as additional (discrete)
level indicators of the phase boundary, because the vis-
cosity of pure 3He is much larger than that of the di-
luted phase. Figure 2 shows the result of one particular
‘one-shot’. The capacitance steps are clearly resolved,
allowing us to infer the calibration constant. Controlling
the phase boundary over almost the whole length of the
mixing chamber allowed us to observe almost all steps
(see inset in Figure 2). A linear ﬁt gives the sensitiv-
ity of our device (0.0162 pF/segment, ≈ 0.0042 pF/mm,
dC/dx = 0.287 pF). The (expected) linearity shows that
our electrodes were indeed parallel.

To know the absolute position of the phase boundary,
it is still necessary to measure a capacitance value at
one known position of the interface. The ‘empty’ value
is a convenient point (only diluted phase in the mixing
chamber; the phase boundary is above the level gauge).

In our experiment, we also used the large change of the
resonance width of our horizontal viscometers when the
phase boundary passed them. Both methods lead to an
‘empty’ value C(1) = 30.061 pF. In the case of a still
level gauge the most convenient point would be the empty
value C(0) (only vapour phase in the gauge).

After the calibration, we were able to monitor and
control the phase boundary in the mixing chamber to
within a fraction of a segment (a segment corresponded
to 3.9 mm). This knowledge greatly helped us to op-
erate the DR with diﬀerent ﬂow rates (from 100 to
1000 µmol/s) because the dead volume behind our large
3He circulation pump was a considerable fraction of the
total volume of the DR, leading to large variations of the
phase boundary in the mixing chamber as a function of
the ﬂow rate.

The segmented capacitor gives us an opportunity to
compare its direct calibration with the procedure which
has to be adopted for a conventional non-segmented ca-
pacitor. If it is not feasible to measure ‘full’ and ‘empty’
values under operating conditions, one can calibrate the
gauge with phases of known dielectric constants. We
calculated the dielectric constants of the various helium
phases using the Clausius-Mossotti relation with the mo-
lar volumes found in reference [3]

We measured the value of the level gauge in vacuum,
Cv = 28.832 pF, and the value with only diluted 3He
phase, C(1) = 30.061 pF. The sensitivity for the 3He –
3He/4He phase boundary is then

dC/dx = (C(1) − Cv)

ǫ34 − ǫ3
ǫ34 − 1
(C(1) − Cv) · 0.238 = 0.293 pF

=

3

a known temperature (density). In practice, this is not
as easy as it sounds, because at the beginning of a DR
experiment we may be unwilling to ﬁll the DR with (dif-
ﬁcult to remove) pure 4He. Nevertheless, it is interesting
to see how accurate such a calibration is. Note that the
dielectric constant of 4He depends strongly on tempera-
ture (through the density) above T ≈ 1.5 K. We used 4He
at T = 1.17 K (measured with a calibrated Ge thermome-
ter, ǫ4 = 1.0573), and vacuum as the calibration phases.
The result was C(0) = 28.832 pF and C(1) = 30.106 pF.
The scaled sensitivity for the phase boundary in the mix-
ing chamber is (C(1) − C(0)) · 0.234 = 0.298 pF, which
must be compared to the 0.287 pF measured directly.

Our conclusion is that a conventional non-segmented
capacitor can be used as a level-gauge, if careful measure-
ments of the ‘empty’ (vacuum) and ‘full’ (with a phase of
known dielectric constant) capacitance values are made.
The use of a segmented capacitive phase boundary level
gauge is more convenient. It makes a direct calibration of
dC/dx in units of pF/segment possible under operating
conditions. This calibration does not involve knowledge
of the dielectric constants, and can be done by moving
the phase boundary only one or two segments. In addi-
tion, the level gauge can be checked for non-linearities.

IV. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research was partly supported by the Brazilian
agency Funda¸c˜ao de Amparo `a Pesquisa do Estado de
S˜ao Paulo

where ǫ34 = 1.0562 and ǫ3 = 1.0428 for T ≤ 100 mK.
This result must be compared to a directly measured
value of 0.287 pF. Thus it turns out that this indirect
calibration, is actually quite good in the case of our level
gauge. We note that for a calibration of a conventional
level gauge in the still there are no alternatives, short of
ﬁlling the whole length of the capacitor.

The level gauge can also be calibrated by pure 4He at

Copyright 2004 American Institute of Physics. This
article may be downloaded for personal use only. Any
other use requires prior permission of the author and the
American Institute of Physics. The following article ap-
peared in Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments – September
2004 – Volume 75, Issue 9, pp. 3071-3073 and may be
found at http://link.aip.org/link/?rsi/75/3071

V. COPYRIGHT

[1] R. C. Richardson and E. N. Smith, eds., Experimental
Techniques in Condensed Matter Physics at Low Temper-
atures (Addison-Wesley, 1998).

[2] D. Celik, D. Hilton, T. Zhang, and S. W. V. Sciver, Cryo-

[3] A. de Waele and J. Kuerten, Thermodynamics and Hydro-
dynamics of 3He-4He mixtures (Elsevier Science Publish-
ers, 1992), vol. 13 of Progress in Low Temperature Physics,
chap. 3, p. 167.

genics 41, 355 (2001).

