4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
5
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

For Publisher’s use

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF A TPC
USING GEM FOILS FOR GAS AMPLIFICATION

PETER WIENEMANN
Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron
Notkestr. 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany
E-mail: peter.wienemann@desy.de

The challenging physics program at the International Linear Collider (ILC) poses stringent require-
ments on the performance of its tracking system. A large volume time projection chamber (TPC) is
considered a good candidate for such a tracker. Whereas conventional TPCs used a wired based gas
ampliﬁcation system, a future TPC is likely to make use of micro pattern gas detectors as e. g. gas elec-
tron multipliers (GEMs) for gas ampliﬁcation. This talk gives an overview over recent achievements
from the R&D activities to build a TPC with a GEM based gas ampliﬁcation system. This includes
charge transfer studies through multiple GEM structures, ﬁeld cage design and spatial resolution
measurements in high magnetic ﬁelds.

1 Introduction

The particle physics community recently
agreed on building an e+e− linear collider
with superconducting accelerating structures
in a joint global eﬀort. The ambitious physics
program at this International Linear Collider
(ILC) poses stringent requirements on the
precision of its tracker as part of a precise
overall detector. The measurement of the
Higgs properties for example requires excel-
lent momentum resolution for mass recon-
struction and good particle identiﬁcation for
branching ratio measurements. A large vol-
ume time projection chamber (TPC) as for
example proposed for the TESLA detector1
is considered a promising candidate as cen-
tral tracking device for a detector at ILC.
Contrary to conventional TPCs with a mul-
tiwire proportional chamber (MWPC) tech-
nique for gas ampliﬁcation, future TPCs are
likely to make use of micro pattern gas de-
tectors (MPGDs). The best known represen-
tatives of such MPGDs are gas electron mul-
tipliers (GEMs)2 and micromegas3. MPGDs
have ampliﬁcation structures of order 100 µm
giving rise to only tiny ~E × ~B eﬀects, provide
a fast and narrow electron signal and have in-
trinsic ion feedback suppression – all features
making them good candidates as gas ampli-

ﬁcation system of a TPC.

In the following, some of the R&D ac-
tivities are described which are carried out
to show that TPCs equipped with GEMs
meet the challenging performance require-
ments and to prove that they can be operated
reliably. The results presented here were ob-
tained from of a joint R&D program of vari-
ous institutes from around the world. This
linear collider TPC group includes groups
from Aachen, Berkeley, Carleton, Cracow,
DESY, Hamburg, Karlsruhe, MIT, Montreal,
MPI Munich, NIKHEF, Novosibirsk, Orsay,
St. Petersburg, Rostock, Saclay and Victoria.

2 Charge Transfer through Triple

GEM Structures

A crucial item is to understand and to opti-
mize the charge transfer through GEM struc-
tures. The goal is to choose voltage set-
tings which allow maximal electron trans-
parency to ensure good spatial resolution and
dE/dx accuracy, and in addition minimal
ion transparency to keep drift ﬁeld distor-
tions due to backdrifting ions small. Charge
transfer parameters like electron/ion collec-
tion/extraction eﬃciency and gain were mea-
sured for various voltage settings from the
currents measured on the various electrodes

For Publisher’s use

ﬁrst proof of principle (see Fig. 2) that by
applying a negative voltage of 150 V to the
MHSP strips the ion backdrift can be reduced
by a factor of four. In order to exploit the
full potential of these devices, an optimiza-
tion similar to that for GEMs remains to be
done.

of a small test chamber being irradiated by
an 55Fe source. In order to take eﬀects of a
magnetic ﬁeld into account the measurements
were performed in a superconducting magnet
providing ﬁelds up to 5 T. The parametriza-
tions obtained from these measurements al-
low the minimization of the ion backdrift (ra-
tio of the cathode and the anode current)
in a convenient way by scanning the avail-
able parameter space using a computer pro-
gram. Figure 1 shows the measured ion back-

Figure 2. The ion backdrift versus the negative volt-
age applied to the MHSP strips.

Figure 1. The measured ion backdrift versus mag-
netic ﬁeld.
In addition the predicted ion backdrift
value from the parametrization is indicated.

drift versus the magnetic ﬁeld. The ion back-
drift decreases by a factor of two from 0 to
4 T. A value of 0.25 % is measured and cor-
responds well with the prediction from the
parametrization. Optimally

ion backdrift × gain < 1,

i. e. the number of backdrifting ions from the
ampliﬁcation system is less than the num-
ber of unavoidable primary ions produced in
the drift region. For the achieved ion back-
drift this corresponds to running with a gain
of less than 400 which is probably not fea-
sible even with new readout electronics de-
velopments. Therefore additional techniques
have been attempted to further suppress ion
backdrift. First tests were performed with
the ﬁrst GEM replaced by a micro hole strip
plate (MHSP)4.
It was demonstrated in a

3 Field Cage Design

The ﬁeld cage has to meet challenging re-
quirements. First of all, it has to provide a
homogeneous electric ﬁeld in order to avoid
track distortions. Second, a stable mechan-
ical support structure is needed to ensure a
precise mutual alignment of the various TPC
components. Third, the material budget in
terms of radiation lengths has to be kept
small in order to minimize a degradation of
the calorimeter performance. The resistor
chain needed to gradually degrade the po-
tential from the cathode to the anode should
dissipate as little heat as possible into the
chamber gas because local temperature ﬂuc-
tuations change the drift velocity and various
other gas parameters. Finally the ﬁeld cage
of a large-scale TPC has to stand cathode
voltages of order 50 to 100 kV.

The electric ﬁeld homogeneity is mainly
determined by the chosen strip layout.
In
order to ﬁnd an optimal setup, simulations
have been performed with the MAXWELL

For Publisher’s use

ﬁnite element package5. Figure 3 shows the
simulated relative E ﬁeld homogeneity for
ﬁeld cage designs with and without mirror
strips on the outer side of the ﬁeld cage. The
double-sided strip layout provides inhomo-
geneities ∆E/E < 10−4 which is an order
of magnitude smaller than what is obtained
without mirror strips on the outside.

Figure 3. The simulated electric ﬁeld homogeneities
for ﬁeld cages with (top) and without (bottom) mir-
ror strips on the outer side of the ﬁeld cage.

Several older TPC prototypes in use by
the LC TPC group have only strips on the
inner ﬁeld cage side. The ﬁndings from the
simulation study lead to the construction of
a TPC prototype with a double-sided strip
ﬁeld cage. Its mechanical support structure
is composed of honeycomb and glass-ﬁber re-
inforced plastic. Electrical insulation is pro-
vided by four layers of Kapton. In total the
ﬁeld cage represents only about 1 % of a radi-
ation length. It has proven to stand at least
30 kV. To reduce the heat emission of the
resistor chain into the chamber gas, the re-
sistor chain has been placed outside the gas
volume.
It is covered by a ceramics plate
conducting the produced heat to the outside
and, at the same time, providing good elec-
tric insulation. Following the careful design
and test phase, the prototype performance is
currently checked in ﬁrst measurements with
cosmic muons and a 90Sr source.

4 Transverse Resolution in High

Magnetic Fields

To achieve a high momentum resolution, a
good spatial resolution is essential. The best
parameter to compare the performance of dif-
ferent prototypes and to extrapolate to large-
scale devices is the single point resolution.
The narrow MPGD electron signals pose a
challenge to accurately reconstruct the track
position with a reasonable number of chan-
nels. As opposed to micromegas, GEMs of-
fer a nice solution. The large diﬀusion be-
tween the individual GEMs of a multiple
GEM structure spreads the charge over a
wider area without sacriﬁcing the track reso-
lution since the defocussing takes place dur-
ing and after the gain stage. The challenge is
to ﬁnd GEM settings and a gas which provide
a good compromise between low diﬀusion in
the drift region and enough defocussing be-
tween the GEMs without severely degrading
the two-track resolution. Several transverse
resolution measurements were performed in
magnetic ﬁelds up to 5 T both for Ar-CH4
(95-5) and Ar-CH4-CO2 (93-5-2). Figure 4

Figure 4. The transverse resolution versus drift dis-
tance in Ar-CH4 (95-5).

shows the results as a function of the drift
distance for Ar-CH4 (95-5) with 2 × 6 mm2
pads. The spatial resolution becomes better
with increasing magnetic ﬁelds since the B
ﬁeld suppresses diﬀusion leading to narrower
charge distributions arriving at the gas am-
pliﬁcation system. Already at 1.5 T values

For Publisher’s use

below the 100 µm level are achieved fulﬁll-
ing the performance goals mentioned in the
TESLA technical design report1.

5. MAXWELL, Finite Element Computa-
tion Package, Ansoft Co., Pittsburgh,
PA.

5 Conclusion

The linear collider TPC R&D activities of the
last few years have led to valuable new in-
sights into the properties and the potential of
GEMs as gas ampliﬁcation devices in TPCs.
Good understanding of the charge transfer
processes in multiple GEM structures has
been gained. First important experiences
have been made with building ﬁeld cages re-
sulting in an increasing ﬁeld cage quality in
the course of time. Furthermore measure-
ments performed with such small prototypes
revealed that single point resolutions of the
order of 100 µm are feasible for drift distance
below 30 cm with 2 × 6 mm2 pads. In sum-
mary, promising results have been achieved
with small prototypes. Further studies are
needed to show that they hold also for large-
scale devices.

Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank the members
of the linear collider TPC group for providing
their latest results.

References

1. T. Behnke, S. Bertolucci, R.-D. Heuer,
and R. Settles, TESLA Technical De-
sign Report, DESY, Hamburg, Ger-
many, DESY 2001-011 and ECFA 2001-
209 (2001).

2. F. Sauli, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 386 531

(1997).

3. Y. Giomataris et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth.

A 376, 29 (1996).

4. J. F. C. A. Veloso et al., Review of Sci-
entiﬁc Instruments 71, 2371 (2000);
J. M. Maia et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci.
49 (2002).

