EUROPEAN ORGANIZATION FOR NUCLEAR RESEARCH

ALICE–INT–2003–37
Internal Note/PHOS
27 October 2004

Direct Photon Identiﬁcation with Artiﬁcial Neural
Network in the Photon Spectrometer PHOS

M.Yu.Bogolyubsky, Yu.V.Kharlov, S.A.Sadovsky

Institute for High Energy Physics, Pobeda str., 1,
Protvino, 142281, Russia

Abstract

A neural network method is developed to discriminate direct photons from the neutral
pion background in the PHOS spectrometer of the ALICE experiment at the LHC
collider. The neural net has been trained to distinguish diﬀerent classes of events by
analyzing the energy-proﬁle tensor of a cluster in its eigen vector coordinate system.
Monte-Carlo simulations show that this method diminishes by an order of magnitude
the probability of π0-meson misidentiﬁcation as a photon with respect to the direct
photon identiﬁcation eﬃciency in the energy range up to 120 GeV.

4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
2
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

|

|

1

Introduction
The Large Ion Collider Experiment ALICE [1] is intended to study heavy-ion col-
lisions at the energy of 5.5 TeV per nucleon at the LHC collider. For photons detection
ALICE is equipped by the PHOton Spectrometer (PHOS) [2] which is a high-granularity
electromagnetic calorimeter built of lead-tungstate crystals (PbWO4) with the transverse
2.2 cm2 and the length of 18 cm. The PHOS detector consists of ﬁve
dimension of 2.2
modules, each made as a matrix of 56
64 crystals located at 460 cm from the beams
interaction point. The spectrometer is positioned at the bottom of the ALICE set-up
covering

×
< 0.135 in pseudorapidity and 100◦ in the azimuthal angle.

×

η

∼

The ALICE set-up is rather transparent to γ-radiation. To reach PHOS, the pro-
duced photons pass through the Inner Tracking System (ITS) [3], the Time Projection
Chamber (TPC) [4] and the Charge Particle Veto Detector (CPV) [5]. The stratum of
0.1 of the radiation length [6] (with the main contribution from ITS and
medium takes
TPC), which gives a small probability of the secondary photon production in the medium.
One of the tasks of the ALICE experiment is to detect direct photons carrying the
information about fundamental processes at extreme conditions of the quark matter. The
energy range of such photons extends from 0.4 GeV to 10 GeV for thermal radiation of
Quark Gluon Plasma (QGP) and higher, up to hundreds GeV, for radiation occurring also
in early collisions of the constituents. In the latter case the essential background is arising
from the two-photon decay of π0-mesons, produced at the same energies as photons, due
to the merge of decay photons into one shower in PHOS. Contribution of the photonic
decay from heavier meson resonances (ρ, η, ω, etc. ) exists as well. Such photons provide
a rather heavy background to direct photon production over the whole pT range and they
should be subtracted from the data. It leads to the necessity of identifying the PHOS
showers as those produced by the photons or π0-mesons.

The straightforward way to discriminate the considered background from direct
photons is to exploit a powerful reconstruction program tuned especially for the given
PHOS structure and able to resolve the ﬁne problem of the ”direct” photon selection
(say, by the maximum likelihood method), and correspondingly, to ﬁnd the real number
of the showers even in the overlapped clusters. To accomplish this task, a program should
correctly take into account the shower proﬁles of photons and charged particles at dif-
ferent incident angles, as well as their ﬂuctuations, the electronics noise, the threshold
on registered signals (that increases the number of zero channels in the selected cluster),
etc. In practice such a perfect program is often too complicated for fast realization with
long tuning and commissioning and additionally needs essential computational resources.
Therefore, real reconstruction programs are usually created in some simpliﬁcation as-
sumptions which results in the degradation of its discrimination power for direct photon
selection. Such simpliﬁed programs are often based on the recognition of the shapes of
the showers produced by diﬀerent kinds of particles.

In this paper we apply the Artiﬁcial Neural-Network (ANN) approach [7] for the
direct photon identiﬁcation in PHOS. The ANN-method has already recommended itself
as a powerful tool in diﬀerent applications of high energy physics, e.g. quark and gluon jet
separation, b-quark identiﬁcation, Higgs boson search, selection of the rare neutral meson
decay modes violating C-parity, etc. [8–13].

The main peculiarity of our method is the use of the energy-proﬁle tensor of a
cluster, which components are calculated in its eigen-vector coordinate system, with the
aims of the neural net training and the afterward event classiﬁcation. Our calculations
show essential recognition capacities of this procedure that were examined using a sample

1

of Monte-Carlo generated events simulating the isolating production of direct photons
and π0-mesons for the real ALICE set-up.

2

Application of neural network algorithm method
In the analysis of experimental data, a standard procedure of selecting signal events
is based on various cuts of observed kinematics variables. A general case of such cuts
corresponds to a particular set of functions, called feature functions or neurons. In general
terms, neural networks are represented as a large number of interconnected functional
units named nodes with a neuron in each of them. The data processing is organized in
the most common, to-date, architecture called the Multilayer Perception (MLP). MLP
incorporates one input layer through which the initial data (features) are injected, several
hidden layers, and one output layer of neurons.

Output response Oi of the i-th neuron is obtained by the so called sigmoid function
1) dependent on the weighted sum of all input signals Sj to this neuron:

f

f (0

≤

≤

Oi = f (

wij ·

Sj + θi) ,

Xj

where index j runs over all the inputs of the i-th node, wij and θi are the weights and the
correspondent thresholds optimizing the selecting power of the procedure. Function f is
deﬁned as

f (x) = (1 + tanh(x))/2 .

The output layer, consisting of one node, provides a neural-net response SN N , wedged
between 0 and 1, and used to classify the events.

The use of the neural network is a two-step process, i.e. a learning stage followed
by an application stage. During the learning phase using the Monte-Carlo simulation, we
know about every event whether it is a background or a signal one. The optimal values
of weights wij and thresholds θi, (see (1)), for resolving the problem are determined by
minimizing the functional L(wij, θi)

(1)

(2)

(3)

L(wij, θi) =

1
2

N

Xk=1 |

S(k)
learn −

S(k)
N N |

2 ,

where index k runs over all N training events, S(k)
learn = 1
for desired events, S(k)
N N are the ANN response. The details of the whole minimization
procedure can be found in [14]. And ﬁnally the quality of learning is tested with an
independent sample of Monte-Carlo events.

learn = 0 for the background and S(k)

2.1 Input variables for the ANN

Reconstruction programs for cellular electromagnetic calorimeters provide data as a
set of clusters deﬁned as a group of cells with a common edge. Every cluster is characterized
by the amplitudes of signals from the cells and coordinates of the cluster cells on the
detector plane. The total length of the data array for one cluster is 3Nc, where Nc is a
number of cells in the cluster. This array contains exhausting experimental information
about the cluster but, however, it is not convenient for the aim of the ANN approach, at
least due to the varying data length from event to event. To overcome the latter problem
one can use only the limited number of major cluster cells (say, 3
3 around the cell with
the maximal amplitude [15] ), but it deﬁnitely leads to the uncontrolled information loss.

×

2

The essential part of our ANN-approach to γ/π0 selection is to choose such a ﬁxed
number of variables that carry, nevertheless, the principal part of information with its
volume big enough to ﬁnd a solution and which length is independent of the cluster size.
First of all each cluster is characterized by a position of its center-of-gravity ~Xg as well as
by the center of the cell with the maximal signal in the cluster ~Xm. Vector ~Xg is deﬁned
according to the standard formula

~Xg =

~x(k)Ek/

Ek ,

Xk

Xk
and x(k)

where index k runs over all cluster cells, x(k)
1
cluster cell in an arbitrary coordinate system.

2 being the coordinates of the k-th

Then we introduce an energy-proﬁle tensor Qij of a cluster (that can be also in-
terpreted as a 2
2 matrix) calculated in the local cluster coordinate system. There are
two natural possibilities to set the origin of this coordinate system: either in the center of
gravity ~Xg or in the center of the cell with the maximal signal in the cluster ~Xm. In our
calculations we choose the latter option. After that Qij is deﬁned as

×

Qij =

x(k)
i x(k)

j Ek;

i, j = 1, 2.

Xk

Here index k runs over all the cluster cells, x(k)
2 are coordinates of the k-th cluster
cell, for deﬁnition, in non-dimensional units of the crystal transverse size, and Ek is the
energy detected in this cell. Tensor (5) is a quadratic positive-deﬁnite form.

1 and x(k)

The introduced tensor (5) reﬂects the cluster energy proﬁle which depends on the
number of showers overlapped in one cluster, as well as on inclination of the photon inci-
dence on the detector. To avoid the latter eﬀect or, at any rate, to decrease it we have made
(before calculating matrix Qij) a compression of the cluster space relative to the origin
of the local cluster coordinate system ~X0 = (x10, x20) along the vector directed from the
geometrical center of the PHOS module to the point ~X0. The compression coeﬃcient has
been deﬁned as c = cos Θ, where Θ is the angle between the perpendicular to the PHOS
module surface and the photon propagation direction. The coordinate transformation due
to the compression operation has been made according to the formula

~x

R(

φ0)

Ec(Θ)

R(φ0)

→

−

·

·

~X0

+ ~X0,

~x
(cid:16)

·

−

(cid:17)

where ~x = (x1, x2) is the vector of coordinates of an arbitrary transfered point, R and Ec
are the matrices of rotation and compression, respectively:

R(φ0) =

 

−

cos φ0
sin φ0

sin φ0
cos φ0 !

, Ec =

cos Θ 0

 

0

1 !

and φ0 is the polar angle of the point ~X0 in the polar coordinate system with its origin
in the geometrical center of the PHOS module.

One can calculate two eigen values λ1 and λ2 (ordered as λ1 ≥

λ2) of Qij and ﬁnd the
correspondent eigen vectors ~e1 and ~e2 (normalized to a unit), deﬁning a new coordinate
system, where Qij is reduced to the diagonal form. In this new system we also deﬁne
moments Mmn:

Mmn =

(x′(k)

1 )m

(x′(k)

2 )n Ek; m, n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,

Xk

·

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

3

where index k runs over the cluster cells, x′(k)
are the coordinates of the k-th
1
cluster cell in the new coordinate system. Note that M20 = λ1, M02 = λ2, and M00 = E =
k Ek is the total cluster energy. Such important magnitudes as distance d between hits
of two glued photons and their eﬀective mass Mγγ can also be expressed through Mmn
P
(see addendum).

and x′(k)
2

We would also like to point out an essential remark. Initially the experimental in-
formation was carried by signal amplitudes and cell coordinates, and now it is represented
by the introduced moments Mmn. We shall construct from Mmn the input vector ~P (in) of
event features for ANN. One additional angle variable, not directly expressed through the
Mmn, can be added. This is angle φ between the eigen vector ~e1 and vector ~X0 directed
from the geometrical center of the PHOS module to the cluster center

φ = arccos( ~e1, ~X0/

~X0|

|

).

(9)

The use of this angle, together with the coordinates of the cluster center on the detector
plane, signiﬁcantly improves the quality of γ/π0-selection mainly in the peripheral region
of the PHOS modules.

We have found that there are diﬀerent sets of variables that allow to construct
eﬀective event feature vectors. They include the total detected cluster energy, the eigen
values λ1 and λ2, the moments Mmn, the estimation of the eﬀective mass Mγγ and distance
d between γγ-hits expressed through Mmn (see formulas (A.4) and (A.5) ), and the angle
variable φ. Coordinates of the cluster center ~X0 relative to the center of the PHOS module
can also be added, which increases the selection power of the method.

2.2 Strategy of the γ/π0-selection

In this section the algorithm of the γ/π0-selection is discussed in detail. First of
all we note, that at low energies there is a background from π0 decays producing two
separated clusters in PHOS that can be taken into account by one of the statistical
methods, based on a good resolution of PHOS for Mγγ-eﬀective masses in this case, which
is demonstrated below in Fig.5b. The mentioned procedures can, for example, reject the
π0-contribution by calculating the masses of γγ-combinations and by comparing them with
the π0-mass. It is possible to reduce the number of such combinations at high occupancy of
the detector by taking into account the characteristic angle of the decay cone for photons.
These methods are beyond the scope of the current paper. Thus, further calculations
were fulﬁlled following the assumption that this type of backgrounds had been eliminated
correctly.

Besides, there are two other essential sources of the background due to π0-decays,
when only one cluster appears in PHOS. The ﬁrst one results from the detector geometry,
i.e. when one of the decay photons from π0 escapes detection in PHOS due to the limited
acceptance, whereas the second photon hits PHOS and generates a single shower and
therefore a single cluster. It provides actually indistinguishable from the direct photons
sample of the background photons in the whole photon energy range. This background
is essential at relatively small energies of neutral pions. To suppress the relative part u
(close to one) of such a background, we demand that the cone with a specially deﬁned
total angle θ(u) around the photon propagation should cross the detector plane inside of
it. The angle θ(u) can be easily estimated from the isotropy of π0
γγ decay in the
meson rest frame after the Lorentz boost to the laboratory system

→

θ(u) = arctan

mπ0(1 + βu)√1
2E(β + u)

 

u2

−

!

+ arctan

mπ0(1 + βu)√1
u)
2E(β

 

u2

−

,

!

(10)

−

4

1 is the π0-meson velocity in units of
where E is the energy of the analyzed cluster, β
the light speed. Note that minimal decay cone angle θmin = 2 arccos(β) can be obtained
from formula (10) at u = 0. In the case when both photons ﬂy towards the detector
direction we arrive at u < β. To apply the considered cut we take u = 0.95. This cut
actually works at small energies, and mainly at the edges of the calorimeter, while at high
energies practically all events pass it successfully.

≃

The second background comes from the limited spatial resolution of PHOS, i.e. when
the overlapping showers from two-photon decays of the high-energy pions form one cluster.
This mechanism provides the major background for direct photons at high energies. Its
suppression is mainly fulﬁlled by the ANN-algorithm. The step sequence runs as follows.
First we apply the procedure of the local peak number determination in a cluster.
It classiﬁes the cluster as that with two overlapping showers when two local peaks are
observed above the electronic noise ﬂuctuations. Such classiﬁcation of clusters is a common
algorithm in reconstruction programs for cellular detectors.
To decrease the background from the decays π0

γγ, when only one photon hits
PHOS due to the limited aperture, we apply cut (10) with the use of θ(u). The remaining
clusters with one peak passing this 2-stage preselection are analyzed by ANN. It was
composed of three layers (see Fig. 1): input, hidden and output. The input layer consists

→

in
1

P

in
2

P

in
3

P

in
N

P

S

NN

Figure 1: Architecture of the used ANN.

(0, 1).

of N nodes, where N is the dimension of vector ~P (in) representing the event features; the
hidden layer is built of 2N + 1 nodes; and ﬁnally, the one-node output layer provides the
neural-net response SN N ∈
The net was trained with two samples of events containing the desired signals (i.e.
clusters from direct photons) and the background (i.e. clusters produced by the overlapped
photons from decay π0
2γ). Each sample consisted of 30,000 events (clusters) left
after preselection. Upon training the net, we tested its eﬃciency on another statistically
independent signal and background samples, each consisting of 30,000 events also left
after the preselection.

→

3

Simulation of isolating photons and π0-mesons
The data taken for the analysis were simulated within the ALICE framework for
the simulation, reconstruction and data analysis, aliroot v.3.06.02 [16]. Two samples

5

of events were generated, one sample containing one photon and another sample having
one π0 per event. Photons and π0’s were emitted from the interaction point with the
uniformly distributed transverse momentum in the range of 0 < pT < 120 GeV/c within
the solid angle deﬁned by the uniformly distributed azimuth angle 210◦ < φ < 330◦ and
the polar angle 80◦ < θ < 100◦. The solid angle of the emitted particles was chosen to be
a little larger that that of PHOS detector, to avoid various border eﬀects. The decay of
π0’s was performed by the aliroot.

The real ALICE environment was taken into account during the particle tracking
from the interaction point to PHOS. The following detectors and infrastructure modules
which cover the PHOS aperture were installed: PIPE, ITS, TPC, TRD, FRAME, as
shown in Fig.2. This environment results in particle interactions with the media and the

PHOS

Figure 2: ALICE detector used for the simulation in aliroot.

production of secondary particles which deteriorate the response of the PHOS detector.
The response of the PHOS calorimeter was simulated by GEANT 3.21 [17], which
was included into the aliroot package as a particle tracking and physics interaction
tool. The showers developed by the particles passing through the calorimeter cells, gave
the HITS which were the deposited energy of the shower in each cell. These HITS were
digitized, i.e. the energy amplitude of the cell was measured by the two-channel ADC,
and the integer signal of the ADC produced DIGITS. The noise with σnoise = 10 MeV was
applied to the DIGITS, after which the DIGITS were passed through the 50-MeV threshold
cut. The remaining DIGITS with a common side were grouped into clusters. Only clusters
with the total energy greater than 500 MeV were accepted.

6

The data that passed to the Neural Network analysis contained the following infor-
mation. The event samples (photons or π0’s) were identiﬁed by the ﬁle name. Events had a
header which was characterized by the event number, the energy of the produced particle
and the number of the found clusters. The event header was followed by the cluster data
consisting of the cluster header with the cluster number and the number of cells in the
cluster, and the cell information containing the list of cell positions in PHOS as well as
the cell amplitudes.

4

Results of the γ/π0-selection
Analysis of the generated data shows that only 0.04% of direct photons are recon-
structed as two-cluster events. The energies of the additional clusters are limited, they
are practically not greater than 1.5 GeV.

Two-dimensional plots (Fig.3) of eigen values λ1 and λ2 versus energy E of γ or π0,
demonstrate the diﬀerence between the direct photons and the background that is used
in the process of the ANN training. Fig. 4 also shows one-dimensional distributions which
demonstrate a rather well-expressed γ/π0-distinction.

Fig.5 shows comparative results of the calculations of γγ-eﬀective masses Mγγ for
overlapped and separated clusters from π0-decays and the same data from the sample of
direct photons. For the overlapped clusters we use formula (A.5) expressing Mγγ through
the moments Mmn. In both cases for the overlapped and separated clusters from π0-decays
there are well observed peaks at the value of π0-mass while application of the same formula
(A.5) for direct photons gives a smoothly falling dependence with the growth of mass in
the region of the π0-meson. Smooth solid curves in the ﬁgure show the results of Gaussian
ﬁts of π0-peaks. The average value and variation for the separated clusters are equal to
133 MeV and 6.8 MeV, respectively.

The main results of this article concerning the quality of the ANN training for the
γ/π0-discrimination are presented in Fig. 6 for one of the possible feature event vectors,
selected as (E, λ1, λ2, M30, M04, φ), where E is the measured cluster energy. The cut on
the SN N signal equal to 0.64. This ﬁgure shows the eﬃciency ε(γ, γ) of true photon
identiﬁcation as a photon, misidentiﬁcation ε(γ, π0) of π0-meson as a photon in the range
of generated energies of photons and π0-mesons from 3 GeV to 120 GeV, and the coeﬃcient
of background suppression relatively to direct photons ε(γ, π0)/ε(γ, γ). One can see that
the probability ε(γ, π0) of misidentiﬁcation of a neutral pion as a photon is on the level of
a few percent in the energy range of 3
120 GeV with relatively high eﬃciency of the true
photon identiﬁcation. The rise of the π0 misidentiﬁcation probability at energies below
25 GeV is caused by the π0
γγ decays with one photon outside PHOS, whereas the
decrease of the true photon identiﬁcation eﬃciency at the energies below 15 GeV is the
result of the true photon cut decreasing the background from these decays of π0’s with
only one photon inside PHOS.

→

−

We compare our results with the data of work [18] where the coeﬃcient ε(γ, π0)
was estimated for the STAR experiment as 0.15 at 20 GeV and 0.45 at 40 GeV at ﬁxed
ε(γ, γ) = 0.8. The eﬃciency of the γ/π0-recognition was also calculated within the neural
network approach for the CMS experiment in note [15]. The obtained values ε(γ, π0) varied
from 0.25 to 0.55 at E = 20 GeV and from 0.40 to 0.55 at E = 100 GeV, dependent on
the rapidity range, while the eﬃciency of the single photon recognition was kept at 91%.

7

Figure 3: Two-dimensional plots of λ1 (a), (b) and λ2 (c), (d) vs energy, (a) and (c) are
direct photons, (b) and (d) are the background.

Figure 4: λ1- and λ2 distributions for direct photons (solid lines) and background (dotted
lines).

8

Figure 5: a) Distribution illustrating the results of calculating γγ-eﬀective masses with
formula (A.5) for overlapped clusters from the neutral pion decays (solid lines) and the
same data for the sample of direct photons (dotted lines). b) Distribution of γγ-eﬀective
masses for the divided clusters from π0 decays. A mistaken contribution from the prompt
photon due to the splitting of clusters under treatment is negligible on the level of unity
events in the π0-region. Smooth solid curves show the Gaussian ﬁt with the average value
of 133 MeV and the variation of 6.8 MeV.

9

Figure 6: Eﬃciency ε(γ, γ) of true photon identiﬁcation as a photon (solid lines), misiden-
tiﬁcation ε(γ, π0) of π0-meson as a photon (dotted lines), and the coeﬃcient of the back-
ground suppression ε(γ, π0)/ε(γ, γ) as a functions of E. The vector of event features is
(E, λ1, λ2, M30, M04, φ).

10

5

Conclusion
In this paper a neural network method is developed to separate the direct photons
from the neutral pion background in the PHOS spectrometer of the ALICE experiment.
The proposed algorithm is based on the analysis of the energy-proﬁle tensor of the cluster
calculated in its eigen vector coordinate system. The proposed method allows to construct
eﬀective event feature vectors consisting of a limited number of variables carrying enough
information to train the neural network for the goals of γ/π0 separation. This method
has been applied for Monte-Carlo events in PHOS. It has been found that the probability
of misidentiﬁcation of a neutral pion as a photon is on the level of a few percent in the
pion energy range of 3
120 GeV with the relatively high eﬃciency of the correct photon
identiﬁcation as an isolated photon in the same energy range.

−

References
[1] ALICE Collaboration, Technical Proposal, CERN/LHCC/95-71, Geneva, 1995.
[2] ALICE Collaboration, Technical Design Report PHOS, CERN/LHCC 99-4, ALICE

[3] ALICE Collaboration, Technical Design Report ITS, CERN/LHCC 99-12, ALICE

[4] ALICE Collaboration, Technical Design Report TPC, CERN/LHCC 2000-001,

TDR 2, Geneva,

TDR 4, Geneva, 18 June 1999.

ALICE TDR 7, Geneva, 2000.

[5] A.M.Blick, M.Yu.Bogolyubsky, A.Di Mauro at al., Charged Particle Veto Detector
with Open Geometry for the Spectrometer PHOS, ALICE Collaboration, Internal
Note ALICE/PHOS 2000-21, 4 September 2000.
et

[6] G.Martinez, X.Camard, H.Delagrange

al., ALICE

internal

note

ALICE-INT-2001-37.

[7] L.Lonnblad, C.Peterson and T.Rognvalson, Computer Physics Comminication,
70, 1992; C.Peterson, T.Rognvalson and L.Lonnblad, Preprint, LU-93-29, 1993;
C.Peterson, T.Rognvalson and L.Lonnblad, Preprint CERN-TH.7315/94, Geneva,
1994.

[8] L.Lonnblad, C.Peterson and T.Rognvalson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65,1321 (1990).
[9] C.Peterson,L.Lonbland, C.Peterson and T.Rognvalson, Nucl. Phys. B 349, 675

(1991).

2002.

[10] P.Bhat, L.Lonnblad, K.Meir and K.Sugano, Proc. of the 1990 DPF Summer Study

in High Enerhy Physics, Colorado, 1990.

[11] I.Scabai, F.Czako and Z.Fodor, ITP Budapest report 477 (1990).
[12] T.Maggipinto, G.Nardulli, S.Dusini et al., Preprint BARI-TH/268-97, Bari,1997.
[13] A.A.Aseev, M.Yu.Bogolyubsky, V.A.Viktorov et al., Preprint IHEP 2002-3, Protvino,

[14] C.David et al., Phys. Rev. C51 (1995) 1453.
[15] E.C.Reid and H.F.Health, CMS NOTE 2000/063, Geneva, 2000.
[16] ALICE Oﬀ-line Project. http://AliSoft.cern.ch/offline/.
[17] GEANT, detector descriptoin and simulation tool. CERN program library long

[18] N.G.Minaev, Preprint IHEP 94-142, Protvino, 1994.
[19] S.I.Bityukov, S.A.Sadovsky, V.K.Semenov and V.V.Smirnova, Preprint IHEP, 81-45,

writeup W5013.

Serpukhov, 1981.

11

Addendum.
Calculation of γγ-eﬀective mass through moments Mmn

Kinematics formulae can be applied to estimate the γγ-eﬀective mass Mγγ in the
case of the divided clusters on the base of the measured energies of photons and the angle
between their momenta. The problem is more complicated for the overlapped clusters.
Here we follow paper [19] to express the mass Mγγ in terms of the above introduced
moments (8) under assumption that the shower proﬁle for an isolated photon possesses
an azimuthal symmetry with respect to the point of γ-hit. This leads to the following
properties of the own moments ¯Mmn (i.e. moments relative to the point of γ-hit) for the
isolated showers: ¯Mm0 = ¯M0m and ¯Mmk = 0 for odd k. The γ-incidence inclination violates
the azimuthal symmetry, but we restore it by the mentioned compression of the cluster
space (6).

Due to the principle of energy additivity in the case of the overlapped showers the
summary cluster energy density F (E1, E2, x1, x2) can be expressed in the eigen vector
coordinate system of the cluster as follows:

F (E1, E2, x1, x2) = E1f (x1 −

x10, x2) + E2f (x1 −

x20, x2) ,

(A.1)

where E1, E2 are the individual energies of showers, x1 and x2 are the coordinates of an
arbitrary point in the cluster space, x10 and x20 are the coordinates of photon hits along
the eigen vector ~e1, and f (x1, x2) is the single photon shower proﬁle. After that one can
easily obtain from (8)

l

Mln =

l [ E1xl−i
C i

10 ¯min + E2xl−i

20 ¯min ] ,

(A.2)

Xi=0
where a non-zero contribution gives only terms with even i; C i
i)!) are bi-
nomial coeﬃcients, ¯min are normalized own moments ¯min = ¯Min/M00 of a single photon
shower. Taking into account the above mentioned azimuthal symmetry of single photon
showers, we obtain the following set of equations for the determination of energies and
coordinates of individual showers E1, E2, x10, x20:

l = l!/ (i!(l

−

(A.3)

E1 + E2 = M00
x10 + E2 ·
E1 ·
x2
E1 ·
10 + E2 ·
x3
10 + E2 ·
E1 ·

x20 = M10
x2
20 = M20 −
x3
20 = M30 −

M02
3M12




X =



The solution is:

M30 −

M02)/M00

M10(M20 −
M 2
10/M00
M02 −
M20 + M02)/M00

3M12 −
M20 −
4(XM10 −
XM00)/d

−




d2 = X 2
∆ = (2M10 −
E = M00,
E1 and E = E2 + E1. The variable d
where X = x20 + x10, d = x20 −
gives the estimation of distance between the hits of individual showers in the overlapped
cluster. To calculate the eﬀective γγ-mass one should also know the distance R from the
interaction point to the cluster center to determine the decay angle θ between γ-quanta,
and thus we obtain

x10, ∆ = E2 −

(A.4)

M 2

γγ = 4E1E2 sin2(θ/2) = (E2

∆2)

d2
d2 + 4R2 .

−

(A.5)

12

