4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
1
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

February 2, 2008 4:50 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

dpf˙d0trigger

International Journal of Modern Physics A
c(cid:13) World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company

The DØ Run II Trigger System

Reinhard Schwienhorst∗
Department of Physics and Astronomy,
Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.
Email: schwier@fnal.gov

Received (Day Month Year)
Revised (Day Month Year)

I present the current status of the DØ trigger system in Run II at the Tevatron.

Keywords: Trigger; Hadron Collider; Tevatron; Dzero.

1. Introduction
The DØ detector at the Fermilab Tevatron was upgraded for Run II1,2. This up-
grade included improvements to the trigger system in order to be able to handle the
increased Tevatron luminosity and higher bunch crossing rates compared to Run I.
The DØ Run II trigger is a highly ﬂexible system to select events to be written
to tape from an initial interaction rate of about 2.5 MHz. This is done in a three-tier
pipelined, buﬀered system. The ﬁrst tier (level 1) processes fast detector pick-oﬀ
signals in a hardware/ﬁrmware based system to reduce the event rate to about
1. 5kHz. The second tier (level 2) uses information from level 1 and forms simple
Physics objects to reduce the rate to about 850 Hz. The third tier (level 3) uses
full detector readout and event reconstruction on a ﬁlter farm to reduce the rate
to 20-30 Hz. The DØ trigger menu contains a wide variety of triggers. While the
emphasis is on triggering on generic lepton and jet ﬁnal states, there are also trigger
terms for speciﬁc ﬁnal state signatures.

In this document we describe the DØ trigger system as it was implemented and

is currently operating in Run II.

2. Level 1 and Level 2 Trigger System

The ﬁrst two levels of the trigger system reduce the event rate from the initial in-
teraction rate of about 2.5 MHz to a rate of below 850 Hz that allows for a full

∗On behalf of the DØ collaboration.

1

February 2, 2008 4:50 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

dpf˙d0trigger

2 Reinhard Schwienhorst

Fig. 1. A schematic illustration of DØ Trigger level 1 and level 2 systems.

readout of the DØ detector. In order to accomplish this, the ﬁrst two levels are cou-
pled together tightly through a system that coordinates the trigger decisions and
distributes trigger information to the various sub-detectors. This “trigger frame-
work” handles the information from the level 1 muon, calorimeter, and tracking
sub-systems as well as the level 2 trigger system. It forms global level 1 and level 2
trigger decisions which are sent out to all detector systems to coordinate event
transfers from front-end buﬀers to level 1 buﬀers and to the level 3 system.

A diagram of the level 1 and level 2 trigger conﬁguration is shown in Fig. 1.
At level 1, the individual sub-systems are mostly independent, except for the abil-
ity to match muons to central tracks. At level 2, sub-detector speciﬁc objects are
reconstructed in separate pre-processors. The level 2 global processor then reads
these objects from the pre-processors and combines them to form Physics objects.
It furthermore computes event-wide variables such as the total transverse energy
HT and event correlations such as φ separation between objects.

The level 1 and level 2 trigger systems allow for up to 128 individual trig-
gers to be programmed. If any of these triggers passes, the event is read out and
sent to level 3. Each individual trigger may itself contain several diﬀerent condi-
tions. All conditions must be fulﬁlled in order for this trigger to pass. This ﬂexible
conﬁguration has enabled the design of Physics trigger menus suited well for the
instantaneous luminosities produced by the Tevatron to date. During the Tevatron
start-up, the focus of the trigger menu was on simple calorimeter-based objects
(electrons and jets) and on muons reconstructed using the muon detector. As the
instantaneous luminosity increased over time, track requirements, more complex
objects, and event-wide variables were added.

3. Level 3 Trigger System

The entire DØ detector is read out for events passing level 1 and level 2. This
includes reading out all of the detector elements as well as the trigger level 1 and

February 2, 2008 4:50 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

dpf˙d0trigger

The DØ Run II Trigger System 3

Fig. 2. A schematic illustration of DØ Trigger level 3 system.

level 2 systems themselves. Fig. 2 shows an overview of the level 3 system.

The hit and pulseheight information from each detector readout crate is collected
in single-board-computers (SBC), which send this information to a node on the
ﬁlter farm through a commercial Ethernet switch. The ﬂow of information from the
readout crates to the ﬁlter nodes is controlled by the routing master. The trigger
programming is loaded onto the ﬁlter nodes by the supervisor node. The routing
and ﬁlter node programming occurs over the same Ethernet links that are used in
the data transfer.

Each event is fully reconstructed at level 3 with algorithms that are similar to
those used in the oﬄine event reconstruction. This allows the level 3 system to
accomplish a large rejection factor of 20 that is required to limit the output rate to
less than 50 Hz.

The ﬂexibility of the trigger programming is expanded further at level 3. There
are 256 individual trigger bits available at level 3, each coupled to one of the
level 1/level 2 triggers. Each can be programmed to ﬁlter on combinations of simple
objects such as electrons, muons, or jets, as well as event-wide variables and corre-
lations. Level 3 also provides the ability to select b-tagged jets based on tracking
and silicon detector information.

4. Conclusions

The DØ Run II trigger system is working well, selecting events for oﬄine processing
with high eﬃciency for many diﬀerent Physics signal processes. Full advantage has
been taken of the ﬂexibility of the system as the Tevatron instantaneous luminosity
has increased.

References
1. S. Abachi et al., The DØ Detector, Nucl. Instr. Meth., A338, pp. 185-253 (1994).
2. S. Abachi et al., The DØ Upgrade: The Detector and Its Physics, Fermilab Pub-96-

357-E (1996).

