4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
3
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
2
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Precision measurement of the second order correlation function for a non-stationary
light source

Wonshik Choi, Moonjoo Lee, Ye-Ryoung Lee, Changsoon Park, Jai-Hyung Lee, and Kyungwon An∗
School of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, Korea

C. Fang-Yen, R. R. Dasari, and M. S. Feld†
G.R.Harrison Spectroscopy Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

We report a novel high-throughput second order correlation measurement system which records
and makes use of all the arrival times of photons detected at two detectors. Commercially available
counter/timing boards were used and the correlation measurements for a sinusoidally amplitude-
modulated light were performed. The measured correlation amplitude of the test source was reduced
as the mean intensity was increased. We demonstrated a precise calibration method for a correct
correlation function by introducing an eﬀective dead time of the entire measurement system.

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

The second order correlation is an intensity-intensity
correlation of a light source and has information on both
photon statistics and dynamics of a light generation pro-
cess of the light source. It was ﬁrst introduced by the
Hanbury Brown and Twiss to measure the angular sep-
aration of binary star [1]. Afterwards, it was applied to
measure the properties of various light sources such as
measuring the coherence time of the thermal light [2],
getting information about the nature of the scatterers [3]
and surveying the correlation properties of laser light
near threshold of oscillation [4]. More recently, it was
used to prove the nonclassical nature of the sources such
as an antibunching [5] and sub-Poissonian photon statis-
tics [6].

Much eﬀort has been done to devise an precise and
eﬃcient apparatus to measure second order correlation
function. The ﬁrst successful time-resolved measurement
was done by using a single detector, single variable delay
generator and coincident circuit to measure the coherence
time of a low-pressure gas discharge in a single 198Hg
[2]. This technique has limitation on getting
isotope
correlation near time delay zero due to the imperfectness
of the detector such as spurious multiple pulse emission
and incapability of detection for ﬁnite amount of time
just after detecting real photons. We call these eﬀects as
after-pulsing eﬀect and dead time eﬀect, respectively.

To overcome this limitation, two-detector conﬁgura-
tion was adopted in which light beam is divided into two
parts and two photodetectors are used to record pho-
tons arrived at each part [7, 8, 9, 10]. Unlike the single
detector measurement, the spuriously emitted photons
and dead photons at one detector are completely uncor-
related to the photons detected on the other detector so

∗Electronic address: kwan@phya.snu.ac.kr
†Electronic address: msfeld@mit.edu

that the contribution of after-pulsing and dead time ef-
fects are equally spread out all over the time. This allows
measurements to be extended down to zero time delay.
More sophisticated correlators, which made use of multi-
ple time delays, were developed which digitized the time
interval between a ‘start’ pulse from one photodetector
and multiple ‘stop’ pulses from the other photodetector
at a time [11, 12, 13]. The number of pulse pairs corre-
sponding to a given delay is registered on the correspond-
ing counter and this is proportional to the second order
correlation. This device is called as a “Multi-Stop Time-
to-Digital Converter(MSTDC)”. This method is more ef-
ﬁcient than previous method due to the multiple delay
generators.

Even though a two-detector conﬁguration can eﬀec-
tively remove the artifact caused by the imperfectness of
the detector, this was turned out to be true only for the
stationary source, the intensity of which is independent of
time. Since the probability of spurious emissions or losing
photons due to the dead time is not linear to the intensity
but to the square of the intensity, intensity proﬁle can be
distorted for a non-stationary sources. In this study, we
ﬁrst report on the limitation of two-detector conﬁgura-
tion for a non-stationary source and provide a reasonable
way of calibration. We also developed a novel second or-
der correlation measurement system which record all the
arrival times of photons detected at start and stop detec-
tors and make use of all the photons detected at the start
detector as triggers. There are no wastes of photons at
start detector and thus this system can be more eﬃcient
than MSTDC at least as the number of photons detected
at start detectors.

II. EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS

A schematic description of the second order corre-
lation measurement system is shown in Fig. 1.
It is
composed of two detectors(APD1 as a start detector
and APD2 as a stop detector) which are electrically

connected to the counter/timing boards(Counter1,2) in-
stalled in the two computers(Computer1,2) and addi-
tional controlling computer(Computer0). APDs(SPCM-
AQR-13, PerkinElmer) of dark count rate less than
150Hz, dead time about 50ns and photon detection ef-
ﬁciency about 50% are used to generate electrical pulses
whenever the photons are detected. Relatively low-cost
and commercially available counter/timing boards(PCI-
6602:National Instruments) are used to record the ar-
rival times of the electrical pulses and to store them to
the computers. Each board has its own internal clock of
80MHz so that the time resolution is 12.5ns. Two inde-
pendent boards and computers were used to prevent the
crosstalk inside a board or computer.

The internal clock of each counter/timing board has
limited accuracy and also has a 50ppm of drift as the sur-
rounding temperature changes. The accurate frequency
of the internal clock in each board was calibrated by
counting the arrival times of reference pulses from func-
tion generator(DS345, Stanford Research System). The
frequency diﬀerence between boards was typically several
tens of ppm and is included in getting absolute arrival
times from the measured ones.

To make the two counters start counting at the same
time, additional controlling computer(computer0) was
used to generate trigger signal to simultaneously arm
the counters.
It has an analog output and digital in-
put/output board(NI6703:National Instruments) which
can send TTL signal as a trigger.

All the arrival times of photons detected on both de-
tectors are the relative times to the same origin de-
ﬁned by the trigger. All the detected photons on one
detector therefore can be used as multiple triggers to
those of the other. For this reason, we name this de-
vice as a “Multi-start Multi-stop Time-to-Digital Con-
verter(MMTDC)” comparing with conventional “Multi-
Stop Time-to-Digital Converter(MSTDC)”.

MMTDC makes use of all the photons detected at start
detector whereas the MSTDC makes use of single photon

FIG. 1: Schematic of experimental setup. ECDL:Extended
cavity diode laser(2010M:Newport), A:Acousto-optic modu-
lator(Isomat 1206C),FG:Function generator(DS345, Stanford
Research System), APD1,2: Avalanche photodiode(SPCM-
AQR-13, PerkinElmer), Counter1,2: NI 6602 counter/timing
board. Counter/timing boards are installed in the computer1
and computer2 respectively and are simultaneously armed by
the trigger signal generated from computer0.

2

detected at a start detector as a trigger and measure
the relative arrival times for a correlation time Tc of the
light source. It starts over the next measurement using
another single photon detected at a start detector after
Tc. If the incoming photon ﬂux to the start detector is γ,
only one photon out of γTc is used in the measurement.
Therefore our MMTDC has γTc times higher eﬃciency
than that of MSTDC.

MMTDC is specially useful to measure the second or-
der correlation function of the light source which has a
high photon ﬂux and long correlation time but has lim-
ited operation time and a small size of signal. The mi-
crolaser [15, 16] was a good example to meet this need.
It has an output photon ﬂux of about 3Mcps and correla-
tion time of about 10µs such that new method was about
30times more eﬃcient than that of MSTDC. Because of
the limited oven life time, full time measurement could
give a signal to noise ratio of about 3 even when new
method was used. We could get a signal to noise ratio of
only 0.55 if we used a conventional method, which means
that we could not get a correct measurement in principle.
Since there is a limitation of computer memory, the
number of arrival times recordable at a time are lim-
ited by about one million counts. To get the enough
number of data, measurements should be done in a se-
quential way. All the computers are connected by the
ethernet connections such that they can send and re-
ceive messages among themselves. The counting comput-
ers(computer1,2) send messages to the controlling com-
puter to notify the end of counting whenever they com-
plete speciﬁed number of counting and recording. Af-
ter checking that the controlling computer has received
messages, both counting computers prepare next mea-
surement. When the controlling computer receives these
messages, it sends trigger to the counting computers to
start counting again. The number of sequence is deter-
mined so as to get enough signal to noise ratio.

To get a second order correlation function, histogram
of the time diﬀerences between arrival times of photons
detected at start and stop APDs is built from the mea-
sured arrival times. To save calculation time, only the
pairs of photons the time diﬀerence of which is within a
certain time window, typically 10 times larger than corre-
lation time of the sources, are included in the calculation.
A second order correlation function can be obtained from
the normalization of this histogram by the histogram val-
ues of much longer delay time than correlation time.

A correlation function obtained among the photons
measured at a single detector exhibits the eﬀect of de-
tector dead time and after-pulsing. An extended cavity
diode laser(2010M:Newport) operated at far above the
threshold condition was used as a testing source since
the photon statistics of its output is Poissonian and the
second order correlation function is simply unity for all
over the time delay. A ﬁgure 2(b) shows a measured re-
sult. Two kinds of dip below 1 appear and the one near
time delay of zero corresponds to the detector dead time.
This can be conﬁrmed from the output pulse shape of

3

(1)

soidally modulated source can be calculated to be

g(2)(τ ) =

b2 + a2

2 cos(ωτ )

.

b2 + a2
2

The modulation frequency was set to be 100kHz. Fig-
ure 3(a) and (b) show measured second order correlation
functions. Mean count rates for both detector were about
0.6Mcps and 1000 sequences of measurements were done
with each sequence counting 300kcounts for each detec-
tor.
It took about 1000 seconds including sequencing
procedure. 10 adjacent points were added such that the
time resolution was 125ns. A ﬁgure (a) was a calculated
result among photons detected at a single detector and
thus showed sharp dip near time delay zero. This was
resulted from the dead time eﬀects of the detector and
counter/timing board. A ﬁgure (b) was calculated from
the detected photons between APD1 and APD2. The
central dip was completely washed out. The normalized
shot noise was only about 0.06% due to the mean counts
per time resolution of about 2.8 million. The contrast ra-
tios a2/2b2 of single- and two-detector conﬁguration were
almost same.

B. Contrast ratio of the measurements are reduced
as mean count rate increased

Even though the two detector conﬁguration can elim-
inate detector dead time eﬀects drastically, those eﬀects
still can aﬀect to the correlation measurements. In case
of non-stationary sources, the intensity varies as time.
This means that the number of dead photons varies as
time because the probability to lose photon is not simply
linear to the intensity.

To observe the distortion of intensity proﬁle for the
case of time varying intensity, photon counting method
was used to measure the intensity proﬁle as a function of
time. Photons are counted for every 0.01sec by gating the
counter using 100Hz gate signal. The ratio of amplitude
to the mean intensity of the driving radio frequency ﬁeld
was ﬁxed and the mean intensity was varied. Thus the

FIG. 3: Typical results of the second order correlation func-
tion for a sinusoidally modulated light source. (a) Correlation
using single-detector conﬁguration.
(b) using two-detector
conﬁguration.

FIG. 2: (a)Output pulse shape from APD. (b)A measured
second order correlation function for a Poissonian light source
using single-detector conﬁguration.

APD shown in Fig. 2(a). The full width of the pulse was
measured to be about 50ns. Photon pairs the time dif-
ference of which are shorter than this cannot be counted
correctly and accompanying photons are ignored. An-
other dip was extended to 250ns and depth of the dip
was about 25%, which means that accompanying photons
are partially ignored with a probability of 25%. This was
originated from the counter/timing board.

Usually most of the counting system has dead time
since it takes a ﬁnite amount of time to record mea-
sured arrival times.
In our case, since there is no on-
board memory in the counter/timing board, it transmits
the arrival times to the computer memory through the
DMA(Direct Memory Access). Since the data transfer
rate through DMA is limited by 100MBps, some counts
can be missing if the time interval between photons is
too short to be transferred. The probability to miss a
count depends on the time interval between successive
photons. We call these losses of counts as “dead time
eﬀects of counting/timer board” as an analogy to the
detector dead time.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

A. Two-detector conﬁguration can remove the
distortion near τ =0

Using newly invented second order correlation mea-
surement system, we have measured the second order cor-
relation function for a non-stationary light source. The
output beam from an extended cavity diode laser was
modulated by an acousto-optic modulator. The ampli-
tude of the driving radio frequency ﬁeld to the acousto-
Optic modulator is sinusoidally modulated using func-
tion generator such that the intensity of the ﬁrst-order
diﬀracted beam is sinusoidally modulated. Its functional
form can be written as I(t) = arcsin(ωt + φ) + b, where a
and b have the units of count per second for the photon
counting measurement. Since the response time of AOM
is measured to be 130ns, the modulation frequency can
be safely set up to 1MHz.

The second order correlation function for the sinu-

contrast ratio a/b is ﬁxed while b is varied. To get a
enough signal to noise ratio, the modulation frequency
was lowered down to 0.1Hz. This measurement is free
from the dead time eﬀect of counting/timer board since
data is transferred every 0.01sec which is much longer
than the maximum dead time of 250ns explained above.
A ﬁgure 4(a) shows typical result of the measurement
and intensity was well ﬁtted to the sinusoidal function.
The contrast ratio was measured to be 0.2911 ± 0.0003.
¿From the measured contrast ratio of the intensity a/b,
the contrast ratio of second order correlation function
can be expected to be a2/2b2. Circle dots in ﬁgure 4(b)
represent the contrast ratio expected from the measured
intensity. It kept decreasing as the mean intensity b in-
creased. We can explain the origin from the correction
factor(α) of the detector which needs to be multiplied by
the measured intensity to get a original intensity proﬁle.

α =

= 1 + TdI.

(2)

I
Im

where I and Im are original and measured intensity re-
spectively in a unit of cps and Td is the dead time of the
detector. Note that it is a linear function of the intensity.
For a small TdI≪1,

Im(t) ≃ (1 − TdI(t))I(t) ≃ b − Tdb2 + (a − 2abTd) sin ωt.
(3)
Sinusoidal intensity modulation was assumed and higher
order terms of a were ignored. The contrast ratio is mod-
iﬁed from a/b to (1 − Tdb)a/b. The modiﬁed contrast of
g(2)(τ ) is thus (1 − 2Tdb)a2/2b2. In the experiment, a/b
was ﬁxed and so was the a2/2b2. This value can be de-
termined from the measured result at a low count rate
limit, i.e. b → 0 and was 0.129. Note that the contrast
is expected to be linearly decreasing as mean count rate
becomes higher and the inclination is proportional to the
dead time Td. A line in Fig.4(b) shows a calculated result
with Td = 50ns and was well matched to the circle dots

FIG. 4:
(a)Intensity proﬁle of the sinusoidally modulated
light source measured by the photon counting method.
(b)Contrasts of the second order correlation function. circle
dots: expected from the intensity measurements. line: theo-
retical calculation including the eﬀect of detector dead time.
square dots: directly calculated from second order correlation
function measurements.

4

with mean error between theoretical and experimental
results of 3.6 × 10−6.

Using MMTDC, we directly measured second order
correlation function at a modulation frequency of 100kHz
with same modulation contrast and calculated the con-
trast ratio as a function of mean count rate. The re-
sults are shown as a square dots at Fig.4(b). At low
mean count rate, the contrast ratio expected by the the-
ory and experiment converge to the same value. But as
mean count rate increases, the decrease rate of contrast
ratio is 1.54 times steeper than that expected from the
intensity measurements. We attribute the discrepancy
to the dead time eﬀect of counter/timing board which
was not introduced for the intensity measurements. In
the second order correlation measurement, all the arrival
times are recorded such that some of them can be par-
tially ignored because the time diﬀerence of the photon
pairs can be shorter than maximum board dead time of
250ns. We need to consider an eﬀective dead time which
includes both detector and board dead times.

C. Eﬀective dead time of total measurement
system can correct the discrepancies

We numerically simulated the eﬀect of partial dead
time shown in the counter/timing board. A Poissonian
light source was simulated using random number gener-
ator and if the time diﬀerence between two successive
photons are shorter than 50ns, accompanying photons
are omitted with a probability of 50%, we named this
as a probability to lose photon PL. It will be unity for
the detector dead time case. A ﬁgure 5(a) is the second
order correlation function of this simulated source and
shows a dip with a width same as dead time, 50ns and
depth same as PL, 50%. A correction factor as a func-
tion of the mean intensity was calculated and shown in
Fig. 5(b). The result can be well ﬁtted by the following
relation.

α =

= 1 + PLTdI,

(4)

I
Im

Note that the increasing rate of α to the intensity is PLTd
not just Td as is shown in Eq. (2). We can expect that
contrast reduction rate which was proportional to the de-
tector dead time Td will be reduced by PL times and was
conﬁrmed by the numerical simulations. For this reason,
we named PLTd as an eﬀective dead time and this is sim-
ply same as the area of the dip shown in the second order
correlation function obtained by the single-detector con-
ﬁguration (Fig. 5(a)). We can experimentally determine
the eﬀective dead time of the system from the dead time
distribution obtained from the second order correlation
function calculated among photons detected at a single
detector.

Dead time distribution of our MMTDC was shown in
Fig. 2(b). The total area of the dip was 80ns, which is
the eﬀective dead time(Teﬀ ) of the whole measurement

5

contrast ratio of the measurement should be corrected by
applying 1/(1 − 2Teﬀb), where b is mean count rate.

We are expecting that our correction method can be
applicable to measure the second order correlation func-
tion of the beating signal, which shows sinusoidal mod-
ulation in its intensity and includes the information on
the lineshape of the light source.

FIG. 5: Numerical simulation results for a partial dead time
eﬀect. Dead time of 50ns and probability to lose photon of
0.5 was assumed.
(a)A second order correlation function.
(b)Correction factors as a function of mean count rate of in-
coming photons. solid line is ﬁtted curve.

system whereas the area of central dip was 50ns which
is originated from detector dead time eﬀect. Since the
reduction rate of the contrast is proportional to the ef-
fective dead time, we can expect that the reduction rate
measured at the second order correlation function mea-
surement will be 1.6 times larger than that expected from
the intensity measurement and this is almost same as ob-
served result 1.54 which shows only 4% of diﬀerence.

Finally, if we are trying to measure the second order
correlation function for a non-stationary light source, we
should measure the dead time distribution and determine
an eﬀective dead time by measuring second order corre-
lation function using single detector conﬁguration. The

IV. CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we developed high-throughput second
order correlation measurement system based on a “Multi-
Start Multi-Stop Time-to-Digital Converter” using com-
mercially available counter/timing board, which is more
eﬃcient than conventional method by count rate times
correlation time of the light source. It has been believed
that two-detector conﬁguration can remove the eﬀect of
dead time of the measurement system. we proved that
it cannot perfectly eliminate dead time eﬀects in case of
non-stationary light sources. We suggested a reasonable
way of calibrating the measurement by introducing an ef-
fective dead time of the measurement system, which can
be experimentally determined from the single-detector
correlation measurement.

This work was supported by NSF grant no. 9876974-
PHY and by Korea Research Foundation Grant(KRF-
2002-070-C00044).

[1] E. Hanbury Brown and R. Q. Twiss, Nature 177, 27

[2] B. L. Morgan, L. Mandel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 16, 1012

[3] H. Z. Cummins and H. L. Swinney, p.133 in Progress
in Optics, Vol. 8, ed. E. Wolf (North-Holland, Amster-
dam)(1970)

[4] F. T. Arecchi, E. Gatti and A. Sona, Phys. Lett. 20, 27

(1957)

(1966)

(1966)

[10] F. Davidson, Phys. Rev. 185 446 (1969)
[11] H. Z. Cummins and E. R. Pike, Photon Correlation
Spectroscopy and Velocimetry, Plenum Press, New York
(1977)

[12] H. L. Swinney, Physica D 7 3 (1983)
[13] E. R. Pike, in Coherence, Cooperation and Fluctuations,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge p. 293 (1986)

[14] L. Mandel, Opt. Lett. 4, 205 (1979).
[15] K. An, J. J. Childs, R. R. Dasari, and M. S. Feld, Phys.

[5] H. J. Kimble, M. Dagenais, and L. Mandel, Phys. Rev.

Rev. Lett. 73, 3375(1994).

Lett. 39, 691 (1977).

[6] R. Short and L. Mandel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51,384 (1983).
[7] D. B. Scarl, Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 663 (1966)
[8] D. T. Phillips, H. Kleiman and S. P. Davis, Phys. Rev.

[16] W. Choi et al., “Observation of noncalssical pho-
ton statistics in the cavity-QED microlaser”, arXiv:
quant-ph/0411147 (2004).

[17] D. Meschede and H. Walther, and G. Muller, Phys. Rev.

153 113 (1967)

Lett. 54, 551(1985).

[9] F. Davidson and L. Mandel, J. Appl. Phys. 39 62 (1968)

