4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
4
1
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The aerogel threshold Cherenkov detector for the High
Momentum Spectrometer in Hall C at Jeﬀerson Lab

R.Asaturyana, R.Entb, H.Fenkerb, D. Gaskellb, G.M. Huberc, M.Jonesb, D. Mackb,
H.Mkrtchyana, B.Metzgerb, N. Novikoﬀd, V.Tadevosyana, W.Vulcanb, S.Woodb
a. Yerevan Physics Institute, Yerevan 375036, Armenia

b. Thomas Jeﬀerson National Accelerator Facility, Newport News, Virginia 23606 USA

c. Department of Physics, University of Regina, Regina, SK,S4S 0A2, Canada

d. Houston Baptist University,Houston,Texas 77074

Abstract

We describe a new aerogel threshold Cherenkov detector installed in the HMS spectrometer
in Hall C at Jeﬀerson Lab. The Hall C experimental program in 2003 required an improved par-
ticle identiﬁcation system for better identiﬁcation of π/K/p, which was achieved by installing
an additional threshold Cherenkov counter. Two types of aerogel with n = 1.03 and n = 1.015
allow one to reach ∼ 10−3 proton and 10−2 kaon rejection in the 1-5 GeV /c momentum range
with pion detection eﬃciency better than 99% (97%). The detector response shows no signif-
icant position dependence due to a diﬀuse light collection technique. The diﬀusion box was
equipped with 16 Photonis XP4572 PMT’s. The mean number of photoelectrons in saturation
was ∼16 and ∼8, respectively. Moderate particle identiﬁcation is feasible near threshold.

1

Introduction

The Aerogel detector described in this paper was designed and built for experiments carried out in
Hall C at Jeﬀerson Laboratory.

A number of (e, e′h) experiments,where a scattered electron is measured in coincidence with
a hadron,have been performed in Hall C since 1995. The Hall C base experimental equipment
consists of two magnetic spectrometers, the High Momentum Spectrometer (HMS) and the Short
Orbit Spectrometer (SOS) [1]. Depending on the speciﬁc requirements of experiments, one can
detect either negatively-charged (mostly electrons) or positively-charged particles, by choosing the
proper polarity of the magnetic ﬁeld and the trigger conﬁguration.

The HMS is designed to detect secondary products of reactions in the momentum range 0.5GeV /c
to 7.3 GeV /c, while the SOS momentum extends only up to
1.7 GeV /c . Both spectrometers are
equipped with a pair of drift chambers and X - Y timing scintillator hodoscope planes for trigger
formation.

∼

For particle identiﬁcation (PID) a combination of Time-of-Flight (TOF), threshold gas Cherenkov
counter and segmented lead-glass electromagnetic calo-rimeter (EC) is used. In addition, for co-
incidence measurements, use of the coincidence time diﬀerence between scattered electrons and
secondary hadrons is very eﬃcient. But even with perfectly tuned hodoscope arrays and calibrated

1

∼

detectors, in such a conﬁguration π/K/p separation dramatically deteriorates with momentum as
1/P 2. While TOF is very eﬀective at low momentum, it becomes in practice useless above
∆ t
3 GeV /c. In addition, in this range hadrons tend to become above the detection threshold
P
in gas Cherenkov detectors, making π/K/p separation more diﬃcult. Thus, the HMS PID system
needed to be augmented for good hadron identiﬁcation above 3 GeV /c.

∼

A series of Hall C experiments ran in the Summer of 2003 that required such an improvement of
the HMS PID system. The purpose of the ”Baryon Resonance Electroproduction at High Momen-
tum Transfer” [2] experiment was to measure inelastic nucleon transition amplitudes to the ∆(1232)
and S11(1536) baryon resonances via the p(e, e′p)πo and p(e, e′p)η reactions, respectively, at the
previously inaccessible at JLab momentum of transfer Q2 = 7.5 (GeV /c)2. The scattered electrons
were detected in the SOS in coincidence with recoil protons of up to
5 GeV /c momentum in
the HMS. In this experiment it was important to suppress high-momentum pions with respect to
protons.

∼

A second experiment, termed “The Charged Pion Form Factor”, measured the pion form factor
at Q2 = 1.6 and 2.5(GeV /c)2 [3]. In this experiment one detected pions and electrons in coincidence
π− + p (in order to estimate contributions from
from the reactions γv + p
→
background physics processes). Here, the HMS was set up for pion detection. At the highest
3.4 GeV /c, the ratio of π+ to protons was expected
momentum setting of this experiment, PHMS
to be

1 and good proton rejection became important.

π+ + n and γv + n

→

∼

Finally, the experiment “Duality in Meson Electroproduction” checked the low-energy cross-
section factorization and the quark-hadron duality phenomenon in semi-inclusive electroproduction
of pions (kaons) [4]. Here, it was important to identify kaons and pions at a momentum PHMS
3 GeV /c.

≥

The general requirement for these three experiments was a high detection eﬃciency for pions in
the HMS and the capability to separate protons from pions in the ﬁrst two cases, and pions from
kaons in the third case.

∼

The experiments were planned to run at an electron beam intensity up to 90 µA, hitting a liquid

hydrogen (or deuterium) target with length of 4 cm, rendering rates as high as 1 MHz.

To keep the HMS standard detector conﬁguration intact and not compromise HMS performance,

the new PID detector should be designed with the following restrictions:

- have large sensitive area to match HMS spectrometer acceptance, with an eﬀective area of

1

∼

m2;

- be slim to ﬁt in 25 cm slot in-between the second drift chamber and ﬁrst hodoscope, the only

readily available space in HMS detector stack;

- have minimum material on the particle path to keep the amount of multiple scattering and

δ-electrons small;

- have reasonable time resolution and high rate capability.

To obtain a proton threshold momentum of 3-4.6 GeV/c, for Cherenkov radiation, a medium
with index of refraction n = 1.02-1.06 is needed. Aerogel is the best candidate for this purpose.
For this reason two types of aerogel material with diﬀerent indices of refraction were used.

Many diﬀerent types of Aerogel detectors have been used in physics experiments, but few of
them cover the wide acceptance in high intensity beam experiments we were looking for. Therefore
we designed a new device.

2

2 Choice of Aerogel radiators

The operation of Cherenkov counters is governed by the basic relation [5] which connects the
emission angle θ of Cherenkov photons, the velocity v=βc of a charged particle and the index of
refraction n of the radiator medium. The minimum momentum at which a particle of mass M will
exceed the phase velocity of light in the medium is simply given by

Pmin

c =

·

M
·
√n2

c2

1

−

where c is a speed of the light in vacuum. The number of photons produced by a Z=1 particle per
unit track length in a wavelength region between λ1 and λ2 depends on the velocity of the particle
and the refractive index n(λ) of the radiator:

dN
dl

= 2πα

1
(cid:18)

−

n2(λ)β2 (cid:19) (cid:18)

1

1
λ1 −

1
λ2 (cid:19)

sin2θ, giving a total of N detected photons for a

The number of Cherenkov photons scales as L
radiator of length L:

·
N = N0L sin2 θ,

where

N0 = 2πα

1
λ1 −

1
λ2 (cid:19)

,

(cid:18)

and α - is the ﬁne structure constant.

For a diﬀuse light box having reﬂectivity M and photodetectors which cover an aerial fraction

ǫ of the surface, the average number of detected photoelectrons is

Ne = N0L

1
(cid:18)

−

1
β2n2 (cid:19)

ǫ
M (1

.

ǫ)

−

1

−

Aerogel is a unique material that can have a refractive index between those typical for gases
and liquids (as small as n = 1.008 and as high as n = 1.094) [6]. It is a transparent, highly porous
n(SiO2)+2n(H2O) material with a density ranging from ρ=0.04 to 0.20 g/cm3. The refractive index
for the various density aerogel materials is roughly given by

n

1 = (0.210

0.001)

ρ.

±
The optical properties of aerogel can be characterized by an absorption length Λa and a scat-
tering length Λs. A typical value of the scattering length, at a wavelength λ of 400 nm, is Λs
2
∼
cm. The absorption length Λa increases almost linearly in the interval 200-300 nm, and remains
nearly constant above that. At a wavelength λ

20 cm [7].

400 nm, Λa

−

·

Taking into account above mentioned requirements of the Hall C experiments, we chose two

∼

∼

diﬀerent aerogel materials with an index of refraction of n = 1.030 and 1.015, respectively.

The threshold momenta (in GeV/c) for the particles under consideration in these two types of

aerogel materials are presented in the following table:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

3

46
Figure 1: Particle separation using Aerogel Cherenkov of diﬀerent index of refraction (N0
calculated according to [8]). Electrons (positrons) are above threshold over essentially the full
momentum range.

∼

Type of particle Pth in n=1.030 Pth in n=1.015
0.428
0.565
2.000
3.802

0.608
0.803
2.840
5.379

µ
π
K
P

Table 1. The threshold momenta (Pth in GeV/c) for the diﬀerent particles in two type of aerogel.
In Fig. 1 the expected yields in terms of the number of photoelectrons are given for both types

∼

of aerogel (for a thickness

9 cm and a ﬁgure of merit N0

46), as calculated according to [8].

It can be seen that the n = 1.03 aerogel will allow for good pion/proton separation up to 4 GeV/c,
while the n = 1.015 aerogel material can be used for pion/kaon separation in the momentum range
1-3 GeV/c, and for pion/proton separation up to 6 GeV/c.

Note that the number of photoelectrons (Npe ) produced just above the proton (kaon) threshold
is much lower for protons (kaons) than for pions, which allows for limited particle identiﬁcation just

∼

4

above threshold by counting Npes.

To obtain the required total thickness and eﬀective area of most aerogel detectors, they need
to be comprised of a large number of the typically smaller-size tiles. Thus, the uniformity of the
optical quality and the tolerance from tile to tile becomes important.

Aerogels commercially available from Matsushita Electric Works Ltd (Japan) [9] are highly
transparent and have a light output which is almost linear with the radiator thickness. They are
known to be of high quality. For example, the detailed study of about 1000 tiles of the Matsushita
aerogel produced for the HERMES experiment [7] shows that their mean refractive indexes are in
the n = 1.0303

0.0010 range, with only small variation from tile to tile.

The improved light transmittance and hydrophobicity of this “new” aerogel material is due
to a new production technique [7, 10], and makes it preferable to the early hydrophilic aerogel
materials that needed baking and storage in a dry nitrogen atmosphere to maintain the initial good
transmittance of the radiator [11].

Although the light transmittance of aerogel is relatively small, the light absorption is also rather
small [7]. Hence, a large number of photons undergo multiple scattering and lose directionality but
do eventually reach a photo detector. Diﬀuse light collection by means of highly reﬂective walls,
also known as a “diﬀusion box”, seems a good choice.

±

3 The Aerogel detector

3.1 Physical design

There are diﬀerent schemes for collecting Cherenkov light. In our detector we make use of a diﬀusion
box. The photon detection probability in the case of a diﬀusion box is directly proportional to the
fraction of detector surface covered by PMTs.An increase in the area covered by PMTs results in an
increase of the number of photons detected. As a result, and as shown by Monte Carlo calculations,
we used 16 PMTs in the counter. The aerogel detector schematic design is shown in Fig. 2. It is a
sandwich of an aerogel tray and a diﬀusion light box with PMTs. This allows for simple detector
70 cm2. Eight PMTs
assembly and easy replacement of the aerogel stack. The active area is 120
are mounted on both “long” sides of the box. The total area covered by the photo-cathode windows
of these PMTs amounts to
8% of the inner surface of the counter. Of course, it is important to
have high reﬂectivity for the inner walls of the diﬀusion box. To accomplish this, the inner walls
of the diﬀusion box were covered with millipore paper “Membrane GSWP-0010” (reﬂectivity 96%)
[12].

×

∼

A Monte Carlo simulation for the HMS aerogel detector was done using a technique to sim-
ulate diﬀusely reﬂective aerogel Cherenkov detectors [8]. The detector active area was taken as
24.5 cm3 and 5 inch PMTs with a 20% quantum eﬃciency were used as starting point.
120
Several options were considered for the detector:

70

×

×

- readout with PMTs from one and two sides of the diﬀusion box;

- the number (5 or 8) of PMTs at each side;

- two diﬀerent thicknesses of aerogel, 5 and 9 cm, respectively.

As anticipated, the best uniformity of the summed Npe signal (ﬂat within

10%) was found for
the two-side readout. The mean number of photoelectrons for 5 cm thickness aerogel of n = 1.030

∼

5

6.6 for 10 PMT readout and

was predicted to be
8.3 when 16 PMTs (8 PMT’s from each side)
were used. As a result of the high optical quality of the aerogel material under consideration the
number of photoelectrons increased roughly linearly with the aerogel thickness. The simulated
mean number of photoelectrons for the same type of aerogel of 9 cm thickness was predicted to be

∼

∼

12.1 for the 10 PMT readout case and

14.8 for the 16 PMT case.

∼

∼

∼

We estimated that the use of a detector with n = 1.030 aerogel material of 9 cm thickness
2 mm total Al thickness for entrance and exit windows would double the number of
4

2% for HMS detector stack at momentum PHMS

and with a
δ- electron produced, which could reach
GeV/c.

∼

≥

∼

We used 16 ten-stage Photonis XP4572B PMTs of 5 inch diameter, with a bialkali photo-cathode
107. These PMTs have a quantum eﬃciency
and a maximum gain of
20% in the wavelength
350-450 nm, which well matches the transmitted radiation spectrum of aerogel. Due
range λ
to an enhanced photoelectron collection eﬃciency the eﬀective number of photoelectrons can be
increased by a factor of

2 relative to more commonly used PMTs such as the Burle 8854 [14].

∼

∼

∼

The close spacing of the metal shields (to improve the light collection eﬃciency) required us
to keep the cathode at ground potential, while positive high voltage was applied to the anode
of the PMT to reduce the noise level. To compensate for the low gain of the chosen PMT, we
modiﬁed their High Voltage (HV) bases by inserting an ampliﬁer in the HV dividers as a sequential
component after the last resistor. The fast ampliﬁer was designed [15] for standby operation at
10. It allows us to operate the
relatively low currents with a signal charge ampliﬁcation factor of
PMTs at lower high voltages, hence prolonging their lifetimes.

∼

Two identical boxes were fabricated for the aerogel trays, one each for the n = 1.030 and
n = 1.015 materials. Both match the common diﬀusion box and can be easily substituted for each
other.

10 mm3 tiles.

×

110

110

Matsushita produces aerogel in the form of

In order to stack
∼
the material, each tile dimension was ﬁrst measured and the diﬀerences in block sizes determined.
Taking into account the tolerances on the actual aerogel material thickness inside the diﬀusion
boxes, the tiles were layered in 9 stacks in the case of n = 1.030, and 8 stacks in the case of
n = 1.015. In both cases the total thickness of aerogel radiator was 9 cm, using over
650 tiles
for each box. To prevent any stress on the aerogel material from the front side of the detector, the
aerogel tiles were stacked in a thin (
5mm) honeycomb sheet and housed in a tray of dimensions
67 cm2. The layers were shifted relative to each other by about 2-3 cm to prevent any dead
117
zones inside the aerogel volume.

×

∼

×

∼

The stacks of aerogel tiles are kept in position by means of a mesh of thin (100 µm) stainless

steel wire.

4 Calibration of the photo multiplier tubes

The calibration of the 16 PMTs consists of evaluating the average number of detected photoelectrons
and distributing them eﬃciently over the aerogel detector. The preliminary calibration of each PMT
was performed by measuring the PMT response to a pulsed light source. The light intensity from
the Light Emitting Diode (LED) used was controlled by adjustment of the height and width of the
applied pulses. For each PMT the Single Photo-Electron peak position and its width were found
versus the applied high voltage. This allowed us to roughly equalize the response functions for all
PMTs, and to determine their gains at a given high voltage.

6

Figure 2: Schematic drawing of the Aerogel detector.

7

A preliminary test of the aerogel detector was performed with cosmic rays. The detector was
positioned horizontally with the diﬀusion box on top. A pair of scintillators sandwiched the aerogel
detector, with a third one separated by a layer of lead bricks. This lead absorber was used to
select the energy of cosmic muons (the threshold momentum of muons ﬁring the n = 1.030 aerogel
detector is
430 MeV/c). The DAQ system was a simpliﬁed version of the standard DAQ system
of Hall C [16].The cosmic test was used to roughly adjust the PMT high voltages and estimate the
number of photoelectrons from cosmic muons. Both a typical pulse height spectrum summed over
the 16 tubes, and the single photo-electron positions (in ADC channels) for all the tubes after gain
matching, are presented in Fig. 3.

∼

The ability of the aerogel Cherenkov detector to distinguish between cosmic muons above and
below detection threshold is illustrated in Fig. 4, where the pulse height spectrum summed over the
16 PMTs is shown for several thicknesses of the lead absorber. The use of the lead absorber between
the second and third trigger counters clearly allows the low-energy part of the muon spectrum to
be cut oﬀ. This is reﬂected in the ﬁgure as the diminishing of the pedestal events with the increase
of the lead absorber thickness.

5 Experimental results with beam

The aerogel detector was installed and integrated into the Hall C data acquisition system, and
subsequently successfully used in the Hall C experimental program of 2003. In this section we will
show the results obtained with the aerogel detector, for both indices of refraction, with beam.
4
Fig. 5 shows typical TDC and ADC raw spectra for one of the aerogel PMTs. Although a
∼
ns (FWHM) time resolution is not very good (it is mainly due to the large spread in light paths
through the diﬀusion box), information from the TDC was still useful in the oﬀ-line analysis for
additional rejection of accidental events in the summed aerogel signal at high rates. One can see a
clean separation of the single photo-electron peak from pedestals in the ADC spectrum. The two
photo-electron peak is also, but barely, distinguishable. A smooth ﬁt to such ADC spectra provides
pedestal and single photo-electron peak positions for each PMT. These are then used for detector
calibration purposes.

In Fig. 6 the distribution of the total number of photo-electrons Npe (for all PMTs summed)
for the aerogel detector with n = 1.015 (top) and n = 1.030 (bottom), respectively, are shown for
protons and pions at 3.1 GeV/c. The signal from the pions is nearly in saturation, while the signal
from protons at this momentum is still below detection threshold. The mean values of the number
of photo-electrons (in saturation) are
8 for the n = 1.015 aerogels,
respectively.

16 for the n = 1.030 and

∼

∼

The experimental data over a wide range of momenta, from 0.5 GeV/c to 4 GeV/c, for diﬀerent
types of particles show that the dependence of Npe upon momentum has the expected threshold
behavior, and that the number of photo-electrons indeed saturates at high momentum (see Fig. 7).
When the detector is used in threshold mode, or when one would like to estimate the threshold
velocity of a particle in the given aerogel (or, alternatively, the index of refraction of the material),
0.6 photo-
it is important to know the response for particles below the Cherenkov threshold. The
electron background (for the 16 PMTs summed) shown in Fig. 7 may come from the following
sources [13]:

∼

- δ-electrons with momentum above detection threshold;

- accidental events not rejected by the trigger;

8

Figure 3: The pulse height distribution of the total sum of the 16 PMTs (top) and the mean value
of the single photo-electron signal for each PMT (bottom),from the cosmic test

9

Figure 4: The cosmic test results for the aerogel detector with n = 1.030. The summed pulse height
spectrum is shown for various thicknesses of the lead absorber used: a) no absorber, b) 20cm lead
(µ momentum >300 MeV/c), c) 40 cm lead (µ momentum Pµ >590 MeV/c).

10

Figure 5: Typical TDC (top) and ADC (bottom) spectra of an Aerogel detector PMT. The smooth
lines are Gaussian (TDC) and spline (ADC) ﬁts to the histograms shown. The triangles on the
bottom of the ADC spectrum indicate the pedestal and single photo-electron peak positions.

11

Figure 6: The total number of photo-electrons for protons (hatched) and pions at PHMS = 3.1
GeV/c in aerogel with index of refraction of a) n = 1.015 and b) n = 1.030.

12

Figure 7: The momentum dependence of Npe for both types of aerogel material used and for diﬀerent
particles. Both the experimental data and a ﬁts to them are shown, compare to Fig. 1
.

- particles causing Cherenkov light or scintillation in the millipore paper or the air in the

diﬀusion box.

After subtraction of this background, one can evaluate the index of refraction of the used aerogel
material from a ﬁt to the data shown in Fig. 7. The calculated and real values of index of refraction
for both aerogels match well, although better in the case of the aerogel with n = 1.030.

From these Npe data the detector eﬃciency versus momentum can be determined. This results
in an eﬃciency for pion detection in the aerogel with n = 1.030 of more than 99%, in the 1-4 GeV/c
4). For the case of the aerogel material with n = 1.015, the pion detection
momentum range (Npe
eﬃciency is more than 97%, assuming a cut level of Npe
2, in a 1.2-4 GeV/c momentum range
(see Fig. 8).

∼

≥

One of the most important features of any detector is the near independence of its response
function to position.As shown in Figs. 9 , 10 and 11, the total sum of photo-electrons detected
by the aerogel detector has a near ﬂat distribution both in the vertical (X) and horizontal (Y)
direction . Not surprisingly, close to the PMTs some enhancement can be seen in the number
of photo-electrons detected. Similarly, in Fig. 12 the response function versus the spectrometer
10%) is shown. There is no signiﬁcant dependence over the full
∆p/p
fractional momentum (
|

| ≤

13

Figure 8: The particle detection eﬃciency curves for diﬀerent aerogels at diﬀerent levels of cuts.

14

Figure 9: The Npe two dimentional distribution on the aerogel detector surface for the (n = 1.030)
aerogel for 3.336 GeV/c pions.

momentum acceptance of the HMS.

Note that for these last cases a cut of Npe > 4 was used to provide more than 99% detection
eﬃciency for the (n = 1.030) aerogel detector. The aerogel material with index of refraction
(n = 1.015) shows a similar behavior, but with less detection eﬃciency (97% for a Npe > 2 cut
condition).

The long-term stability of the HMS aerogel detector was tested during experimental runs in Hall
C over a 6-month period. The mean number of photo-electrons for the summed detector signals
remained stable to within

2%, with a typical particle rate of

500-600 kHz.

Our studies show that, for an aerogel detector with (n = 1.015) where kaons cross detection
threshold at a momentum of 2.8 GeV/c, it is more eﬃcient to use the aerogel detector to reject
kaons than to select them. The number of photo-electrons generated by these kaons is about 4, for
2 rejects
a momentum up to 4 GeV/c, as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 7. Applying a cut in Npe of
6% of kaons at

95% of kaons at a momentum P = 3.7 GeV/c, while the same cut rejects only

∼

∼

∼

∼
a momentum of 2.4 GeV/c (below threshold).

∼

6 Conclusions

The particle identiﬁcation properties of the HMS spectrometer in Hall C at Jeﬀerson Lab have been
signiﬁcantly improved by adding a ﬂexible aerogel threshold Cherenkov detector. The detector
consists of an aerogel material followed by a light diﬀusion box. The radiator tray can easily be
swapped for an alternate one with aerogel material with diﬀerent index of refraction. The addition

15

Figure 10: The Npe distribution and pion detection eﬃciency (Pπ= 3.2 GeV/c) versus the vertical
X-coordinate for the (n = 1.030) aerogel detector.

16

Figure 11: The Npe distribution and pion detection eﬃciency (Pπ= 3.2 GeV/c) versus the horizontal
Y-coordinate for the (n = 1.030) aerogel detector. The two sets of PMTs are located at Y=
25
cm.

±

17

Figure 12: The Npe distribution and pion detection eﬃciency versus the HMS fractional momentum
for the (n = 1.030) aerogel detector.

18

·

−

1.1

of this detector enhanced the capabilities of the spectrometer in distinguishing protons from pions
10−3 (for aerogel with n = 1.030) with a pion detection eﬃciency better
on the level of 2.8
than 99% in the 1-4 GeV/c momentum range. It allowed the distinction of kaons from pions on
the level of 10−2, for aerogel with n = 1.015, with a pion detection eﬃciency better than 97% in
a 1.2-4 GeV/c momentum range. The mean numbers of detected photo-electrons are
8
for the n = 1.030 and n = 1.015 aerogel material, respectively. The detector response is uniform
to within
10% over the full eﬀective area. The experimental results are in good agreement with
expected values from simulations using a standard Monte Carlo program for aerogel detectors [8].
The number of fake photo-electrons for particles below detection threshold reaches
0.6, which may
be a result of δ-electrons,accidental events or scintilations of particles traversing the detector.

16 and

∼

∼

∼

∼

We wish to thank many people who assisted and contributed in the design, construction and
testing of this detector. We are particularly indebted to R. Carlini for support to construct such
a detector, D. Higinbotham for assistance and providing access to his Monte Carlo simulation
program for Aerogel detectors, B. Wojtsekhowski for interest and many useful discussions, C. Zorn
for valuable contributions to the systematic tests of the PMTs, V. Popov for the development of
the PMT ampliﬁer and the installation of these in the HV bases, W. Kellner and his group for their
technical expertise and help with the installation of the aerogel detector and the aerogel radiator
replacement in Hall C. Lastly, many thanks to J. Beaufait for continuous help during all stages of
the construction and the preliminary testing.

The Southeastern Universities Research Association (SURA) operates the Thomas Jeﬀerson
National Accelerator Facility for the United States Department of Energy under contract DE-
AC05-84ER40150.

References

ginia, April 13,. 1990

spokespersons

[1] Conceptual Design Report - Basic Experimental Equipment, CEBAF,. Newport News, Vir-

[2] TJNAF Experiment E01-002, P. Bosted, V. Frolov, M. Jones, V. Koubarovski and P. Stoler

[3] TJNAF Experiment E01-104, H. Blok, G. Huber, D. Mack spokespersons

[4] TJNAF Experiment E00-108, R. Ent, H. Mkrtchyan, G. Niculescu spokespersons

[5] D. E. Groom et al., Eur. Phys.J. C 3, (1998) 150

[6] H. Yokogawa and M. Yokoyama, Hydrophobic Silica aerogels. Jurnal of Non-Crystalline Solids,

186 (1995)

[7] E. Aschenauer, N. Bianchi, G. Capitani et al., Nucl. Inst. and Meth. A 440 (2000) 338

[8] D.Higinbotham, Nucl. Inst. and Meth. A 414(1998) 332

[9] Matsushita Electric Works, 1048 Kadoma, Kadoma-shi, Osaka 571, Japan

[10] I. Adachi et.al., Nucl. Inst. and Meth. A 355 (1995) 390

[11] R. Mohring, Ph.D. Thesis. University of Maryland, 1999; and http://www.jlab.org/Hall-C

19

[12] Millipore Corporation, 80 Ashly Road, Bedford, MA 01730. http://www.millipore.com/.

[13] D. Barancourt et.al., Nucl. Inst.and Meth. A 465 (2001) 306, and Y. Asaoka et.al., Nucl.

Inst.and Meth. A 416 (1998) 236

[14] B.Wojtsekhowski, C.Zorn and S.Flyckt, Evaluation of new 5 inch PMT for use in threshold
Cherenkov detectors with aerogel radiator. Transactions of the 2000 IEEE Nuclear Science
Symposium, Lyons, France, Oct.15-20 (2000) pp 7-63 - 7-65 .

[15] V.Popov, JLab Detector Group Internal Reports and private communication.

[16] Hall C Analysis Documentation. http://www.jlab.org/Hall-C

20

