4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
0
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

CMS Inner Tracker Detector Modules

Giacomo Sguazzoni a,1

aUniversit`a degli Studi e I.N.F.N., Pisa

Abstract

The production of silicon detector modules that will instrument the CMS Inner
Tracker has nowadays reached 1300 units out of the approximately 3700 needed in
total, with an overall yield close to 96%. A description of the module design, the
assembly procedures and the qualiﬁcation tests is given. The results of the quality
assurance are presented and the experience gained is discussed.

1 Introduction

The CMS Tracker is a cylindrical device of 5.4m in length and 2.4m in di-
ameter immersed in a 4 Tesla solenoidal magnetic ﬁeld. The innermost region
(r < 15cm) is occupied by a pixel detector, whereas the remaining volume is
instrumented by using silicon microstrip modules organized in 10 cylindrical
layers and 12 disks as sketched in Fig. 1, corresponding to more than 200m2 of
active surface. A detailed description of the CMS Silicon Strip Tracker (SST)
can be found elsewhere (1). The detector modules described in this paper will
instrument the region comprised between ∼ 20cm and ∼ 55cm in radius and
±110cm in z, i.e. the innermost four cylindrical layers, known as Tracker Inner
Barrel (TIB), and the two groups of three disks at |z| between ∼ 70cm and
∼ 110cm, the Tracker Inner Disks (TID), each organized in three concentric
rings.

Single-sided and double-sided layers can be distinguished in Fig. 1. Single-
sided layers are made of “rφ” modules, whose readout strips lay along the z
direction for the barrel and along the radial direction for the disks, providing a
measurement of the rφ coordinate. The innermost TIB/TID layers are instead
double-sided, i.e. equipped with “double-sided” sandwiches capable of a space
point measurement and obtained by coupling back-to-back a rφ module and a

1 On behalf of the CMS TIB/TID consortium.

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

11 August 2013

Fig. 1. rz cut through one quarter of the SST. The black dot shows the collision
point, the numbers on the top and on the right show the pseudorapidity coverage
of the tracker. Blue/darker lines represents double-sided layers.

special “stereo” module with the strips tilted by 100 mrad. The TIB requires
2724 modules, 1536 of which assembled into 768 double-sided sandwiches;
the TID requires 816 modules, 576 of which assembled into 288 double-sided
sandwiches. In total 3540 modules must be produced, plus ∼ 5% of spares.

The TIB/TID modules and their components share the same basic structure
and design with all other SST modules: as shown in Fig. 2(a), the module
consists of a carbon ﬁbre frame that supports the silicon detector and the
readout electronics, hosted on a hybrid. The picture of a module is shown in
Fig. 2(b).

All TIB/TID silicon detectors are radiation hard 320µm thick sensors (2) made
by Hamamatsu Photonics on 6” wafer lines. Barrel sensors are (120 × 62)mm2
with 768 strips at 80µm in pitch for the two innermost layers, and with 512
strips at 120µm in pitch for the outermost layers. Disk detectors have a wedge
shaped geometry with several diﬀerent dimensions and pitches depending on
the ring.

The front-end hybrid is made of a kapton circuit (that also integrates the
connection tail) laminated onto a ceramic rigidiﬁer. It hosts four or six APV25,
the SST front-end chips (3), the additional ASICs (APVMUX, PLL and DCU)
and the pitch adapter that allows to match the pitch of the APV25 input pads

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. (a) Sketch of a TIB barrel module with the various components; (b) picture
of a TIB barrel module.

2

to the pitch of the sensor readout pads.

2 Module assembly

Building a high precision silicon tracker device requires that the accuracy
and the reproducibility of the mechanical assembly of its sub-components lay
within few tens of microns, i.e. a ﬁgure comparable with the point resolu-
tion. This tight requirement is met in our case by means of semi-automatic
assembly gantries that have been designed and commissioned for this purpose
within the SST community (4). The “gantry” is a robot based on a micro-
metric 3D movement that ﬁrst dispenses the glue on the carbon ﬁbre frame
and then places the components (silicon sensors and front-end hybrid) on it.
The accuracy is guaranteed by the use of pattern recognition techniques that
exploit the presence of ﬁducial marks on each component. At the end of every
operation the gantry itself is able to perform a survey measurement. Typical
RMS spread of the relative linear oﬀset between pieces is below ∼ 8µm, to be
compared with acceptance cuts of few tens of microns; the RMS spread of the
angular relative oﬀset is ∼ 4 × 10−3 deg, with an acceptance cut of 10−2 deg.
Out of more than 1500 modules assembled at the gantries, less than 1% are
rejected because of assembly precision being out of speciﬁcations.

The connections between the silicon strip sensor readout pads and the corre-
sponding pitch adapter lines are made by using wire micro-bonding machines.
The bonding of the innermost layer modules with 80µm pitch is particularly
critical, requiring the bonds to be organized in two overlapping rows between
staggered pads. Bias connections for the silicon sensor are also made by three
groups of micro-bonds, one on the silicon sensor back and two on the bias
ring on the front. Overall, the TIB/TID project requires more that 2M bonds.
Such huge numbers require the deployment of state-of-the-art micro-bonding
techniques, but this has been certainly achieved since all bonding centers are
performing beyond the speciﬁcations: the quality control procedure, consisting
of pull tests on test bonds (and also on real bonds on a sample basis), have
measured an average pull force exceeding 8g, well above the 5g required. More
than 0.65M bonds have already been done up to now, with less than 0.01% of
unrepairable failures.

3 Quality control tests

The quality assurance procedure for fully assembled modules consists of two
complementary tests. The “module full test” deﬁnes the module grading by
tagging major functional problems and defective channels; it follows almost

3

]

A
o
r
c
m

i

[
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
C

10

1

-110

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

Voltage [V]

Fig. 3. Sensor currents vs. bias voltage curves for ∼ 1000 TIB modules. Dot-line
curves exceed the 10µA acceptance cut at < 450V bias voltage.

immediately the assembly and bonding phases for a fast and eﬀective feedback
on possible upstream problems. The “long term test” is performed within a
climatic chamber and uses a DAQ system similar to the ﬁnal one; it is intended
to study possible thermally induced mechanical stresses and module infant
mortality.

The “module full test” is performed by using a light, compact, standalone and
user-friendly test system, known as ARC (5). The test consists of the following
measurements: sensor I-V curve up to 450V; pedestal, noise and pulseshape
runs; shorted neighbouring channel detection by means of cross-talk; open
channel detection by means of LED illumination test, and pinhole detection
by means of light-induced sensor leakage current. A “open” is a channel not
connected to the corresponding sensor readout strip, whereas “pinhole” is
jargon for a short-circuited strip coupling capacitor. Shorts and pinholes cause
the lost of the aﬀected channels and, more dangerously, can prevent an entire
readout chip from functioning properly. The standard procedure requires these
channels to be disconnected from the readout electronic once identiﬁed.

The current versus voltage (I-V) measurements on the silicon sensors show a
modest degradation with respect to bare sensor measurements. The I-V curves
of ∼ 1000 modules are shown in Fig. 3. The current distribution at 450V
shows a bulk around ∼ 200nA and only 24 out of more than 1300 modules
(∼ 1.8%) do not comply with the acceptance cut (I(450V)< 10µA). These
failures, concentrated in the early production, have been traced back to be
mainly due to a defective sensor manipulation tool causing scratches, as later
spotted by the detailed optical inspection that all modules also undergo.

A module is also classiﬁed as bad if the number of defective channels exceed
2% of the total. A channel or strip is considered bad if ﬂagged as dead, noisy,
shorted, open or pinhole. Only ∼ 0.8% of modules have been rejected for this

4

reason up to now: of over 640k strips only 1k bad channels have been identiﬁed
(∼ 0.15%), approximately half as noisy and half as opens (thus including also
unbonded pinholes and shorts).

The long term test is performed into a climatic chamber, that hosts up to 10
modules, and by which temperature and humidity are controlled. The test,
lasting days, is intended as a real module burn-in, and consists of the con-
tinuous readout of the modules during multiple thermal cycles between room
temperature and −20◦C to emulate the real operating conditions within CMS.
Over more than a thousand modules tested, only 11 (∼ 1%) have failed the
long term test. Among them, only one was lost for a suspected stress-induced
failure. The others showed DAQ errors that in all likelihood are not related
to the modules themselves. Most signiﬁcantly no new bad channel has been
found after the multiple thermal cycles.

All modules identiﬁed as bad, i.e. not complying with the tight quality re-
quirements at any point of the testing procedure, are now being collected in
a specialized diagnosis and repair center for further deep investigation and
possible recovery.

4 Conclusions

After one year of full activity, the TIB/TID community has reached ∼ 40%
of the total module production (1300 out of 3700 pieces). The overall yield is
stable, around 96%. No major sensor-related failures have been encountered
thanks to the excellent sensor quality and their eﬀective screening. The module
design has been demonstrated to be robust and the excellent yield proves that
the assembly, bonding and testing procedures are safe and reliable.

References

[1]

[2]
[3]

CMS Collaboration, CERN-LHCC/98-6 (1998); CMS Collaboration,
CERN-LHCC/2000-16 (2000).
J.L. Agram et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 517 (2004) 77.
L.L. Jones, APV25-S1 User Guide, Version 2.2, Rutherford Appleton
Laboratory, Oxfordshire.

[4] A. Honma, et al., CMS Note 2002/005.
[5] M. Axer et al., CMS Note 2001/046. (2004) 321.

5

