4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
5
0
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LAL 04-14
DAPNIA 04-78
May 2004

ION BACKFLOW IN THE MICROMEGAS
TPC FOR THE FUTURE LINEAR
COLLIDER

P. Colas a, I. Giomataris a, V. Lepeltier b,

aDAPNIA, CEA Saclay, 91191 Gif sur Yvette C´edex, France
bLAL, IN2P3 and Universit´e de Paris-Sud, 91898 Orsay C´edex, France

Abstract

We present ion backﬂow measurements in a Micromegas (MICRO-MEsh GASeous
detector) TPC device developed for the next high energy electron-positron linear
collider under study and a simple explanation for this backﬂow. A Micromegas
micro-mesh has the intrinsic property to naturally stop a large fraction of the sec-
ondary positive ions created in the avalanche. It is shown that under some workable
conditions on the pitch of the mesh and on the gas mixture, the ion feedback is equal
to the ﬁeld ratio (ratio of the drift electric ﬁeld to the ampliﬁcation ﬁeld). Measure-
ments with an intense X-ray source are in good agreement with calculations and
simulations. The conclusion is that in the electric ﬁeld conditions foreseen for the
Micromegas TPC (drift and ampliﬁcation ﬁelds respectively equal to 150-200 V/cm
and 50-80 kV/cm) the expected ion backﬂow will be of the order of 2 − 3 × 10−3.
In addition, measurements have been done in a 2T magnetic ﬁeld: as expected the
ion backﬂow is not altered by the magnetic ﬁeld.

1 The Micromegas TPC

In a TPC, especially in high background conditions, it is very important to
have a very limited ion backﬂow from the secondary ions produced in the
ampliﬁcation region to the drift volume, in order to avoid distortions of the
drift electric ﬁeld. The MWPC TPC’s (as ALEPH, DELPHI or STAR) are
equipped with a gating grid, where two consecutive wires are polarised at
opposite voltages, so creating a transverse ﬁeld stopping most of the secondary
ions before they reach the drift space.

For the physics to be studied on the next linear collider [1], it is proposed to
build a high performance large TPC, using instead of MWPC, new MPGD

(Micro-Pattern Gaseous Detector) readout. The Micromegas [2] (MICRO-
MEsh GASeous detector), under development for the future TPC [3][4] by
the Saclay-Orsay collaboration is a parallel plate device, simply composed of
a very thin (5 µm) metallic micro-mesh, with a pitch of 25 to 50 µm, set at
a small distance from the anode plane (50-100 µm). Primary electrons com-
ing from the drift space cross the micromesh, which is fully transparent, and
avalanche in the small gap, where a voltage of ∼300-500 V is applied between
the two electrodes (see ﬁgure 1).

MICROMEGAS

m
m
 
3

m

 m
0
0
1

Micromesh

Strips

e-

HV1

HV2

Particle

Drift electrode

Micromesh

Insulator

Pillar

strip

Fig. 1. Micromegas device

2 Theory and predictions

Micromegas has many advantages: among them, a fast signal, no ExB eﬀect,
a high gain, a good energy resolution; it has also the capability to naturally
stop most of the ions produced in the ampliﬁcation space. Due to the very
large ﬁeld ratio α between the multiplication and the drift regions (as high

2

as 400 or 500) the electric ﬁeld lines are very much compressed between the
two regions (”funnel” eﬀect). Following the Gauss theorem, the compression
factor of the ﬁeld lines is equal to the ﬁeld ratio α. But due to collisions in the
gas, electrons do not drift along the ﬁeld lines. They diﬀuse, especially also
in the multiplication space: the transverse extension σ (standard deviation)
of the avalanche due to diﬀusion is of the order of 10-15 µm, depending on
the gas mixture, the electric ﬁeld and the gap width; in ﬁgure 2 is shown a
simulation by GARFIELD of electron diﬀusion and multiplication in the drift
and the multiplication gaps.

Fig. 2. GARFIELD simulation of electron drift and multiplication in Micromegas

This electron cloud size is much larger than the size of the funnel end
(1-2 µm in radius in the TPC conditions).Conversely, ions, due to their high
mass, are not submitted to diﬀusion and drift along the ﬁeld lines. Assuming
that they are emitted with the same distribution as the avalanche, most of
them are naturally collected by the micro-mesh (see ﬁgure 3), and only the
fraction of ions created inside the small funnel will ﬂow back into the drift
volume.

Fig. 3. Field lines in Micromegas

3

Analytic calculations have been done assuming a bi-dimensional Gaussian dis-
tribution of the electron diﬀusion in the multiplication space. It is assumed
that ions are created from the anode plane, with the same Gaussian distribu-
tion (rms σ) as the avalanche. This is valid since the gain is generally large
enough (at least a few hundred), and most of the ions are emitted at a very
small distance (a few µm only) from the anode plane. Then ions are supposed
to drift along the ﬁeld lines without any diﬀusion. Ions created outside the
funnel will follow ﬁeld lines ending on the micro-mesh, and will be naturally
collected by it; a very small fraction, produced inside the thin funnel, will drift
along ﬁeld lines ﬂowing from the drift volume, and will feed it, before being
collected by the HV electrode of the TPC after a very long time (typically a
few hundred ms for a 2m drift length).

Following the previous assumptions, it is easy to compute the ion backﬂow
fraction β as a function of the ﬁeld ratio α. As expected the key parameter is
the relative value of the size of the ion cloud (σ) and the mesh pitch [1]. On
ﬁgure 4 is shown the product βα as a function of σ/l: if this parameter is small
(small diﬀusion and/or too small pitch mesh) ion feedback β is substantially
larger than the inverse of the ﬁeld ratio α; if σ/l is greater than 0.5, the optimal
is reached, with an ion feed back equal to 1/α.

Fig. 4. Computed value of α (ﬁeld ratio times ion feedback) as a function of σ/l
(transverse diﬀusion divided by mesh pitch)

This condition is easily reached: for most usual gas mixtures, the transverse
diﬀusion at high electric ﬁeld (40-70 kV/cm) is of the order of 120-150 µm×
cm−1 ie σ = 12-15 µm for a 100 µm ampliﬁcation gap. With a 500 lpi (lines
per inch) micromesh (50 µm pitch), σ/l is equal to .25-.3, and the ion backﬂow
is 2 or 3 times larger than the optimal value 1/α. With a 1000 or 1500 lpi
mesh (25 or 17 µm pitch) σ /l is larger than .5, and the expected feedback is
equal to the inverse of the ﬁeld ratio α.

4

As a conclusion it is expected that the optimal ion backﬂow conditions will
be fulﬁlled with a 1000 lpi mesh for 100 µm gap, and with a 1500 lpi mesh for
50 µm. In addition, it is expected that ion backﬂow will not be aﬀected by a
magnetic ﬁeld, since ion masses make them insensitive to it.

3 Measurements

Measurements have been performed using an intense (10mA-10 keV) X-ray
gun to produce primary electrons (see ﬁgure 5) in the 3mm drift space. The
Ni micromesh, manufactured at CERN was located at a distance of 100 µm
from the anode plane, and the typical gain was a few hundred. Gas mixture
was Argon with 10% isobutane or 2-3% CH4. Currents on the drift (id) and
mesh (im) electrodes were accurately measured. The primary ionisation current
ip, which is of the order of a few 10pA, was obtained by measuring the drift
current without gain (by lowering the voltage on the mesh). From these current
measurements, it is easy to determine the ion backﬂow β: β = (id-ip)/(id+ip)
as a function of the ﬁeld ratio by changing the voltage on the drift electrode
(α was varying in a large dynamic range, between 10 and 700).

Fig. 5. Experimental device for ion feedback measurements

Figure 6 shows measurements performed with a 500 lpi electroformed Ni mesh:
as expected from calculations, the extension of the avalanche is not large
enough compared to the mesh aperture, and ion backﬂow is degraded by a
quite large factor (∼4) as compared to 1/α.

5

Fig. 6. Measurements of ion backﬂow vs ﬁeld ratio for a 500 lpi micromesh

Then measurements (see ﬁgure 7) have been done with a smaller pitch Ni mesh
(1500 lpi, 17 µm): as expected, the backﬂow is exactly equal to the inverse of
the ﬁeld ratio over a very large range of ﬁeld ratios.

Fig. 7. Measurements of ion backﬂow vs ﬁeld ratio for a 1500 lpi micromesh

6

Finally, measurements have also been done in a superconducting coil, varying
the magnetic ﬁeld from 0 to 2T, without any change in the ion feedback, as
expected (see ﬁgure 8).

Fig. 8. Measurements of ion backﬂow vs magnetic ﬁeld from 0 to 2T

4 Conclusion

It has been proved and explained that in a Micromegas TPC device the ion
backﬂow is equal to the inverse of the ﬁeld ratio between the ampliﬁcation and
the drift electric ﬁelds, with only a few restrictions on the gas mixture, and
on the mesh which should have a small pitch (< 25µm). As a conclusion, in
the conditions of a future Micromegas TPC for the next linear collider, with
a ﬁeld ratio equal to 300-500, the expected ion feedback will be of the order
of 2 × 10−3. If the TPC can work at a relatively low gain (< 1000), the total
amount of secondary ions feeding the drift volume will be of the same order
than the primary ionisation. Thus it is possible to envisage the construction
of the detector without a gating grid, which is a major simpliﬁcation in the
design and the construction.

7

We wish to thank J. Martin, J. Jeanjean and V. Puill for their contribution
to this work.

5 Acknowledgements

References

[1] J.-E. Augustin, talk presented at the Xth VCI conference, Vienna, Feb. 2004,

to be published in Nucl. Instr. and Methods

[2]

I. Giomataris et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A376(1996)29.

[3] TPC for a future linear collider, DESY LC-DET-2002-08

[4] P. Colas, talk presented at the Xth VCI conference, Vienna, Feb. 2004, to be

published in Nucl. Instr. and Methods.

8

