4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
1
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Correction of Non-Linearity Eﬀects in Detectors for Electron Spectroscopy

N. Mannella,1, 2, ∗ S. Marchesini,2, † A. W. Kay,1, 2, ‡ A. Nambu,2, 3 T. Gresch,2, 4
S.-H. Yang,2, § B. S. Mun,1, 2, ¶ J. M. Bussat,5 A. Rosenhahn,2, ∗∗ and C. S. Fadley1, 2
1Department of Physics, UC Davis, Davis, CA, USA
2Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA
3Department of Physics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
4Institute of Physics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
5Engineering Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA

Using photoemission intensities and a detection system employed by many groups in the electron
spectroscopy community as an example, we have quantitatively characterized and corrected detector
non-linearity eﬀects over the full dynamic range of the system. Non-linearity eﬀects are found to
be important whenever measuring relative peak intensities accurately is important, even in the
low-countrate regime. This includes, for example, performing quantitative analyses for surface
contaminants or sample bulk stoichiometries, where the peak intensities involved can diﬀer by one
or two orders of magnitude, and thus could occupy a signiﬁcant portion of the detector dynamic
range. Two successful procedures for correcting non-linearity eﬀects are presented. The ﬁrst one
yields directly the detector eﬃciency by measuring a ﬂat-background reference intensity as a function
of incident x-ray ﬂux, while the second one determines the detector response from a least-squares
analysis of broad-scan survey spectra at diﬀerent incident x-ray ﬂuxes. Although we have used one
spectrometer and detection system as an example, these methodologies should be useful for many
other cases.

Keywords: Photoemission spectra, electron spectroscopy, detectors, non-linearity eﬀects

INTRODUCTION

Electron detection systems are an integral part of any
experimental setup for electron spectroscopy. Any de-
viation from an ideal linear response in which the true
electron ﬂux incident on the detector is not proportional
to the response signal of the detector may cause un-
desirable eﬀects in the recorded spectra. Seah and co-
workers have previously discussed methods for detecting
non-linearity eﬀects in photoelectron spectroscopy count-
ing systems for spectra measured with laboratory x-ray
sources [1, 2, 3]. In this work, we develop methods for
correcting for such non-linearities in a fully quantitative
way.

Non-linearity is an ever-present concern in electron
spectroscopy measurements. With laboratory x-ray exci-
tation sources and solid samples, the diﬀerences between
the highest and lowest photoelectron peak intensities can
diﬀer by as much as two orders of magnitude. Beyond
this, for any electron spectrum, measurement of features
in the higher-intensity low-energy secondary electron tail
region of any spectrum can push many detection sys-
tems into non-linear behavior. For the particular case
of synchrotron radiation experiments on solids, intensity
levels can even more easily be found to exceed the linear
response range of the detection systems. For example,
several groups have observed non-linearity eﬀects when
using state-of-the-art photoelectron spectrometers such
as for example the Gammadata/Scienta series of spec-
trometers [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
In this situation, non-
linearity eﬀects are likely to be present when high-cross-
section peaks are excited with bright sources (e.g. undu-

lators), or even more so in resonant photoemission exper-
iments during which photon energy is scanned [7]. For
example, prior work on multi-atom resonant photoemis-
sion (MARPE) by several groups was strongly aﬀected
by non-linearity eﬀects which produced irregularities in
the size and shape of the measured resonances, with this
eﬀect arising through changes in the inelastic background
underneath the peak whose intensity was being measured
[4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10].

More generally, the possible occurrence of non-linearity
eﬀects should always be kept in mind whenever measur-
ing relative intensities accurately is important, since it is
not limited to resonance experiments. In fact, we have
found for our example system that non-linearity eﬀects
are present even when the exciting energy is far away
from any resonance and the countrates are relatively low,
of the order of a few KHz. Examples of measurements
signiﬁcantly altered by non-linearity eﬀects occurring at
low countrates include quantitative analysis of complex
oxides via core-level intensities [11], relative intensities in
angle-resolved valence spectra [12] and dichroism mea-
surements on ferromagnetic systems [13].

In this paper, we explore in detail these non-linearity
eﬀects using photoemission intensities as an example, and
focusing in particular on the response of the detector over
the low-countrate region. We demonstrate two quantita-
tively accurate correction procedures to correct for non-
linearity eﬀects. The ﬁrst one directly yields the detector
eﬃciency by measuring a ﬂat-background reference in-
tensity as a function of a linearly-varying incident x-ray
ﬂux, while the second determines the detector response
from a least-squares analysis of broad-scan survey spec-

tra, each of which spans a considerable fraction of the dy-
namic range, obtained at diﬀerent incident x-ray ﬂuxes.
Although we have used one spectrometer system as an
example, the Gammadata-Scienta SES200, the method-
ologies presented should be applicable to a broad array
of situations.

EXPERIMENTAL

The Detector System

experiments using

We have performed our

a
Gammadata-Scienta SES200 spectrometer and detec-
tor system, as located on the Advanced Photoelectron
Spectrometer-Diﬀractometer situated at the Berkeley
Advanced Light Source [14, 15]. The detection system
used is that provided by the manufacturer as part of the
standard equipment, and is schematically illustrated in
Fig. 1.

ddd d E

s

i

x
A

 
l

a
i
t
a
p
S

s
l
e
x
i
P
S
f

•
 
0
4
2

370 • fE Pixels
Energy Axis

Experimental method

X-ray tube:
V = 12.5 kV
Ix-ray varied

Sample

Cu(001)

e-

Isample
Ix-ray

Phosphor screen

Scienta
SES 200

r(true)

m
(meas.)

Computer

CCD camera

MCP

FIG. 1:
Schematic illustration of the experimental geom-
etry. The maximum active region of the detector (shown
on the CCD camera monitor) includes 370 pixels along the
energy axis and 240 pixels along the spatial axis, which is
reduced to about 70,000 pixels via a rectangular window cir-
cumstribed by the circular microchannel plates and mating
phosphor. Both the energy and spatial axes can be gated
to include only a speciﬁc rectangular portion of the detector.
The ﬁlling fractions fE and fS along the energy and spatial
axis respectively can be set via software. Note that a lin-
ear variation in the x-ray emission current (at constant high
voltage between ﬁlament and anode) results indeed in a lin-
ear increase in the ﬂux of photons at the sample and thus of
the electrons incident on the front of the MCP. In fact, the
sample-to-ground current (in turn proportional to the pho-
ton ﬂux at the sample), as measured with a picoammeter and
recorded as a function of the x-ray emission current, has been
found to track linearly with the emission current of the x-ray
source at constant high voltage.

A microchannel plate multiplier (MCP) is followed by

2

a phosphor screen at high voltage in ultra-high vacuum
(UHV), so as to convert charge pulses into visible light
pulses. A standard CCD camera [16], mounted outside
the UHV chamber and focused on the phosphor screen
through a glass viewport, is ﬁnally responsible for record-
ing the light pulses on the phosphor and therefore per-
forming the actual event detection. We have operated
the detector primarily in the greyscale or analogue (GS)
mode in which integrated CCD charge is used for count-
ing, rather than in the black-and-white or digital mode
(BW) in which individual pulses are counted. However,
we also present some results based on the BS mode. In
the GS mode, the readout involves a measurement of
the collected charge in the pixel with an 8-bit analog to
digital converter (ADC). For the GS mode, the equiva-
lent of the BW mode discriminator is a digital mask that
eliminates low-order ADC bits in an attempt to discard
spurious noise counts. Further details have been reported
elsewhere [4, 5, 6]. With any change in the discriminator
levels or voltages across the MCP, the conditions under
which the detector measures a count are altered and the
response function will be modiﬁed. Unless otherwise ex-
plicitly speciﬁed, the detector has been intentionally used
as delivered and installed by the manufacturer, leaving
its settings at their recommended value at setup. How-
ever, in what follows, we will explore the inﬂuences of
changing some of these settings on non-linearity.

This detector is intrinsically two-dimensional. The na-
ture of the hemispherical energy analyzer to which the
detector is attached results in one pixel axis of the camera
representing the electron kinetic energy. The perpendic-
ular axis, for our purposes, simply represents multiplexed
detection at each energy. These axes will be referred to
as the energy and spatial axis respectively (cf. Fig. 1).
The camera views the 40 mm diameter circular phosphor
screen, with the rectangle circumscribing this maximum
active region of the detector including about 370 pixels
along the energy axis (a number we will refer to as NE)
and 240 pixels along the spatial axis (a number we will re-
fer to as NS). Within a square circumscribing the circle,
a maximum fraction, π/4, of the pixels within the square
will actually include the phosphor screen image, leading
to a maximum of approximately 370×240×π/4 ≈ 70, 000
pixels available for counting in two dimensions when the
camera views the largest fully-ﬁlled rectangular image.

The detector operates in a mode for which both the
energy and spatial axes can be gated to include only a
speciﬁc rectangular portion of the detector in the ﬁnal
binned data: we will refer to the fractional coverage along
the energy azis as fE and that along the spatial axis as
fS. However, once these limits are selected, all counts for
a given energy axis coordinate (i.e. a line of pixels along
the spatial axis) are summed in hardware and only this
binned sum is available for readout. This sum of spatial-
axis pixels for a ﬁxed energy pixel coordinate is referred
to as a detector channel, whereas a pixel will refer to one

(cid:181)
(cid:181)
(cid:181)
(cid:181)
pixel of the CCD camera.

In order to provide a detailed description of the detec-
tor response, the detected signal must ﬁrst be processed
from a typical distribution of total measured counts to a
distribution of measured countrates per pixel. Once the
detector signal has been acquired, the average countrate
per pixel is computed as a function of the true countrate
per pixel, revealing the response of the detector for the
current detector settings (GS–or perhaps BW–mode, dis-
criminator/mask setting, MCP and phosphor voltages).
The fact that the full camera image cannot be stored
for analysis prevents the most accurate corrections of the
eﬀects to be considered here. That is, only in the limit of
using a single pixel per detector channel can the actual
per-pixel countrate be obtained. However, we have dealt
with this problem by gating the detector so as to have it
count over only much smaller selected regions, as will be
discussed further below.

The detector and analyzer can be run in two diﬀerent
modes, a ﬁxed or snapshot mode as well as a dithered
or swept mode. In the ﬁxed mode, the analyzer settings
determine the linear kinetic energy distribution over the
energy-axis of the detector and are held constant. For
a given setting fE, the detector will see a kinetic energy
range of δE (cf. Fig. 1) that is a maximum of about 10%
of the mean kinetic energy passed by the spectrometer.
In this mode, the per-channel counts, which are actually
sums of spatial pixel counts, are simply stored directly as
read from the detector. By using only a narrow portion
of the spatial axis over which the count-rate is nearly
constant, the recorded counts may be trivially converted
to a reliable per-pixel countrate. For this particular case
of data collected in the ﬁxed mode, the correction from
per-channel counts M to countrate per pixel m is given
by

m =

M
τ · fS · NS

,

(1a)

(1b)

where τ is the total dwell or counting time of the spec-
trum. Or, if we illuminate the detector with a uniform
ﬂux of electrons, then m can be obtained from the total
countrate over all channels T via:

m =

T
τ · fE · NE · fS · NS

,

where τ is again the total dwell or counting time of the
spectrum, NE = 370 is the maximum number of active
pixels along the energy-axis, fE is the fraction of the de-
tector that is ﬁlled along the energy axis, NS = 240 is the
maximum number of active pixels along the spatial axis,
and fS is the fraction of the detector that is ﬁlled along
the spatial axis (cf. Fig. 1). Here, we have assumed that
the ﬁlled portion of the spatial axis has essentially uni-
form countrate over the summed pixels. If this uniformity
condition is not met, the eﬃciency may vary signiﬁcantly
across the spatial axis of the detector, and Eq. (1a, 1b)

3

will give only some sort of average spanning a part of
the dynamic range of the detector. The requirement of
having uniform illumination over the active area of the
detector can be experimentally achieved by using only
a narrow portion of the detector along both the spatial
and energy axes. The region of the detector over which
counts are accumulated, indicated via the percentage of
each of the two axes over which counting is permitted (fE
and fS, along the energy and spatial axis, respectively),
can be adjusted via software. A previous investigation
provided evidence that there is no signiﬁcant change in
the response function over any evenly illuminated sur-
face of the detector, permitting us to much simplify the
procedure for correcting spectra [5, 6]. Normally, pho-
toemission experiments are performed in a dithered or
swept mode that involves sweeping the kinetic energy of
the electrons accepted by the analyzer so that all energies
in the ﬁnal spectrum are accumulated in sequence by each
channel in the detector. This is primarily done to allow
parallel detection channels to be used while eliminating
the channel-to-channel diﬀerences in the detector gain in
the ﬁnal spectra. For the dithered mode the correction
from measured per-channel counts M to an average coun-
trate per pixel m is given by an equation similar to (1a):

m =

M
τ ′ · fS · NS

,

(2)

where τ ′is the total time that each pixel has spent in
counting at each energy channel, as summed over the
total no. of sweeps [17].

Experimental methodology for detector
characterization

In order to determine the response of the detector, one
needs to determine the measured countrate as a func-
tion of the true countrate. To accomplish this in the
most direct way, the true countrate, which is proportional
to the number of electrons incident on the front face of
the MCP, must be adjusted in a controlled manner while
recording the measured countrate at the detector. Once
the detector signal has been acquired, the average mea-
sured countrate per pixel is computed as a function of
the true countrate per pixel, revealing the response of
the detector for the used detector settings (GS or BW
mode, discriminator/mask setting, MCP and phosphor
voltages).

In this study, we have used electrons emitted during
the photoemission process (photoelectrons) as a source
of true countrates. Photoelectrons were provided by ex-
citing with a standard laboratory x-ray source a Cu (110)
single crystal in an as-is uncleaned condition, i.e. con-
taining a stable amount of contamination in the UHV
environment of the experiment. It is only important that

the sample is in a stable condition during the duration
of the measurements. We have in the present study used
a standard x-ray tube (un-monochromatized dual-anode
Al Kα/Mg Kα, Perkin Elmer Model 04548), which has a
power supply permitting variable emission power which
can be adjusted in 1 W steps at ﬁxed high voltage.

We note that there is a fundamental question as to
whether a linear variation in the x-ray emission current
(at constant high voltage between ﬁlament and anode)
results indeed in a linear increase in the ﬂux of photons
at the sample and thus of the electrons incident on the
front of the MCP. We thus veriﬁed initially that the to-
tal electron current from the sample tracked linearly with
the emission current of the x-ray source at constant high
voltage. The sample-to-ground current (in turn propor-
tional to the photon ﬂux at the sample) was measured
with a picoammeter and recorded as a function of the
x-ray emission current, and thus also power since the
voltage has been held constant (cf. Fig. 1). This rela-
tionship is found to be quite linear over the range of x-ray
power used in this study (5-300 W), with all quadratic
or higher-order terms contributing less than 5% of the
linear component within this range, as already shown in
a previous investigation [2]. Thus, using either the sam-
ple current or the x-ray power as a measure of the true
countrate introduces negligible diﬀerences in the ﬁnal re-
sponse function analysis.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The detection of non-linearity eﬀects

Ideally, the behavior of the detector as a function of
the true countrate should be completely linear. In this
case, the detector response would be described as m(r) =
ε · r, where m(r) and r denote the measured and the
true countrate per pixel respectively, and ε is a counting
eﬃciency factor. The constant ε would thus be equal to
one in an ideal system, but it is for us only necessary
to know it to within some constant factor. When the
detector deviates from the ideal behavior, the detector
response must be described by

m(r) = ε(r) · r ,

(3)

where ε(r) can be termed the eﬃciciency function or de-
tector response function, and it now depends on the true
countrate, reﬂecting the deviation from ideal behavior.
In order to correct measured countrates into true coun-
trates it is necessary to determine the response function
of the detector and invert Eq. (3). We note that since
the signal is detected after being processed by the CCD
camera, the values for the measured countrate (and, con-
sequently, also for the true countrate) are not absolute,
but are determined by the particular choice of the de-
tector parameters (for example, discriminator threshold

4

settings). Before discussing the procedures for the quan-
titative determination of this response function, we com-
ment on a couple of straightforward ways to detect non-
linearity eﬀects by making use of survey spectra mea-
sured at diﬀerent x-ray ﬂuxes.

In Fig. 2a we show broad-range survey spectra col-
lected in the dithered mode from a Cu (110) sample, as
excited by Al Kα (hν = 1486.6 eV) radiation.

FIG. 2:
(a) Broad-range survey spectra collected in the
dithered (swept) mode from a Cu (110) sample, as excited
by Al Kα (hν = 1486.6 eV) radiation. Some more intense
spectral features are labeled. Some weaker peaks result from
a Ta clip at the edges of the Cu sample. The left ordinate
here is an integrated rate assuming that 50,000 pixels count
at the rate per pixel given on the right scale, and is this only
appropriate to a situation of uniform illumination of the de-
tector. (b) The same spectra as shown in (a) after they have
been normalized with respect to x-ray ﬂux. The fact that the
spectra do not lie on top of one another provides unambiguous
evidence for the presence of non-linearity eﬀects.

These spectra span countrates ranging from a few KHz
to ≈ 12 MHz, corresponding to countrates per pixel in
the range m ≈ 1 − 240 Hz for the detector active area
we have used. For our conditions of gating the active
portion of the detector via fS and fE, the total no. of
active pixels is thus about 50,000, a number we will use

in estimating total maximum uniform countrates later
[18]. The same spectra are shown in Fig. 2b after they
have been normalized with respect to the x-ray ﬂuxes.
If the detector were linear, all spectra in Fig. 2b should
lie on top of one another, but it is evident that they are
not, with factors of up to 4 separating them in the higher
intensity regions at higher binding energy, as illustrated
more quantitatively in the upper inset showing the Cu 2p
spectral region. Even within the narrow binding energy
range of 0 to 120 eV (lower inset), there can be diﬀerences
of a factor of 2-3.

Another direct way to monitor non-linearity eﬀects in
electron detector systems makes use of ratio plots, as in-
troduced by Seah and co-workers [3], which consist of
ratios of intensities in survey spectra measured at dif-
ferent x-ray ﬂuxes. In Fig. 3, we plot the ratios of the
uncorrected intensities of the individual spectral points
collected at values of the x-ray power set to 300, 200,
100, 50 and 25 W and the intensity of the same spec-
tral points in energy collected at 25 W. All intensities
have been normalized by dividing by their respective x-
ray emission currents, and the ratios are plotted versus
the intensities of the relevant numerator spectrum. We
note that the ratio plots are completely equivalent to
plotting the ratios of the eﬃciencies curves as a function
of the measured countrate. In fact, if two spectral points
are recorded at two diﬀerent emission currents related by
a scaling factor n, from Eq. (3) we can write the ratio of
the eﬃciencies as:

ε(nr)
ε(r)

=

m(nr)
n · m(r)

=

m(nr)
nr

m(r)
r

(cid:18)

(cid:19)(cid:30)(cid:18)

(cid:19)

,

(4)

which shows that this ratio is equal to the ratio of the
intensities of the two spectra normalized by the respec-
tive x-ray emission currents at which they have been
collected. Ideally, the eﬃciency would have a constant
value, so that the ratio in Eq. (4) should be constant.
The main eﬀect observed in Fig. 3 is that the ratios
of the eﬃciency of the detector increase for measured
countrates per pixel up to 60 - 70 Hz and decrease for
countrates per pixel greater than 90 Hz, while in an ideal
system one would expect these curves to be horizontal
straight lines lying on top of one another, most simply of
value unity, as shown in the ﬁgure.

We now consider two diﬀerent methods for determin-
ing the response function of the detector and correcting
non-linearity eﬀects. The ﬁrst method directly yields the
response function by measuring a ﬂat-background ref-
erence intensity as a function of incident x-ray ﬂuxes,
while the second method determines the response func-
tion from what is eﬀectively a least-squared-ﬁt analysis
of broad-scan survey spectra taken at diﬀerent incident
x-ray ﬂuxes.

5

Correction method 1: measurement of
ﬂat-background reference intensity as a function of
incident x-ray ﬂux

The most obvious way to determine the response func-
tion of the detector is to record directly the measured
countrate at the detector while adjusting the true coun-
trate in a controlled manner. This is easily accomplished
by measuring a ﬂat-background region in a spectrum
from a sample with a stable surface while varying the
incident x-ray ﬂux.

FIG. 3: Ratio plots (cf. ref.
[3]) of spectral intensities at a
given kinetic energy and for diﬀerent x-ray powers (equivalent
to ﬂuxes). The solid line indicates the behavior of an ideal
linear detector with unit eﬃciency. (a) is before correction,
and (b) after correction by Method 1. All points have been
referred to the lowest power of 25 W (a) and 10 W (b). After
correction, the ratio plots look like horizontal straight lines
lying on top of one another, as expected in an ideal system.
The deviation from a horizontal straight line shown for coun-
trates approaching zero is simply due to the higher fractional
statistical uncertainty that is typical of a Poisson distribution.

Although photoemission experiments are usually per-
formed in a dithered mode, this mode was not used here
because the inherent averaging over the detector would
be detrimental to the analysis of the detector behavior.
The analyzer and detector were on the contrary run in
a ﬁxed mode. Here we stress the importance of having
uniform illumination over the active area of the detector
in order not to have signiﬁcant variations of the detector
eﬃciency across the spatial axis of the detector. This
requirement was experimentally achieved by setting via
software the region of the detector over which counts were
accumulated equal to 20% and 40% of the spatial and
energy axes respectively. The use of a featureless region
of the spectrum (for example, for the Cu (110) sample
shown in Fig. 2a, suitable regions would correspond to
the binding energy (BE) ranges 134.6-164.6 eV and 850-
900 eV) along with the use of a gated (40%) portion of
the energy axis allows one to be able to measure sev-
eral detector channels at the same time providing better
statistics. The countrate per pixel can then be derived
from Eq. (1a). For some of our measurements, a sim-

ilar ﬂat region in the spectrum from a La0.7Sr0.3MnO3
sample was used in order to achieve higher intensities, as
discussed in more detail below.

Once the detector signal has been acquired and con-
verted to countrate per pixel, this method yields directly
the response function of the detector as a function of
the x-ray emission current or power, which is in turn
proportional to the true countrate, as discussed before.
By changing the operational mode of the analyzer (e.g.
pass energy and slit size) of the analyzer, it was possi-
ble to derive the detector response in diﬀerent regions of
its dynamic range, thus permitting the measurement of
various portions of the response function of the detector,
particularly the one corresponding to less than 5 Hz per
pixel. As previously shown [5, 6], the only eﬀect intro-
duced by changing the settings of the analyzer is simply
a multiplication of the true countrate by a constant scal-
ing factor. The nature of the scaling factor is immaterial
to this discussion, but it must be compensated for in or-
der to properly and self-consistently determine per-pixel
countrates.

Within each setting of the detector operational mode
(e.g. GS or BW) and other detector and analyzer set-
tings, the x-ray power was varied in the range 5-300 W
(at ﬁxed constant voltage V = 12.5 kV). We ﬁrst com-
bined several measurements of diﬀerent portions of the
response function corresponding to diﬀerent operational
mode settings into an overall measurement of the GS
mode response function up to a measured rate of about
70 Hz per pixel (corresponding to a maximum total coun-
trate over all energy channels of 3.5 MHz), as shown in
Fig. 4. The data shown in Fig. 4 have been taken
with a La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 single crystal (containing a sta-
ble amount of contamination in the UHV environment of
the experiment) and photoelectrons emitted from a fea-
tureless region with BE range 440 – 480 eV. This was
done to obtain a measured rate of 70 Hz per pixel, e.g.
higher than the 35 – 40 Hz per pixel which could be ob-
tained from the Cu (110) sample, (cf. Fig. 2a).

Note that we generally do not know the point (if any)
at which the measured and true countrates exactly coin-
cide. In Fig. 4, we have arbitrarily set the true countrate
scale so that the measured and true countrates are the
same for count rates approaching zero, with the asymp-
totic behavior of the measured detector response as the
true countrate goes to zero being a straight line with
slope equal to unity. This choice is of course equivalent
to set the eﬃciency equal to unity at zero true countrate.
It is important to realize that this choice is arbitrary,
and that it does not aﬀect the results of any correction
we make.

Fig. 4 shows that the detector responds with signiﬁ-
cant deviations from the ideal linear behavior described
by Eq. (3), even at very low countrates. This type of
non-linearity for low countrates can approximately be
described as a quadratic deviation from linearity, as pre-

6

viously observed for this particular detector in both GS
and BW modes [6]. In particular, an inspection of Fig.
4b shows that the detector starts already to deviate from
an ideal behavior at 0.5 Hz per pixel or a maximum coun-
trate of 25 kHz. If we quantify the deviation from linear-
ity as in d = [m(r) − r]/r × 100, these data show that d
= 19, 29 and 40 % for measured countrates equal to 1, 2
and 3 Hz per pixel, respectively.

Detector response--Method 1

(a)

(b)

)
)
p
p
p
/
z
z
H
H
(
(
 
 

m
m

)
)
p
p
/
p
z
z
H
H
(
(
 
 

m
m

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0

5

r(Hz/p) (cid:181)

10
r (Hzpp)
(cid:181) X-ray Power

15

20

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

r(Hz/p) (cid:181)

(cid:181) X-ray Power
r (Hzpp)

 

FIG. 4:
(a) The detector response measured via the correc-
tion procedure of Method 1. Note the “quadratic” deviation
from linearity at low countrates. (b) The detector response
function for very low measured countrates (less than 3 Hz per
pixel). Note that non-linearity eﬀects are already present at
measured countrates as low as 1 Hz per pixel.

Once the detector response function is determined,
only a simple interpolation algorithm is needed to invert
Eq. (3) so as to express the true countrates as a function
of the measured countrates. It should also be noted that
only after a spectrum has been corrected from measured
to true countrate is a photon-ﬂux normalization appro-
priate.

Finally, we show in Fig. 5 the same spectral compar-
isons as in Fig. 2b, but with and without the correction
applied: it is clear that all normalized spectra for diﬀer-
ent ﬂuxes coincide to a high accuracy (within 4.5 % for
all data points) after correction. Also, Fig. 3b makes the

(cid:181)
(cid:181)
(cid:181)
(cid:181)
same point via the ratio plots. In fact, after correction,
the ratio plots look like horizontal straight lines lying
on top of one another, as expected in an ideal system.
The deviation from a horizontal straight line shown for
countrates approaching zero is simply due to the higher
fractional statistical uncertainty that is typical of a Pois-
son distribution, which scales as the inverse of the square
root of the counts. These results thus provide unambigu-
ous evidence that the above-described procedure yields
the correct determination of the response function and is
eﬀective in correcting non-linearity eﬀects.

FIG. 5: The same spectra shown in Fig 2b, but compared
before and after detector non-linearity correction via Method
1. In (a), the full spectra are shown, and in (b) certain blowup
regions. Note the limited power range possible with Method
1, going only up to about 70 Hz/pixel as measured.

Nevertheless, an inspection of Figs. 3b and 5 reveals a
minor inconvenience of this method. It has been possi-
ble to correct over the whole binding energy range only
the spectra taken with x-ray powers of less than 50 W at
most, corresponding to a maximum countrate of ≈ 70 Hz
per pixel or ≈ 3.5 MHz maximum total countrate over
all pixels. The cause for this limited range lies in the
impossibility of ﬁnding a suitable featureless region in
the spectra whose countrate is high enough to be able to

7

drive the detector over a wider dynamic range [19]. More-
over, the necessity of adjusting in a controlled manner the
incident x-ray ﬂux can in principle impose stringent re-
quirements on existing experimental setups. For exam-
ple, standard x-ray tubes are not necessarily equipped
with a power supply which allows quasi-continuous vari-
ation of the emission x-ray power (at constant voltage)
with a stepsize as small as a few watts. Finally, com-
bining several measurements of diﬀerent portions of the
response function of the detector by changing diﬀerent
operational mode settings into an overall measurement of
the GS mode response function can be time-consuming.
As an example, the collection of the several data sets
combined in Fig. 4 took about 24 hours. These consider-
ations have motivated the development of an alternative
procedure for correcting non-linearity eﬀects that we now
describe below.

Correction method 2: Analysis of broad-scan survey
spectra at diﬀerent incident x-ray ﬂuxes

The possibility to develop a new correction procedure
was initially triggered by observing that a single broad-
scan spectrum can provide in a single measurement a
highly dense set of measured countrates. For example,
Fig. 2a shows that the survey spectrum taken with the
power set to 300 W yielded in a few minutes a distri-
bution of measured countrate ranging from 0 to 240 Hz
per pixel. The possibility of determining the detector re-
sponse function from an analysis of survey spectra is thus
appealing since it permits sampling a wide portion of the
detector response in a relatively short amount of time.

To make this idea more quantitative, consider a set of
N survey spectra measured on the same sample, but with
diﬀerent incident ﬂuxes n = n1, n2, . . . , nN as shown in
Fig. 2a. For the case of data collected in the dithered
mode, the one used to acquire the broad-scan survey
spectra, the correction from per-channel count-rate M
to count-rate per pixel m is given by Eq. (2). When ex-
pressed in countrate per pixel, the survey spectra provide
a distribution of measured countrates m = m(nj, Ek) for
a given x-ray ﬂux nj and kinetic energy Ek of the pho-
toelectrons.

The true countrates per pixel r(nj , Ek) for a given x-
ray ﬂux and kinetic energy of the photoelectrons can now
be expressed as a polynomial expansion of order P of
the measured countrates per pixel m(nj, Ek) with real
coeﬃcients ai:

r(nj , Ek) =

aimi(nj, Ek),

∀ j = 1, 2, . . . N
∀ k = 1, 2, . . . Q,

(

(5)

P

i=1
X

where Q denotes the number of equally-spaced kinetic
energy values used to collect the spectra. Here, we have
set the coeﬃcient a0 (which represents the dark current

8

background in the absence of any excitation) equal to
zero, as this background is often negligible or can simply
be measured and subtracted from all the measurements,
but one can simply extend the summation to the 0 order
term if necessary to include this. The determination of
the response function and the correction of non-linearity
eﬀects are thus reduced to the computation of the un-
known coeﬃcients ai.

The normalized true countrates do not depend on the

incident ﬂux, such that we can write:

r(n1, Ek)
n1

=

r(nj , Ek)
nj

,

∀ j = 2, 3, . . . N
∀ k = 1, 2, . . . Q.

(

(6)

From Eqs. (5) and (6), we can thus write out a system

of N −1 equations as:

1
n1

P

i=1
X

1
nj

P

i=1
X

ai · mi(n1, Ek) =

ai · mi(nj, Ek) ,

(7)

As in our treatment of the ﬁrst method, we have ar-
bitrarily set the measured and true countrates to be the
same at countrates approaching zero, which corresponds
via this limit to setting the arbitrary value a1 = 1. This
still leads to a completely general result for the response
function, since the true and measured counts can diﬀer
by an arbitrary factor. From Eq. (7) we then have with
trivial rearrangement, another system of equations:

m(nj, Ek)
nj

m(n1, Ek)
n1

=

mi(n1, Ek)
n1

−

mi(nj, Ek)
nj

∀ j = 2, 3, . . . N
∀ k = 1, 2, . . . Q.

(

(8)

P

i=2 (cid:20)
X

· ai

,

(cid:21)

A

}

|{z}

C

{z

−

B

{z

|

}

|

In the matrix and vector notation introduced above, A
is a (P − 1)-long column vector, B is a Q × (N − 1)-long
column vector, and C is a Q × (N − 1) by (P − 1) matrix.
Thus, in the ideal case for which there is no statistical
error in the experimental data, B − CA = 0, and it
would represent an over-determined set of equations for
determining the coeﬃcients ai.

For the actual case with statistical variations in the
data, Eq. (8) thus describe an over-determined system
of Q × (N − 1) linear equations in the unknown (P − 1)
coeﬃcients ai’s that can be solved for maximum likeli-
hood by minimizing |B − CA|2, i.e. solving the normal
equation of the linear least-squares problem:

∇A |B − CA|2 = 2C T CA − 2C T B = 0 ,

(9)

where the superscript T denotes the transposition opera-
tion. The polynomial coeﬃcients embedded in A can be
obtained by standard methods such as the LU decompo-
sition [20] or simple matrix inversion as:

A =

C T C

−1

· C T B ,

(10)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)
where CTC is a small (P −1) by (P −1) matrix. For bet-
ter numerical precision in the matrix inversion, we have
rescaled the measured countrates per pixel m to vary
from 0 to 1. Note that this overall approach is analogous
to ﬁtting the assumed polynomial form to the experi-
mental data via a least-squares criterion. In practically
implementing this scheme, we ﬁnd that including pow-
ers up to P ≈ 12 is necessary. The values of the other

parameters for the results shown in this work are N = 7
and Q = 2400.

We have applied this ﬁtting procedure to all the data
points belonging to the survey spectra shown in Fig. 2a.
The detector response function has in this way been de-
termined for measured countrates up to over 250 Hz per
pixel (Fig. 6a), approximately a factor of 4 higher than
the range accessed by the ﬁrst method. Fig. 6b also
shows that there is excellent agreement between Meth-
ods 1 and 2 over the much narrower range covered by
Method 1. We stress that in order to be able to invert
Eq. (3), so as to determine the true counts r, the rela-
tionship m vs. r must be a one-to-one mapping.

There is some deviation from a simple smooth curve in
Fig. 6a above measured rates of approximately 260 Hz
per pixel. This is simply due to the limited number of
data points with countrate per pixel greater than the 250
accessible by our measurements. However, the smooth
dashed curve in this region should permit correcting even
up to about 325 Hz per pixel, corresponding to a total
maximum countrate of 16.25 MHz.

We show in Fig. 7 the same spectra as in Fig. 2b, but
again comparing spectra with and without the correction
procedure applied, this time via Method 2. All normal-
ized spectra for diﬀerent ﬂuxes coincide to a high degree
of accuracy (within at most 6 % for all data points) over
the entire range of the measured countrates accessed by
the spectra shown in Fig. 2a. This second correction pro-
cedure is thus very eﬀective in correcting non-linearity ef-
fects and yields the correct determination of the response

9

(a)

)
p
/
z
H

(
 

m

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

(b)

Method 1
Method 2

)
p
/
z
H

(
 

30
m
20

70

60

50

40

10

0

Method 1
Method 2

30

40
50
r (Hz/p)

0

10

20

60

70

0

2

4

6

8

10 12 14 16 18

r (Hz/p)

 

FIG. 6: Comparison of the detector response determined
with correction Methods 1 and 2. In (a), a broad range going
up to above 300 Hz/pixel is shown, and in (b) only the more
limited region in which the two methods overlap.

function for measured countrates extending to 250 Hz (or
even 300 Hz) per pixel, approximately a factor of 4 higher
than the range accessed by the ﬁrst procedure.

Finally, we show in Fig. 8 the ratio plots shown in
Fig. 3, but with the second correction procedure applied.
After correction, the ratio plots look like one would ex-
pect in an ideal system, with the curves being horizontal
straight lines lying on top of one another.

We suggest that this procedure will be particularly
useful for existing experimental set-ups, such as those
with standard x-ray tubes equipped with a power sup-
ply which can allow only a few x-ray emission current
settings.

Further considerations

FIG. 7: As Fig.
5, but with correction via Method 2–
minimum likelihood ﬁtting of a polynomial to broad scan
spectra via Eqs. (5)-(10). Note the similarity with Fig. 5,
indicating that both correction procedures coincide and are
eﬀective in correcting for non-linearity eﬀects. Note also the
much broader power range for Method 2.

The correction procedures applied above clearly
demonstrate successful and consistent methods for deal-
ing with a non-ideal behavior in the response function
of the detector. Maintaining a uniform illumination over
the active portion of the detector screen is an essential
condition for the eﬀectiveness of both of the correction
procedures described above. It should also be noted that
there are alternate versions of the Gammadata-Scienta
hardware that do allow full two-dimensional images to
be retained in both energy and space and read out from
the electronics interface. With these systems, it should
be possible to apply the correction procedure developed
here with even greater precision than that demonstrated
here.

We have also successfully applied both correction pro-
cedures described above with variable photon ﬂux pro-
vided by synchrotron radiation. In this particular situa-
tion, the variation in the photon ﬂux at the sample can
be monitored by recording the natural decay of the ring
current (although this does not normally allow for more

than a factor of 3 or so change in ﬂux), or by changing the
entrance (or exit) slits of the beamline while measuring
either the photon ﬂux along the beamline with a conven-
tional “I0”mesh or more directly the sample-to-ground
total-electron-yield current. However, we point out that
caution should be exercised to insure that changing the
slits does not change the ratio between the beam spot
size at the sample and the actual sample area seen by the
spectrometer, otherwise a linear variation of the photon
ﬂux at the sample may not result in a linear increase of
the number of electrons incident on the front of the MCP.
We stress that non-linearity eﬀects should always be
kept in mind for any case where measuring relative peak
intensities accurately is important. As one illustration
of this, we show in Fig. 9 the same spectra presented
in Fig. 2a after the correction procedure has been ap-
plied. The overall countrate M and the countrate per
pixel m now range from 0 to 3 MHz and 60 Hz, respec-
tively, that is, a factor of 4 less in range than before the
correction has been applied. As a more concrete example

10

of how quantitative analysis could be aﬀected, Fig. 10
shows the ratio of the intensities of the Cu 2p and Cu 3s
core level spectra, after taking into account diﬀerences in
photoelectric cross section, electron attenuation lengths,
and the transmission function of the analyzer, so as to
eﬀectively be taking a ratio of the Cu atomic density via
two diﬀerent spectra from the same atom. After the cor-
rection, as expected, this ratio is constant and equal to
1 within a full range of ± 9%, while before the correc-
tion it shows a strong x-ray ﬂux dependence and a value
ranging from 1 to a little over 2.

FIG. 9: The same spectra as in Fig. 2(a), but after they
have been corrected via Method 2. Note in particular that
the maximum countrates per pixel or as integrated over all
pixels after correction are a factor of 4 less than before the
correction. The integrated total countrate assumes 50,000
active pixels uniformly illuminated, and may be optimistic in
estimating maximum countrates achievable with this detector
in the sense that spectra often have high countrate peaks well
above background.

the discriminator level on the detector could be held re-
sponsible for the non-linearity eﬀects here reported, we
thus studied the response function for various detector
discriminator settings in both for the GS and the BW
modes. Making use of the ﬁrst method described above,
we determined the response functions corresponding to
six diﬀerent settings of the discriminator, with the re-
sults presented in Fig. 11. We deliberately used values
for the discriminator setting (here reported as numbers
in arbitrary units) lower and higher than that set by the
manufacturer, which was equal to 314, so as to investigate
what the eﬀect of increasing or decreasing the threshold
level would be. It is evident from an inspection of Fig. 11
that there is no value for the settings that we tried that
yields the correct linear behavior over the entire coun-
trate range accessed by our measurements. For the par-
ticular case of the GS mode, the discriminator settings
which would allow one to measure spectra with quasi-
linearity are those corresponding to the values 300, 314
and 330, centered on the manufacturer’s recommended
setting. Outside of this range, for the value equal to 264
we obtained a multi-valued response function, while for
values equal to 364 and 414 the dark counts are so high
that they would constitute an unacceptable noise level in
the recorded spectra. For values equal to 300, 314 and
330, all three response functions show quadratic behav-
ior at low countrates, as already pointed out before. In
order to better quantify the deviation from an ideal lin-
ear behavior, we show in Fig. 12 (for the particular case
of the GS mode) the detector responses corresponding

FIG. 8: As Fig 3, but with spectra compared (a) before and
(b) after detector non-linearity correction via Method 2.

As a ﬁnal point, we note that all of the data reported
to this point have been obtained with the detector inten-
tionally used as delivered and installed by the manufac-
turer, leaving its settings at their recommended values
at setup. We also note that several other groups ap-
pear to have encountered the same type of non-linearity
with these standard settings [7, 8, 9]. According to the
manufacturer’s recommendations, a too-low discrimina-
tor level introduces noise, while a too-high discriminator
level inﬂuences the detection eﬃciency of low intensity
signals and therefore modiﬁes the linearity of the inten-
sity scale. The manufacturer recommends setting the dis-
criminator by minimizing the dark counts; making sure
that the dark counts are barely visible is thus thought
to ensure that the discriminator is not set too high. As
we discuss immediately below, we have in fact as part of
this study varied both the discriminator setting and the
phosphor and MCP high voltages, but the general type
of non-linearity discussed here persists.

We thus now address the question of whether it is pos-
sible that the non-linearity eﬀects so far observed are
related to poor settings of the discriminator level. Seah
et al. have in fact pointed out that the discriminator
setting in a detector very similar to ours can be used to
improve linearity in certain countrate ranges, although
this procedure is not expected to eliminate nonlinearity
eﬀects over a broad countrate range, especially in GS
operation due to the nature of this mode [1, 2, 3].
In
order to investigate whether an improper adjustment of

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25

1.00

)
.

U

 
.

A

(
 
)
s
3
 
u
C

(
I
 
/
 
)
p
2
 
u
C

(
I

 

Before correction

After correction

– 9%

0

50

150

250
100
X-ray power (W)

200

300

FIG. 10: The intensity ratio of the Cu 2p and Cu 3s core level
spectra after allowing for the diﬀerent photoelectric cross sec-
tions and electron inelastic attenuation lengths, as well as the
transmission function of the analyzer, so as to yield a num-
ber that should in principle equal unity. Note the strong ﬂux
dependence of the ratio for the case of non-corrected spectra,
a clear indication of the presence of non linearity eﬀects.

FIG. 11: The eﬀects of changing the discriminator setting
on the detector response function for the grey scale mode
(a) and the black-and-white mode (b). All curves here show
signiﬁcant deviations from linearity.

to the discriminator values set to 300, 314 and 330 af-
ter they have been diﬀerentiated, i.e. dm/dr. Consistent
with our prior analysis, we have arbitrarily set the true
countrate scale so that the measured and true count rates
are the same for countrates approaching zero. The non-
linearity aﬀecting these response functions is evident: in
an ideal case, these plots should be straight lines with
zero slope. Therefore, these results indicate that it is gen-
erally unlikely that diﬀerent discriminator settings would
eliminate nonlinearity eﬀects for this particular detection
system over a broad range of measured countrates nor-
mally accessed by typical photoemission measurements.
Nonetheless, the setting of 330 in this ﬁgure is somewhat

11

better than the 314 of the standard setup, even though
it still shows a slope change of about a factor 3 over the
range studied.

Beyond this, exploring optimum settings for detector
high voltages, phosphor high voltages, and discrimina-
tors on our detection system is part of routine optimiza-
tion of this detector, an operation performed approxi-
mately once a year on our system in collaboration with
the manufacturer’s engineers. We have recently veriﬁed
that, just after re-optimizing (and in fact increasing) the
MCP voltage, the detector still shows the same type of
non-linearity, both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Greyscale

 D300
300 
 D314
314     Discriminator settings (A.U.)
330
 D330

/

r
d
m
d

14

12

10

8

6

4

2
1

elivered
As d

Ideal

0

10

20
30
r (Hzpp)

40

50

60

 

FIG. 12: The derivative of the detector response dm/dr ob-
tained in the grey-scale mode (Fig. 11a) corresponding to the
discriminator values of 300, 314 and 330. If the detector were
linear, these should be horizontal lines.

The detector response has also proven to be very stable
over time. We obtained excellent reproducibility of the
detector response (and hence correction procedure) even
after 1 year, thus suggesting that the correction proce-
dure does not have to be derived more often than once
every six months or so, provided that the system is al-
ways operated at the same UHV conditions and the focus
of the CCD camera is not changed.

Although a precise determination of the true source(s)
of the non-linearity in this particular detector is beyond
the scope of our paper, we brieﬂy comment on the possi-
ble causes for the non-linearity eﬀects we observe, ﬁrst at
high countrates and then at low countrates. Saturation
of the detector at high countrates occurs most likely be-
cause of photon “pile-up” at the phosphor plate and/or
saturation of the CCD camera due to its maximum sam-
pling rate. The photon “pile-up” at the phosphor occurs
when the decay time of the phosphor is not suﬃciently
fast; for the phosphor used in our system the decay time
is 10 µs, and thus we can estimate that pileup in a given
pixel will begin to occur at about ten times the phosphor
decay time or the equivalent rate of 104 Hz per pixel,

–
–
–
a value which is much higher than any countrate mea-
sured in our work. The saturation of the CCD cameral is
clearly shown in Fig. 11b for the spectra taken in black-
and-white mode with the discriminator set to 364 and
414; in fact, for this particular model saturation occurs
at 30 Hz per pixel (in black-and-white mode) since this
is the CCD sampling rate.

It is not clear at the moment what the precise cause
of the quadratic non-linearity at low countrate is, even
though our investigation suggests that the most plausi-
ble source of these eﬀects is the CCD camera. A too-low
MCP high voltage would cause the gain to change sen-
sitively as the ﬂux change, giving rise to non-linearity
eﬀects. Nonetheless, we rule out a too-low MCP high
voltage as a cause for the quadratic non-linearity, since
after increasing the MCP the same non-linearity eﬀects
are found, as explained above.

It has been suggested that a change in the CCD camera
might improve the behavior [21] of the detector, and this
is a direction for future investigation. Plausible causes
for the non-linear behavior at low countrates are CCD
dark signal and CCD pattern noise. The ﬁrst one is
caused by some leakage currents which would produce
charge in some of the pixels. It is expected that chang-
ing the discriminator values would suppress this source
of noise, but our measurements (cf. Fig. 11) reveal that
for diﬀerent discriminator settings nonlinearity eﬀects are
always present. CCD pattern noise refers to any pat-
tern of counts (e.g. hot spots) which does not change
signiﬁcantly from frame to frame and, thus, even if not
properly a random noise, can produce a dark signal-like
background, however diﬀering from random noise in that
it would be dependent on the speciﬁc location of the CCD
pixels used. As already noted above, we do not ﬁnd any
evidence on heterogeneity in the behavior of the pixels
from one part of the detector to another, thus suggest-
ing that CCD patttern noise cannot be held responsible
for the non-linearity. From our investigation we conclude
that most likely the cause of the non linearity is the in-
herent use of a CCD camera, since such devices are well
known to be non-linear devices [22], with the determina-
tion of the precise cause being object of future investiga-
tion.

More generally, this study constitutes a motivation for
improving existing detectors and developing new detec-
tors that overcome problems related to non-linearity ef-
fects over much larger countrate ranges.

CONCLUSIONS

We have developed two procedures for accurately cor-
recting non-linearity eﬀects in detectors for electron spec-
troscopy that should be applicable to a broad range of
systems. The ﬁrst one directly yields the detector eﬃ-
ciency by measuring a ﬂat-background reference inten-

12

sity as a function of incident x-ray ﬂux, while the second
one determines the detector response from a least-squares
analysis of broad-scan survey spectra at diﬀerent incident
x-ray ﬂuxes. To illustrate our correction procedures, we
have characterized the detector response over a broad
dynamic range of a state-of-the-art electron spectrom-
eter system (Gammadata/Scienta SES200), using pho-
toemission intensities as an example. Although we have
studied only one spectrometer and detection system, our
conclusions and general methods for determining and cor-
recting for non-linearity are useful for many other cases.
For the particular case studied here, our results demon-
strate the occurrence of “quadratic” non-linearity eﬀects
which aﬀect the detector response function at even very
low countrates, far from saturation. Such non-linearity
eﬀects should thus always be kept in mind for any case
where measuring relative peak intensities accurately is
important, even at low countrates. Our results indi-
cate that changing the discriminator settings does not
eliminate these non-linearity eﬀects, nor does adjusting
the voltage across the multichannel plates. Finally, this
study points out the importance of developing new de-
tectors with a linear behavior over the entire countrate
range accessed by typical experiments in electron spec-
troscopy.

This work was supported by the Director, Oﬃce of Sci-
ence, Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Science
and Engineering Division, U.S. Department of Energy
under Contract No. DE-AC03-76SF00098.

ley, CA, USA

many

(1992) 240.

732.

∗ Present address: Physics Department, Stanford Univer-
sity, Stanford, CA, USA.; Correspondence should be ad-
dressed to N. Mannella: nmannella@lbl.gov
† Present address: LLNL, Livermore, CA, USA
‡ Present address: Intel Corporation, Portland, OR, USA
§ Present address:
IBM Almaden Research Laboratory,

San Jose, CA, USA

¶ Present address: Advanced Light Source, LBNL, Berke-

∗∗ Present address: Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Ger-

[1] M. P. Seah, M. Tosa, Surface and Interface Analysis 18

[2] M. P. Seah, Surface and Interface Analysis 23 (1995) 729-

[3] M. P. Seah, I. S. Gilmore, S. J. Spencer, J. Electron Spec-
trosc. Relat. Phenom. 104 (1999) 73-89. The methods to
check for linearity is described as ISO 21270:2003, “Sur-
face chemical analysis - X-ray photoelectron spectrome-
ters and Auger electron spectrometers - Linearity of in-
tensity scale”.

[4] A. W. Kay, Ph.D. dissertation, UC Davis, 2000.
[5] A. W. Kay, S.-H. Yang, E. Arenholz, B. S. Mun, N. Man-
nella, Z. Hussain, M. A. Van Hove and C. S. Fadley,
J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom. 114, (2001) 1179-
1189.

[6] A. W. Kay, F. J. G. de Abajo, S.-H. Yang, E. Arenholz,
B. S. Mun, N. Mannella, Z. Hussain, M. A. Van Hove
and C. S. Fadley, , Phys. Rev. B 63, (2001) 115119.
[7] M. G. Garnier, N. Witkowski, R. Denecke, D. Nord-
lund, A. Nilsson, M. Nagasono, N. M˚artensson, and A.
F¨ohlisch, Maxlab Annual Report for 1999, Lund, Swe-
den, and private communication.

[8] A. Nilsson, R. Denecke, et al., private communication.
[9] A. Kikas, E. Nommiste, R. Ruus, A. Saar, and I. Mar-
tinson, Solid State Communications 115, (2000) 275, and
A. Kikas, private communication.

[10] M. Finazzi and N. Brooke, private communication; G.

Paolucci and K. Prince, private communication.

[11] N. Mannella, Ph.D. dissertation, UC Davis, 2003.
[12] I. –D Chang and D. Dessau, private communication.
[13] P. Wernet, N. Mannella, B. S. Mun, S.-H. Yang and C.

S. Fadley, unpublished.

[14] N. M˚artensson, P. Baltzer, P.A. Br¨uhwiler, J.-O. Forsell,
A. Nilsson, A. Stenborg, and B.Wannberg, Journal
of Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 70,
(1994) 117.

[15] C.S. Fadley et al., J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom.

75, (1995) 273.

15 V, 2.2 W.

[16] Manifactured by Sony, model XC-77 E72675, DC 10.5 –

[17] The time τ ′ is a little more complicated to calculate,
but if the active detector window in kinetic energy is
δE cf. Fig. 1, then the smallest reasonable step in ki-
netic energy (or equivalently energy channel width) will
be dE = δE/(fENE). If the spectral region to be scanned
is ∆E in width, (where ∆E is usually ≥ δE), then, in

13

order to have each detector pixel contribute equally to
each energy channel, the detector has to be scanned over
a range of ∆E + δE, involving a maximum no. of energy
steps S = (∆E + δE)/dE = (∆E + δE)fENE/δE. If
the actual accumulation time at each energy step is δτ ,
not including any time necessary for the saving of data
and settling in of the power supplies, and the spectrum
is swept F times, then the total time τ ′ to accumulate a
swept-mode spectrum will be τ ′ = F Sδτ . If, as is often
the case, a certain number of detector energy channels α
is binned together to make a ﬁnal spectral energy channel
of width αdE, where α > 1 and need not be an integer,
then the number of energy steps is reduced to S′ = S/α
and the total time becomes τ ′ = F Sδτ /α.

[18] The ﬁlling fractions fE and fS along the energy and spa-
tial axis have been set to 0.8 and 0.7, respectively. Conse-
quently, one has 0.8·370·0.7·240 ≈ 50000 as a conversion
factor between countrate per pixel and overall maximum
total countrate (T /τ ), provided the detector sees a uni-
form illumination (see Eq. (1b)).

[19] Changing the sample could help in some cases, even
though it is unlikely to ﬁnd a featureless region which
can provide countrates as high as 240 Hz per pixel.
[20] W.H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W.T. Vetterling, B.P. Flan-
nery, Numerical Recipies in C: the art of scientiﬁc com-
puting (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, 1992

[21] P. D. Johnson, private communication.
[22] Y. Reibel, M. Jung, M. Bouhifd, B. Cunin and C. Dra-

man, Eur. Phys. J. AP 21, 75-80 (2003).

