4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
4
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
0
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

First operation of a liquid Argon TPC
embedded in a magnetic ﬁeld

A. Badertscher, M. Laﬀranchi, A. Meregaglia, A. Rubbia

Institut f¨ur Teilchenphysik, ETHZ,
CH-8093 Z¨urich, Switzerland

Abstract

We have operated for the ﬁrst time a liquid Argon TPC immersed in a magnetic
ﬁeld up to 0.55 T. We show that the imaging properties of the detector are not
aﬀected by the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld. The magnetic bending of the ionizing
particle allows to discriminate their charge and estimate their momentum. These
ﬁgures were up to now not accessible in the non-magnetized liquid Argon TPC.

Key words: Liquid Argon, Liquid Argon TPC, Time projection chamber

1 Introduction

Among the many ideas developed around the use of liquid noble gases, the
Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber [1,2] certainly represented one of the
most challenging and appealing designs. The technology was proposed as a
tool for uniform and high accuracy imaging of massive detector volumes. The
operating principle of the LAr TPC was based on the fact that in highly
puriﬁed LAr ionization tracks could indeed be transported undistorted by a
uniform electric ﬁeld over distances of the order of meters. Imaging is provided
by wire planes placed at the end of the drift path, continuously sensing and
recording the signals induced by the drifting electrons. Liquid Argon is an
ideal medium since it provides high density, excellent properties (ionization,
scintillation yields) and is intrinsically safe and cheap, and readily available
anywhere as a standard by-product of the liquefaction of air. Non–destructive
readout of ionization electrons by charge induction allows to detect the signal
of electrons crossing subsequent planes with diﬀerent wire orientation. This
provides several projective views of the same event, hence allowing for space
point reconstruction and precise calorimetric measurement. The feasibility of
this technology has been demonstrated by the extensive ICARUS R&D pro-
gram, which included studies on small LAr volumes about proof of principle,

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

23 July 2013

LAr puriﬁcation methods, readout schemes and electronics, as well as studies
with several prototypes of increasing mass on puriﬁcation technology, collec-
tion of physics events, pattern recognition, long duration tests and readout.
The largest of these prototypes had a mass of 3 tons of LAr [3,4] and has been
continuously operated for more than four years, collecting a large sample of
cosmic-ray and gamma-source events. Furthermore, a smaller device with 50 l
of LAr [5] was exposed to the CERN neutrino beam, demonstrating the high
recognition capability of the technique for neutrino interaction events. The re-
alization of the 600 ton ICARUS detector culminated with its full test carried
out at surface during the summer 2001 [6]. This test demonstrated that the
LAr TPC technique can be operated at the kton scale with a drift length of
1.5 m.

2 Liquid Argon TPC in a magnetic ﬁeld

The bubble-chamber-like reconstruction capability of the liquid Argon TPC
provides simultaneously (1) a tracking device with unbiased imaging and re-
construction, and (2) full sampling calorimetry. The detector is fully active,
homogeneous and isotropic. The resolution is very good, both for energy
(calorimetry) and for angular reconstruction (tracking). The possibility to
complement the features with those provided by a magnetic ﬁeld has been
considered and would open new possibilities [7,8,9]: (a) charge discrimination,
(b) momentum measurement of particles escaping the detector (e.g. high en-
ergy muons), (c) very precise kinematics, since the measurements are multiple
scattering dominated (e.g. ∆p/p ≃ 4% for a track length of L = 12 m and a
ﬁeld of B = 1T ).

The orientation of the magnetic ﬁeld can be chosen such that the bending
direction is in the direction of the drift where the best spatial resolution is
achieved. The magnetic ﬁeld is hence perpendicular to the electric drift ﬁeld.
The Lorentz angle is expected to be very small in liquid (e.g. ≈ 30mrad
at E = 500 V /cm and B = 0.5T ). Embedding the volume of argon into a
magnetic ﬁeld should therefore not alter the imaging properties of the detector
and the measurement of the bending of charged hadrons or penetrating muons
would allow a precise determination of the momentum and a determination
of their charge.

The required magnetic ﬁeld for charge discrimination for a path x in liquid
Argon [8] is given by the bending

b ≈

l2
2R

=

0.3B(T )(x(m))2
2p(GeV )

(1)

2

and the multiple scattering contribution:

MS ≈

0.02(x(m))3/2
p(GeV )

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

At low momenta, we can safely neglect the contribution from the position
measurement error given the readout pitch and drift time resolution. The
momentum determination resolution is then given by:

∆p
p

≈

0.13
B(T )(x(m))1/2

and the statistical signiﬁcance for charge separation can be written as (b± are
the bending for positive and negative charges):

sig ≈

b+ − b−
MS

≈

2b
MS

≈ 15B(T )(x(m))1/2

For example, with a ﬁeld of 0.55 T, the charge of tracks of 10 cm can be
separated at 2.6σ. The requirement for a 3σ charge discrimination can be
written as: b+ − b− = 2b > 3MS, which implies a ﬁeld strength:

B ≥

0.2(T )

qx(m)

For long penetrating tracks like muons, a ﬁeld of 0.1T allows to discriminate
the charge for tracks longer than 4 meters. This corresponds for example to a
muon momentum threshold of 800 MeV/c. Hence, performances are very good,
even at very low momenta. Unlike muons or hadrons, the early showering of
electrons makes their charge identiﬁcation diﬃcult. The track length usable
for charge discrimination is limited to a few radiation lengths after which
the showers make the recognition of the parent electron more diﬃcult. In
practice, charge discrimination is possible for high ﬁelds x = 1X0 → B > 0.5T ,
x = 2X0 → B > 0.4T , x = 3X0 → B > 0.3T . From simulations, we found that
the determination of the charge of electrons of energy in the range between
1 and 5 GeV is feasible with good purity, provided the ﬁeld has a strength
in the range of 1 T. Preliminary estimates show that these electrons exhibit
an average curvature suﬃcient to have electron charge discrimination better
than 1% with an eﬃciency of 20%[9]. Further studies are on-going.

An R&D programme to investigate a LAr TPC in a magnetic ﬁeld was ini-
tiated. The goal was to study the drift properties of free electrons in LAr in
the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld and to prove that the imaging capabilities

3

Fig. 1. Cut through the magnet with the LAr cryostat containing the drift chamber.
The cryostat consists of three cylinders: the puriﬁed LAr container (red), the LN2
bath (blue) and the vacuum insulation (green)

are not aﬀected. The test programme included (1) checking the basic imag-
ing in B-ﬁeld (2) measuring traversing and stopping muons (3) test charge
discrimination (4) check Lorentz angle. We report here on preliminary results
obtained. A complete report is in preparation [10].

3 Experimental Setup

The experimental setup (see Figure 1) was custom built for this test.

We have ﬁrst designed and assembled a liquid Argon TPC with a width of
300 mm, a height of 150 mm and a maximal drift length of 150 mm (see

4

Fig. 2. (left) Cut through the drift chamber (right) View into the assembled drift
chamber with the cathode plate removed.

Figure 2). Its dimensions were chosen to ﬁt in the recycled SINDRUM I mag-
net 1 , which allows to test the chamber in a maximal ﬁeld of 0.55 T. At the
maximal ﬁeld the DC current is 850 A corresponding to a power consumption
of 220 kW. The electrical power and the water cooling circuit necessary to
operate the magnet in the laboratory had to be specially installed by ETH.

The cryostat is made of three concentrical cylinders: the inner most with a
diameter of 250 mm contains the puriﬁed LAr with the drift chamber, the
second cylinder is a LN2 bath kept under an absolute pressure of 2.7 bar in
order not to freeze out the LAr at about 1 bar, it is wrapped with 25 layers
of superinsulation; the outer most cylinder is for the insulation vacuum.

The drift chamber consists of a rectangular cathode, 27 ﬁeld shaping elec-
trodes spaced by 5 mm and the three detector planes. The ﬁrst two detector
planes are wire chambers with the wires oriented at ±60o to the vertical; the
stainless steel wires have a diameter of 100 µm and a pitch of 2 mm. The
wire chambers are operated at potentials such that they are transparent to
the drifting electrons and only pick up an induced signal from the electron
cloud passing the planes. The third plane is a PCB with horizontal strips with
a width of 1 mm and a pitch of 2 mm on which the drift electrons are col-
lected. The wires and the strips are connected through 3 m long twisted pair
cables to the feedthroughs on a ﬂange, from the feedthroughs the signals are
connected through 20 cm cables to the analog boards (CAEN-V791) of the
ICARUS readout electronics; the VME-like analog board contains the low-
noise preampliﬁers for 32 channels and two multiplexed 10 bit FADC running
at 40 MHz; each wire (strip) is sampled with 2.5 MHz. The readout electronics

1 The magnet was kindly lent to us by PSI, CH-5232 Villigen, Switzerland and was
brought from PSI to ETH/Z¨urich.

5

works as a continuous wave form digitizer: the digitized data are stored in a
buﬀer, large enough to contain the data of a time interval of about 1 ms for
each channel; the maximal drift time during this run was about 150 µs. When
a trigger occurs the ﬁlling of the buﬀer is stopped and the data are transferred
to a PCI card in a PC, the PCI card is read out with a LabView program. The
high voltage up to a maximal value of 22.5 kV is applied to the cathode and
is connected through a resistor chain to the ﬁeld shaping elctrodes in order
to produce a homogeneous electric drift ﬁeld (horizontal and perpendicular to
the solenoid axis).

There were two diﬀerent triggers used: to trigger on cosmic ray muons passing
through the magnet, plastic scintillators mounted on top and at the bottom
of the magnet were used. The trigger counters also deﬁne the time t0 of the
event, needed to determine the drift time from the chamber signals. The sum-
output from the chamber signals allows to trigger on low-energy events, as
e.g. muons stopping in the chamber. In this case the scintillators on the top
of the chamber are use to deﬁne the t0.

4 Results

In November 2004 the setup was ready for a ﬁrst test. Before ﬁlling with LAr,
the cylinder containing the drift chamber was pumped during four weeks; the
ﬁnal vacuum was better than 5 · 10−6 mbar. After cooling down during a few
days with LN2, the cylinder was ﬁlled through a puriﬁcation cartridge with
LAr; the same LAr ﬁlling was used during the whole three weeks of data taking
without recirculating it through the puriﬁcation cartridge. Starting the tests
without magnetic ﬁeld and triggering with the scintillator counters, clean cos-
mic ray tracks were immediately observed at a drift ﬁeld of 500 V/cm. About
100 passing-through muons per hour were stored. From the observation of a
decreasing collected drift charge with increasing drift time, the mean lifetime
of the free electrons in LAr was estimated to be about 100 µs; it did not de-
crease signiﬁcantly during the whole period of the run.
After a few days of commissioning, the magnetic ﬁeld was turned on to the
maximal value of 0.55 T. The signal-to-noise ratio of the chamber signals did
not change signiﬁcantly with the magnet on. Figure 3 shows the raw data (from
the collection plane) of events with the magnetic ﬁeld turned on and with a
drift ﬁeld of 300 V/cm; the intensity of the black color is a measure of the
collected charge. The horizontal axis corresponds to the drift time and the ver-
tical axis to the wire number. The ﬁgures show the two-dimensional projection
of tracks in the plane perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld. Combining clusters
with equal drift time from two (or three) planes allows the three-dimensional
reconstruction of the track[10]. These events are interpreted as cosmic muons
either crossing or stopping then decaying in the detector. Delta-rays or con-

6

verted e+e−-pairs are also easily identiﬁable.

5 Conclusions

We have built a small LAr test TPC and operated it for the ﬁrst time in a
magnetic ﬁeld (0.55 T) perpendicular to the electric drift ﬁeld. The quality
of cosmic ray tracks is not signiﬁcantly decreased with the B-ﬁeld turned on.
The setup will be used to study the drift properties of electrons in LAr in a
magnetic ﬁeld and a measurement of the Lorentz angle is foreseen. A complete
description of this work is in preparation[10].

Acknowledgements

We thank the ETHZ, Abteilung Bauten, for providing us the necessary power
and cooling infrastructure to operate the SINDRUM magnet at ETHZ. We are
also indebted to the INFN Padova group who has cordially lent us the readout
electronics necessary for the measurements. In particular, we thank Sandro
Centro (INFN Padova) for his support. We thank P. Picchi and F. Pietropaolo
for useful discussions.

This work was supported by ETH/Z¨urich and Swiss National Science Foun-
dation.

References

[1] C. Rubbia, “The Liquid Argon Time projection Chamber: a new concept for

Neutrino Detector”, CERN–EP/77–08, (1977).

[2] E. Aprile, K. L. Giboni and C. Rubbia, “A Study Of Ionization Electrons
Drifting Large Distances In Liquid And Solid Argon,” Nucl. Instrum. Meth.
A 241, 62 (1985).

[3] P. Benetti et al. [ICARUS Collaboration], “A 3 Ton Liquid Argon Time

Projection Chamber”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 332, (1993) 395.

[4] P. Cennini et al., [ICARUS Collaboration], “Performance Of A 3 Ton Liquid

Argon Time Projection Chamber”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 345, (1994) 230.

[5] F. Arneodo et al. [ICARUS Collaboration], “The ICARUS 50 l LAr TPC in the

CERN neutrino beam”, arXiv:hep-ex/9812006.

7

[6] S. Amerio et al. [ICARUS Collaboration], “Design, construction and tests of the
ICARUS T600 detector”, Nucl. Inst. Meth., A527 (2004) 329-410 and references
therein.

[7] A. Rubbia, “Neutrino factories: Detector concepts for studies of CP and T

violation eﬀects in neutrino oscillations,” arXiv:hep-ph/0106088.

[8] A. Rubbia, “Experiments for CP-violation: A giant liquid argon scintillation,

Cerenkov and charge imaging experiment?,” arXiv:hep-ph/0402110.

[9] A. Bueno, M. Campanelli, S. Navas-Concha and A. Rubbia, “On the energy
and baseline optimization to study eﬀects related to the delta-phase (CP-/T-
violation) in neutrino oscillations at a neutrino factory,” Nucl. Phys. B 631
(2002) 239 [arXiv:hep-ph/0112297].

[10] M.

Laﬀranchi,

Ph.D.

Dissertation,

2005.

Available

at

http://neutrino.ethz.ch/diplomathesis.html.

8

Fig. 3. Eight examples of real events collected with the liquid Argon TPC prototype
immersed in a magnetic ﬁeld of 0.55 T. The horizontal axes correspond to the time
coordinate and the vertical axes are the wire coordinate.

9

