Design of a Base-Board
for arrays of closely-packed
Multi-Anode Photo-Multipliers

M. Ameri, S. Cuneo, P. Musico, M. Pallavicini, A. Petrolini
F. Siccardi and A. Thea.

∗

,

Dipartimento di Fisica dell’Universit`a di Genova and INFN Sezione di Genova,
Via Dodecaneso 33, I-16146, Genova, Italia.

Abstract

We describe the design of a Base-Board to house Multi-Anode Photo-Multipliers
for use in large-area arrays of light sensors. The goals, the design, the results of tests
on the prototypes and future developments are presented.

Key words: Photon Detectors, Multi-Anode Photo-Multipliers, Housing, Sensor
Array, High-Energy Physics, Astro-Particle Physics.
PACS: 85.60, 29.40, 96.40, 13.85

4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
1
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗

Corresponding Author: e-mail: Alessandro.Petrolini@ge.infn.it

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

13 August 2013

1 Introduction

Contemporary experiments in Nuclear, Particle and Astro-Particle physics of-
ten require the use of fast, large area and highly pixelized single photon detec-
tors with limited dead-areas, featuring up to hundreds of thousands of channels
with tight resource limitations. Among others, Ring Imaging Cherenkov detec-
tors (RICH) (see HERAb [1], LHCb [2] and AMS [3]) and Space Telescopes for
Ultra High energy Cosmic Rays observation (see EUSO [4], TUS/KLYPVE [5]
and OWL [6]) belong to this category. Moreover Medical Imaging applications
are often subject to very similar requirements. Multi-Anode Photo-Multipliers
are often the preferred sensor for these applications.

In such cases one of the main problems is to assemble the whole detector, on
the focal surface of the collecting optics, by closely packing the array of sensors,
in such a way to keep an acceptable geometrical acceptance and avoid defocus-
ing eﬀects. With this goal in mind we have carried on the design, prototyping
and testing of the housing (Base-Board) for a large array of closely-packed
Multi-Anode Photo-Multipliers, with particular emphasis on possible Space
applications. As Space applications have a number of tight additional require-
ments with respect to ordinary applications, the device described in this paper
might have a broad range of applicability.

One should note that the geometrical acceptance of the sensor itself is a closely
related issue, aﬀecting the overall geometrical acceptance of the array of sen-
sors. The usual way to deal with the geometrical acceptance of the sensor
consists in either improving the geometrical acceptance of the bare sensor
(like, for instance, in the R8520 and Flat Panel PMT series from Hamamatsu
Corporation [7]) or using a suitable Light Collection System (either an imaging
system or not) in front of the sensor [8,9,10]. This paper will not be concerned
with this issue, and it will be assumed that the geometrical acceptance of the
sensor itself has been already maximised in a suitable way. However, in the
development of the Base-Board, we kept in mind that each sensor might be
equipped with its own suitable Light Collection System.

The Base-Board which is the object of this paper was ﬁrst developed in the
framework of the development of the RICH detectors of the LHCb experi-
ment [?]. Later on the design was improved to adapt it to the Space require-
ments of the EUSO mission [11].

2

2 The Goals of the Design

A modular architecture is preferred when building large detectors made by
assembling smaller units, because it has many advantages including: indepen-
dence of the diﬀerent modules, fault propagation limitation, easier spare mod-
ules management and procurement. Moreover a modular architecture makes
the development, design, integration and testing phases easier.

Therefore the full apparatus shall consist of small independent functional
units, named Elementary-Cells (EC), assembled into larger modules, named
Photo-Detector Modules (PDM). The Elementary-Cell shall consist of a lim-
ited number of MAPMT, sharing some common resources and constituting a
totally autonomous system.

The sharing of resources improves the economy and makes design, production
and testing easier. Moreover when resources are limited, as it is the case in
Space applications, saving on resources can be accomplished by combining
functions, which is the approach implemented in the current design of the
Base-Board.

The Elementary-Cell was conceived with the following guidelines and require-
ments in mind.

• The EC shall be an autonomous and compact module with diﬀerent func-
tionalities integrated onto a Printed Circuit Board (PCB) Base-Board.
• To EC shall allow to pack as closely as possible the MAPMT on the Base-
Board and shall be built to allow to pack as closely as possible diﬀerent EC,
in both cases ensuring a precise relative positioning. The packing of both
the sensors in the EC and the EC in the PDM has to be optimised to reduce
losses in the geometrical acceptance, due to dead regions between the close
packed elements, and defocusing eﬀects, originating from a positioning of
the elements at some distance from the ideal focal surface.

• To EC shall allow a sharing of diﬀerent resources between diﬀerent MAPMT:
· there is one common mechanical supporting structure and common ther-

mal dissipation capabilities;

· the thick PCB is used as a mechanical supporting structure but it also acts
as an electric board housing the electrical components and connections;
· voltage dividers and HV/LV power connections may be common to dif-

ferent MAPMT (whenever this is desired);

· common electro-thermo-mechanical components such as cables, connec-

tors and heat bridges;

· possibly common front-end electronic chips for more than one MAPMT.
• The EC shall include the front-end electronics chip for local processing of
the signals, located as close as possible to the MAPMT in order to minimise

3

the length of the connections to preserve the fast signal from the MAPMT,
with good signal to noise ratio. Due to the large number of channels and
the tight space, speed and power requirements the development of an ASIC
device is mandatory (see [12]).

• Finally the EC shall be a single, self-contained and autonomous system,
designed as a general purpose instrument to be used in other applications
too.

The EC can be built as a thick multi-layered Printed Circuit Boards (PCB). A
number of these modules, each one making an essentially autonomous system,
are then put together to make a PDM. These are independent assemblies
tied to each other by a common supporting structure and having a shape
determined by the layout of the focal surface. In fact a modular structure
made of small elements is well suited to ﬁt any focal surface shape, as it is
required by some of the applications, featuring a highly curved focal surface.

In the current work MAPMT are assumed to be packed into a (2 × 2) EC. A
realistic (and possibly conservative) MAPMT pitch is assumed to be 27.0 mm
to account also for the large tolerances on the MAPMT dimensions provided
by the manufacturer: (25.7 ± 0.5) mm.

It will be assumed that a PDM is made of an array of close-packed EC with a
suitable layout and shape, possibly surrounded by a border of variable thick-
ness running all around the MAPMT, to leave space for the mechanical assem-
bly of the PDM. Obviously the detailed design of the PDM geometry depends
on the speciﬁc application and it will not be discussed in this paper.

3 Design, production and assembly of the Base-Board

The MAPMT used in this design is the R7600-M64 Multi-Anode Photo-
Multipliers from Hamamatsu Corporation [13]. The sensor has a square input
window with L = 25.7 mm side and about 35 mm height. Its mass is about
30 g.

The current prototype has been designed and manufactured without the front-
end chip, due to the parallel development of the ASIC chip itself. In place of
the front-end chip two high-density connectors per MAPMT, with 0.5 mm
pitch, were installed, The signals are then taken away from the EC by means
of a ﬂex-cable to be processed by a suitable electronics.

4

3.1 The Elementary-Cell

The EC, in the current design and conﬁguration, consists of:

• the sensors (currently four R7600-M64 Multi-Anode Photo-Multipliers);
• the Light Collector System;
• the HV dividers (currently one for each MAPMT);
• the front-end electronics chip;
• the connectors for HV/LV, signals and controls;
• the Base-Board, a thick PCB housing all the other components and carrying

the electrical connections;

• a copper layer, buried inside the PCB, to help heat transfers away from the

EC;

• mechanical elements;
• a potting resin;
• any other required structural or functional element (if any).

A resistive voltage divider was chosen for maximum reliability. MAPMT are
powered in negative polarity, that is with anode grounded, in order to avoid
using decoupling capacitors at the anodes, thus saving space and increasing
the reliability.

In order to keep the linearity of the response, under the expected photon
rates, suitable capacitors were inserted in parallel to the last three dynodes.
Moreover, in order to save power while keeping an acceptable linearity of the
response, three diﬀerent HV inputs were provided to the MAPMT at the level
of the cathode and the last two dynodes.

3.1.1 The Base-Board

Any EC is totally autonomous and it is individually ﬁxed to the PD module
supporting back-planes. This approach allows a large ﬂexibility in the choice
of the shape of the PD module, including, possibly, allowance for a curved
shape.

The Base-Board acts as the structural element, housing the MAPMT, the
front-end electronics and all the other necessary components. It includes the
traces to carry the signals from the MAPMT to the front-end electronics and
to the outside of the Base-Board as well as the traces carrying the power and
control signals to the components.

The MAPMT side of the Base-Board also houses the components of the voltage
dividers to power the dynode chain. Up to one voltage divider per MAPMT
(that is four in total) can be housed onto the Base-Board (as it is in the

5

prototype). Alternatively, one might install only one or two voltage dividers
(trade-oﬀ). In the current base-line one voltage divider per MAPMT is used
in order to decouple as much as possible the four MAPMT. This approach
increases the reliability and reduces the interactions among the MAPMT,
while testing the design in its most challenging conﬁguration.

3.2 The Mechanical and Thermal design

The following assumptions have been made:

• standard printed circuit board manufacturing accuracy (0.1 mm);
• maximum MAPMT side length limited to 25.7 mm;
• minimum installation clearance between neighbouring MAPMT: 0.5 mm.

The mechanical drawing of the current Base-Board design is shown in ﬁgure 1.

Fig. 1. Mechanical drawing of the current Base-Board design.

The Base-Board is a 4 mm thick ﬂame retardant FR4 glass epoxy laminate. It
integrates a copper layer, 0.5 mm thick, to help to convey the heat produced
on the Base-Board to the screws and dowel pins as well as improving the
structural properties. The Base-Board is secured to the back-standing support
by four M2.5 stainless steel screws and, if necessary, by up to four φ2.0 dowel
pins. This allows a precise relative positioning of the diﬀerent EC onto the
PD-module and redundant support.

6

Screws and dowel pins ﬁt into metallized holes drilled into the PCB. Screws
are equipped with cylindrical hollow aluminium spacers, so that enough space
to allow the routing of the services is available between the Base-Board and
the back-standing support. The spacers also allow to improve the structural
performance of the fastening system. The location of the holes is a trade-oﬀ
between the structural requirements and the electrical layout. High accuracy,
conventionally available in PCB manufacturing, should allow the precise posi-
tioning of the EC, so that the design characteristics can be kept without any
interference during assembly and dismounting operation.

Screws, dowel pins and spacers also act as thermal bridges to convey the heat
generated on the Base-Board, by the voltage dividers and front-end electronics,
away from it, to the back-plane supporting structure. This is accomplished by
conduction, and dedicated heat bridges, whenever necessary.

3.2.1 Structural analysis

A ﬁnite elements structural simulation has been performed, modelling the
Base-Board with its links to the back-standing structure and simulating the
MAPMT as added masses. The modal analysis of a 5 mm thick Base-Board,
fastened through four M2.5 × 15 stainless steel screws, with an overall mass of
0.2 kg, has determined the following ﬁrst modal frequencies: 716 Hz, 872 Hz,
1259 Hz, 1801 Hz, 1878 Hz. Afterwards a random vibration analysis has been
performed with the input spectrum suggested by NASA for acceptance of items
whose mass at launch is below 23 Kg ([14]). Such spectrum of acceleration
is equivalent to 6.9 G RMS. A standard damping ratio of 0.025 has been
assumed, constant throughout the frequency range. The calculated response
of the system, when the excitation is parallel to the Base-Board plane, showed
a sharp peak in correspondence of the ﬁrst modal frequency, with an integral
value of 25 G RMS. The calculated response of the system, when the excitation
is orthogonal to the Base-Board plane, showed a sharp peak in correspondence
of the ﬁfth modal frequency, with an integral value of 39 G RMS. The result
is consistent with the ﬁfth modal shape.

The static analysis performed with the above acceleration combined in a load
vector showed the screws working as fully constrained beams, as expected,
with the most stressed points at their ends. Calculated Von Mises’ equivalent
stress in those points was well below the allowed limits.

3.2.2 Thermal analysis

A ﬁnite elements analysis has been performed on a simpliﬁed model, where
the EC was thermally linked, through its fastenings, to a cold pit at T =
13 ◦C. Heat is supposed to be drained away by means of conduction only. An

7

uniformly distributed power of 0.3 W, as expected in real operation, has been
assumed. The results of the analysis showed that the copper layer works well:
the PCB hot side temperature becomes uniform to within one degree and a
temperature drop of ∆T = 6 ◦C is generated with respect to the cold pit.

3.3 The Electrical design

The routing of the electric connections is hard, due to the high number of
channels and components and the limited available space. However, thanks
to the regular geometry of the MAPMT anode connections and of the con-
nectors, it was easy to manually route the connections in such a way that no
intermediate layer was necessary in the PCB for the routing the signal paths.

The four voltage dividers (made of resistors, capacitors and the three HV
inputs per MAPMT) are made of surface-mount devices and installed on the
side of the MAPMT.

The signal connections starts from the MAPMT side and are routed to the
back-side of the Base-Board through via holes, where either a front-end chip
or suitable connectors are housed.

The signal connectors on the back-side are located at the centre of the corre-
sponding MAPMT. The HV connector is located at the centre of the Base-
Board and the three voltages are routed to the four voltage dividers.

The PCB layout was done following the standard design rules.

3.3.1 Mounting of the MAPMT

By using a surface-mount technique for the MAPMT the thickness of the Base-
Board can be kept relatively small, compatibly with the mechanical require-
ments, thus saving mass. The optimal thickness will result from a trade-oﬀ
with the structural requirements.

If one wants to avoid direct soldering of the MAPMT one needs a suitable
socket. A dedicated surface-mount socket was produced [15], as shown in ﬁg-
ure 2.

3.4 The Elementary-Cell assembly

A possible assembly procedure can be carried on via the following steps.

8

− 3 −

Fig. 2. Prototype of the surface-mount socket for the MAPMT.

(1) Mounting of the passive components on the Base-Board: voltage-dividers
components, surface-mount socket for the MAPMT and connectors. Test
of the passive components. An X-ray scan can be performed at this stage
to check the soldering joints.

(2) Installation and test of the front-end electronics.
(3) Installation and test of the MAPMT.
(4) Potting of the whole EC.

A suitable potting between the MAPMT and the Base-Board and all around
the four MAPMT with a suitable resin will ensure electrical and mechanical
insulation, mechanical damping, structural strength, containment and good
protection of the components, long-lasting mechanical resistance and good
electrical contacts, and, possibly, light tightness and good thermal conduction.
Dow Corning DC-93500, a commonly used potting resin for space application,
has been assumed as base-line potting compound.

The impossibility to perform a complete visual inspection of the EC can be
overcome by X-ray inspection techniques and/or by deﬁning a suitable alter-
native testing functional procedure, either for the MAPMT connections and
for the front-end ASIC.

The scheme of the mounting is shown in ﬁgure 3.

9

Fig. 3. Scheme of the mounting scheme for the EC (cross section).

4 Prototype tests

A batch of Base-Board prototypes has been manufactured to be used in labora-
tory tests, and equipped with BGA sockets and dummy, expendable, MAPMT.
This prototype is reasonably close to the designed EC as far as the thermo-
mechanical properties are concerned. Moreover one prototype was installed
including real MAPMT.

Pictures of the prototype EC with some of the MAPMT installed, without
Light Collector Systems and no potting, are shown in Figure 4 and 5.

4.1 Functional tests

The EC prototype was submitted to functional tests. The behaviour of the
MAPMT was as expected and no eﬀect due to the speciﬁc housing on the EC
was noticed.

10

Fig. 4. Front-view of the prototype EC, with three of the MAPMT installed but
without Light Collector Systems and no potting.

4.2 Structural tests

Eﬀectiveness and reliability of M2.5 screws, a forced choice because of the tight
layout constraints, have been checked through an extensive a test campaign.
An M2.5 stainless steel screw has been tightened on a 5 mm thick FR4 board
and submitted to approximately six times the maximum expected equivalent
static stress. After eight months, there was no evidence of damage either of
the Base-Board, or of the screw. Then, M2.5 stainless steel screws have been
tightened to rupture onto a 4.5 mm thick G10 board (including a 0.5 mm
thick copper layer inside): all the ﬁve screws tested broke at a torque in the
range from (60 ÷ 65) cNm.

11

Fig. 5. Side-view of the prototype EC, with three of the MAPMT installed but
without Light Collector Systems and no potting.

Mechanical tests have then been performed on a vibrating table.

A EC sub-assembly, complete with dummy MAPMT and potting resin, has
been set up. Its measured mass, including stainless steel screws and aluminium
spacers, was measured to be 0.16 kg, that is much lighter than assumed in the
simulations.

The EC assembly has been installed, in horizontal position, equipped with
an accelerometer, and submitted to a sine sweep. The ﬁrst resonances were
found at 1.0 kHz and 1.3 kHz. Afterwards a Random Vibration Test was
started, submitting the assembly to white noise in the frequency range from
20 Hz ÷ 2000 Hz. The load was gradually stepped, from 4 G RMS to 9 G,
and each step lasted 60 seconds. As a last step, the spectrum measured by the
accelerometer on the support bracket (input) was equivalent to 8.3 G. After
the Random Vibration Test campaign, a sine sweep has been performed again,
and resonances have been found at almost the same frequencies, showing that
no signiﬁcant changes happened.

The same test campaign has been repeated with the EC assembly installed in
vertical position. The ﬁrst resonances were found at 0.6 Hz and 0.8 Hz. The
system has been submitted to the same Random Vibration Test with white

12

noise and up to 9 G in input was measured. The location of the resonances
showed no signiﬁcant change after the test.

At the end, the assembly in horizontal position has been submitted to a sine
burst, where a sinusoidal excitation at 35 Hz and amplitude equivalent to 11 G
entered the system for 10 seconds. The sine sweep again found almost the same
resonances after the test. The EC response was about the same as the input,
showing a rather ineﬀective damping at 35 Hz.

After all the tests, the whole assembly has been inspected, and electrical con-
tinuity checked. No damage has been noticed.

The preliminary tests performed on the prototypes proved that the mechanical
design solutions chosen are reliable, including the choice of the stainless steel
screws holding directly on a thread machined on the glass-epoxy EC Base-
Board.

4.3 Thermal tests

A group of three EC, equipped with heaters to simulate the power dissipation
of the on-board electronics and instrumented with PT100 temperature probes,
has been installed in a test set-up, with a geometry that kept at negligible level
the convective heat exchange.

All the parameters have been set to reproduce the boundary and load condi-
tions, as assumed in the simulations. Measured Base-Boards surface temper-
atures were around 22 ◦C, slightly above room temperature, while the tem-
perature drop measured across the mechanical links of the EC was in the
range 4.5 ◦C ÷ 5.8 ◦C. Results are in good agreement with the simulations.
The heat balance conﬁrmed that 0.95 of the power was ﬂowing through the
EC mechanical fasteners, as desired.

The good agreement between estimates and measurements conﬁrms the good
thermal conduction at the metallized holes.

The preliminary tests performed on the prototypes proved that the thermal
design solutions chosen are reliable, including the choice of including a cop-
per layer inside the EC Base-Board to reduce both temperature peaks and
temperature non-uniformities.

13

5 Conclusions

The design, construction and tests of the prototype of a Base-Board for arrays
of closely-packed Multi-Anode Photo-Multipliers was presented. The design
was carried on taking into account the tight requirements of space applications
and it is, therefore, of wide applicability.

The EC Base-Board design proved to be robust enough to withstand the severe
environmental conditions expected during a space mission.

The next and ﬁnal step of prototyping foresees a Base-Board with the front-
end electronics ASIC installed on the back-side. It is planned to use the device
as the sensitive element of the Photo-Detector for applications including: mea-
surement of the background to Ultra-High-Energy Cosmic Rays observations
from space, test measurements of Ultra-High-Energy Cosmic Rays either from
the Earth surface or from balloons and measurements of the air scintillation
yield (a basic information for Ultra-High-Energy Cosmic Rays experiments).

6 Acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank Laura Confalonieri (Hamamatsu Italia) and Yuji
Yoshizawa (Hamamatsu Photonics Electron Tube Center) for many useful
discussions and support.

The authors are grateful to INFN for continuing support to the project.

List of Figures

2

3

4

5

1 Mechanical drawing of the current Base-Board design.

Prototype of the surface-mount socket for the MAPMT.

6

9

Scheme of the mounting scheme for the EC (cross section).

10

Front-view of the prototype EC, with three of the MAPMT installed but without Light Collector

Side-view of the prototype EC, with three of the MAPMT installed but without Light Collector

14

References

[1] D. R. Broemmelsiek, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A, 433 (1999) 136.

[2] S. A. Wotton, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A, 453 (2000) 296; E. Albrecht et al.,
Performance of a cluster of Multi-Anode Photo-Multipliers equipped with lenses
for use in a prototype RICH detector, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 488, 110 (2002).

[3] B. Alpat, Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl., 85, (2000) 15.

[4] A. Petrolini et al., EUSO Collaboration, Observation from space of ultra high
energy cosmic rays with the EUSO experiment, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 125,
212 (2003).

[5] V. Alexandrov et al., UHECR Study on Satellites

in TUS/KLYPVE
Experiments Proceedings of the 28th International Cosmic Ray Conference,
497, 2003.

[6] Orbiting Wide-angle Light-collectors (OWL) White Paper, Submitted to SEUS

(NASA), Jan 31, 2002; http://owl.gsfc.nasa.gov/.

[7] Multi-Anode Photo-Multiplier tube R8520 and Flat Panel PMT; Hamamatsu
Photonics K. K., Electron Tube Center, 314-5, Shimokanzo, Toyooka-village,
Iwata-gun, Shizuoka-ken, 438-0193, Japan; http://www.hamamatsu.com.

[8] A. Petrolini, A comparative study of light collector systems for use with Multi-

Anode photo-multipliers, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 497, 314 (2003).

[9] Y. Takizawa et al., RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan,
Evaluation of the Performance of Optical Adaptors, Internal EUSO note,
unpublished.

[10] L. Gambicorti, P. Mazzinghi, E. Pace et al., XUVLab, Dipartimento Astronomia
e Scienza dello Spazio, Universit`a di Firenze, Italy; Istituto Nazionale di Ottica
Applicata, Firenze, Italy; INFN, Sezione di Firenze, Italy; UV ﬁltering optical
adapters to enhance the collection eﬃciency of MAPMT R7600, Internal EUSO
note, unpublished.

[11] A proposal for a supporting structure for the multianode Photo-Multipliers of
RICH2, LHCb 2000-005 RICH, CERN internal note; R&D mechanical studies
of the photon detector Elementary-Cells and Modules for the EUSO experiment,
INFN/TC-03/13, INFN internal note;

[12] P. Musico et al., First Results of VLSI Front-End Electronics for Photo-

Detectors, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A518, 210,2004.

[13] Multi-Anode Photo-Multiplier tube R7600; Hamamatsu Photonics K. K.,
Iwata-gun,

Electron Tube Center, 314-5, Shimokanzo, Toyooka-village,
Shizuoka-ken, 438-0193, Japan; http://www.hamamatsu.com.

[14] General Environmental Veriﬁcation Speciﬁcation for STS and ELV payloads,
subsystems and components, GEVS-SE, Rev A, June 1996, NASA
GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER, Greenbelt, Maryland 20771

15

[15] DSMI ELECTRONICS S.A., Rue du T´el´eph´erique, 1914 ISERABLES,

SWITZERLAND.

16

