4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
6
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
1
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LNF-04/25 (P)
15 novembre 2004

AN UNCONVENTIONAL APPROACH FOR A
STRAW TUBE-MICROSTRIP DETECTOR

E.Basile(*), F.Bellucci (***), L. Benussi, M. Bertani, S. Bianco, M.A. Caponero (**),
D. Colonna (*), F. Di Falco (*), F.L. Fabbri, F. Felli (*), M. Giardoni, A. La Monaca,
G. Mensitieri (***), B. Ortenzi, M. Pallotta, A. Paolozzi (*), L. Passamonti, D.Pierluigi,
C. Pucci (*), A. Russo, G. Saviano (*), S. Tomassini.
Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati dell’INFN

Abstract

We report on a novel concept of silicon microstrips and straw tubes detector, where integration is
accomplished by a straw module with straws not subjected to mechanical tension in a Rohacell r lattice
and carbon ﬁber reinforced plastic shell. Results on mechanical and test beam performances are reported
on as well.

PACS.: wire chambers, straw tubes, HEP detectors, silicon detectors, silicon microstrips, beauty quark, CP
violation.

Submitted to Transactions on Nuclear Science

∗

∗∗

∗∗∗

Permanent address: “La Sapienza” University - Rome.
Permanent address: ENEA Frascati.
Permanent address: “Federico II” University - Naples.

1 CONCEPT

Modern physics detectors are based on tracking subcomponents, such as silicon pixels and strips, straw

tubes and drift chambers, which require high space resolution, large geometrical acceptance and extremely

large-scale integration. Detectors are often requested demanding requirements of hermeticity and

compactness that must satisfy the minimization of materials. We have developed an integration solution

that accommodates straw tubes and silicon strips in a common structure.
Our novel design utilizes straw tubes mechanically non-tensioned and embedded in a Rohacell r lattice.

2 BTEV DETECTOR

Experiment BTeV[1] at

the Fermilab proton-antiproton collider Tevatron produces and studies the

elementary particles composed of the heavy quark beauty, in order to investigate the phenomenon called

CP violation, and understand if the Standard Model of particles and interactions is sufﬁcient to describe the

world we live in. BTeV is composed of tracking detectors (pixel, strips, straws) for detection of charged

particles, RICH Cerenkov detector for identiﬁcation of pions, kaons and protons, crystal EM calorimeter
for detection of neutral particles (photons and π0), and muon detector.

3 M0 CONCEPT

M0 is a special straw module which houses straw tubes and supports silicon microstrip detectors planes. M0
is made of straw tubes embedded in a Rohacell r foam, inside a Carbon Fiber Reinforced Plastic (CFRP)

shell. CFRP is chosen to allow the fabrication of a rigid mechanical structure with high transparency to

incoming particles. CFRP is also used for M1 modules, conventional straw tubes sub detectors that act

as struts sustaining the mechanical tension of remaining straw modules. Six straw-microstrips stations are

deployed in BTeV, each station made of three views, each view made of two half-views. Straw lengths vary

from 54cm in the ﬁrst station to 231cm in the sixth station.

4

FEA VALIDATION

A Finite Element Analysis (FEA) of these structures allows us to estimate the displacements of the

M0 and M1 modules under the loads of the micro-strips and straws tubes. Time stability and maximum

displacements of the order of 10µm are requested, in order not to spoil the space resolution of microstrip

detectors. The FEA analysis has been carried on the M0 of the sixth station, the longest straw length.

A straw load of 1.4N in each corner of M0 has been simulated to reproduce the mechanical tension of

wires. A load of 12.3N and a momentum of torsion of 2N m have been applied to simulate the weight

of the micro-strip. The used material properties are reported in the table below. FEA shows a maximum

2

displacement of 15µm (4µm in the axial direction, 2µm x direction, 11µm y direction), close to the

required speciﬁcation. We have used shell elements for the simulation of the carbon ﬁber reinforced
polyester structure and bricks for the Rohacell r simulation. Beam elements were used for introducing

glue between the CRFP modulus and the cylindrical plate where microstrips were placed.

M0 AND M1 STRUCTURE MICRO STRIP CYLINDER ROHACELL FOAM

THICKNESS
[MM]

E11[GP a]
E22[GP a]
E12[GP a]
ν12

0.07 EACH PLY WITH
FIBRES DISPOSITION
OF 0/90/0
260
10
7.2
0.3

0.07 EACH PLY (0/90/0)
WITH A ROHACELL
FOAM OF 5CM
590
10
7.2
0.3

2

0.019
-
-
0.3

Table 1: Geometrical arrangement (thicknesses), Young modules (E11, E12, E22), and Poisson coefﬁcient
(ν12) for a FEM simulation of M0 and M1.

5 TOMOGRAPHY AND FBG

A check of the eccentricity of the straws and of their positions in the grooves can be done with tomography

method. The tomography uses X-ray and can reconstruct sections of the scanned region. Due to the short

X-ray wavelength of about 0.1nm, the technique determines the amount of inner surfaces and interfaces

of micrometer dimensions. Computed images are reconstructed from a large number of measurements

of X-ray transmission. The result images are bidimensional, but a 3-D image is allowed using a digital

reconstruction. Results show how a precision of about 20 µm can be reached on the measurement of straws

radii. The maximum variation from circularity allowed is 100 µm. The BTeV detectors utilize Fiber Bragg

Grating (FBG) sensors to monitor online the positions of the straws and microstrip. The optical ﬁber

is used for monitoring displacements and strains in mechanical structures such as the presented straw

tubes-microstrip support. A wavelength selective light diffraction along the FBG sensor is placed in the

ﬁber, and it permits an on-time monitoring of the support. According to these proprieties, an FBG sensor is
going to be placed in the M0 and M1 structure between the Rohacell r foam and the CFRP shell.

6

PROTOTYPE

MOX prototypes have been fabricated in order to study the construction procedures, mechanical properties,

material characterization, and physical behaviour for detection of particles, in test beam set-ups. The most

demanding design requirement is the assembly of straws in a close pack, with no mechanical tension

applied. Several gluing techniques have been examined and tested to determine the optimal technique.

3

Straw tubes are glued together in three layers, and the upper and lower layer are glued to the Rohacell r

foam. Glues with different viscosity, and several gluing techniques, have been used. Glues tested range

from cianoacrylate (Loctite 401) to epoxy (Eccobond series). Gluing techniques ranged from brush, to

injection, to spray gluing. The most promising results have been obtained by using Eccobond 45W and

catalyst mixture (1:1 by weight), diluted with dimethylcheton solvent. For each 40g of glue-catalyst
mixture, 40cm3 of solvent was used. The assembly process proceeds as follows. Stainless steel rods

are inserted in each straw tube. A straw layer is formed by locating 48 straws on machined grooved plate.

The glue-solvent mixture described is sprayed, with 2bar air pressure, and 20cm distance between spray

gun and straw layer. After curing at room temperature, straw layers are sprayed again and layers are

superimposed. After additional curing, stainless steel rods are removed from straws. Conductive contact is

accomplished via spraying of Eccobond 57C.

7 COSMIC RAY AND TEST BEAM RESULTS

Preliminary results with cosmic rays show very clean pulses in gas mixtures of interest for BTeV

(Ar-CO2 80/20), as shown in Fig.5. Prototypes have been exposed to beam particles in the Frascati Test

Beam Facility [7]. Preliminary results show the expected response of prototype to minimum ionizing

particles. The distribution of drift times of gas ions to the straw wire (Fig.6) over the straw 2mm

radius is compatible with the drift velocity in Ar-CO2 (80/20) gas mixture used.

8 CONCLUSIONS

We have developed a novel concept for integration of straw tubes tracking detectors and silicon microstrip

detectors, for use in HEP experiments at hadron colliders. In our design, silicon microstrips are integrated

to a straw tube special module MOX via a CFRP mechanical structure. Detailed Finite Element Analysis

shows that deformations affect negligibly the tracking performances of the system. A complete system

based on Fiber Bragg Grating sensors — acting as optical strain gauges — monitors the position of each

sub detector with a micron-resolution. The special straw tube module MOX is realized via straws embedded
in a Rohacell r lattice with no need of mechanical tension. Preliminary results show that the MOX can

provide the 100 µm resolution needed by the BteV tracking detector requirements.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We gratefully thank F.Baruffaldi and his team at Laboratori Ortopedici Rizzoli (Bologna, Italy) for help and

advice on tomographic imaging of MOX prototype. We also thank G.Mazzitelli (LNF INFN, Italy) and all

the DAΦNE team for smooth running of the Beam Test Facility.

4

References

[1] www-btev.fnal.com

[2] E.Basile F. Bellucci M.Bertani S.Bianco M.A.Caponero F. Di Falco F.L.Fabbri F.Felli M.Giardoni A. La

Monaca G.Mensitieri B.Ortenzi M.Pallotta A.Paolozzi L.Passamonti D.Pierluigi A.Russo S.Tomassini,

”Study of Tensile Response of Kapton, and Mylar Strips to Ar and CO2 Mixtures for the BTeV Straw

Tube Detector”, presented by F. Di Falco at 10th Vienna Conference On Instrumentation 16-21 Feb

2004, Vienna, Austria, LNF - 04 / 5(P).

[3] L. Benussi et al., ”Results of Long-Term Position Monitoring by Means of Fiber Bragg Grating Sensors

for the BTeV Detector”, LNF - 03 / 15(IR)

[4] S. Berardis M. Bertani S.Bianco M.A.Caponero F. Di Falco F.L.Fabbri F.Felli M.Giardoni A. La

Monaca B.Ortenzi E. Pace M.Pallotta A.Paolozzi S.Tomassini, ”Fiber optic sensors for space missions”

2003 IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceeding, Big Shy Montana, March 8-15, 2003, pp. 1661-1668

[5] E. Basile, ”Scelta dei materiali ed analisi strutturale per supporti di rivelatori di particelle

dell’esperimento BTeV a Fermilab (U.S.A.)”, degree thesis, University ”La Sapienza”, Rome, 2003.

[6] C. Pucci, ”Analisi strutturale del supporto per microstrip straw tubes per l’esperimento di ﬁsica delle

particelle BTeV”, degree thesis, University ”La Sapienza”, Rome, 2004.

[7] G.Mazzitelli, A.Ghigo, F.Sannibale, P.Valente, G.Vignola, Nucl. Instr. Methods A515 (2003) 524-542.

5

Figure 2: BTeV microstrip and straws tubes integration (left); MOX prototype with straw tubes embedded
in Rohacell r.

Figure 1: BTeV detector layout

6

Figure 3: Tomography 3D reconstruction of MOX prototype (left); FEA results on MOX CFRP shell(right).

Figure 4: FBG long-term monitoring stability results. FBG output (crosses) is validated by TV camera
(bars).

Figure 5: Cosmic rays signals in M0X prototype.

7

Figure 6: MOX module prototype. Straw tubes are glued together and positioned between end-plates (one
shown) without mechanical tension.

Figure 7: Arrival times for beam particles to MOX wire. Times are expressed in Time-To-Digit-Converted
channels (300ps/count).

8

