5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
1
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
6
0
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

CALORIMETERS IN ASTRO AND PARTICLE PHYSICS

KLAUS PRETZL
Laboratory for High Energy Physics, University of Bern,
3012 Bern, Switzerland
E-mail: pretzl@lhep.unibe.ch

In this article an attempt is made to review some of the original works leading
to new developments of calorimeters which are so widely and successfully used in
astro and particle physics experiments. This report is far from being complete and
the author apologizes for omissions and misquotations.

1. Introduction

Calorimeters belong to the most important instruments to measure the energy
of neutral and charged particles produced with cosmic rays or with particle
accelerators. They provide the means to explore new physics in an energy
range from several eV to more than 1020 eV. Their development was very
much driven by the quest for new frontiers in astro- and particle physics.

Several types of calorimeters have been developed. There are the so-called
true calorimeters, which operate at very low temperatures and are used as ther-
mal sensors. Cryogenic calorimeters are the most sensitive devices in the en-
ergy region eV to keV. They are frequently used in direct dark matter detection
and double beta decay experiments. Then there are the sampling calorimeters,
which are based on measuring the energy loss of secondary particles in an active
material, which is inserted between the absorbing material of the calorimeter
(see for example Fig.1).
Ionization or scintillation detectors are commonly
used as active layers. Sampling calorimeters are among the most frequently
employed calorimeters in high energy physics experiments because they are
relatively cheap and they can cover a large energy range, typically from GeV
to TeV. Homogeneous total absorption calorimeters, like crystals or liquids
(Ar, Kr, Xe) have mostly been developed for electromagnetic shower detec-
tion. They yield outstanding energy resolutions but they are rather expensive.
Cerenkov calorimeters are based on the detection of Cerenkov radiation of rel-
ativistic particles in transparent materials. An early example is the lead glass
calorimeter for electromagnetic shower detection.

Cerenkov calorimeters with enormous dimensions using large underground

1

2

water tanks, sea water, polar ice and the atmosphere of the earth have recently
been developed to measure solar, atmospheric and cosmic neutrinos as well
as ultra high energy particles (UHEP) in cosmic rays. Large atmospheric
calorimeters also make use of the ﬂuorescence scintillation light emitted when
particles pass through the atmosphere. The observation of the ﬂuorescence
light of air showers in the atmosphere from a space station is planned for
the near future. Properly instrumented, the atmosphere would be the largest
calorimeter ever put in operation and would enable us to study UHEP with
energies in excess of 1020 eV.

There are excellent review articles1 as well as a monograph2 which describe
in all details the state of the art in calorimetry. It is the intention of this article
to highlight some of the original works in the development of calorimeters and
their impact on experiments in astro and particle physics.

2. Early Developments

−

±

One of the early pioneers in developing the art of calorimetry was W. Orth-
mann, a close collaborator of W. Nernst (Nobel prize winner for chemistry in
1920). Orthmann3 developed a diﬀerential calorimeter with which he could
measure heat transfers of the order of µWatt. Using this true calorimetric
technique, he and L. Meitner4 were able to determine the mean energy of
spectrum in 210Bi to be E = 0.337 MeV
6%. This value
the continuous β
agrees very well with the mean kinetic energy of E = 0.33 MeV of the emitted
particles. Their measurements contributed to the notion of a continuous
β
−
spectrum leading to Pauli’s neutrino hypothesis in 1930.
β
−
Applying this technique to high energy particles would fail, since the tem-
perature increase ∆T = ∆E
C caused by the energy loss ∆E of a high energy
1020 eV) due to the
particle is unmeasurably small (∆T
108 g Fe) necessary to contain
heat capacity of the large absorber mass (
the shower. Nevertheless this technique was revitalized in the 1980s by the
development of calorimeters for dark matter detection (see chapter 9).

10−7K for ∆E

In 1954 N.L. Grigorov5 put forward the idea of sampling calorimeters
using ionisation chambers (arrays of proportional counters) interspersed be-
tween thick iron absorber sheets to measure cosmic ray particles with energies
E > 1014 eV. The visible energy of the particle Evisible = dE
dx R n(x)dx is then
determined from the number of secondary particles in the shower n(x) and
their energy loss dE
dx in the ionisation detectors. Because of the invisible energy
loss in the absorber plates and in the detector sheets, sampling calorimeters
need to be calibrated in particle beams with known energies in order to ob-
tain absolute energy measurements. The principle of a sampling calorimeter
is shown in Fig.1. In 1957 Grigorov and his collaborators6 constructed a sam-

∼

∼

∼

3

Figure 1. The principle of a sampling calorimeter is shown.

pling calorimeter in the Pamir mountains, at an altitude of 3860 m above sea
level (Fig.2). Their calorimeter also employed 10m2 of emulsion sheets, which
they placed between 3 lead sheets to study details of the primary interaction.
In order to identify corresponding events in the emulsions and the calorimeter,
two layers of emulsion sheets on top of each other were used: one ﬁxed in space,
the other moved by a certain amount in a certain time interval with respect
to the other one. The two emulsion ﬁlm images were then matched and thus
the time of the shower passage determined.

In the 1960s high energy accelerators in the USA and Europe became the
main facilities to study high energy phenomena. While charged particles were
measured with high accuracy in magnetic spectrometers, the energy of neutral
particles like photons, πo and neutrons could only be measured by calorimet-
ric means. First successful attempts to measure photon and electron energies
with compact electromagnetic sampling calorimeters were made at CALTECH
by C. Heusch and C. Prescott7. They studied the electromagnetic shower
development of electrons and photons in the energy range of 100 MeV to 5
GeV. For that purpose they built two sandwich counters, one made of plastic
scintillator and one of lucite material with lead inserts as absorbers (Fig.3).
With this they were able to exploit and compare the performance of calorime-
ters based on the ionization loss of shower particles in scintillators and those
based on Cerenkov radiation in plastic materials. They also studied sampling
ﬂuctutations and shower containment by changing the thickness of the lead
inserts. A similar study for a hadron calorimeter was done by the Karlsruhe
group under the leadership of H. Schopper motivated by the idea of mea-

4

Figure 2. The ionization sampling calorimeter of Babayan, Grigorov, Shestoperov and So-
bikyakov used in cojunction with nuclear emulsions.

suring n-p elastic scattering at CERN8. With the vision that calorimeters

Figure 3. The schematic drawing of a lucite sandwich counter and a scintillation sandwich
counter is shown.

will play a role not only in accelerator experiments but also in experiments
on board of space missions, R. Hofstadter and his collaborators9 developed
large homogeneous NaI (Tl) and CsI total absorption calorimeters. Because of
their robustness, CsI crystals were particularly suited for space-born gamma

5

ray astronomy. The persuasively good energy resolutions obtained with these
calorimeters also made them powerful tools for studying inclusive πo produc-
tion in hadron collisions as well as electron and gamma ﬁnal states in e+e−
collisions at SPEAR. Hofstadter’s original ideas were later further developed
and realised in the very successful CRYSTAL BALL calorimeter at SLAC, with
which many of the charmonium states have been discovered (see chapter 8).

3. Segmented Calorimeters

lepton + missing ET (Emiss

Large charged particle spectrometers were designed for exploring the physics
in an energy domain which was made accessible by the new large proton accel-
erators at Fermilab and at CERN (SPS) in the early 1970s. At that time the
usefulness of calorimetric energy measurements to complement the measure-
ments in magnetic spectrometers was not yet widely appreciated. However,
the parton picture of hadrons, strongly supported by the SLAC single-arm
spectrometer experiment, demanded a search for parton jets, which would for
example manifest their presence by a large transverse energy ﬂow ET in deep
inelastic hadron-hadron collisions. For this search, segmented calorimeters
covering a large solid angle were developed. Although jets could not be un-
ambiguously identiﬁed at Fermilab, ISR and SPS energies, they were clearly
detected at higher energies in the UA2 and UA1 experiments at the p-¯p col-
lider at CERN. The extraordinarily successful use of segmented calorimeters
in the UA1 10 and UA2 11 experiments in discovering not only jets but also
the intermediate vector bosons in their decay-channels Z
2 leptons and
W ±
) made them indispensable tools for fu-
jets + leptons),
ture collider experiments searching for the top quark (t
the Higgs (H
). In 1973 neutral currents
were discovered by GARGAMELLE at CERN12. This important step was
decisive for future neutrino experiments. To measure neutral current reactions
in neutrino detectors required calorimeters of multiton mass with very large
dimensions. One of the ﬁrst upgrades in this direction was initiated by B. Bar-
ish and collaborators13 of CALTECH. They improved the calorimetric shower
detection capability of their neutrino experiment at Fermilab by introducing
a wavelength shifting (WLS) read-out14 of their very large-sized scintillator
tiles. The principle of the WLS technique is shown in Fig.4. The primary light
in the scintillator is shifted to longer wave length to match the absorption
spectrum of the WLS read out bar which is separated by a small air gap from
the edge of the scintillator tile. The loss of photoelectrons due to this WLS
technique, typically a factor of 10, could be compensated somewhat by using
thicker scintillators. However, the main advantage of the WLS technique over
the conventional light-guides is its simplicity and the smaller number of read-

γγ) and SUSY particles (Emiss

→

→

→

→

T

T

6

Figure 4. The principle of a wavelength shifting read-out is shown.

out channels necessary, which is reﬂected in the lower costs. By reading the
light from at least two opposite sides of a scintillator tile, it was even possible
to locate the center of gravity of the shower to within a few cm accuracy.

4. Segmentation Using Wavelength Shifter Read-out
The WLS principle, which was ﬁrst introduced by W. Shurcliﬀ14, further dis-
cussed by R.L. Garwin15 and later developed by G. Keil16 provided the capa-
bility to construct tower-structured scintillation counter sampling calorimeters.
Tower-structured calorimeters were an essential ingredient for the jet search,
since they allowed to trigger on events with a large transverse energy ET and
to determine the jet energy as well as the jet size. Two types of WLS systems
were developed: WLS sheets and WLS rods (later replaced by WLS ﬁbers).

Figure 5. A lead scintillator tower using a wavelength shifter sheet read-out is shown.

7

W. Selove17 used WLS sheets for his jet search experiment at Fermilab
and D. Wegener18 developed a ﬁne sampling tower-structured electromagnetic
calorimeter for the ARGUS experiment at the DORIS e+e− collider. A lead
scintillator tower using a WLS sheet read-out is shown in Fig.5 from Ref.18 .
A novel read-out system using WLS rods19 was introduced by the author
of this article for the jet search experiment NA5 at the SPS at CERN. By
using a diﬀerent WLS color (yellow) in the electromagnetic part of the NA5
calorimeter20 than in the hadronic part (BBQ green), it was possible to guide
the light of both colors in one rod to the two photomultipliers which, by us-
ing appropriate ﬁlters, were sensitive to either yellow or green light. This
way the energy deposited in the electromagnetic and in the hadronic part of
the calorimeter could be measured separately (Fig.6). The NA5 calorimeter
was the ﬁrst tower-structured scintillator sampling calorimeter in operation at
CERN. It is still in use in the NA49 experiment in the North Area of the SPS.
On the basis of the ﬁrst positive experiences with WLS read-outs, UA1 and
UA2 at CERN and CDF at Fermilab developed their calorimeters using this
principle.

Figure 6. The wavelength shifter read-out system developed for the NA5 calorimeter is
shown. The signals from the electromagnetic and the hadronic part of the calorimeter could
be measured separatly. They were distinguishable by the yellow (electromagnetic) and green
(hadronic) colour of the wavelength shifter rods.

The next step was to introduce WLS-doped optical ﬁbers and scintillating
optical ﬁbers for future scintillator sampling calorimeters. However, no com-
pany in the ﬁber-producing industry was interested in developing these special
ﬁbers with only slim expectations for a large market. In 1982 D. Treiller, P.
Sonderegger and the author of this paper persuaded J. Thevenin at SACLAY
to develop scintillating ﬁbers and WLS ﬁbers for calorimetry. Thanks to J.

8

Thevenin, very soon the ﬁrst tower-structured electromagnetic calorimeter21
using WLS ﬁbers doped with K27 (BBQ was not successful, since it cracked
during extrusion) could be successfully tested.
It was later given the name
SHASHLIK. Due to its good energy resolution and its relatively low construc-
tion costs, SHASHLIK is being used in DELPHI, HERA-B, PHENIX (RHIC)
and LHCB experiments. WLS ﬁber read-out in hadronic tile calorimeters was
further developed by the CDF collaboration at Fermilab. This technique is
also applied in massive neutrino calorimeters, like for example in MINOS and
in the target tracker in OPERA.

O. Gildemeister proposed a novel structure for the ATLAS hadron calorime-
ter, the so-called TILECAL22. In this structure, the scintillating tiles and the
read-out ﬁbers run parallel to the particles (Fig.7). This design turned out to
be cheap and allowed a hermetic construction, projective geometry as well as
depth sampling (3 times).

Figure 7. One of the thirty six ATLAS hadronic barrel calorimeter modules is shown.The
longitudinally oriented scintillator tiles are read out by WLS ﬁbers.

Equally promising were the ﬁrst tests of J. Thevenin’s scintillating ﬁbers
used in a prototype calorimeter. This technique was further developed, leading
to the SPACAL23 calorimeter - at the time a most promising candidate for use
in LHC experiments. SPACAL was a compensating (for explanation see chap-
ter 6), homogeneous, high resolution calorimeter with properties very close to
homogeneous calorimeters (Fig.8). However, depth segmentation turned out
to be diﬃcult and its production was more expensive than other calorime-

ters with similar performances. Therefore it ﬁnally did not get used in LHC
experiments, but its great performance was fully appreciated in smaller-sized
experiments like CHORUS, H1 backcalo, AMS-2 and KLOE.

9

Figure 8. One of the towers of the SPACAL scintillating ﬁber calorimeter is shown.

Mainly for heavy ion physics at the CERN SPS there was a demand for a
fast and radiation-hard calorimeter to measure forward energy ﬂow, which was
used for the determination of the centrality of the collision. P. Gorodetzky24
pioneered the development of a quartz ﬁber/lead calorimeter with a very fast
response (6 ns pulse to pulse separation) due to Cerenkov radiation. The
radiation resistance of quartz ﬁbers is considerably higher than that of scin-
tillating ﬁbers. However, because of its moderate energy resolution this type
of calorimeter is limited in its applications. Quartz ﬁber calorimeters are em-
ployed in the N50, NA52, and CMS (CASTOR) experiments.

5. Liquid Ionization Chambers

One of the limiting factors of a sampling calorimeter are the sampling ﬂuctu-
ations and the uniformity of response. To reduce both these factors and still
keep the sampling calorimeter compact with minimal dead space between tow-

10

ers, W. Willis and V. Radeka25, in the early 1970s, introduced liquid argon
(LAr) as active medium. This technique has proven to be highly successful
and has been used in many ﬁxed target and collider experiments (R807/ISR,
MARK2, CELLO, NA31, SLD, HELIOS, D0, HERA, ATLAS). The develop-
ment of the LAr ionization chamber technique was also pioneered by the group
of J. Engler26 at Karlsruhe. Although ﬁne sampling LAr calorimeters surpass
the performance of their scintillator counterparts in many respects, they have
the disadvantage that they require cryogenics (boiling temperature of LAr is
T = 87 K) and high purity of the liquid.

In order to overcome the cooling problem, J. Engler and H. Keim27 de-
veloped liquid ionization chambers which operate at room temperature. They
used tetramethylsilane Si(CH2)4 (TMS), which has a relatively high electron
mobility. TMS and tetramethylpentane (TMP) have the double advantage of
operating at room temperature and being hydrogeneous, providing the neces-
sary presupposition for a compensating calorimeter. A disadvantage is the high
degree of puriﬁcation needed. Warm liquid calorimeters have been proposed
for the UA1 upgrade (TMP) and are being used in the CASCADE experiment.
In 1990 D. Fournier28 introduced a novel design for a LAr calorimeter, the
so-called ”accordeon”, which has practically no dead space between towers and
provides better uniformity of response, less cabling (signals can be extracted
from the front and back face of the calorimeter) and fast signal extraction
due to low capacitance. The ”accordeon” was adopted as electromagnetic
calorimeter for the ATLAS detector (Fig.9). In the evaluation of all possible
types of calorimeters, CMS chose PbWO4 crystals for their electromagnetic
calorimeter with the argument of obtaining the best energy resolution, while
for ATLAS the better uniformity of response and the better angular resolution
with the ”accordeon” were decisive.

In the mid-1980s C. Rubbia started the development of a LAr total absorp-
tion calorimeter for solar and atmospheric neutrino experiments at the Gran
Sasso Laboratory. A 600 ton calorimeter has been realized and is going to be
installed in the Gran Sasso Laboratory. The ICARUS collaboration plans to
complete the calorimeter to 3 kton to perform a long baseline neutrino oscilla-
tion experiment using the CNGS beam from CERN. A LKr total absorption
calorimeter has been developed by the NA48 collaboration and is in opera-
π+π− channels. At
tion to study CP violation in K o
the Paul Scherrer Institute in Villigen a LXe calorimeter is in construction to
e + γ decays which, if found, would indicate physics
search for forbidden µ
beyond the Standard Model.

πoπo and K o

S,L →

S,L →

→

11

Figure 9. ATLAS liquid argon electromagnetic calorimeter based on the ”accordeon” ar-
rangement.

6. Compensating Calorimeters

Even with minimal sampling ﬂuctuations the energy resolution of hadron
calorimeters is mainly limited by large shower ﬂuctuations, which are due to
ﬂuctuations in the electromagnetic component (πo, etc.) of the shower and
the invisible energy due to nuclear excitations, muons and neutrinos. It was
suggested by C. Fabjan and W. Willis29 that some of this invisible energy
can be recuperated using depleted 238U plates as absorber. The energy loss
will be compensated by the emission of soft neutrons and gammas in ﬁssion
processes of the uranium. Measurements supported these ideas and the ﬁrst
compensating 238U /scintillator calorimeter was employed in the Axial Field
Spectrometer at the ISR30.

Compensation turned out to be essential for a correct jet energy determina-
tion and therefore was a main consideration for the design of calorimeters for
high energy collider experiments. However, there are also other ways to achieve
compensation, namely by proper weighing of the electromagnetic and hadronic
components, as shown by H. Abramowicz et al31 for the WA1 calorimeter and

12

W. Braunschweig et al32 for the H1 calorimeter.

In 1987, mainly due to the detailed work of R. Wigmans33 supplemented
by the work of Brueckmann et al34, the compensation eﬀects were fully under-
stood. Wigmans could show that compensation can be achieved with absorber
materials other than uranium by tuning the inﬂuencing parameters like choos-
ing the appropriate sampling fractions. For example, compensation can be
achieved by choosing the thickness of the absorber and of the scintillator as
follows: U/sci = 1/1, Pb/sci = 4/1, Fe/sci = 15/1. The crucial role of hydro-
gen in the active material was clearly demonstrated by measurements of the
L3 collaboration.

LAr calorimeters do not compensate, due to the missing hydrogen. How-
ever, compensation can be achieved by prolonging the charge collection time so
that the gammas from neutron capture reactions can be detected or by using
the above mentioned weighing procedure.

In order to achieve the best jet energy measurements large compensating
calorimeters were built at HERA (ZEUS: 238U /sci, H1: Pb,steel/LAr) and at
the Fermilab collider (D0: 238U /LAr).

However, compensation degrades the energy resolution for electromagnetic
showers considerably. Since the search for the Higgs, with its prominent decay
channel H
γγ, is one of the prime goals at the LHC, the ATLAS and
CMS experiments have chosen non-compensating calorimeters with the highest
energy resolution capabilities for electromagnetic showers.

→

7. Other Sampling Calorimeters

∼

The high segmentation capability and the relatively low cost were the main
arguments for the development of gas sampling calorimeters. All four LEP
experiments were equipped with such devices. The modest obtainable energy
20%/√E) for electromagnetic showers with such calorimeters is
resolution (
mainly due to Landau and pathlength ﬂuctuations. In addition, gas sampling
calorimeters have to cope with stability problems due to temperature and
pressure changes. The disadvantages outweighed the advantages such that
they were not further developed.

In 1983 P.G. Rancoita and A. Seidman35 introduced silicon detectors for
electromagnetic calorimetry. These calorimeters were further developed by the
SICAPO collaboration36. Large-sized silicon detectors employing relatively
low-resistivity (less expensive) material are appropriate for calorimeters used
in experiments requiring compact geometry, fast signal response and opera-
tion in strong magnetic ﬁelds. Disadvantages are the high cost and the poor
radiation resistance of silicon. Nevertheless, they are used in the ZEUS experi-

13

ment as electron-hadron separator and in the PAMELA experiment as imaging
calorimeter and they were employed as luminosity monitor in the OPAL ex-
periment at LEP. Si/W calorimeters are being seriously considered for e+e−
linear collider experiments of the next generation.

8. Crystal Calorimeters

Pioneering work in using inorganic Crystals for the detection of high energy
particles goes back to V.I.Broser37, H.Kallmann38, R.Moon39 and others.
Following earlier developments using NaI (Tl) crystals for physics at e+e−
colliders, the CRYSTAL BALL collaboration40 at SLAC demonstrated very
impressively the discovery potential of a tower-structured high-resolution crys-
tal calorimeter.
It made major contributions to the discovery and the bet-
ter understanding of the charmonium states (Fig.10). Crystal calorimeters
are mainly used for electromagnetic shower detection. In later developments,
where the CRYSTAL CLEAR collaboration41 played a leading role, NaI (Tl)
crystals have been replaced by denser and non-hygroscopic materials. Among
the most popular are: CsI, BGO and PbWO4. The production as well as
the physical properties of many of these crystals were already studied dur-
ing World War II, since ﬂuorescent and scintillating crystals were developed to
mark ﬁring tanks or guns for airplane attacks at night. The typical energy reso-
lutions of (1.5% - 3.5%) / √E obtained with crystal calorimeters have not been
reached by sampling devices. Because of their energy resolution and compact-
ness crystal calorimeters have frequently been applied in collider experiments:
L3, CUSB, CLEO II, KTEV, GLAST, BABAR, BELLE and CMS. One of the
notable by-products is the use of CsI (Tl) crystals in medical tomography.

9. Cryogenic Calorimeters
In 1935 F. Simon42 suggested measuring the energy deposited by radioactivity
with low temperature calorimeters. He claimed that, with a calorimeter con-
sisting of 1cm3 tungsten in a liquid helium bath at 1.3 K, one could measure a
heat transfer of the order of nWatt, which is about 1000 times more sensitive
than the calorimeter of W. Orthmann. The argument is that at low tempera-
tures the heat capacity C of a calorimeter is low and a small energy loss ∆E
of a particle in the calorimeter can lead to an appreciable temperature in-
crease ∆T = ∆E/C. More recently, the development of cryogenic calorimeters
was motivated by the quest for the dark matter in the universe, the missing
neutrinos from the sun, the neutrinoless double beta decay and the mass of
the neutrinos. First ideas and experimental attempts were discussed at a ﬁrst
workshop on low temperature detectors (LTD1)43, which was held in 1987 at

14

Figure 10. Charmonium states as measured with the high resolution CRYSTAL BALL
calorimeter at SLAC.

Ringberg Castle in southern Bavaria. More workshops followed every other
year, either in Europe or in the USA. A review on cryogenic calorimeters in
astro and particle physics can be found in Ref.44.

A typical cryogenic calorimeter, a so-called bolometer, is shown in Fig.11. It
consists of an absorber with heat capacity C, a thermometer and a thermal link
with heat conductance g to a heat reservoir with a constant bath temperature
TB. Particles interacting in the absorber cause a change in the resistance of the
thermometer which is measured by a voltage drop V when passing a current
I through the thermometer. Cryogenic calorimeters can be made from many
diﬀerent materials including superconductors, a feature which turns out to be
very useful for diﬀerent applications. They can be used as target and detectors
at the same time.

Most calorimeters used in high energy physics measure the energy loss of
a particle in form of scintillation light or ionization.
In contrast, cryogenic
calorimeters are able to measure the total deposited energy in form of ioniza-
tion and heat with very high eﬃciency. This feature makes them very eﬀective

15

Figure 11. The principle of a cryogenic calorimeter (bolometer) is shown.

∼

in detecting very small energy deposits (order of eV) with very high accuracy.
The use of superconductors as cryogenic particle detectors was motivated by
the small binding energy
1meV of the Cooper pairs. Thus, compared to
conventional detectors, several orders of magnitude more free charges are pro-
duced, leading to a much higher intrinsic energy resolution. In Fig.12 X-ray
spectra obtained with a cryogenic micro-calorimeter (solid line) and a state
of the art Si(Li) solid state device ( dashed line) are compared. The micro-
calorimeter consisting of a Bi absorber and a Al-Ag bilayer superconducting
transition edge thermometer has been developed at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) in Boulder USA 45.

The main advantage of cryogenic devices for the direct detection of dark
matter particles, so-called WIMPs (weakly interacting massive particles), is
their eﬀectiveness in measuring very low energy recoils and the possibility of
using a large variety of detector materials. WIMPs can be detected by mea-
suring the nuclear recoil energies in coherent elastic WIMP-nucleus scattering.
Depending on the mass of the WIMP and the mass of the detector nucleus, the
average recoil varies between eV and keV. The most commonly used WIMP
detectors are bolometers shown in Fig.11. E. Fiorini and T. Niinikoski46 pio-
neered the development of bolometers for measuring neutrinoless double beta

16

Figure 12. TiN X-ray spectra obtained with a cryogenic micro-calorimeter (solid line) and
with a state of the art Si(Li) solid state device (dashed line) are compared. EDS stands for
energy-dispersive spectrometer. TiN is an interconnect and diﬀusion barrier material used
in semiconductor industry.

decay.

But also superheated superconducting granules (SSG) for dark matter
detection47 have been developed. This technique was ﬁrst introduced by H.
Bernas et al48 for beta radiation detection and later proposed for dark matter
and solar neutrino detection by L. Stodolsky and A. Drukier49. The ﬁrst gen-
eration WIMP experiments with cryogenic bolometers with absorber masses of
about 1 kg (CDMS, EDELWEISS, CRESST and ROSEBUD) and with SSG of
0.5 kg (ORPHEUS) are in operation. Recent reviews of dark matter detection
can be found in Ref.50 and Ref.51. Larger detector masses of more than 10 kg
are planned for the future. One of the big advantages of cryogenic calorime-
ters over conventional WIMP detectors is their capability of active background
recognition, which allows to discriminate between background recoils due to
electron scattering and genuine nuclear recoils by a simultaneous but separate
measurement of phonons and ionization (or photons) in each event. This is
possible since, for a given deposited energy, the ionization generated by nuclear
recoils is smaller than that generated by electrons. This feature, which was ﬁrst
pointed out and further developed by B. Sadoulet52 increases the sensitivity
for WIMP detection considerably. A similar idea using scintillating crystals as
absorbers was introduced by L. Gonzales-Mestres and D. Perret-Gallix53 and

17

further developed by ROSEBUD and CRESSTII.

Mainly for applications other than WIMP detection, calorimeters on the
basis of superconducting tunnel junctions (STJ) have also been studied. Cryo-
genic cameras54 consisting of STJ pixel arrays provide the astronomers with a
powerful tool to observe very faint and distant objects and to determine their
distance via red shift. Other research areas have also beneﬁted from these
cryogenic detector developments, such as x-ray spectroscopy in astrophysics,
mass spectrometry of large molecules (DNA sequencing) as well as x-ray mi-
croanalysis for industrial applications.

10. Detection of Extraterrestrial Neutrinos
In 1968 R. Davis55 pioneered the detection of extraterrestrial neutrinos and
started a new ﬁeld of neutrino astronomy.
In his chlorine detector buried
in the Homestake mine in South Dakota he was the ﬁrst to detect neutri-
nos from the sun. The neutrino ﬂux, however, turned out to be lower than
expected from the standard solar model. His ﬁndings were later conﬁrmed
by many experiments, such as BAKSAN, GALLEX, GNO, KAMIOKANDE,
SUPERKAMIOKANDE. However, the missing neutrinos from the sun still
remained a puzzle until 2002, when the SNO experiment56 conﬁrmed a long-
presumed hypothesis, namely that neutrinos have a mass and as a result of
this they oscillate, i.e. they change ﬂavour on their way from the sun to the
earth. Anti-electron neutrino oscillations have also been measured with reactor
neutrinos in the Kam-Land experiment57 supporting the SNO ﬁndings.

The discovery of atmospheric muon neutrino oscillations in 1998 by the
SUPERKAMIOKANDE water Cerenkov detector58 was made possible due to
the intuition and initiative of M.Koshiba and Y.Totsuka, who were respon-
sible for the construction of KAMIOKANDE and SUPERKAMIOKANDE.
These oscillations have later also been observed with the MACRO detec-
tor in the Gran Sasso Laboratory (Italy) and have recently been conﬁrmed
in the K2K experiment59 by sending accelerator born neutrinos to SU-
PERKAMIOKANDE.

In order to look for extraterrestrial neutrinos, K. Lande60 and collaborators
installed a water Cerenkov detector in the Homestake mine adjacent to the R.
Davies experiment. The detector consisted of 7 water tanks, each viewed by 4
PMs on opposite sides of the tank. On January 4, 1974 the detector signalized
an event which the experimenters interpreted as a possible antineutrino burst.
Unfortunately, such events do not happen very often and a conﬁrmation is
practically impossible unless they are also witnessed by other experiments. If
for nothing else, these ﬁndings wakened the curiosity of researchers to look
for more of these events with larger and better detectors. Thus it was around

18

this time that F.Reines from Irvine, S.Miyake from INS Tokyo, J.G.Learned
and V. Peterson from Hawaii and others started to think about a deep sea wa-
ter neutrino telescope near the coast of Hawaii which later became a project
called DUMAND61. The idea to use the ocean for Cerenkov light detection
goes back to M.A.Markov62. Unfortunately DUMAND was discontinued, but
it paved the way for the next generation of cosmic neutrino Cerenkov detec-
tors: NESTOR, ANTARES and NEMO in the Mediterranean sea as well as
AMANDA and ICECUBE in the Antarctic ice.

Massive calorimeters like NUSEX in the Mont Blanc tunnel, BAKSAN in
Russia, IMB in the Morton-Thiokol salt mine and KAMIOKANDE in Japan,
originally designed for proton decay experiments, were, on 17th February 1987,
witness to an extraterrestrial neutrino burst, which originated from a nearby
supernova explosion (SN1987A). This was the ﬁrst time neutrinos from a super-
nova explosion were detected with terrestrial calorimeters. This happy event
encouraged all those who had already made plans to set new trends in neutrino
astronomy.

11. The Atmosphere as Calorimeter

At sea level our atmosphere measures 1032 g/cm2. Very high energy particles
from outer space trying to traverse our atmosphere would ﬁnd material in front
of them which corresponds to 28 radiation lengths and 16.6 collision lengths.
Particles from cosmic origin like hadrons, photons or neutrinos interact with
air nuclei, producing secondaries that in turn collide with air atoms, leading
to extensive air showers (EAS). The most numerous particles in EAS are elec-
trons. Electrons traversing the atmosphere produce Cerenkov light, which is
directed along their path. On their way, they can also excite metastable en-
ergy levels in atmospheric molecules which, after a short relaxation time, emit
a characteristic ﬂuorescence light, which peaks at wavelenghts from 330 to 450
nm. In contrast to the Cerenkov light the emitted ﬂuorescent light is isotropic.
The emitted Cerenkov and ﬂuorescence light are proportional to the EAS en-
ergy. Thus properly instrumented, the atmosphere can be utilized as a huge
calorimeter.

It was P. Blackett63 who, in 1948, suggested to detect the Cerenkov light
in the atmosphere caused by penetrating cosmic particles. A. Chudakov and
collaborators64 were the ﬁrst to apply this idea in 1962 to detect celestial γ-
rays. Atmospheric Cerenkov light detection was also pioneered by the Whipple
telescope on Mount Hopkin, Arizona, in 1987(Fig.13). It consisted of a 10m-
diameter mirror dish and a pixel array of photon detectors65.

This technique provided information on the direction, shape and energy of
the shower as well as on the type of primary particle (cosmic hadrons produce

19

Figure 13. The Whipple Observatory 10 m imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescope.

2 times less Cerenkov light than gammas of the same energy). The Whipple
telescope was one of the most powerful early instruments which made major
contributions to the study of high energy gamma rays in the energy range of
several hundred GeV to several TeV. However, this technique was limited to a
relatively small ﬁducial area yielding low event rates for high energy showers as
well as too poor energy resolutions. In a further step the Fly’s Eye detector66
was built to overcome these deﬁciencies. The Fly’s Eye detector consists of an
array of spherical mirrors with a cluster of PMTs mounted in the focal plane
of each mirror. It records the ﬂuorescence light, which is caused by ultra high
energy cosmic ray showers in the atmosphere. The Fly’s Eye observatory in
Utah consists of two detector stations (Fly’s Eye I and II) situated 3.3 km dis-
tant from each other (Fig.14). Fly’s Eye I is equipped with 67 detector arrays
and Fly’s Eye II with 8 detector units with 120 eyes. Events more than 20 km
away from the observatory could be detected, giving rise to a very large ﬁducial
area of about 100 km2 sr. The simultaneous observation from both Fly’s Eye
stations allows a stereoscopic reconstruction of an event. From the observed
shower proﬁles the total energy can be derived. However, the knowledge of the
energy scale is still a central issue for atmospheric calorimeters. The original
Fly’s Eye detector has now been replaced by a new facility called HiRes, which

20

is sensitive in the energy domain of the Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cut-
oﬀ above 1020 eV . Air showers in this energy range were also observed by the
AGASA array in Akeno, Japan. For some time HiRes and AGASA yielded con-
ﬂicting results in the energy range where the GZK cut oﬀ is expected to occur.
However, the statistical and systematical uncertainties in both experiments are
still very large. Experiments like AUGER and EUSO/OWL (see below) with
better statistics may be able to settle this discrepancy in the future.

Figure 14. Aerial view of the Fly’s Eye I detector on top of the Little Granite Mountain in
Utah.

The new generation of atmospheric Cerenkov telescopes has the potential
to provide images of high energy gamma sources in the energy range of around
0.1 to 10 TeV with better resolution. Two telescopes of the High Energy
Stereoscopic System (HESS) in central Namibia and MAGIC in La Palma
(Canary Islands) are already taking data. The HESS facility ( the acronym
is also an homage to Victor Hess, the discoverer of cosmic radiation) consists
of 4 telescopes each equipped with a 107m2 mirror area and a camera of 960
PMT’s. MAGIC has two telescopes each with a 239m2 mirror and a 577 PMT
camera. By 2006 the US project VERITAS plans to have 4 Cerenkov telescopes
in operation.

Presently under construction is the P. Auger observatory (AUGER) in
Malargue in Argentina. It will consist of 1600 water Cerenkov detectors and

21

4 ﬂuorescence ”eyes” spread over an area of 3000 km2. AUGER will measure
the energy and arrival direction of UHE cosmic rays with energies in excess of
1019 eV.

For the future, an exploratory mission probing the extremes of the universe
using the highest energy cosmic rays and neutrinos is planned.
It is called
EUSO/OWL (EUSO for Extreme Universe Space Observatory) and will orbit
105km2sr of the
the earth in 500 km height and observe an area of about 3
earth’s atmosphere, being able to detect several thousand air showers above
1020 eV per year. With this sensitivity the experimenters aim to systematically
study the energy spectrum around the GZK cut-oﬀ. They also hope to be able
to detect relic Big Bang neutrinos through the Z0-resonance absorption of
cosmic neutrinos with energies > 1021 eV.

·

12. Conclusions

The development of novel detectors is essential for the exploration of new
domains in physics. Calorimeters are a very good example for this. Major
discoveries, like neutral currents ( GARGAMELLE), quark and gluon jets (
SPEAR, UA2, UA1 and PETRA), W,Z bosons ( UA1 and UA2), top quark
( CDF and D0), neutrinos from the supernova explosion SN1987A ( NUSEX,
IMB, KAMIOKANDE and BAKSAN), atmospheric neutrino oscillations ( SU-
PERKAMIOKANDE) and solar neutrino oscillations ( SNO) were made with
detectors employing calorimeters. The future will provide enough challenges
for young people with imagination to work in this ﬁeld.

I would like to thank A. Ereditato, P.Grieder, S.Janos, S.Kabana and U. Moser
for the critical reading of the manuscript and usefull discussions.

Acknowledgments

References

1. C.Fabjan and F.Gianotti Rev. Mod.Phys. Vol.75,1243 (2003).
2. R.Wigmans, Calorimetry, Oxford Science Publication , (2000).
3. W. Orthmann, Zeitschrift f. Physik Bd 60, 10 (1930).
4. L. Meitner and W. Orthmann, Zeitschrift f. Physik Bd 60, 143 (1930).
5. N.L. Grigorov et al, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 34, 506 (1954).
6. V.S. Murzin, Prog. Elemt. Part. Cosmic Ray Phys. 9, 247 (1967).
7. C. Heusch and C. Prescott, IEEE NS12, 213 (1965).
8. J. Engler et al, NIM 106, 189 (1973).
9. E.B. Hughes et al, IEEE NS17, 14 (1970) and NS19, 126 (1972).
10. M.J. Corden et al., NIM A238, 273 (1985)and C. Cochet et al.,NIM A243, 45

(1986) .

22

11. A. Beer et al., NIM 224, 360 (1984).
12. F.J. Hasert et al., Phys.Lett. 46B, 138 (1973)
13. B. Barish et al, IEEE NS25/1, 532 (1978).
14. W.A. Shurcliﬀ, J. Optical Soc. Vol 41/3, 209 (1951).
15. R.L. Garwin, Rev. Sci. Instr. 31, 1010 (1960).
16. G. Keil, NIM 83, 145 (1970).
17. W. Selove et al., NIM 161, 233 (1979).
18. W. Hofmann et al., NIM 195, 475 (1982).
19. V. Eckardt et al., NIM 155, 389 (1978).
20. C. De Marzo et al., NIM 217, 405 (1983).
21. H. Fessler et al., NIM A240, 284 (1985).
22. O. Gildemeister, F. Nessi-Tedaldi and M. Nessi, Proceedings of the 2nd Int.
Conf. on Calorimetry in HEP, Capri 199, ed. A. Ereditato, World Scientiﬁc, page
199 and F.Ariztizabal et al.,NIM A349, 384 (1994).

23. D. Acosta et al, NIM A294, 193 (1990) and NIM A308, 481 (1991).
24. P. Gorodetzky, Rad. Phys. and Chem. 41, 253 (1993) and P. Gorodetzky et al,

NIM A361, 161 (1995).

25. W. Willis and V. Radeka, NIM 120, 221 (1974).
26. J. Engler et al, NIM 120, 157 (1974).
27. J. Engler and H. Keim, NIM 223, 47 (1984) and J. Engler et al, NIM A252, 29

28. B. Aubert et al, RD3 coll. CERN/DRDC/90-31 and NIM A309, 438 (1991).
29. C. Fabjan et al., NIM 141, 61 (1977).
30. H. Gordon et al., NIM 196, 303 (1982).
31. H. Abramovicz et al., NIM 180, 429 (1981).
32. W. Braunschweig et al., NIM A265, 419 (1988).
33. R. Wigmans, NIM A259, 389 (1987).
34. H. Brueckmann et al., NIM A263, 136 (1988).
35. P.G. Rancoita and A. Seidman, NIM 266, 369 (1984).
36. G. Barbiellini et al, NIM A235, 55 (1985) and E. Borchi et al., CERN-EP/89-28

(1986).

(1989).

37. V.I. Brose and H. Kallmann, Zeitschr.Naturforschung 2a, 439 (1947).
38. H. Kallmann, Phys.Rev. 75, 623 (1949).
39. R.J. Moon, Phys. Rev. 73, 2295 (1948).
40. M. Oreglia et al., Phys. Rev. D25, 2295 (1982).
41. Crystal Clear Collaboration, CERN/DRDC P27/91-15, project RD-18
42. F. Simon, Nature 135, 763 (1935).
43. Low Temperature Detectors for Neutrinos and Dark Matter, ed. K. Pretzl, N.

Schmitz, L. Stodolsky, Springer, Berlin (1987).

44. K. Pretzl, NIM A 454, 114(2000).
45. D.Wollmann et al., NIM 224, 83 (1984).
46. E. Fiorini and T.O. Niinikoski, NIM A 444, 145 (2000).
47. K.Borer et al., Astroparticle Phys. 22, 199 (2004).
48. H. Bernas et al., Phys. Lett. A24, 721 (1967).
49. A. Drukier and L. Stodolsky, Phys. Rev. D30/11, 2295 (1984).
50. K.Pretzl, Dark Matter, Massive Neutrinos and SUSY Particles, in Structure
and Dynamics of Elementary Matter, ed.W.Greiner, 2004 Kluver Academic Pub-

23

lisher,page 289

51. R.J. Gaitskell Annu.Rev.Nucl.Part.Sci. 54, 315 (2004).
52. B.Sadoulet in Low Temperature Detectors for Neutrinos and Dark Matter, ed.

K. Pretzl, N. Schmitz, L. Stodolsky, Springer, Berlin (1987),86.
53. L.Gonzales-Mestres and D.Perret-Gallix, NIM A 279, 382 (1989).
54. T. Peacock et al., Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 127, 497 (1998).
55. R. Davies et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 1205 (1968).
56. Q.R.Anmad et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 011301 (2002).
57. K.Euguchi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 021802-1 (2003).
58. Y.Fukuda et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81/8, 1562 (1998).
59. T.Nakaya, New K2K Results, talk presented at NEUTRINO 2004, 14.-19.June

2004, Paris.

60. K. Lande et al., Nature 251, 485 (Oct.11.1974).
61. A.Roberts, Rev.Mod.Phys. 259, (Jan.1992).
62. M.A.Markov, Proceedings of

the Rochester Conference on High Energy
Physics, ed. E.C.G.Sudarashan, J.H.Tinlot and A.Melissinos (University of
Rochester/Interscience,Rochester,NY) 578, (1960).
63. P. Blackett, Rep. Gassiot Committee 34, UK (1948).
64. A. Chudakov et al., J. Phys. Soc. Japan 17/AIII, 106 (1962).
65. M. Cawley et al., Experimental Astronomy 1, 173 (1990).
66. R.M. Baltrusaitis et al., NIM A240, 410-428 (1985).

