5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Study of the Scintillation Induced by Alpha
Particles and Gamma Rays in Liquid Xenon
in an Electric Field

J. V. Dawson a, A. S. Howard a, D. Akimov b, H. Araujo a,
A. Bewick a, D. C. R. Davidge a, W. G. Jones a, M. Joshi a,
V. N. Lebedenko a,b, I. Liubarsky a, J. J. Quenby a,
G. Rochester a, D. Shaul a, T. J. Sumner a, R. J. Walker a

aDepartment of Physics, Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College London,
SW7 2BW, UK
bInstitute of Theoretical and Experimental Physics, Moscow, RU

Abstract

Scintillation produced in liquid xenon by alpha particles and gamma rays has been
studied as a function of applied electric ﬁeld. For back scattered gamma rays with
energy of about 200 keV, the number of scintillation photons was found to decrease
by 64±2% with increasing ﬁeld strength. Consequently, the pulse shape discrim-
ination power between alpha particles and gamma rays is found to reduce with
increasing ﬁeld, but remaining non-zero at higher ﬁelds.

Key words:
PACS: 29.40.Mc

liquid xenon, scintillation, pulse shape discrimination

1 Introduction

There is much recent interest in xenon as a target for Weakly Interacting
Massive Particle (WIMP) detectors. It has a high atomic mass of 131 amu,
good for maximising the energy deposition from a WIMP collision. This is
due to a close match between the nuclear mass and the most favoured WIMP
mass according to SUSY models. Xenon is a scintillator, giving ∼ 52 × 103
photons/MeV for recoiling electrons in our energy range of interest [1,2]. The

Email address: jaime.dawson@imperial.ac.uk (J. V. Dawson).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

emitted photons are VUV, from an emission band centred at 176.7 nm [3],
which can be detected with photomultiplier tubes.

The observed scintillation pulse shape has a fast rise (∼ few ns) followed by
an exponential-like decay. The decay time is indicative of the incident parti-
cle, allowing discrimination between gamma rays,alpha particles and nuclear
recoils [4,5]. This property is exploited by ZEPLIN I [6], the Boulby Dark Mat-
ter Collaboration’s liquid xenon dark matter detector. The scintillation pulse
shape is used to diﬀerentiate between background gamma rays and recoiling
nuclei produced by scattering WIMPs.

The next generation of xenon dark matter detectors are two-phase systems;
ZEPLINs II [7] and III [8]. Such detectors measure both scintillation and ion-
isation produced by interacting particles separately. They comprise a liquid
xenon target and gaseous xenon layer. An applied electric ﬁeld removes elec-
trons from the primary interaction site and extracts them into the gas phase.
Whilst crossing the gas layer, the electrons have suﬃcient kinetic energy to
excite the xenon gas atoms producing electroluminescence. VUV signals are
produced by both the primary scintillation and the subsequent secondary elec-
troluminesence. In a uniform electric ﬁeld, the electroluminesence signal is di-
rectly proportional to the number of electrons removed from the interaction
site. The ratio of primary to secondary signal sizes is used as a discrimination
tool for the two-phase system.

This work presents a study of the scintillation signal, produced by alpha par-
ticles from an 241Am source and gamma rays from a 60Co source, as a function
of applied electric ﬁeld.

u and 3Σ+

The VUV scintillation signal from liquid xenon is produced by the de-excitation
to ground of the two lowest excited molecular states; 1Σ+
u . These
states can be produced initially through excitation, or via recombination [4].
The lifetimes of these states are found to be 4.3 ± 0.6 ns and 22.0 ± 2.0 ns for
alpha particles [9] and 2.2 ± 0.3 ns and 27 ± 1 ns for recoiling electrons [4].
In addition, there is a long recombination time of ∼ 15 ns for recoiling elec-
trons [4]. These eﬀects are convoluted into a pulse shape that can be approxi-
mated as a single exponential decay. This is particulary true with low numbers
of photons where the Poisson width blurs any distinction between the respec-
tive components. In this work, the overall decay proﬁle for recoiling electrons
has a measured mean time constant of 48.4 ± 0.2 ns compared to 15.0 ± 0.2 ns
for alpha particles.

Under an electric ﬁeld, the gamma ray induced (or recoiling electron) pulse
shape and area changes. This is due to the removal of electrons from the inter-
action site, suppressing the recombination component of the scintillation [10].
Understanding the behaviour of gamma ray signals under an electric ﬁeld is

2

vital to two-phase xenon detectors in order to calibrate the energy scale, and
estimate background contributions etc. To predict the primary and secondary
signal sizes the number of electrons removed from a gamma ray interaction as a
function of energy deposit and electric ﬁeld strength is needed. For charge mea-
surements, a linear relationship is observed between the inverse of the charge
extraction and the inverse of the electric ﬁeld [11,12]. Using this functional
form, the proportion of scintillation lost (or charge gained) can be found for
an inﬁnite electric ﬁeld. In the work presented here, recombination is found
to be responsible for 64 ± 2 % of the total scintillation signal for gamma
rays. Normalising by this quantity allows direct comparison between previ-
ous charge measurements. The proportion of the recombination component
removed by the electric ﬁeld, Ne(∞), is deﬁned as 1 at an inﬁnite electric
ﬁeld. The behaviour of the quantity (Ne) versus electric ﬁeld (E) is depen-
dent on the deposited gamma ray energy (Eγ). Charge measurement data of
Voronova [13], with gamma ray energies of 15.3, 17.3, 21.4 and 662 keV, show
this dependence. It is possible to parametrise their data as follows [14]:

1
Ne

=

30.07
Eγ

 

+ 0.40

+ 1,

1
E

!

(1)

where Eγ is the energy of the incident gamma ray in keV and E is the electric
ﬁeld strength in kV/cm.

The gamma ray recombination component is suppressed by an applied electric
ﬁeld, causing the overall decay time of the scintillation pulse to reduce. The
alpha particles pulse shapes show no discernable change with increasing the
electric ﬁeld strength up to 3.7 kV/cm. The gamma ray decay proﬁle changes
from a time constant of 48.4 ± 0.2 ns with no electric ﬁeld to 23.7 ± 0.2 ns
at 3.7 kV/cm. This change can be used in a diagnostic capacity in two phase
detectors since gamma rays interacting in low electric ﬁeld regions will present
longer decay proﬁles. Such regions can be problematic in a two phase detec-
tor as interacting gamma rays may not suﬀer suﬃcient charge extraction to
produce electroluminesence, or smaller electroluminesence signals may result.
Whilst the gamma ray scintillation decay time is reduced by an electric ﬁeld,
under low ﬁelds it is still possible to discriminate between gamma rays and
nuclear recoils using Pulse Shape Discrimination.

2 Experimental Setup

A prototype two phase liquid xenon dark matter detector was used for these
studies, Figure 1. Inside the chamber is a photomultiplier tube immersed in
liquid xenon, ﬁeld shaping rings, two grids, an aluminium mirror (electrode)

3

Fig. 1. Schematic of the detector showing liquid nitrogen cryostat and the liquid
xenon chamber containing the photomultiplier tube and electric ﬁeld ring structure.

and a ﬁxed 241Am internal source. The total xenon mass is 4.5 kg. The sensitive
liquid xenon volume is deﬁned by the ﬁeld rings and for this experiment ﬁlls
the structure to the mirror (top electrode). The ﬁeld rings have an internal
radius of 3 cm. Figure 2 is a diagram of the sensitive volume of the xenon
chamber, showing the electric ﬁeld rings, top electrode (mirror), high voltage
grids and photocathode of photomultiplier tube. The 241Am source is ﬁxed
to the upper high voltage grid and sits upward facing inside a lead holder.
Voltages are applied to the upper high voltage grid (-ve) and mirror (+ve),
providing the drift ﬁeld. The lower grid is kept at a low negative potential (-
0.2 kV) primarily to shield the photocathode from the high voltage grid. The
photomultiplier tube is quartz windowed (ETL 9829B) with a photocathode
quantum eﬃciency of 23 % at 175 nm [15].

2.1 Xenon Purity

In order to drift electrons for centimetres without loss through xenon requires
high purity (parts per trillion): in particular, free of electronegative contam-
inants such as O2, N2O, CO2 and H2O. The scintillation is also aﬀected by

4

Fig. 2. Schematic of the internal structure, showing the electric ﬁeld rings, top
electrode (mirror), grids and face of the photomultiplier tube. The 241Am source
and holder are shown. The voltage loads are applied as shown on the right-hand
side of the diagram.

the presence of impurities (shortening the total attenuation length) but to a
lesser extent (parts per billion).

Puriﬁcation apparatus and procedures have been developed to remove con-
taminants [16]. All components of the inner chamber were constructed from
stainless steel, copper, quartz or high purity ceramic, and designed for ultra-
high vacuum use with residual pumped pressures below 10−8 mbar. The xenon
was delivered to an Oxisorb cartridge [17] which removes O2 and H2O chem-
ically. Xenon was distilled into the detector from a temperature controlled
external bottle through a 0.5 µm dust ﬁlter. This distillation procedure sep-
arates xenon from other trace impurities left solidiﬁed behind, particularly
CO2, CH4 and H2O.

The xenon is kept cold via liquid nitrogen delivered to a cryostat directly
above the main chamber. The chamber temperature is monitored at various
locations, and with the use of heaters and a restrictive coupling the liquid
temperature is actively maintained at -97◦C.

The purity of the xenon is assessed via the measurement of the free electron
lifetime. To do this, potential diﬀerences are applied between the high voltage
grid and top electrode causing free electrons released by background gamma
and cosmic ray interactions and alphas from the internal 241Am source to drift
towards the mirror. The electron drift is quantiﬁed with a calibrated charge
sensitive ampliﬁer (Amptek A250) connected to the top electrode (mirror).
The outputed voltage is recorded as a function of time, triggered by the pri-
mary scintillation signal. The longest drift times are found to be in excess of
60 µs across a 21.75 mm drift path [16], indicating a very high purity, without
any measurable loss of charge even at ﬁelds below 10 V/cm.

5

2.2 Applied Electric Field

The electric ﬁeld is produced by applying negative voltages to the upper high
voltage grid and positive voltages to the top electrode. The total potential
diﬀerence between the upper high voltage grid and top electrode ranged from
0 to 8 kV. The corresponding electric ﬁeld distribution was modelled using
the ﬁnite element analysis code, ANSYS [18].

3 Calibration

The calibration was made with no applied electric ﬁeld. Initially the scintil-
lation spectrum from the internal source was measured. The 241Am source is
coated, producing alpha particles with a broad energy distribution peaking at
3.9 MeV. As the source is mounted in a lead source holder, the scintillation
light produced by the alpha particles has no direct path to the phototube
(maximum shadowing). Only light reﬂected by the mirror is seen. The peak
of the alpha distribution contains ∼1900 photoelectrons as shown in Figure 3
(upper spectrum). The resulting spectrum produced by a GEANT 4 [19] sim-
ulation of the full detector and 241Am source is also shown (lower spectrum).

The 241Am source produces 60 keV gamma and X-rays, resulting in a peak
at ∼ 180 photoelectrons. The low energy spectrum is shown in Figure 4 with
the corresponding simulated spectrum. The 60 keV gamma rays are seen as
3 peaks; the uppermost (∼ 180 photoelectrons) giving direct light to the pho-
totube from gamma rays passing sideways through the lead source holder, the
lowermost (∼ 20 photoelectrons) from gamma rays emitted upwards being
maximally shadowed by the source holder, and the intermediary structure re-
sulting from partial shadowing and multiple interactions. Below these three
peaks, lower energy gamma rays from 241Am (maximally shadowed) merge to
form the rest of the low energy spectrum.

The upper 60 keV line results from events occuring less than 3 mm from
the 241Am source, with most interactions occuring at a distance of 1 mm.
These scintillation signals with no applied electric ﬁeld, give a measured yield
of 3 photoelectrons per keV. These interactions occur in the most eﬃcient
light collection region in the chamber, with the rest of the chamber being a
factor 2.3 ± 0.3 less eﬃcient. The spectra were energy calibrated assuming
1.5 photoelectrons per keV.

Figure 5 is a spectrum from an external 60Co source after subtraction of the
background spectrum from the internal source (Figure 3). Due to the amount
of liquid xenon surrounding the sensitive region, the spectrum displays only

6

Fig. 3. Pulse Height spectrum of internal 241Am source (upper plot) and GEANT 4
simulated spectrum (lower plot). The alpha distribution is broad and peaks at ∼1900
photoelectrons. The 60 keV gamma peak is found at ∼ 180 photoelectrons.

one clear feature: a broad peak from gamma rays scattering at large angles in
the external xenon volume and depositing ∼ 212 keV in the internal xenon
volume. This feature was replicated in the simulation (lower plot).

4 Pulse Height Spectra Analysis

For each applied potential diﬀerence, pulse height spectra were recorded, both
with and without the 60Co source. The background spectra (without the 60Co
source) is predominantly from the internal 214Am souce, see Figure 3. The
background spectra were subtracted from the source spectra to give the 60Co
spectra. The position of the peak in each 60Co spectrum was determined. With
the application of an electric ﬁeld, the position of the peak moved to lower
channels as a result of the scintillation signal area decreasing. Figure 6 shows
the fraction of the scintillation signal removed (S) as a function of the applied
electric ﬁeld (E). A straight line ﬁt to the inverse of this quantity ( 1
S ), and
the inverse of the electric ﬁeld ( 1

E ) was made, resulting in:

1
S

= (0.8 ± 0.1)

+ (1.56 ± 0.06).

1
E

(2)

For an inﬁnite electric ﬁeld the percentage of signal removed by the electric
ﬁeld is equal to the inverse of the intercept, 64 ± 2 %. Work by Kubota, with
207Bi conversion electrons of energies 0.976 and 1.05 MeV, found a reduction

7

Fig. 4. Pulse Height spectrum of internal 241Am source (upper plot) and GEANT 4
simulation spectrum (lower plot). The 60 keV gamma rays from the 241Am source re-
sult in 3 peaks. The uppermost peak is from gamma rays penetrating the sides of the
source holder giving direct light to the phototube. The lower peak (at ∼20 photoelec-
trons) is from 60 keV gammas maximally shadowed by the source. The intermediary
structure is from partial shadowing of the direct light and multiple interactions.

Fig. 5. Pulse Height spectrum of external 60Co source (background subtracted).
The lower plot is a GEANT 4 simulated spectrum. The broad peak at ∼ 200 keV
is from gamma rays scattered at large angles into the sensitive xenon volume, and
comprises ∼ 300 photoelectrons.

8

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

1

2

3

4

Fig. 6. Fraction of the gamma ray scintillation signal removed as a function of the
electric ﬁeld. The dashed line is a line of best ﬁt (Equation 2 rearranged).

0

0

1

2

3

4

Fig. 7. Fraction of charge extracted as a function of applied electric ﬁeld. The inner
error bar represents statistical errors only. The outer error bars represent total errors
including systematic errors. The dashed line is the line of best ﬁt to the data (from
Equation 2). The dotted lines are from Equation 1, assuming a gamma ray energy
of 200 keV (lower curve) and 1 MeV (upper curve).

fraction of 0.74 ± 0.02 [12] at 12.7 kV/cm, signiﬁcantly greater than found in
this work. This suggests a variation in the mean electron creation energy We
with recoiling electron energy.

9

The corresponding fraction of charge extracted as a function of the electric
ﬁeld is shown in Figure 7. Also shown are two trends from Equation 2. The
lower dotted curve is for a gamma ray energy of 200 keV, and the upper curve
is for an energy of 1 MeV. The line of best ﬁt to the data lies at slightly higher
energies than the 200 keV trend. The energies deposited by the large angle
scatters peak at 212 keV, resulting in a faster increase in charge removal with
increasing electric ﬁeld strength. For energy deposits greater than 1 MeV, the
trends are far less dependent on the energy deposit and all gamma rays behave
in a similar manner; this is the maximal charge removal trend.

5 Scintillation Traces

Scintillation traces were recorded at each applied electric ﬁeld strength. The
photomultiplier voltage output was digitised by a Lecroy 7200 oscilloscope of
1 Gs/s at 500 MHz bandwidth, and recorded by computer with Labview DAQ
software. A leading edge trigger provided the lower amplitude threshold of
0.1 V. The upper amplitude threshold was set to 0.9 V through DAQ software
selection. As alpha and gamma ray signals have diﬀerent pulse shapes the
amplitude threshold settings select diﬀerent energy ranges for alphas than
for gamma rays. For gamma rays, the recorded event energies were between
approximately 100 keV and 1 MeV with no applied electric ﬁeld. Alpha events
from the internal 241Am source have visible energies of between 50 keV and
400 keV. These alpha events are the lower energy tail of the alpha source
energy distribution and the threshold settings used do not include the peak
of the spectrum (see Figure 3). The recorded traces were analysed through
software, returning maximum amplitudes (pulse amplitudes in V) and pulse
areas (in nVs). A characteristic time parameter, known as the time-constant,
was deﬁned as the ratio of the pulse area to amplitude (units of ns). Figure 8
shows this quantity for the condition of no applied electric ﬁeld (solid) and
0.05 kV/cm (dashed).

The data are clearly divided into alpha and gamma ray populations, based
upon the measured area to amplitude ratios. Events with time-constants less
than 22 ns were deemed alphas, events with ratios greater than this were
identiﬁed as gamma rays. Figure 8 illustrates the eﬀect of the electric ﬁeld on
the gamma ray scintillation pulse shape, reducing the time-constant. At each
electric ﬁeld value the mean time-constant was determined for alpha particles
and gamma rays, see Figure 9.

A Monte Carlo simulation was used to investigate the behaviour of measured
time-constant with number of photoelectrons detected. A parent exponential
time-constant was chosen to mimic the behaviour of gamma rays under no
electric ﬁeld (47 ns), for alphas a shorter time-constant was chosen (15 ns).

10

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

Fig. 8. Histograms of the ratio of pulse area to amplitude. The solid line represents
the condition of no applied electric ﬁeld, and the dashed line is for an electric ﬁeld of
0.05 kV/cm. The alpha signals have a ratio of ∼ 15 ns, and display no discernable
change with electric ﬁeld. The gamma ray signals have area to amplitude ratios
greater than ∼ 22 ns, which reduce with increasing electric ﬁeld.

Fig. 9. Variation of pulse area to amplitude ratio with applied electric ﬁeld for source
alphas and gammas from an external 60Co source. The alphas (lower points) show
no change with increasing electric ﬁeld. The gamma rays (upper points) decrease
rapidly with increasing electric ﬁeld from 46.1 ± 0.1 ns with no electric ﬁeld to
22.6 ± 0.1 ns at 3.7 kV/cm.

11

Exponential random deviates were generated, simulating the emission time of
scintillation photons. All emitted photons are assumed to strike the photo-
cathode of the photomultiplier tube, and an output voltage trace is produced.
The photomultiplier simulation included the quantum eﬃciency of the tube,
single photoelectron temporal proﬁle, and jitter. The dynode resistor chain,
and applied voltage were also implemented to give a realistic single photoelec-
tron spectrum. The simulated voltage traces were analysed, returning pulse
areas and amplitudes. The data were binned by pulse area and for each bin the
mean and standard deviation of the pulse area to amplitude ratios was found.
The simulated data were then compared to experimental data, as shown in
Figure 10. The simulations can be made to match the experimental data well
by adjusting the the parent exponential time-constant. In this ﬁgure the sim-
ulations are slightly oﬀset from the experimental data. Simulations were also
made to represent gamma rays under various electric ﬁelds by changing the
parent time-constant.

Fig. 10. Comparison between the simulated dataset (denoted by crosses) and binned
experimental data (points with error bars). On the left the mean area to amplitude
ratio is shown. On the right the standard deviation of the area to amplitude ratio
is plotted. The dashed lines represent the eﬀect of lower amplitude threshold on the
experimental dataset, pulses with amplitudes smaller than this threshold are not
recorded.

The aﬀect of the 22 ns time-constant cut applied to the real datasets was ex-
plored by applying the same cut on the simulated dataset. The probability of
correctly identifying alphas (with time-constants less than 22 ns) and gamma
rays (with time-constants greater than 22 ns) can be assessed. Figure 11 shows
the identiﬁcation probabilities determined by simulation as a function of num-
ber of photoelectrons, for the case of greatest applied electric ﬁeld. The alpha

12

Fig. 11. The probability of correctly identifying populations using a 22 ns
time-constant cut on simulated datasets.

particles are well identiﬁed with this cut for all photoelectrons. The alpha
identiﬁcation probability falls with decreasing number of photoelectrons as the
standard deviation of the time-constant distribution increases (see right-hand
plot, Figure 10). Below a hundred photoelectrons, the probability increases as
the mean of the time-constant distribution falls (see left-hand plot, Figure 10)
overriding the eﬀect of the increasing standard deviation. For gamma rays,
the identiﬁcation probability falls with number of photoelectrons, due to both
the mean and standard deviation of the time-constant distribution falling and
rising respectively. For a gamma ray signal comprising 1000 photoelectrons
the probability of correctly identifying the signal is 0.96 ± 0.01. Equivalently
for an alpha signal the probability is greater than 0.999. For the experimen-
tal datasets (with large numbers of photoelectrons) this time-constant cut
was good and should not have biassed the results, even under high electric
ﬁeld strengths. However, using this cut on signals with low numbers of pho-
toelectrons would have resulted in misidentifying many gamma rays as alpha
particles. To achieve the most success in separating gamma rays from alpha
particles, the time-constant cut should vary with number of photoelectrons
and be set according to one of three conditions; to either accept fewer alphas
(and reject gammas with high eﬃciency), to accept fewer gammas (and reject
alphas with high eﬃciency), or to some intermediary state in which the ma-
jority of one population are accepted but with a signiﬁcant contamination of
the other population. As an example, with 100 photoelectons and a 22 ns cut

13

the probability of identifying a gamma ray has a low eﬃciency (∼ 0.5) but
the probability of an alpha particle contaminating the sample is unlikely (less
than 0.02). In this case, the gamma rays are identiﬁed with a low eﬃciency
but alpha particles are highly discriminated.

6 Conclusion

Pulse height spectra produced by an external 60Co source and the internal
241Am source were compared to GEANT 4 [19] simulations. The features of
both spectra are well reproduced. For the majority of this sensitive volume
the yield is estimated to be 1.5 photoelectrons per keV (under the condition
of no applied electric ﬁeld).

The variation of scintillation pulse area from 60Co gamma rays was investi-
gated as a function of electric ﬁeld, using the large-angle scatter peak. The
scintillation pulse areas decrease as the applied electric ﬁeld increases. For a
212 keV gamma ray, 64 ± 2 % of the scintillation is found to be produced via
recombination.

The temporal proﬁle of the scintillation signal was investigated for incident
alpha particles and gamma rays with increasing electric ﬁeld. No signiﬁcant
change with electric ﬁeld was observed for alpha particles. Gamma ray signals,
however, become faster with low electric ﬁeld strengths from 46.1 ± 0.1 ns with
no electric ﬁeld to 25.2 ± 0.1 ns at 0.5 kV/cm. Increasing the electric ﬁeld
strength further reduces the time-constant to 22.6 ± 0.1 ns at 3.7 kV/cm.
The behaviour of the derived time-constant with numbers of photoelectrons
detected was investigated with simulation and compared to experimental data.
The behaviour of measured time-constants from alphas and gammas (at all
ﬁelds) can be reproduced using only one parameter, the parent time-constant.

From this work, the scintillation signal (both in size and shape) produced by
any energy deposit from an alpha particle or gamma ray in liquid xenon can
be predicted. The number of electrons extracted from a gamma ray interaction
under any strength electric ﬁeld can also be predicted, aiding simulations of
the response of two-phase xenon detectors to gamma ray interactions.

References

[1] Doke T., Hitachi A., Kikuchi J., Masuda K., 2002, Japanese Journal of Applied

Physics, 41, 1538-1545.

14

[2] Barabanov I. R., Gavrin V. N., Pshukov A. M., 1987, Nuclear Instruments and

Methods in Physics Research A, 254, 355-360.

[3] Schwentner N., Kock E.-E.,Jortner J., 1985,

in
Condensed Rare Gases’, Springer Tracts in Modern Physics, Vol 107, 135-136.

’Electronic Excitations

[4] Kubota S., Hishida M., Suzuki M., Ruan(Gen) J-Z., 1979, Physical Review B,

20, 3486-3496.

[5] Akimov D., et al., 2002, Physics Letters B, 524, 245-251.

[6] Hart S. P., et al (the UK Dark Matter Collaboration), 2002, Nuclear Physics B

(Proceedings Supplement), 110, 91-93.

[7] Cline D., 2000, Nuclear Physics B (Proceedings Supplement), 87, 114-116.

[8] Dawson J. V., 2003, Ph.D Thesis, University of London.

[9] Hitachi A., Takahashi T., Funayama N., Masuda K., Kikuchi J., Doke T., 1983,

Physical Review B, 27, 5279-5285.

[10] Conti E., et al, 2003, Physical Review B,68, 054201.

[11] Jaﬀe G., Ann. Phys. (Leipzip), 1913, 42, 303.

[12] Kubota S., et al, 1978, Physical Review B, 17, 2762-2765.

[13] Voronova T., Kirsanov M., Kruglov A., 1979, Soviet Journal of Technical

Physics, 59, 186-189.

[14] Davidge D. C. R., 2003, Ph.D Thesis, University of London.

[15] Electron Tubes Limited, 2003, http://www.electron-tubes.co.uk.

[16] Howard A. S., et al, 2001, 3rd International Workshop on Identiﬁcation of Dark

Matter (World Scientiﬁc) 457-462.

[17] Messer Griesheim, 2003, http://www.messergroup.com/index1.html.

[18] ANSYS Inc., 2003, http://www.ansys.com.

[19] Agostinelli S., et al (GEANT4 Collaboration), 2003, Nuclear Instruments and

Methods in Physics Research A, 506, 250-303.

15

