5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
9
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
1
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Compact Apparatus for Muon Lifetime Measurement and
Time Dilation Demonstration in the Undergraduate Laboratory

Thomas Coan,∗ Tiankuan Liu,† and Jingbo Ye‡
Physics Department, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX 75275 USA

We describe a compact apparatus that automatically measures the charge averaged lifetime of
atmospheric muons in plastic scintillator using low-cost, low-power electronics and that measures
the stopping rate of atmospheric muons as a function of altitude to demonstrate relativistic time
dilation. The apparatus is designed for the advanced undergraduate physics laboratory and is
suitable for ﬁeld measurements.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Measurement of the mean lifetime of muons produced in Earth’s atmosphere from collisions between cosmic rays
and air nuclei is a common experiment1,2,3 in advanced undergraduate physics laboratories. Typically, a single
scintillating medium, massive enough to stop some useful fraction of the muons impinging on it, is viewed by one or two
photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) that detect the pair of scintillation light ﬂashes associated with the entry and subsequent
decay of a stopped muon. Histogramming the time interval between the two ﬂashes and then ﬁtting the time
distribution with an exponential function yield the mean muon lifetime. Various PMT readout and histogramming
techniques have been implemented to produce the decay time histogram. However, such techniques tend to rely
on relatively expensive and bulky electronic instrumentation (e.g., NIM and CAMAC-standard modules) and stand-
alone multi-channel analyzers to generate the decay time histogram. We have developed fully equivalent readout
instrumentation, based on a complex programmable logic device (CPLD4), that is compact (20 × 25 × 5 cm3), low
cost and low power (< 25 W). The readout instrumentation is easily interfaced to a laptop computer to display and
ﬁt the decay time histogram.

II. DETECTOR AND READOUT ELECTRONICS

We use a standard detector conﬁguration, with no attempt made to select only vertically traveling muons. A
plastic scintillator in the shape of a right circular cylinder (15.2 cm diameter and 12.7 cm tall) is viewed by a single
10-stage, 51 mm diameter, bi-alkali photocathode PMT biased to nominal gain 3 × 105 attached to one end. Both
scintillator and PMT are wrapped carefully with aluminum foil and electrical tape to prevent light leaks. The PMT
is biased using a compact, commercially available DC-DC converter5 with negative high voltage (HV) applied to
its photocathode. To mimic events where a muon enters, stops and then decays inside the scintillator, a blue light
emitting diode (LED) is permanently inserted into a small hole drilled in one end of the scintillator. The LED can
be driven by a transistorized pulser circuit that produces pairs of pulses at a nominal repetition rate of 100 Hz with
an adjustable interpulse separation in a given pair from 300 ns to 30 µsec. For robustness and portability, and so that
no HV electrodes are exposed to students, the scintillator, PMT, HV circuit and pulser are all enclosed inside a black
anodized aluminum tube 36 cm tall and 15.2 cm inner diameter. The cylinder is capped at both ends. Power to the
HV supply and pulser circuitry is provided by a single multi-connector cable and the PMT signal is sent to the readout
electronics module by a coaxial cable. Potentiometers installed in the cylinder cap allow student adjustment of the
PMT HV and LED interpulse time separation. Provision is made to monitor the HV with a conventional voltmeter
and output of the pulser circuitry is accessible by a coaxial connector on the cap. The mass of the overall detector is
5 kg.

The electronic circuitry to process PMT signals, perform timing, communicate with the computer, and provide
power to the detector is mounted on one printed circuit board (PCB) located inside a single enclosure of volume
20 × 25 × 5 cm3. A block diagram of this circuitry is shown in Fig. 1. Signals from the PMT anode are coupled by
the coaxial cable to the input of a two-stage ampliﬁer constructed from a fast current feedback ampliﬁer6. A typical
raw PMT signal amplitude for muon decay events is 100 mV into 50 Ω impedance. The ampliﬁer output feeds a
discriminator with adjustable threshold and TTL logic output. Students can monitor the ampliﬁer and discriminator
outputs via BNC connectors mounted on the front of the electronics enclosure.

The discriminator output signal is processed by a CPLD, mounted on a single PCB. A CPLD is a single, ﬂexible
integrated circuit (IC) comprised of thousands of usable logic gates that can implement a wide variety of digital
logic functions. The chip includes programmable interconnections and multiple input/output (I/O) pins, and can
be clocked at rates up to ∼ 100 MHz. Its behavior can be extensively and reliably simulated before its controlling

Amplifier 1

Amplifier 2

Discriminator

2

CPLD

Time−to−Digital
Convertor

FIFO
Interface

USB−FIFO
Translator

USB Port

RS−232
Interface

RS−232
Transceiver

Serial Port

FIG. 1: Block diagram of the readout electronics showing the two-stage ampliﬁer, discriminator, CPLD and I/O communications
circuitry. Signals are processed from left to right.

program is downloaded into its electrically erasable programmable read only memeory (EEPROM). Such ICs are
reprogrammable and relatively cheap, typically costing a few tens of dollars, making the inexpensive implementation
of a wide variety of digital logic signal processing circuitry practical.

The CPLD is programmed in a digital hardware description language (VHDL) to function primarily as a timer.
A logical “yes” output from the discriminator, corresponding to an ampliﬁed PMT signal above threshold, causes
either the CPLD to start recording clock cycles from the 50 MHz crystal oscillator that clocks it, or, if the CPLD
had already started counting clock cycles, to stop counting. In this way, any ampliﬁed PMT signal above threshold
can serve as a stop or start timing signal. The CPLD is also programmed to reset itself if a second “yes” does not
occur within 20 µsec of the ﬁrst one. This simple logic scheme corresponds to our desired event scenario where we
have a ﬂash of scintillator light corresponding to a muon entering and stopping in the scintillator, and a second ﬂash
occurring when the stopped muon decays.

The CPLD formats data in a simple fashion. For successive PMT signals above threshold and within the 20 µs
timing window, the time diﬀerence, in integral units of 50 MHz clock cycles, between these two signals is recorded.
Data of this type is ultimately histogrammed and ﬁt to an exponential curve by the laptop software to extract the
muon lifetime. For cases when there are no signal pairs within the timing window, the CPLD merely records the
integer 1000, corresponding to the number of clock cycles in our timing window. All data are subsequently sent to
the laptop through either a serial or USB port.

The CPLD I/O circuitry (see Fig 1) has two physical ports to simplify interfacing to laptop computers. One port
is a standard serial port that follows the RS-232 protocol and that relies on a dedicated RS-232 transceiver chip to
shift RS-232 standard voltage levels to low voltage TTL levels to communicate with the RS-232 interface module
resident in the CPLD. The data transmission rate between CPLD and laptop is 115 kbits/s. The other port adheres
to the USB 1.1 protocol and relies on a USB-FIFO (“ﬁrst in, ﬁrst out”) translator chip to communicate with the
FIFO interface module within the CPLD. Data transmission rates in this case are 2.4 Mbits/s.

Overall power consumption of the electronics module is less than 25 W, suﬃciently low that it can be powered in

the ﬁeld from an automobile cigarette lighter.

III. DATA DISPLAY SOFTWARE

The laptop-resident software that displays and curve ﬁts the decay time histogram is written in the Tcl/Tk scripting
language, an open source language that permits easy implementation of graphical user interfaces and that is compatible
with Unix, Microsoft Windows and Apple Macintosh operating systems. The laptop continuously examines its own
I/O port buﬀers for the presence of any data that the CPLD has sent it. Any data consistent with PMT pulse pairs
within the timing window has the corresponding pulse separation time entered into a decay time histogram. Data not
corresponding to pulse pairs is used to update various rate meters monitoring the frequency of PMT signals above
threshold. All data is then slightly reformatted to include the absolute time in seconds when it was examined by the
laptop before being written to disk in ASCII format for easy human interpretation and exporting to student written
data analysis software routines. The histogram and rate meters are displayed in real time for student observation.

The laptop software has provision for simulating muon decay by randomly generating times according to an expo-
nential distribution with a user selectable lifetime. This permits students to practice their curve ﬁtting and lifetime
extracting software routines on large simulated data sets.

IV. MEAN MUON LIFETIME

A decay time histogram for muons stopping in our detector formed by histogramming the time between two
successive scintillator ﬂashes within our 20 µs timing window is shown in Fig. 2. Dots with crosses are data and the line

is a ﬁt to the data. This histogram contains 28, 963 events collected over 480 hours of running and contains µ+and µ−
decays as well as background. The data is ﬁt to the functional form ˙N (t) = P1P2 exp (−P2t) + P3, characteristic of
radioactive decay with background. Here ˙N (t) represents the observed number of decays per unit time at time t and
the quantities P1, P −1
2 and P3 are constants extracted from the ﬁt and represent an overall normalization constant,
the muon lifetime and the background level, respectively. These values are shown in the box in the upper right-hand
corner of Fig. 2. The quality of the ﬁt is indicated by the low χ2 per degree-of-freedom (χ2/d.o.f. = 73/55). The ﬁt
was done with PAW, a freely available7 ﬁtting and plotting software package. Other ﬁtting packages return similar
results. Due to the properties of an exponential function, it is irrelevant that the muons whose decays we observe are
undetected when born outside the detector.

3

FIG. 2: Decay time histogram for 28,963 events collected over 480 hrs. The dots with error bars are data and the line is a ﬁt
to the data with the three-parameter function f (t) = P1P2 exp(−P2t) + P3. The values for the ﬁt parameters plus the χ2 per
degree-of-freedom are shown in the upper right hand corner.

The extracted value of the mean muon lifetime τ = P −1

2 = 2.12 ± 0.02 µs (statistical error only) is less than the free
space value τµ = 2.19703 ± 0.00004 µs due to the non-negligible probability that a µ−, but not a µ+, will be captured
into the K-shell of a scintillator carbon atom and then be absorbed by its nucleus8. (The probability that a stopped
µ− will be absorbed by a target atom of atomic number Z is proportional to Z 4.)

The extracted background rate of fake muon decays is inferred from the value of P3 and the 480 hr running time,
and corresponds to 0.6 mHz. This rate of two PMT signals in coincidence is consistent with the observed rate of single
PMT signals above threshold (∼ 6 Hz) and our 20 µs timing window. For comparison, the ﬁtted rate of muon decays
in the scintillator is 17 mHz (∼ 1 min−1).

From the charge averaged lifetime of muons in what is essentially a carbon target (the ratio of hydrogen to carbon
in plastic scintillator is 1:1), and the lifetime of µ− in carbon9, it is straightforward10 to measure the charge ratio
abundance ρ = N (µ+)/N (µ−) of low-energy (E . 200 MeV) muons at sea-level. For example, from our measured
lifetime, we ﬁnd ρ = 1.08 ± 0.01 (statistical error only), averaged over the angular acceptance of the detector, a value
consistent with the diminishing trend11 for ρ as the muon momentum approaches zero.

V. DEMONSTRATION OF RELATIVISTIC TIME DILATION

The stopping rate of muons in the detector as a function of altitude above sea level can be used to demonstrate
relativistic time dilation. Although the detector design is non-optimal for this demonstration since it is sensitive

4

(1)

(2)

to muons with a range of velocities as well as non-vertical trajectories, it has the advantage that no bulky velocity
selecting absorbers or additional trajectory deﬁning scintillators12 are required. The idea is simple. The total number
of stopped muons in the detector in some ﬁxed time interval and at some ﬁxed altitude above sea level (a.s.l.) is
measured from the decay time time histogram. A lower altitude is selected and predictions made for the new stopping
rate that do and do not include the time dilation eﬀect of special relativity. Measurement then discriminates between
the two predictions.

To make the comparison between the competing assumptions meaningful, the eﬀects of the energy loss of a muon
as it descends in the atmosphere as well as the shape of the sub-GeV/c muon momentum spectrum13 near sea-level
should be included. The ﬁrst eﬀect tends to increase the transit time of the muon from one altitude to another and
the other tends to over emphasize the eﬀects of time dilation.

The transit time t′ measured in the muon’s rest frame as it descends vertically in the atmosphere from a height H

down to sea-level is given by

where β and γ have their normal relativistic meanings, dh is a diﬀerential element of pathlength and c is the speed of
light. All quantities on the right-hand side of Eq. (1) are measured in the detector rest frame. As the muon descends
it loses energy in a manner described by the Bethe-Bloch equation14 so the integral can be evaluated numerically if
great precision is desired. Instead, we use the common approximation that a singly-charged relativistic particle loses
energy by ionization and excitation of the medium it traverses with a magnitude dE/dx = 2 MeV g−1cm2 (≡ S0).
Eq. (1) becomes

t′ =

0

Z

H

dh
cβ(h)γ(h)

γ1

t′ ≃ mc

ρS0 Z

γ2

dγ
γ2 − 1

p

Here, γ1 is the muon’s Lorentz factor at height H, γ2 is its Lorentz factor just before it enters the sea level scintillator,
m is the muon mass and ρ denotes the pathlength-averaged mass density of the atmosphere. We take γ2 ≃ 1.5 since
we want muons that stop in the scintillator and assume, consistent with our detector geometry, that stopped muons
travel an average distance s = 10 g/cm2 in the scintillator . (See muon range-momentum graphs from the Particle
Data Group15 for correlating a muon’s range with its momentum.) The appropriate value of γ1 depends on the height
H where we take our upper measurement and is computed from the energy E1 a muon has at that height if it is
to arrive at the sea-level detector with γ2 = 1.5 (corresponding to energy E2 = 160 MeV). Clearly, if a muon loses
energy ∆E in traversing a vertical distance H, then E1 = ∆E + 160 MeV. The quantity ∆E can be computed from
the Bethe-Bloch equation or estimated from the above rule-of-thumb for minimum ionizing particles and properties
of the standard atmosphere.

Since the time dilation demonstration relies on stopping muons in the detector, we must account for the fact that
muons that eventually stop in the lower detector have, at the position of the upper detector, an energy that is greater
than those muons that would be stopped in the upper detector. Since the momentum spectrum of sub-GeV muons
near sea-level is not ﬂat, but peaks at muon momentum pµ ∼ 500 MeV/c, we correct for this aﬀect so that the eﬀective
ﬂux of incident muons is appropriately normalized. (This is easy to see if you assume muons don’t decay at all and
only lose energy in the atmosphere as they descend.) We do this by measuring the ratio of stopping rates at a pair of
altitudes to determine a single scaling factor that we can apply to other pairs of altitudes.

To illustrate the procedure, we measure the muon stopping rate at two diﬀerent elevations (∆h = 3, 000 m between
Taos, NM and Dallas, TX) and compute the ratio Robs of observed stopping rates (Robs(Dallas/Taos) = 0.41 ± 0.05.)
The transit time t′ in the muon’s rest frame for vertical trajectories between the two elevations is computed using
Eq. 2 and yields t′ = 1.32τµ. This corresponds to a naive theoretical stopping rate ratio R = exp(−t′/τµ) = 0.267.
The double ratio R0 = Robs/R = 1.5 ± 0.2 is then interpreted as a correction factor for the shape of the muon
momentum spectrum. Note that this same correction tends to account for muons with non-vertical trajectories that
stop in the detector. These slanting muons with a projection onto the vertical axis of distance H travel further in the
atmosphere and hence start with more energy than their purely vertical counterparts.

To verify that the procedure is sensible, we choose a new elevation (H = 2133 m a.s.l. at Los Alamos, NM), compute
the transit time t′ = 1.06τµ and the expected stopping rate ratio (Dallas/Los Alamos) Rthy = R0 exp(−t′/τµ) =
0.52±0.06. The observed ratio Robs = 0.56±0.01, showing good agreement. Table I summarizes relevant measurements
and lists in the third column calculated proper transit times for vertical muon trajectories, in units of the proper
muon lifetime τµ and relative to Dallas’ elevation.

To compare the stopping rate measurements with the competing assumption that there is no time dilation eﬀect
(“ntd”), we proceed as before except we calculate the transit time in the detector rest frame and we assume all muons

5

Elevation (meters a.s.l.)
146
2133
3154

TABLE I: Muon Stopping Rate Measurements and Calculated Proper Transit Times
Observed Stopping Rate (min−1)
1.24 ± 0.01
2.21 ± 0.05
3.00 ± 0.34

Proper transit time (τµ)
−
1.06
1.32

travel at the speed of light so as to minimize the eﬀect of time dilation. For the case of transit between Los Alamos
and Dallas, the transit time tntd in the detector rest frame is tntd = 6.62 µs, implying an expected stopping rate ratio
Rntd = R0 exp(−t/τ ) = 0.08 ± 0.01, a result strongly disfavored by observation.

We have designed a compact and low-cost apparatus for measuring the mean muon lifetime and for demonstrating
relativistic time dilation suitable for undergraduate teaching. An electronics schematic and Tcl/Tk data acquisi-
tion/display software are available upon request.

VI. SUMMARY

Acknowledgments

The technical assistance of H. van Hecke and L. Lu is greatly appreciated, as well as the ﬁnancial support of the

Lightner-Sams foundation.

∗ Electronic address: coan@mail.physics.smu.edu
† Electronic address: liu@mail.physics.smu.edu
‡ Electronic address: yejb@mail.physics.smu.edu
1 R.E. Hall, D.A. Lind and R.A. Ristinen, Am. J. Phys. 38, 1196 (1970).
2 A. Owens and A.E. Macgregor, Am. J. Phys. 46, 859 (1978).
3 R.J. Lewis, Am. J. Phys. 50, 894 (1981).
4 Part EPM7128BTC100-10, Altera Corp., www.altera.com.
5 Model G12, EMCO High Voltage Corp., www.emcohighvoltage.com.
6 Part AD8004AR-14, Analog Devices, www.analog.com.
7 PAW graphing and plotting package, http://wwwasd.web.cern.ch/wwasd/paw/.
8 T. Ward et al., Am. J. Phys. 53, 542 (1985).
9 R.A. Reiter et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 5, 22 (1960).
10 B. Rossi, High-Energy Particles (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1952).
11 I.M. Brancus et al., 28th International Cosmic Ray Conference (Tsukuba, Japan, 2003).
12 N. Easwar and D.A. MacIntire, Am. J. Phys. 59, 589 (1991).
13 P.K.F. Greider, Cosmic Rays at Earth (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2001), p399.
14 W.R. Leo, Techniques for Nuclear and Particle Physics Expriments (Springer-Verlag, 1994).
15 The Review of Particle Physiscs, Particle Data Group, http://pdg.lbl.gov.

