5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
1
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fracture Processes Oberved with A Cryogenic Detector

J. ˚Astr¨om 6, F. Pr¨obst1, L. Stodolsky1∗, J. Timonen7, C. Bucci4, S. Cooper3,
C. Cozzini1, P. diStefano1,8, F. v. Feilitzsch2, H. Kraus3, J. Marchese3, O. Meier1,
U. Nagel2,9, Y. Ramachers10, W. Seidel1, M. Sisti1, S. Uchaikin1,5, L. Zerle1
1 Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik, F¨ohringer Ring 6,D-80805 Munich,
Germany; 2 Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Physik Department,
D-85747 Munich, Germany; 3 University of Oxford, Physics Department,
Oxford OX1 3RH, UK; 4 Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso,
I-67010 Assergi, Italy; 5 Joint Institute for Nuclear Research,
Dubna, 141980, Russia; 6 CSC - IT Center for Science,
P.O.Box 405, FIN-02101 Esbo, Finland; 7 Department of Physics,
P.O. Box 35 (YFL), FIN-40014 University of Jyv¨askyl¨a,
Finland; 8 IPNL, Lyon I, 4 rue Enrico Fermi,F-69622 Villeurbane,
France; 9 Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics, EE-0026 Tallinn,
Estonia; 10University of Warwick, Dept. of Physics, Coventry CV4 7AL,

UK, ∗ Corresponding author, email address:

les@mppmu.mpg.de.

In the early stages of running of the CRESST dark matter search using sapphire detectors at
very low temperature, an unexpectedly high rate of signal pulses appeared. Their origin was ﬁnally
traced to fracture events in the sapphire due to the very tight clamping of the detectors. During
extensive runs the energy and time of each event was recorded, providing large data sets for such
phenomena. We believe this is the ﬁrst time that the energy release in fracture has been accurately
measured on a microscopic event-by-event basis.

We report some features of the data, including energy distributions for the events, waiting time
distributions, autocorrelations and the Hurst exponent. The energy distribution appear to follow a
−β, similar to the Gutenberg-Richter power law for earthquake magnitudes,
power law, dN/dE ∝ E
and after appropriate translation, with a similar exponent. In the time domain, the waiting time w
or gap distribution between events has a power law behavior at small w and an an exponential fall-
oﬀ at large w, and can be ﬁt ∝ w−αe−w/w0 . The autocorrelation function shows time correlations
lasting for substantial parts of an hour. A clustering eﬀect is found where count and energy rates
increase in the vicinity of “big events”.

INTRODUCTION

In the Spring of 1999 preliminary runs of the CRESST
dark matter search [1] were carried out at the Gran Sasso
Laboratory (LNGS), a deep underground laboratory for
low background physics located in the Apennines.
In
these ﬁrst runs of CRESST a phenomenon was observed
which we believe may be of interest for the study of crack
and fracture formation in brittle materials. CRESST is
a cryogenic detector, working in the vicinity of 10 milli-
Kelvin [2].
In addition to being deep underground for
shielding against cosmic rays, it is carefully designed to
minimize eﬀects of radioactive background. The detec-
tor elements were large (262 gram) high quality single
crystals of sapphire, with a strip of superconductor (W)
evaporated on one surface to serve as a sensitive ther-
mometer. This system, as shown by tests with gamma
ray sources, detects single events in the sapphire with en-
ergies in the range from about 1 KeV to several hundred
KeV with good energy resolution ( 0.5 keV) and good
time resolution (40 or 100 µs for the onset of a pulse).

In order to reach these low temperatures it is impor-
tant to eliminate the eﬀects of any vibrations (“micro-
phonics”) that might deliver energy to the crystal. Thus
in addition to special suspensions to isolate the appara-

tus, the crystals are held very tightly in their holders to
In the
prevent any even microscopic frictional eﬀects.
data to be discussed here this was eﬀected by small sap-
phire balls held against the sapphire crystal by a plastic
clamp. The plastic of the clamp, delrin, is known to
contract substantially at low temperature, thus provid-
ing additional “tight holding”. An unanticipated result
of the small contact area of the sapphire balls and the
great force of the clamp turned out to be a cracking or
fracturing of the sapphire. This was observed as follows.

When the system was ﬁrst brought into operation, an
unexpectedly high rate of signal pulses was observed. Ini-
tial fears that this might be due to an unexpected ra-
dioactive contamination were relieved by the observation
that even an unknown radioactive contamination must be
poisson distributed in time, while the unexpected pulses
appeared rather to come in “avalanches”. The time dis-
tributions showed that they were indeed non-poissonian.

Pulse formation and fractures: The pulses themselves
resembled those seen from good particle events. However,
this is a rather unspeciﬁc criterion, due to the operat-
ing characteristics of the detector. There are essentially
three steps in the production of a signal pulse 1) A rela-
tively localized energy release within a short time, 2) A
rapid degradation of this energy into a uniform “hot”

 10000

 1000

 100

V
e
k
 
r
e
p
 
s
t
n
e
v
e
 
.
o
N

 10

 1

 0.1

 1

(∼ 10 oK) gas of phonons produced through phonon-
phonon interaction and decay, as well as interaction with
the crystal surface, 3) Absorbtion of the phonons in the
thermometer strip. This leads to a heating with an
increase of electrical resistance for the superconductor,
which is ﬁnally read out by SQUID electronics. The re-
sulting pulse shape is well described by a model employ-
ing the various thermal and and electrical parameters of
the system [3]. As may be seen from this brief descrip-
tion, the pulse shape is essentially determined by the
thermal responses of the system and not by the initiat-
ing event, as long as it is “fast”. Hence any release of a
given energy in the crystal in a short time (µ seconds)
leads to the same pulse shape and so examination of the
pulses does not lead to an identiﬁcation of their origin.
An extensive search for the origin of the pulses was ﬁ-
nally successful when it was noticed that there appeared
to be markings or scratches on the crystal at the contact
points with the sapphire balls. When the sapphire balls
were replaced by plastic stubs, which are evidently much
softer, the event rate immediately dropped from some
thousands per hour to the expected few per hour.

These observations strongly suggest that the pulses
were due to some kind of cracking or micro-fracturing
phenomema in the sapphire crystal and/or its support
balls. Indeed, examination under a microscope revealed
a small crater with radiating irregular ﬁssures extend-
ing sideways and down into the crystal. Damage to the
sapphire balls was also observed. Since the reduction
in rate after the exchange of the sapphire balls was so
large, we believe the data with the sapphire balls repre-
sents essentially 100% fracture events. If we accept this
crack or fracture hypothesis, our data then represent a
large sample of well measured fracture events, under low
background conditions, and with good time and energy
determination.

Calibration runs: In order to calibrate the energy scale
regular calibration runs were carried out. In these runs
the system is left undisturbed and a radioactive source
supplying 120 keV photons (which can penetrate to the
detectors) is inserted in an external plug in the shielding.
These photon-induced events can be selected by using the
resulting 120 keV peak in the data. Since a radioactive
source produces statistically independent events, that is
poisson statistics, these events provide a useful compari-
son when studying statistical properties of the data.

ENERGY DISTRIBUTIONS

We believe this is the ﬁrst time that the energy release
in microfracture has been accurately measured on a mi-
In Fig. 1 we show the
croscopic event-by-event basis.
diﬀerential distribution dN/dE for the number of events
N per unit energy, for 4 data sets with two detectors
from Run9. The straight line is the result of a power law

2

(1)

ﬁt

dN/dE ∝ E

−β

to the lowest curve which yields β ≈ 1.9. Similar results
are found from ﬁts to other data sets. From a total of
seven examined (Runs 9, 10 and 11) the power β ranged
between 1.7 and 2.0. An interesting point is that the
rates do not appear to diﬀer greatly from one data set
to another, despite the fact that diﬀerent crystals and
mountings are often involved. At the mid-range value of
21 keV, the rates over the various data sets vary between
4 and 11 pulses/keV-hr.

 10

 100

 1000

Energy (keV)

FIG. 1: Energy spectra from four data sets of Run9, with 53
hr for the upper pair of curves and 28hr for the lower. The
−β, yielding
straight line shows a ﬁt to the lowest curve ∝ E
β ≈ 1.9.

A power law of this type, called the Gutenberg-Richter
law [4], is known for the “magnitudes” of earthquakes.
Unfortunately the “magnitude” is a seismic amplitude
and not a direct measurement of the energy of an earth-
quake, so a simple comparison is not possible. However
if one takes the prescription that the seismic amplitude
to approximately the 3/2 power [4] [5] represents the en-
ergy, and uses the power ≈ 1.0 found for the integral
distribution of earthquake magnitudes [5], it corresponds
to β ≈ 1 + 2
3 ≈ 1.7, not far from our β ≈ 1.7 − 2.0.
Of course the six orders of magnitude range available for
seismic data is much greater than the one or two orders of
magnitude available here. Acoustic emission recordings
of microfracture events in brittle materials typically ap-
pear to produce a somewhat lower exponent β ≈ 1.5 [6].

TIME SERIES

Waiting Time Distributions: A useful quantity in the
study of intermittent data such as the present is the
“waiting time” w. To each event i we assign wi, the

3

time interval till the next event, and study the distri-
bution of these intervals. Fig. 2 shows the waiting time
distribution for detector 2 in a 28 hr data set of Run
9. The distribution has power law behavior at small w
and an exponential fall oﬀ at large w, and an accurate ﬁt
is obtained with dN/dw ∝ w−αe−w/w0, with α = 0.33.
Similar results are found for other data sets with α in the
range 0.25-0.5. The parameter w0 determines the loca-
tion of the crossover from power law to exponential and is
essentially the inverse rate or average waiting time, with
¯w = (1 − α)w0. Qualitatively similar results, with α near
to or somewhat less than one, have very recently been
reported for earthquakes in California [7].

n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f

n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c
o
t
u
A

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

−20

 1e+08

 1e+07

 1e+06

 100000

 10000

 1000

w

 
t
i
n
u
 
r
e
p
 
s
t
n
e
v
e
 
.
o
n

 100

 1e-04

 0.001

 0.01

 0.1

waiting time w in hrs

FIG. 2: Waiting time distributions. Upper curve: fractures,
ﬁt to ∝ w−αe−w/w0 . Lower curve: photon-induced events
from a calibration run, ﬁt to ∝ e

−w/w0 .

For the simple case of poisson statistics, one expects
a waiting time distribution ∝ e−w/w0, where 1/w0 is the
average count rate. The lower curve of Fig. 2 shows the
waiting time distribution for the photon-induced events
of a calibration run, with a ﬁt to ∝ e−w/w0. There is a
good ﬁt with 1/w0 in agreement with the event rate.

An interesting point concerns the behavior of w0 as the
the energy threshold for the sample is raised. It appears
that the form w−αe−w/w0 is preserved, with α varying
little. Since the count rate is reduced however, the value
of w0 increases and so the crossover between power law
and exponential behavior moves to larger w. Indeed, tak-
ing a given data set (Run9-d2,100µs), repeatedly raising
the energy threshold and ﬁtting for w0, we ﬁnd a linear
relation between the inverse count rate, that is ¯w, and
the ﬁtted w0. The slope and the relation ¯w = (1 − α)w0
then gives the global determination α ≈ 0.26.

The power law behavior for the waiting times at small
w, as well as that for the energy distribution in the pre-
vious section, is suggestive of an underlying scale-free
processes without any intrinsic dimensional paramaeter.
However this cannot be entirely true since w0 is a time
and has dimensions. Since e−w/w0 corresponds in fact

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2
Time diﬀerence in hours

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

FIG. 3: Autocorrelation function C for the event rate from
calibration data of Run10. The lower curve is for photon-
induced events (events in the 120 keV peak), and the upper
curve is for fractures plus some admixture of compton scat-
ters (events below the peak). For the photons the data is
consistent with C = 0 for (t − t
) 6= 0 as expected for poisson
statistics, with C(0) = V ariance = ¯R.

′

to a poisson distribution, this may suggest an interpre-
tation in terms of some basic scale free processes where
several such processes are occurring independently and
simultaneously and so are overlaping in the data. This
arises trivially if the signals originate from more than
one of the support points of the crystal, of which there
were several; but one can also imagine independent crack
systems beneath one support point.

The increase of w0 as the count rate goes down sug-
gests that the limit of zero count rate is a kind of critical
point: the waiting time becomes inﬁnite as the distribu-
tion becomes non-integrable and completely scale free,
while 1/w0 appears as a diverging correlation length. Un-
derstanding w0 is an interesting point for further study.
Correlations in Time: We expect the existence of cor-
relations in time, corresponding to the “avalanches”. We
use the event rate Rt of a calibration run to construct
the autocorrelation function

C(t − t

′

) = (Rt − ¯R)(Rt′ − ¯R)

(2)

and compare C for photon-induced events and fractures
in Fig. 3. While for photons we have C = 0 as expected,
for the microfractures there are correlations lasting for
substantial fractions of an hour. These long-term corre-
lations are found for the fracture events of all data sets.
The physical origin of the correlations may be in stress re-
laxation phenomena where a slow ”diﬀusion” of strain [8]
can trigger new microfractures when meeting other weak
spots in the crystal.

Hurst exponent: The autocorrelations as in Fig. 3 can
be approximately ﬁtted to power laws ∝ (t − t′)−p. This

TABLE I: Exponent H found by diﬀerent methods. d1 and
d2 refer to the two detectors in operation, and 40, 100 µs to
diﬀerent digitization windows used in data taking in Run9.

Data Set

Autocorr. Stnd. Dvtn. Sh. Entropy

increase before the events, suggests its investigation as a
“big event” predictor [10]. We stress that Fig. 4 shows
an average over all “big events” and does not necessarily
imply that the vicinity of individual ones has the same
appearance as in the ﬁgure.

4

t

e
a
R
 
y
g
r
e
n
E
d
e
z

 

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

 4

 3.5

 3

 2.5

 2

 1.5

 1

 0.5

-20

Run9 d1 100µs 0.77
Run9 d2 100µs 0.80
Run9 d1 40µs 0.73
Run9 d2 40µs 0.69
0.59
Run10 d2
0.60
Run11 d1
0.69
Run11 d2

0.70
0.80
0.70
0.70
0.63
0.64
0.66

0.69
0.80
0.67
0.65
0.59
0.53
0.62

and other features of the data are suggestive of the scale
free, self-similar behavior associated with fractal statis-
tics. A way of characterizing such behavior is in terms of
what is called the Hurst exponent H; and we can check
the plausibility of such a description by comparing the
consistency of H found in diﬀerent ways. Table I shows
H found in three ways for various data sets. First the
autocorrelation exponent p is ﬁtted to ﬁnd H = 1 − p/2.
The next column shows H determined by the ”growth of
the standard deviation”, a characterization of the ﬂuc-
tuations in the event rate ∼ tH , where t0.5 would be
the classical gaussian or random walk behavior with ﬁ-
nite range correlations. Finally, the last column gives H
found from the “Shannon Entropy”, related to the prob-
ability of the number of events over a time interval t [9].
Although the ﬁts were not all excellent and there is con-
siderable ﬂuctuation in the results, the overall rough con-
sistency of the three determinations supports the picture
of a scale free, self-similar process. We do not necessar-
ily expect the same H for diﬀerent data sets since these
involve diﬀerent energy thresholds and sensitivities.

CLUSTERS

A frequently used concept in the earthquake literature
is the “Omori Cluster”: a “big shock” followed by “after-
shocks”. Although as Fig. 1 shows, and as is also the case
for earthquakes, there is no separate class of high energy
events—no distinctive “big shocks” –we have searched
for increased activity in the vicinity (in time) of high
energy pulses. We do ﬁnd a signiﬁcant increase in the
event rate, and an even clearer eﬀect if we use the energy
rate, that is the sum of the energies of the pulses occur-
ing in a given time interval. Fig. 4 shows this energy
rate, normalized to the average energy rate for the whole
sample, for times close to “big events”, using a data set
of Run9. Similar results are found for other data sets.
It is characterized by a distinct increase, up to almost
a factor four, for time intervals near “big events”, with
perhaps an asymmetry towards a higher rate after the
events. The fact that there is also a strong energy rate

-15

-10

-5

 0

 5

 10

 15

 20

Time Relative to "Big Event"

FIG. 4: Energy rates in the vicinity of “big events”, showing
a signiﬁcant rise close to the “big events”. From a 53 hr
data set of Run9, plotted in twenty 1.44 s bins before and
after the “big events”. Negative/positively labeled bins are
before/after, with 0 the time of the “big event”. There were
1082 “big events”, deﬁned as a single pulse with E > 300keV .
Rates are normalized to the average rate.

CRACK PROPAGATION AND MATERIAL
PROPERTIES

Our material is a single crystal of high purity[11]. In
crack propagation models the growing stress enhance-
ment at the crack tip implies that a “hard spot” is nec-
essary to limit the propagation of a crack; thus when
a homogeneous stress is applied to a defect-free material
there is nothing to stop a propagating crack. Presumably
the microfractures here were limited by the random, non-
homogeneous stress and defect ﬁeld which quickly arises.
This may have been assisted by the damage to the small
sapphire balls, leading to an irregular application of the
stress. Although we speak of “cracks”, it should be kept
in mind that from our simple observation of pulses we
cannot infer the exact nature of the microfracture. Fi-
nally, with respect to materials it should be noted that
our system is of course quite opposite to those in the
geological context, where one has highly heterogeneous
systems.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE TECHNOLOGY

It is interesting to contemplate the extension of this
method in the study of fracture phenomena. The su-

perconducting thermometer, and perhaps other cryo-
sensors[2], can be applied to many materials. The very
low temperature and large crystals of the dark matter
search would not always be needed, and indeed it might
be possible to follow the crack development in time with a
smaller and thus faster system. However, low background
conditions may still be necessary to avoid contamination
of the data by non-fracture events. In the present data
the crystal was contacted by several of the small sapphire
balls, and we are unable to determine where an event
originates. Such eﬀects lead to a dilution of correlations,
which thus may be intrinsically much stronger than we
ﬁnd here. In an apparatus especially designed for such
studies one could arrange to have only one “hard” con-
tact and with a known force. Finally, since the energy
range available is relatively small compared to that for
earthquakes it would be useful to consider techniques for
increasing the dynamic range.

[1] For recent CRESST results on dark matter see G. Anglo-
her et al., astro-ph/0408006, Astroparticle Phys. 23, 325
(2005). For the apparatus as it was in operation here, see
M. Sisti et al., NIM A466 499 (2001).

[2] For a general introduction to cryogenic detectors see L.

5

Stodolsky, Physics Today, August, 1991 or N. Booth, B.
Cabrera and E. Fiorini, Ann. Rev. Nuclear and Particle
Science 46, Dec 1996.

[3] F. Pr¨obst et al., Jnl. Low Temp. Physics 100 69 (1995).
[4] Seismicity of the Earth, B. Gutenberg and C. F. Richter,

Hafner Publishing Company, (1965).

[5] K. Christenson, L. Danon, T. Scalon, and P. Bak, Pro-
ceedings National Academy of Sciences 99 suppl.1, 2509,
2002.

[6] P. Diodati, F. Marchesoni, and S. Piazza, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 67, 2239 (1991); G. Caldarelli, F. D. Di Tolla, and
A. Petri, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2503 (1996); A. Garci-
mart´in, A. Guarino, L. Bellon, and S. Ciliberto, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 79, 3202 (1997); C. Maes, A. Van Moﬀaert, H.
Frederix, and H. Strauven, Phys. Rev. B 57, 4987 (1998).
[7] N. Scafetta and B. J. West, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 138501

(2004)

[8] M. S. Mega et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 188501 (2003).
[9] N. Scafetta and P. Grigolini Phys. Rev. E 66, 036130
(2002). For an overview of many of these issues see Frac-
tals and Dynamic Systems in Geoscience J. Kruhl, Ed.
Springer-Verlag (1994).

[10] The role of “foreshocks” has been a subject of great
debate concerning earthquakes for many years. See
www.nature.com/nature/debates/earthquake/equake 1.html.

[11] The crystals were high quality single crystals, optically
defect free. One was supplied by the Hemex company,
the other by BEC Breznikar.

