5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
1
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Roberto Guida, Alessandro Cacciani
Observation of the atmospheric sodium layer with a magneto-optical ﬁlter
(MOF)
Department of physics, University of Rome “La Sapienza”
Rome (Italy)
roberto.guida@icra.it

Abstract

The Mesosphere is interested by important chemical and dynamical phenomena, so
observation of its Sodium layer’s behavior has became a common target of several research
plans all over the world. In order to study its dynamical and chemical variation during
daytime (so the solar ﬂux, which is not localized, stimulates the Sodium emission) we want
to observe from the space continuously the Sodium emission (and perform diﬀerential
analysis looking for periodic changes), using a small telescope with a Magneto-Optical
Filter and a image sensor.

1 THE OBSERVABLE

The atmosphere of the Earth contains a layer
of metallic Sodium. Even though almost 30
years have passed since the ﬁrst routine inves-
tigations by Gibson, Standford and Bowman
have made [1], we still have no deﬁnite an-
swers about its origin, large scale properties
and temporal evolution. This lack of knowl-
edge is the basic reason why several research
groups, all around the world, are working on
this ﬁeld and, deﬁnitely, constitutes the main
trigger for our proposal.
Neutral atoms of Sodium have been ﬁrst dis-
covered by Slipher in 1929 [2] and they are
located between 80 and 105 Km in the Meso-
sphere (Fig. 1). The peak density of this
Sodium layer is around 90 Km at a level of
109 ÷1010 atoms m−3 so that its investigation
faces some diﬃculties as follows:

• Its altitude is not suitable for balloons

Figure 1: Relative altitudes of various com-
ponents

(too high) as well as for orbiting satel-
lites (too low).

• The background solar daylight radiation,
diﬀused by the atmosphere is far exceed-
ing its faint yellow glow, leading to the
problem of the signal to albedo noise,
discussed in section 3.1.

1

As far as the ﬁrst point, lidars (systems
composed by a powerful laser which excites
the atmosphere, coupled with a fairly large
telescope to collect the backscattered radia-
tion from the various component) have made
possible accurate observations, limited how-
ever to point-like targets only, so precluding
large scale ﬁeld of view (FOV) and spatio-
temporal studies of its evolution.
As far as the second point, routine observa-
tions are usually being performed at night
time only, so precluding long and uninter-
rupted temporal series to get better fre-
quency spectra of its variations. Attempt
have been made during the day, reducing the
divergence of the lidar beam or using nar-
row band Fabry-Perot ﬁlters that, however,
are aﬀected by extreme thermal and mechan-
ical instability.
In spite of the above diﬃculties, the Meso-
spheric Sodium is the most frequently stud-
ied metallic component of the Earth’s at-
mosphere because of its high backscattering
cross section, 7 · 10−17 m2 ster−1, and abun-
dance, 3 · 1013 atoms per m2 [3].
However, so far, we are not able to respond
with certainty to the basic question of the its
In 1939 Chapman [4] described the
origin.
characteristic and listed some possible groups
of Sodium sources:

• Terrestrial sources like volcanic dusts
projected up to 10 ÷ 30 Km and salt
particles brought from the oceans by up-
drafts.

• Extraterrestrial sources like meteorites
and comet dusts, gas from the sun, and

interstellar Sodium that the Earth col-
lect during its movement in the Solar
System.

Most likely, ablation of meteorites and comet
dusts is the main source mechanism; however,
diﬃculties arise when trying to justify the ob-
served abundance.
Moreover, researchers ﬁnd that the Sodium
layer is changing as a function of geographi-
cal coordinates, seasons and even time during
the day. Complex chemical reactions are tak-
ing place that involve many ions and neutral
particles present at high levels: all depend-
ing from the basic parameter governing the
evolution, that is the temperature (Fig. 2).
Finally, one important aspect is the dynam-

Figure 2: Temporal series of temperature
proﬁles

ical behavior, driven by the tidal eﬀects and
gravity waves.
These eﬀects, with some contribution of at-
mospheric turbulence, are mainly responsi-
ble for short periods evolution. The avail-
able data [5] show oscillations of the Sodium

2

layer: in particular, the density and the thick-
ness oscillate in phase, while the average al-
titude is 180 degrees out of phase. More-
over, sometimes, sporadic layers have been
detected with very high Sodium density and
short formation time, whose origin is still not
understood (Fig. 3).

• Get evidence and possibly obtain spatio-
temporal Fourier analysis of both tidal
and gravity waves.

• Try to combine our space observations
with other techniques from the ground,
for example using data available from li-
dar routine measurements.

2 INSTRUMENT
DESCRIPTION

The Magneto-Optical Filter (MOF) is a par-
ticular instrument that gives a really nar-
row bandwidth, an high transmission (almost
50%) and a good stability. It can work only
in a small range of wavelengths, well deﬁned,
like Na and K doublet, and can be thought as
an high resolution spectrograph within those
wavelengths.
It has been developed by professor Alessan-
dro Cacciani of the Rome university “La
Sapienza” at the end of ’60 years and its
main use has been for Sun’s study; during
the last years it has been used for the analy-
sis of Jupiter’s oscillation modes and for the
observation of mesosphere with lidar tech-
nique.
It is made of two separated unit: a MOF and
a Wing Selector (WS).
The MOF is made by two crossed polariz-
ers (P1, P2) and a metallic vapour, in this
case sodium, between them in a longitudi-
nal magnetic ﬁeld (2000 ÷ 4000 Gauss). The
scheme of the ﬁlter is shown in Fig. 4. The
working principle of the MOF is based on two
concurrent eﬀects, namely the Zeeman eﬀect

Figure 3: Density proﬁles

Because of its high resonance cross section,
the Mesospheric Sodium constitutes a very
good mark able to reveal waves and short
duration transients phenomena in the Earth
atmosphere. For this reason it could be very
important to image and to record such events
in order to:

• Further clarify the source of Sodium
from meteorites and comet dusts de-
tecting its consequent density variation.
Since meteoric events are randomly lo-
calized in space and time, we would
need a continuous monitoring of a large
FOV, obtainable with measures from the
space.

3

Figure 4: Schematic diagram of the MOF

in absorption as shown in Fig. 5 and a sort
of Faraday rotation close to the line’s wings
called Macaluso-Corbino eﬀect. Both change
the polarization in and around the resonance
lines, leading to the typical total transmission
proﬁle shown in Fig. 6.

Figure 5: Zeeman eﬀect

In fact the light coming from the left crosses
the ﬁrst polarizer and becomes so linearly
polarized; consider then the sodium vapor

4

Figure 6: Transmission proﬁles at diﬀerent
temperatures, with H=2000 Gauss.

follow-
in a magnetic ﬁeld of few K Gauss:
ing the Zeeman rules, the vapor absorbs and
ri-emits two circularly polarized wavelengths
(λD1 = 5895.92 ˚A and λD2 = 5889.95 ˚A). All
the other wavelengths are still linear polar-
izated due to the ﬁrst polarizer and so they
will be stopped by the last polarizer orthogo-
nal to the ﬁrst one, while the two close wave-
lengths can pass due to their circular polar-
ization: so we get a couple narrow bands that
can be close at will depending on the mag-
netic ﬁeld strength; in fact lowering the mag-
netic ﬁeld lower the Zeeman splitting of the
atomic levels.
The wing selector (WS) is also made of a cell
containing sodium vapor in a more strong
magnetic ﬁeld; before this cell there is a
quarter-wave plate. The WS deletes alter-
natively one of the two bands transmit from
the MOF, depending by the orientation of the
quarter-wave plate. The wing selector is par-

ticularly used in Solar physics, to measure the
velocities of the diﬀerent parts of the Sun.

3 THE TECNIQUE
FROM SPACE

Referring to Fig. 7 where our instrument is
shown as composed by three parts (a tele-
scope, the MOF ﬁlter and an image sensor),
we want to stress here the importance and
the characteristics of the MOF ﬁlter for space
use. Its working principle has been described

Figure 7: Mechanical assembly of the instru-
mentation

previously, and summarizing, it is a very sta-
ble and narrow band ﬁlter, about 50 · 10−3
˚A, and it achieves unsurpassed performances
of perfect tuning in the core of the Sodium
yellow lines.
Its weight is about 1 Kg and
the dimensions are 10 × 10 × 10 cm3 mak-
ing it so very attractive for space applica-
tions. As a ﬁlter, it will be located between
the telescope and the image sensor so that
this last can only see light within about 50
milliAngstrom centered in the Sodium emis-
sion wavelength values.
In this manner we
are able to reject all the other wavelengths
of the solar spectrum so that we can deﬁ-
nitely say that the MOF produces an arti-
ﬁcial night which is the necessary condition

5

to detect the faint yellow glow originated by
the mesospheric Sodium. The most impor-
tant consequence of this artiﬁcial night is that
we can work on daylight, using the solar ra-
diation, instead of the uncomfortable lidar
apparatus, to get the Sodium excited; more-
over, the solar radiation is not localized, as
the laser beam is, and so we can observe many
points at once of a large bi dimensional FOV.
A drawback of this otherwise ideal situation
is that we must compete with the albedo ra-
diation from the Earth inside the same wave-
length pass-band of the MOF. This problem
is discussed in the following section devoted
to the signal-to-noise ratio.

3.1 Signal-to-Noise ratio

Here we need to compute the expected sig-
nal and the competing luminosity from the
Earth: as far as the expected signal, the lat-
ter comes from the Sodium atoms. We have:

• The average value of the Sodium colum-
nar abundance that is around 3 · 1013
atoms m2 [3].

• The cross section for resonance scatter-
ing that is around 7 · 10−17 m2 ster−1 [3].

The product of them gives the probability
that one single solar photon is scattered back
from the Sodium layer inside one steradiant.
This amounts to 2 · 10−3 events per second
and per steradiant.
We need to compare this number with a simi-
lar probability coming from the other compo-
nents of the Earth, namely: the albedo from

the clouds, the oceans, the lands and the at-
mosphere. Each component displays a diﬀer-
ent albedo luminosity (clouds are white and
oceans are blue), therefore we want to select
the observations in the most favorable condi-
tion for the yellow part of the spectrum, that
is, above the oceans and the air as a back-
ground. Unfortunately, albedo data in the
narrow MOF band width are not available:
only integral or wide band spectral resolution
data have been estimated in the whole solid
angle (Fig. 8). It is, therefore, possible that

Figure 8: Earth’s energy budget

most of the measured yellow albedo from the
oceans or the air is coming from the high res-
onance radiation of the Sodium atoms (which
is our signal).
To give some numbers, let us take the yellow
albedo of the air (with the exclusion of the
Sodium resonance) to be of the order of 10−2,
that is less than 10−3 in a single steradiant.
This would mean that the above quoted reso-
nance probability is larger than the albedo in
the same spectral bandwidth. We add that at

6

the terminator (the twilight zone) the Sodium
layer at 90 Km is excited by the solar ra-
diation while the Earth’s atmosphere is not
completely illuminated: so that the situation
is even more favorable.

3.2 Data analysis

The ﬁrst order data analysis is to perform
suitable time lag diﬀerences in order to get
evidence of transient events, specially during
the times of Leonids, Perseids, etc.
In this
manner we can visualize the location and ge-
ometrical conﬁguration of any glow increase.
The temporal coincidence with the periods
of known meteor swarms, will witness about
their credibility. Then we can try to evalu-
ate the consequent density variation in the
nearby Sodium regions. Depending on the
system sensitivity to small variations we can
also try to get evidence of waves and look
at spatio-temporal power spectra of the ob-
served surface oscillations as in solar seismol-
ogy where in this way people can make good
diagnostics of the deeper layers of the star.
This kind of information, if prolonged in time,
we think are surely useful also for other dis-
ciplines connected with the very important
problem of global changes.

References

[1] Bowman M.R., Gibson A.J., Sandford
M.C.W.,Atmospheric Sodium measured
by a tuned laser radar, Nature, 221,
457, (1969).

[2] Slipher V.M., Emission in the spectrum
of the light of the night sky, Publ. As-
tron. Soc. Paciﬁc, 41, 262, (1929).

[3] Humphreys R.A., Bradley L.C., Her-
rmann J., Sodium-Layer Synthetic Bea-
cons for Adaptive Optics, Lincoln Lab-
oratory Journal Special Issue on Adap-
tive Optic, volume 5, number 1, 45,
(Spring 1992).

[4] Chapman S., Notes on atmospheric
Sodium, Astrophysical Journal, 90,
309, (1939).

[5] Contento C., Studio preparatorio di
strumentazione per misure di Sodio
mesosferico in luce diurna, Master
Thesis, Department of physics, Univer-
sity of Rome “La Sapienza”.

[6] Gibson A.J., Sandford M.C.W., Day-
time laser radar measurement of the at-
mospheric Sodium layer, Nature, 239,
509, (1972).

[7] Clemesha B.R.,

Simonich D.M.,
Batista P.P., Kirchhoﬀ V.W.J.H.,
The diurnal variation of atmospheric
Sodium, Journ. Geoph. Res., 87, 181,
(1982).

[8] Agnelli G., Cacciani A., Foﬁ M.,
The magneto-optical ﬁlter. 1: Prelim-
inary observations in Na D lines, Solar
Physics, 44, 509, (1975).

7

