5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
4
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A TEST FACILITY FOR THE INTERNATIONAL LINEAR COLLIDER
AT SLAC END STATION A,
FOR PROTOTYPES OF BEAM DELIVERY AND IR COMPONENTS∗

M. Woods,† R. Erickson, J. Frisch, C. Hast, R.K. Jobe, L. Keller, T. Markiewicz,
T. Maruyama, D. McCormick, J. Nelson, T. Nelson, N. Phinney, T. Raubenheimer,
M. Ross, A. Seryi, S. Smith, Z. Szalata, P. Tenenbaum, M. Woodley, SLAC
D. Angal-Kalinin, C. Beard, C. Densham, J. Greenhalgh, F. Jackson, A. Kalinin, CCLRC
F. Zimmermann, CERN
I. Zagorodnov, DESY
Y. Sugimoto, KEK
S. Walston, LLNL
J. Smith, A. Sopczak, D. Burton, R. Tucker, N. Shales, Lancaster University
R. Barlow, A. Mercer, G. Kurevlev, Manchester University
M. Hildreth, Notre Dame University
P. Burrows, G. Christian, C. Clarke, A. Hartin, S. Molloy, G. White, QMUL, London
W. Mueller, T. Weiland, TEMF TU Darmstadt
N. Watson, University of Birmingham
D. Bailey, D. Cussans, University of Bristol
Y. Kolomensky, University of California, Berkeley
M. Slater, M. Thomson, D. Ward, University of Cambridge
S. Boogert, A. Liapine, S. Malton, D.J. Miller, M. Wing, UCL, London
R. Arnold, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
N. Sinev, E. Torrence, University of Oregon

Abstract

The SLAC Linac can deliver damped bunches with ILC
parameters for bunch charge and bunch length to End Sta-
tion A. A 10Hz beam at 28.5 GeV energy can be delivered
there, parasitic with PEP-II operation. We plan to use this
facility to test prototype components of the Beam Delivery
System and Interaction Region. We discuss our plans for
this ILC Test Facility and preparations for carrying out ex-
periments related to collimator wakeﬁelds and energy spec-
trometers. We also plan an interaction region mockup to in-
vestigate effects from backgrounds and beam-induced elec-
tromagnetic interference.

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

The International Linear Collider (ILC) is envisioned to
be the next frontier accelerator facility for particle physics
after the LHC begins operation, providing exceptional re-
solving power and precision for exploring the TeV energy
scale. New discoveries are expected in one or more excit-
ing areas: Higgs and the explanation of particle masses, su-
persymmetry, dark matter, extra dimensions, uniﬁcation of

∗ Work supported in part by U.S. Department of Energy contract DE-
AC02-76SF00515, and by the Commission of the European Communities
under the 6th Framework Programme ”Structuring the European Research
Area”, contract number RIDS-011899.

† mwoods@slac.stanford.edu

fundamental forces. The luminosity at this facility will be
a factor 1000 greater than that achieved at LEP and 10,000
times greater than achieved at the SLC.

In SLACs End Station A (ESA), we are planning to
test prototype components of the Beam Delivery System
(BDS) and Interaction Region (IR). This program [1] in-
volves both machine and detector physicists, reﬂecting the
close connections between the accelerator and experiment.
Primary areas of study are collimation, backgrounds and
precision energy measurements. The ESA experimental
program includes many of the critical beam tests [2] dis-
cussed for the BDS at the 2004 KEK ILC Workshop. It
also plays an important role for the test beam program con-
sidered by the Worldwide Study on Detector test beams [3].

BEAM SETUP TO ESA

ESA beam tests are planned to run parasitically with
PEP-II with single damped bunches at 10Hz, beam en-
ergy of 28.5 GeV and bunch charge of 2.0 · 1010 electrons.
The long (5mm rms) bunch length out of the damping ring
can be compressed in the Ring-to-Linac transfer line and
in the 24.5-degree A-line bend from the Linac to ESA to
achieve ∼ 300µm bunch length in ESA. A simulation with
LiTrack [4] gives the results in Fig. 1 for the energy spread
and bunch length in ESA. Transverse beam sizes for the
tests planned are expected to be 100 − 200µm rms.

Figure 1: Energy spread and Bunch length in ESA.

COLLIMATOR WAKEFIELDS

At the ILC, collimators are required to remove halo par-
ticles (having large amplitudes relative to the ideal orbit)
to minimize damage to beam line elements and particle de-
tectors and to achieve tolerable background levels. Short-
range transverse wakeﬁelds excited by these collimators
may perturb beam motion and lead to both emittance di-
lution and ampliﬁcation of position jitter at the IP.

The goal of these tests [5] is to ﬁnd optimal materials and
geometry for the collimator jaws to minimize wakeﬁeld ef-
fects while achieving the required performance for halo re-
moval. The collimators will be rectangular in transverse
section with a shallow longitudinal taper, long relative to
the ∼ 300µm ILC bunch length. To optimize their design,
accurate modeling of wakeﬁeld effects for short bunches
is needed, including the non-linear near-wall region which
has implications for machine protection. However, calcu-
lating the impedance for such an insertion using analytic
methods is difﬁcult, even for an idealized design without
real engineering features such as contact ﬁngers. Similarly,
tools such as MAFIA have problems in this regime due to
grid dispersive effects.

The ESA beam tests will allow further progress with
both analytic calculations and development of state-of-the-
art 3-d electromagnetic modeling methods [6]. Earlier
measurements [7] have already enabled signiﬁcant devel-
opment of analytic calculations, but the typical consistency
with data is only within a factor 2-3. The ILC design goal
is agreement at the 10% level [8].

Figure 2: Collimator insertions planned for a ﬁrst set of
measurements.

Initial ESA measurements will measure resistive wakes

in copper and study two-step tapers. Two sets of four col-
limator insertions will be used, and Fig. 2 shows the ﬁrst
set of four collimator insertions we plan to install in the
Collimator Wakeﬁeld Box [9]. Collimator 1 is the same
as used in a recent measurement [7], and is essential for
commissioning and control of systematics. Two collima-
tor sandwiches are available, each holding four collimator
insertions. We expect to be able to swap the sandwiches
in an eight-hour shift. Future plans could include investi-
gations of different grades of copper, aluminium, and iron
for resistive wakeﬁelds, and optimised tapers, as proposed
in [6].

ENERGY SPECTROMETERS

At the ILC, beam energy measurements with an accu-
racy of 100-200 parts per million (ppm) are needed for the
determination of particle masses, including the top quark
and Higgs boson. Energy measurements both upstream
and downstream of the collision point are foreseen by two
different techniques to provide redundancy and reliability
of the results [10]. Upstream, a LEP-style beam position
monitor (BPM) spectrometer is envisioned to measure the
deﬂection of the beam through a dipole ﬁeld. Downstream
of the IP, an SLC-style spectrometer is planned to detect
stripes of synchrotron radiation (SR) produced as the beam
passes through a string of dipole magnets.

In the proposed ESA tests, we plan to implement the
BPM measurement and the synchrotron stripe technique in
the same chicane (Fig. 3), which will have the same 5mm
dispersion at mid-chicane and similar dipole ﬁelds (∼ 1
kG) as the currently designed upstream ILC energy chi-
cane. It should be possible to measure beam offset with the
BPMs at the same time as measuring the synchrotron light
position, so beam energy determined from the two tech-
niques can be compared directly. Knowing the R B · dL
of the magnets and the chicane geometry, together with the
position of the offset beam in the BPMs and the horizon-
tal offset of the synchrotron light swath, the beam energy
can be determined and compared with that delivered by the
SLAC A-bend system. To study systematics of the mea-
surements we can dither the beam energy or trajectory at
the end of the Linac, as well as change the beam trajectory
in the ESA chicane.

BPM energy spectrometer

The BPM spectrometer tests [5], will use existing rf cav-
ity BPMs (at least for the ﬁrst stage), but will upgrade the
BPM processing electronics. The overall goal for system
(mechanical and electrical) stability is <∼500 nm, corre-
sponding to 100 ppm energy precision over a one hour time
scale. One hour is a possible calibration timescale where
one reverses polarity of the chicane and moves the BPMs
at mid-chicane by 10mm on precision movers. We are also
investigating possibilities for a stretched wire or laser in-
terferometer system to monitor mechanical stability of the
support girder. A 6-axis moveable stage would allow us to

a)  Plan view (not to scale)

10D45

10D45

10D45

10D45

BPM1,2

BPM3,4

Wiggler

BPM5,6

synch beam
vertical fan +- 0.5 mr

synch beam
angle 1.33 mr

Detector

2.5 cm

collimator

vac chmb
19 mm gap

-1.5

0

3.7

5.25

7.4

9.3.

11.2

13.0

(approximate Z m)

26.7

b)  Elevation view
     looking down beam
     at BPM 6 exit

3 mm

synch beam offset

3 mm

2.0 cm ID

c) Elevation view
    looking down beam
    at detector

2.0 cm

2.5 cm

Exit beam pipe

Synch beam
vertical fan +- 0.5 mr

Electron beam

Synch beam

Electron beam

Figure 3: Chicane for BPM and SR stripe energy spectrometer measurements.

gauge the effects of beam tilts on the BPM measurements
by observing any measurement bias as a function of over-
all BPM rotation. We also plan temperature sensors along
the girder to study temperature sensitivity of mechanical
motion and electronics drifts.

of simulating the collision environment in a test beam. We
also plan to make measurements to quantify beam-induced
electromagnetic interference (EMI) along the beamline and
near features such as toroids, BPMs, and bellows. We plan
to measure the EMI frequency spectrum and its dependence
on bunch charge and bunch length.

SR Stripe Energy Spectrometer

The SR stripe energy spectrometer [5] must make pre-
cise measurements of the centroid and shape of the SR
stripe. A vertical SR stripe will be generated by a wiggler
in the third leg of the chicane. (The ILC chicane will have
wigglers in both the ﬁrst and third legs; an additional wig-
gler in the ﬁrst chicane leg in the ESA setup is a possible
upgrade option.) We are planning to test a detector array
with 100µm quartz ﬁbers read out by a multi-anode PMT
that senses Cherenkov light produced by secondary elec-
trons generated by SR photon interactions in the ﬁbers and
the upstream window/radiator. The beam test will validate
Monte Carlo simulations of the Cherenkov light production
and detection efﬁciency. We will study backgrounds and
cross-talk and compare energy measurements (energy jitter
and absolute energy scale) with the BPM spectrometer and
existing A-line diagnostics.

OTHER STUDIES: IP BPMS, EMI

We want to demonstrate that the fast IP BPMs and kick-
ers, located within 4 meters of the IP, can work to the re-
quired precision in the presence of the intense beam-beam
interaction. We are studying simulating aspects of the
beam-beam interaction with either a 5% radiation length
ﬁxed target or a spray beam to mimic a high ﬂux of low
energy pairs. This system has been identiﬁed as one of the
highest risks to delivering design luminosities for both the
warm and cold LC designs, in part because of the difﬁculty

REFERENCES

[1] Website for SLACs ILC program in End Station A, www-

project.slac.stanford.edu/ilc/testfac/ESA/ESA.html.

[2] M. Woods
for

and
the

Tests
http://lcdev.kek.jp/ILCWS/Talks/14wg4-19-Critical BeamTests2.pdf.

Delivery

Beam

S.

Kuroda,

Critical

Beam
System,

[3] Worldwide LC Test Beam Working Group, Report
Linear Collider Test Beam Effort,

on Worldwide
http://www-lc.fnal.gov/lc testbeams/tbpage.html.

[4] P. Emma and K. Bane, LITrack: A Fast Longitudinal Phase
Space Tracking Code with Graphical User Interface, SLAC-
PUB-11035 (2005), contributed to PAC-05.

[5] See Projects link at website in [1].
[6] I. Zagorodnov and T.Weiland, A Conformal Scheme for Wake
Field Calculation, Proc. EPAC-02 (2002); I. Zagorodnov, T.
Weiland, and K. Bane, Calculation of Collimator Wakeﬁelds,
SLAC-PUB-9727, Proc. PAC-03 (2003).

[7] P. Tenenbaum and D. Onoprienko, Direct Measurement of
the Resistive Wakeﬁeld in Tapered Collimators, SLAC-PUB-
10578, Proc. EPAC-04 (2004).

[8] Sec. 7.3.9, G. Loew et al., ILC-TRC 2nd Report (2003).
[9] P. Tenenbaum et al., An Apparatus for the Direct Mea-
surement of Collimator Transverse Wakeﬁelds, SLAC-PUB-
8137, Proc. PAC-99 (1999).

[10] D. Cinabro,

E. Torrence

and M. Woods,

Linear

of
Design,

tus
tion
http://www.slac.stanford.edu/xorg/lcd/ipbi/notes/white.pdf.

Beam
IPBI-TN-2003-1,

Collider

ALCPG

Sta-
Instrumenta-
2003.

