5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
1
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE CLEO RICH DETECTOR

SUHEP 20-2005
June, 2005

M. Artuso a, R. Ayad a, K. Bukin a, A. Eﬁmov a,
C. Boulahouache a, E. Dambasuren a, S. Kopp a, Ji Li a,
G. Majumder a, N. Menaa a, R. Mountain a, S. Schuh a,
∗, G. Viehhauser a, J.C. Wang a

T. Skwarnicki a, S. Stone a,

aDepartment of Physics, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244-1130, USA

T.E. Coan b, V. Fadeyev b, Y. Maravin b, I. Volobouev b, J. Ye b

bDepartment of Physics, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX 75275-0175,
USA

S. Anderson c, Y. Kubota c, A. Smith c

cSchool of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
55455-0112, USA

Abstract

We describe the design, construction and performance of a Ring Imaging Cherenkov
Detector (RICH) constructed to identify charged particles in the CLEO experiment.
Cherenkov radiation occurs in LiF crystals, both planar and ones with a novel
“sawtooth”-shaped exit surface. Photons in the wavelength interval 135–165 nm
are detected using multi-wire chambers ﬁlled with a mixture of methane gas and
triethylamine vapor. Excellent π/K separation is demonstrated.

Key words: Cherenkov, Particle-identiﬁcation
PACS: 03.30+p, 07.85YK

∗ Corresponding author.

Email address: stone@physics.syr.edu (S. Stone).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

21 February 2014

1

INTRODUCTION

The CLEO II detector was revolutionary in that it was the ﬁrst to couple
a large magnetic tracking volume with a precision crystal electromagnetic
calorimeter capable of measuring photons down to the tens of MeV level [1].
CLEO II produced many ground-breaking physics results, but was hampered
by its limited charged-hadron identiﬁcation capabilities that were provided by
a combination of dE/dx and time-of-ﬂight measurements.

The CLEO III detector was designed to study decays of b and c quarks, τ
leptons and Υ mesons produced in e+e− collisions near 10 GeV center-of-mass
energy. CLEO III is an upgraded version of CLEO II, as the magnet, the
calorimeter and the muon system were kept. It contained a new four-layer
silicon strip vertex detector, a new wire drift chamber and a particle identiﬁ-
cation system based on Cherenkov ring imaging described herein. Information
about CLEO is available elsewhere [2,3].

Design choices for particle identiﬁcation were limited by radial space and the
necessity of minimizing material in front of the CsI crystal calorimeter. The
CsI imposed a hard radial outer limit, and the desire for maintaining excellent
charged particle tracking imposed a lower limit, since at high momentum the
error in momentum is inversely proportional to the square of the track length.
The particle identiﬁcation system was allocated only 20 cm of radial space,
and this limited the technology choices. To retain the superior performance
of the calorimeter, a material thickness of only 12% of a radiation length was
allowed.

The CLEO III installation including the RICH detector occurred in the sum-
mer of 1999 and was used to study physics in the e+e− center-of-mass energy
region around 9-12 GeV. The two-ring machines KEKB and PEP-II produced
much more luminosity than CESR, and after some excellent initial results
on B decays and Upsilon spectroscopy, it became clear that there was much
physics to be explored in charm decays and studies of charmonium. The trans-
formation from CLEO III to CLEO-c was made in 2003, when the CESR ac-
celerator began operating in the 3-5 GeV center-of-mass energy region. The
inner double-sided silicon detector was replaced with a wire drift chamber
that has signiﬁcantly less material and is much better suited to the CLEO-c
physics program; in any case, the silicon was showing eﬀects of premature
radiation damage. The magnetic ﬁeld was lowered from 1.5 T to 1 T, mainly
for accelerator related considerations.

The plan of this paper is as follows: The basic RICH detector design will
be delineated, followed by descriptions of the individual components, namely
the crystals, multi-wire chambers, superstructure, readout electronics, and

2

support subsystems. Issues in the long-term operation of the RICH are then
discussed. Finally, some details of the data analysis technique and physics
performance are presented.

2 DETECTOR OVERVIEW

2.1 Design Choices

The severe radial spatial constraint forces the design to have a thin, few-cm
detector for Cherenkov photons and a thin radiator. Otherwise the photons
have too little distance to travel and it becomes very diﬃcult to precisely
measure the photon angles. In fact, the only thin, large-area photon detectors
possible in our situation were wire chamber based, either using a reﬂective CsI
photocathode or a gas mixture of methane (CH4) and triethylamine (TEA)
vapor to convert ultraviolet photons. 1 Use of CsI would have allowed us to use
a liquid freon radiator with quartz windows in the system and to work in the
wavelength region from about 160–200 nm. However, at the time of decision,
the use of CsI was far from proven and, in any case, would have imposed
severe constraints on the construction process, which would have been both
technically diﬃcult and expensive. Thus we chose a multi-wire chamber ﬁlled
with a mixture of CH4 and TEA that uses Cherenkov photons in the vacuum
ultraviolet (VUV) region, 135–165 nm, generated in a 1 cm thick LiF crystal.

The quantum eﬃciency of the CH4 and TEA mixture peaks at
150 nm [4],
as shown in Fig. 1, below the transmission cutoﬀ for glasses and fused sil-
ica quartz. This short wavelength requires the use of alkali halide crystals as
both the Cherenkov-emitting medium and the entrance window to the pho-
tosensitive volume [5]. We chose LiF as the Cherenkov radiator because it
has the lowest dispersion in the wavelength band of the CH4-TEA quantum
eﬃciency [6]. Transparent gases must be used between the radiator and the
photon detector that are almost entirely free of O2 and H2O, both of which
have 1–10 Mbarn cross section for photon absorption below 175 nm [7].

∼

Details of the design of the CLEO RICH have been discussed elsewhere [8,9].
Here we brieﬂy review the main elements. Cherenkov photons are produced
in a LiF radiator. The photons then traverse a free space, an “expansion
volume,” where the cone of Cherenkov light expands in size. The photons
enter a detector consisting of spatially-segmented multi-wire chambers (MWC)
ﬁlled with CH4 gas mixed with TEA vapor, in which they are converted to

1 A TMAE-based photon detector would have been unacceptably thick in order to
obtain the same detection eﬃciency, due to its long photon absorption length.

3

100

80

60

40

20

)

%

(
 
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
s
n
a
r
T

0
100

CaF
2
LiF
 
+TEA  Q.E.
CH
4

120

140

160

180

200

220

240

Wavelength (nm)

Fig. 1. The transmission of the LiF and CaF2 optics for the CLEO RICH, along
with the measured quantum eﬃciency of CH4 plus TEA gas [4].

electrons and multiplied. Finally, signals are picked up with sensitive low-noise
electronics. No optical focusing elements are used; this is called “proximity-
focusing” [6]. The scheme is shown in the upper left of Fig. 2, while the
placement in CLEO is shown in Fig. 3.

G10 Box Rib
 

Photon Detector

Charged 
Particle

1 6   c m

Pure N
 

2

Cherenkov 
Photon

LiF Radiator

20 µm wires

CH  +TEA
4
 
CaF  Window

2

192 mm

Fiberglass 
Siderail

P h oto n 
D etectors
LiF 
R a diators

101 cm

8

2
 
c

m

c m

0  

5

(cid:13)2

4

Fig. 2. Outline of the CLEO RICH detector design.

There are 30 individual photon detectors around the outer cylinder. They

CsI

RICH

DRIFT CHAMBER

100

80

60

(cm)

40

20

Si

CsI

IR Quads

3

s q =   0 . 9

o

c

Quad
Support

20

50

100

150

(cm)

200

Fig. 3. The CLEO RICH, shown in CLEO-III conﬁguration.

subtend the same azimuthal angle as the radiators, which are segmented into
30 rows and 14 rings on the inner cylinder. The expansion volume between
the radiators and detectors is ﬁlled with pure N2 gas. In fact, any transparent,
pure gas could be used. Our choice was based on the availability of very pure
gas from the super-conducting coil boil oﬀ.

The most distinctive features of the design of the CLEO RICH are: (1) ultra-
thin photon detectors, with high spatial segmentation and almost full area cov-
erage; (2) a large volume of high-purity, VUV-transparent crystals including a
novel “sawtooth” geometry; and (3) exceptionally low-noise analog electronics
readout.

2.2 Radiators

LiF was chosen over CaF2 or MgF2, both of which are transparent in the
VUV wavelength region, due to its lower dispersion leading to smaller chro-
matic error. Originally all the radiators were planned to be 1 cm thick planar
pieces. However, since the refractive index of LiF at 150 nm is 1.5, all the
Cherenkov light generated from tracks normal to the LiF surface would be
totally internally reﬂected, as shown in Fig. 4 (top). We could have used these
planar radiators, but we would have had to tilt them at about a 15◦ angle.
Besides the obvious mechanical support problem, some tracks would produce
Cherenkov photons that would cross through the entire thickness of another
radiator tile causing a loss of eﬃciency and reconstruction problems. Instead,
we developed novel radiators with a serrated top surface, called “sawtooth”
radiators [10], as shown in Fig. 4 (bottom). Measured physical properties of

5

the radiators have been described previously [8].

10 mm

γ

γ

track

170 mm
track

10 mm

γ

γ

m
m
 
4

Fig. 4.
Sketch of a plane radiator (top) and a sawtooth radiator (bottom).
Cherenkov light paths radiated from a charged track normal to each radiator are
shown.

The overall radiator shape approximates a cylinder of radius 82 cm. Indi-
vidual radiator crystals are placed in 14 coaxial rings of 30 crystals each,
centered around the beam line and symmetrically positioned about the inter-
action point. The inner four rings are made of sawtooth radiators. (The 30
crystals segments are parallel to the wire chambers.) Inter-crystal gaps are
typically 50–100 µm. The crystals are attached to the exterior surface of a
1.5 mm thick carbon ﬁber shell with a low outgassing epoxy.

2.3 Photon Detectors

The photon detectors have segmented cathode pads 7.5 mm (length)
8.0 mm
(width) etched onto G10 printed-circuit boards (PCBs). The pad array was
formed from four individual boards, each with 24
80 pads, the latter split
into two 24
40 pad sections with a 7 mm gap. Each board was individually
ﬂattened in an oven and then they were glued together longitudinally on a
granite table where reinforcing G10 ribs were also glued on. The ribs have a
box-like structure. There are 4 longitudinal ribs that traverse the entire length.
Smaller cross ribs are placed every 12 cm for extra stiﬀening. The total length
of the pad array is 2.46 m.

×

×

×

Wire planes were strung with 20 µm diameter gold plated tungsten with a
3% admixture of rhenium; the wire pitch was 2.66 mm, for a total of 72 wires
per chamber. The wires were placed on and subsequently glued to precision
ceramic spacers every 30 cm. The spacers extend 1 mm above the cathodes,
and therefore are 3.5 mm from the CaF2 windows. We achieved a tolerance
of 50 µm on the wire to cathode distance. The spacers had slots in the center
for the glue bead.

Eight 30 cm

19 cm CaF2 windows were glued together in precision jigs

×

6

lengthwise to form a 2.4 m long window. Positive high voltage is applied to
the anode wires, while negative high voltage is put on 100 µm wide silver traces
deposited on the CaF2. The spacing between the traces is 2.5 mm, and they
are connected together by a trace running across both edges. The pad plane
is close to ground. The gain of the chamber depends on the amount of high
voltage on wires and windows. We deﬁne “wire-gain,” in the normal manner,
as the multiplication factor on a single electron. We run the system at typical
wire-gains around 30,000. “Pad-gain” is our usual measure of multiplication
and is calculated as being 75% of the wire-gain.

To maintain the ability of disconnecting any faulty part of a chamber, the
high voltage is distributed independently to three groups of 24 wires and the
windows are each powered separately.

2.4 Electronics

The position of Cherenkov photons is measured by sensing the induced avalanche
charge on the cathode pad array. Since the pulse height distribution from sin-
gle photons is expected to be exponential at low to moderate gas gains [11],
the use of low noise electronics is required to ensure high detection eﬃciency.
Pad clusters in the detector can be formed from single Cherenkov photons,
overlaps of more than one Cherenkov photon, or charged tracks. In Fig. 5
we show the pulse height distribution for single photons and charged tracks.
(Note, one ADC count corresponds to
200 electrons.) These can be sepa-
rated by just examining the pulse height. The charged tracks give very large
pulse heights because they are traversing
4.5 mm of the CH4-TEA mixture.
We can distinguish somewhat between the charge due to single photons and
two photons because of the pulse height shapes on adjacent pads.

∼

∼

To have as low noise electronics as possible, a dedicated VLSI chip, called
VA RICH, based on a very successful chip developed for solid state applica-
tions, has been designed and produced for our application at IDE AS, Nor-
way [13]. We have fully characterized 3,600 64-channel chips, mounted on
hybrid circuit boards. For moderate values of the input capacitance Cin, the
equivalent noise charge measured ENC is found to be about

ENC = 130 e− + (9 e−/pF)

Cin .

·

(1)

The dynamic range of the chip is between 450,000 and 900,000 electrons,
depending upon whether we choose a bias point for the output buﬀer suitable
for signals of positive or negative polarity or we shift this bias point to have
the maximum dynamic range for signals of a single polarity.

7

s
r
e
t
s
u
C
d
a
P

 

l

 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

410

310

210

1000 2000 3000 4000

0
Pulse Height (ADC counts)

Fig. 5. Pulse height distributions from pad clusters containing single photons (solid
histogram) and charged tracks (dashed histogram). The photon data is consistent
with an exponential distribution. One ADC count corresponds to
200 electrons.
The charged track distribution is aﬀected by electronic saturation.

∼

In our readout scheme we group 10 chips in a single readout cell commu-
nicating with data boards located in VME crates just outside the detector
cylinder. Chips in the same readout cell share the same cable, which routes
control signals and bias voltages from the data boards and output signals to
the data boards. Two VA RICH chips are mounted using wire bonds on one
hybrid circuit that is attached via two miniature connectors to the back of the
cathode board of the photon detector.

The output of the VA RICH is transmitted to the data boards as an ana-
log diﬀerential current, transformed into a voltage by transimpedance ampli-
ﬁers and digitized by a 12-bit diﬀerential ADC. These receivers are part of
very complex data boards which perform several important analog and dig-
ital functions. Each board contains 15 digitization circuits and three analog
power supply sections providing the voltages and currents to bias the chips,
and calibration circuitry. The digital component of these boards contains a
sparsiﬁcation circuit, an event buﬀer, memory to store the pedestal values,
and the interface to the VME crate CPU.

Coherent noise is present. We eliminate this by measuring the pulse heights on
all the channels and performing an average of the non-struck channels before
the data sparsiﬁcation step. 2 The pedestal width (r.m.s.) is reduced from 3.6
to 2.5 ADC counts after this coherent noise subtraction. The intrinsic noise of
the system then is

500 electrons r.m.s.

∼

2 This algorithm is executed by a DSP located on the data boards before the data
are sparsiﬁed.

8

3 CRYSTAL FABRICATION and TESTING

The design of the CLEO RICH demands a large number of high-quality, high-
purity VUV-transparent crystals, used as the entrance window to the multi-
wire photon detectors and as the solid Cherenkov radiator medium. In fact,
nearly 420 kg of crystal was required, in the form of 240 full-sized windows
2.0 mm3 in
and 420 radiator tiles. The full windows were 191.0
size, and the planar radiators were 174.3

307.6
10.0 mm3.

169.8

×

×

×

×

There were several signiﬁcant issues in the production of these crystal pieces.
First, the bulk absorption of VUV photons needed to be small, so high purity
raw material was required. Second, the surface transmission needed to be ap-
preciable, so high-quality polishing of the surfaces was required. These two el-
ements are necessary to yield good transmission in the VUV region. Third, the
ﬁnished plates needed to have large dimensions, so the active area of the detec-
tor remained high. Last, they needed to have good mechanical stability—free
of cleaves, nascent cleaves, and geometric shape deformations—so the inter-
nal strain in the crystals needed to be minimal. This was particularly critical
for the very thin 2 mm windows, which would cause the photon detector to
fail if a crack occurred in situ. In order to meet these stringent requirements
a R&D program in the areas of ﬂuoride crystal growth and processing were
undertaken.

3.1 Crystal Production

3.1.1 Crystal Growth Process

Fluoride crystals were grown at the Optovac facilities [14] using a modiﬁed
Bridgman-Stockbarger method [15]. In this technique, pure raw powder is
packed in a graphite crucible which is heated in a vacuum furnace to a tem-
perature far above its melting point. After a period of impurity removal, the
crucible is reduced to a temperature just above the melting point, and then
slowly lowered mechanically through a sharp thermal gradient into a second
volume where the temperature is below the melting point. This eﬀects a sur-
face of solidiﬁcation in the melt where the crystal lattice is actually grown.
The resulting solid ingot is then held at a reduced temperature (roughly half
that of the melting point [16]), at which it is annealed to reduce the bulk strain
induced by the growth process as it is slowly brought to room temperature.

The growth process is the most important single step in crystal production,
since it not only impacts the manufacturability directly, but the ultimate op-
tical and mechanical properties of the ﬁnished crystal as well. Stockbarger
recognized from the beginning the critical roles of both the high purity of the

9

raw material and the sharpness of the thermal gradient between the two tem-
perature regions. This latter impacts the design and operation of the furnace,
as does the need for uniformity of temperature in the melt. Good control of the
crystallization zone allows for low intrinsic strain growth, and for the impuri-
ties to segregate to the top of the ingot. Both are necessary for the large-area
RICH crystals.

The actual temperature levels and durations in the thermal cycle were deter-
mined by repeated experimentation, and varied according to material used and
ingot size. This optimization constituted an important line of development,
in particular for the large 14.5 and 16-inch diameter ingots grown for CaF2
windows. 3 The CaF2 ingots were grown using a piece of single crystal as a
seed, in order to reduce the number of domain boundaries between regions of
diﬀerent crystal orientation. This was never entirely successful, and all ingots
grown were polycrystals.

The raw material used was either very pure grade LiF powder synthesized
by Merck, 4 or crushed natural ﬂuorite (CaF2), of suﬃcient purity for thin
windows. In order to remove residual impurities from the ﬂuorite, 2% PbO2
was added as a getter that subsequently segregated from the melt. Any residual
impurities reduce transmission signiﬁcantly at 150 nm, since they will either
create absorption (color) centers or scattering centers for light in the VUV
region.

In order to monitor the ingot quality at growth, test bars were taken as a ver-
tical slice from the periphery of each ingot. The transmission of these witness
pieces from a representative good ingot and bad ingot are shown in Fig. 6. This
allowed the prooﬁng of the ingots, as well as a diagnostic of growth problems.

3.1.2 Crystal Machining

The machining process consisted of taking a single ingot and producing many
“blanks” from it—each of which is a formed piece of crystal ready for polishing
in order to have good optical transmission. To produce the blanks, the ingot is
ﬁrst mounted on a plaster base and sliced to approximate thickness on a band-
saw using a diamond blade and a gravity-feed table. It is important to use a
“well-cutting blade,” 5 to thermalize the ingot and lubricant to room temper-

3 Large ingot growth also has important implications for other applications, such
as 157 nm lithography for VLSI fabrication.
4 LiF Optipur (R) powder, Merck SA, Darmstadt D-64293, Germany.
5 A “well-cutting” blade is not only sharp (e.g., using a diamond abrasive), but is
properly dressed and lubricated so as to prevent loading up with ﬁne crystal silt as
it cuts. Thus the blade will cut the ingot instead of rubbing and cracking it. This
same criteria is applied to the other cutting tools and grinding wheels used.

10

Fig. 6. Test bar transmission as a function of vertical position in the LiF ingot,
at 135 nm, from 10 ingots grown in the same furnace. The low transmission curves
show earlier bad growths having high levels of impurities (including Fe), while the
high transmission curves come from later ingots, made after the growth process was
optimized. The left end of the plot refers to the end of the ingot that is cone shaped,
the bottom, while the right side shows the top.

ature, and to establish the proper feed rate of the blade through the ingot.
Next, the slice is trimmed to approximate shape, and all edges are bevelled by
150 µm of ﬁnal
hand. Then, the two faces of the slice are ground to within
thickness, using a Blanchard-type surface grinder with ﬁne-grit superabrasive
pellets. Finally, the four edges of the piece are ground to dimension using a
SX CNC machine with a very ﬁne diamond superabrasive wheel. The LiF
radiators have two edges which are given a 6◦ angle.

∼

For the case of windows and planar radiators, the blank is now ﬁnished and
ready for polishing. For the case of sawtooth radiators, additional grinding
steps (as well as a diﬀerent polishing technique) are required, as described
below.

The machining process is developed by determining the proper speeds and
feed rates for each operation. Otherwise the crystal may be easily destroyed.
Nevertheless, each of these machining steps does introduce some actual dam-
age to the crystal. This consists of microscopic cleaves and irregularities at
the surface and just below it, called “subsurface damage.” The goal of each
step in the machining process is to cut away enough material so as to get un-
der the subsurface damage created by the previous step, while itself creating
at worst only a ﬁner level of damage, which is to be removed by the subse-
quent operation. In this way, a piece of suﬃcient transmission is ultimately

11

Fig. 7. Photograph of a polishing table, showing the lapping surface and rotating
crystal carriers. Weights are placed on the crystals.

produced.

3.1.3 Crystal Polishing

The polishing process consisted of placing a blank on a lapping table with a
polyurethane polishing pad and a speciﬁc polishing media, such as ﬁne-grit
diamond powder suspended in glycol or a commercially-available polishing
slurry. Fig. 7 shows a working polishing table. The blank is weighted but free
to spin within a rotating holder on the rotating polishing pad, the net eﬀect of
which is randomized orbits of the ﬁne abrasive with respect to the blank. This
yields a uniform action as it cuts away stock (mechanically or chemically) to
get under the subsurface damage. This procedure is repeated with a ﬁner grit
abrasive, in order to ﬁnish the surface.

This is a ﬁne and somewhat delicately balanced procedure, taking many hours
per surface. The eﬀectiveness is governed principally by the total amount of
stock removed, which is related to the amount of weight applied to the piece
as it glides on the polishing pad. The rate of stock removal also depends on the
material (CaF2 or LiF) and on the orientation of the crystal. The eﬀectiveness
of diﬀerent polishing times and weights was extensively studied.

3.1.4

Production Yields

Nearly one thousand individual crystals were produced for the CLEO RICH.
The early stages of the crystal production saw a very low yield of pieces. It
was only after intense eﬀorts developing all phases of production (growth,

12

machining and polishing) that the yields grew to acceptable levels.

For CaF2 production, the intrinsic strain in the thin large-area windows needed
to be minimized. Optimization of the annealing cycle, major improvements to
the machining process, and determination of proper weighting during polish-
ing, gave rise to increased yields. The manufacturing yield of an ingot (i.e.,
the number of windows produced divided by the number possible in an ingot)
grew from below 30% in the initial phases of the project to be routinely above
80%, and as high as 90%. In the wake of these improvements, the quality of the
ingot (i.e., the fraction of windows produced that passed CLEO requirements)
also rose to be close to 100%.

For LiF production, proper purity of the material needed to be maintained.
Improvements parallel to those made for CaF2, as well as critical corrections
to raw material handling, contributed to slowly increasing yields. For the ﬁrst
twenty LiF ingots grown, the manufacturing yield was under 40% with the
quality about the same. Several episodes of material contamination then re-
duced the quality to eﬀectively zero, as indicated in Fig. 6. This was due to
insuﬃcient segregation of impurities, or overabundance of impurities, both of
which create color centers in the bulk material as well as enhanced domain
boundaries. The latter creates “fault lines” along which the crystal may sep-
arate into multiple pieces, thereby becoming useless. As improvements were
made during the second half of the project, the manufacturing yield grew to
70%, albeit with large ﬂuctuations, due mainly to the continued presence of
separating domain boundaries in some ingots. Also in later production, the
quality of the ingots became quite high, far surpassing CLEO requirements
even at 135 nm. This is also indicated in Fig. 6.

3.2 Crystals for Chamber Windows

There were 240 full-sized chamber window crystals required. A total of 300
were delivered, of which 272 were used in construction. To make the num-
ber of full-sized windows used, there were 393 individual crystals, of which
151 were full-sized CaF2 crystals, 182 were half-sized CaF2 crystals, and 60
were half-sized LiF window crystals. This small admixture of LiF windows
was acceptable if the machining process succeeded, and sped up the chamber
production schedule. An additional 16% were rejected for various reasons.

3.2.1

Inspection and Testing

All window crystals were cleaned, inspected and tested individually. Fig. 1
shows typical transmission curves for a 2 mm thick CaF2 window and for a
10 mm thick LiF planar radiator. The main features on these curves are the

13

Fig. 8. Distribution of average window transmissions at 135, 150, and 165 nm.

drop to zero transmission at the band edge for the crystals (122 nm for CaF2
and 105 nm for LiF). There are also several possible absorption lines at 130,
142.5, and 175 nm from water impurities. The transmission above 180 nm rises
to more than 90% where bulk impurities cause minimal loss and only surface
reﬂections dominate. For speed of processing of the crystals, most parts were
scanned over their surface at 3 wavelengths only, namely 135, 150, and 165
nm, for each piece on a grid of 30 points over its surface, using the VUV
Spectrophotometer system at Syracuse University, described in Appendix A.

Fig. 8 shows the distribution of transmissions at each of these wavelengths
for all window crystals. Variations in the transmission may result from bulk
impurities which vary by ingot, from polishing non-uniformities, and from
variations in the cleaning. The variation at 135 nm are clearly larger than at
165 nm, and reﬂect the greater inﬂuences of water and other impurities below
145 nm. On average, the transmission in the windows is 71.5, 80.1, and 85.3%
at 135, 150, and 165 nm, which matches our design criteria of 72, 80, and
85% at these wavelengths. All windows were tested both before and after high
voltage trace deposition.

The dominant mechanism for transmission loss was generally surface scatter-
ing or absorption, with bulk absorption accounting for <20% of the transmis-
sion loss. This was conﬁrmed by transmission measurements of identically-
prepared LiF and CaF2 pieces of diﬀerent thicknesses to separate the two
eﬀects.

On some crystals, cleaves were found to have propagated after production. In
the case where the cleave was small and near an edge, the pieces were hand-
worked to remove the cleave and get under the subsurface damage. If properly

14

Fig. 9. Distribution of optically inactive area for windows. The two peaks correspond
to windows made with full plates (left) and half plates (right).

done, there was only a small probability that the cleave would reappear and
propagate in a relevant amount of time. This was often successful and the best
of these reworked pieces were used as chamber windows.

Fig. 9 shows the fraction of each window that was optically inactive. Factors
which contribute to the inactive area include the window traces which typically
contributed a 4% opacity, any mechanical defects such as missing corners,
any reworked areas of cleave removal as mentioned above, or surface stains
which were not easily cleaned with acetone. Additionally, due to production
schedules and the detector installation deadline, the windows formed out of
half-sized plates epoxied together in pairs had an extra glue joint resulting in
an additional 2% loss of active surface area. The two peaks in Fig. 9 represent
the whole and the half windows, with the tails in each distribution coming
from defects, smudges, or coating problems.

3.2.2 Deposition of Traces

The CaF2 crystals serve a dual role as entrance windows into the wire cham-
bers, as well as high voltage cathodes for these chambers. In order to apply a
voltage to this plane, a 200 nm thick coating of nickel and silver was applied
to the chamber side of the window. This coating was in the form of 100 µm
wide strips spaced 2.54 mm apart, and connected at each of their their ends
by another metallized coating to act as a voltage distribution bus bar. During
construction, a metal conductor was glued to this bus bar using conductive
epoxy.

The metallized coating was performed by EMF; 6 the setup is shown in Fig. 10.

6 Evaporated Metal Films Corp., Ithaca, NY 14850.

15

Fig. 10. The coating chamber for sputtering the metallized strips on the CaF2
windows. In the foreground are the tungsten ﬁlaments which will vaporize the silver
onto the crystals. The four crystals in the background lay behind steel masks with
100 µm slots cut into them to deﬁne the high voltage traces.

The coating was a standard sputtering process, in which a stream of metal ions
is created by placing loops of nickel or silver on tungsten ﬁlaments through
which a 100 Amp current passes. The crystals and ﬁlaments are placed in
a vacuum chamber for the sputtering process. The nickel was found to bond
better to the CaF2 surface, so a 50 nm layer of this was laid down ﬁrst, followed
by 150 nm layer of the silver. The strip features on the windows were deﬁned
by metal masks placed in contact with the windows which had 100 µm wide
slots cut into them. These masks were held in contact with the crystal by
placing the crystal on a machinist’s magnetic chuck and pulling on the steel
mask with the ﬁeld from the chuck. Careful preparation of the chucks were
required to make them vacuum-compatible and prevent outgassing onto the
crystals. The masks were heat-treated to make them ﬂat enough to not rise
25 µm oﬀ the crystals. If the mask was not held in intimate
more than
contact with the crystals, the sputtered silver would tend to “feather” under
the mask, making a broad coated area that was then optically opaque.

∼

3.3 Crystals for Radiators

There were 420 full-sized radiator crystals required, of which 300 were of planar
and 120 were of sawtooth geometry. A total of 436 were delivered, from which
420 were used. To make the full radiator array, there were 450 individual
crystals, of which 270 were full-sized LiF planar crystals, 60 were half-sized
LiF planar crystals, and 120 were full-sized LiF sawtooth crystals. Pairs of half

16

crystals were alternately used as the end rings to make the radiator left-right
symmetric. An additional 2% of the planar radiators were rejected for various
reasons, whereas for sawtooth radiators there were 23% rejected, indicating
the relative diﬃculty in production.

3.3.1

Inspection and Testing

All radiator crystals were cleaned, inspected and tested individually. For pla-
nar radiators, the transmission was measured at 135 nm, 142 nm, 150 nm,
and 165 nm, for each piece on a grid of
300 points over its surface, using
the VUV Spectrophotometer system at SMU, described in Appendix A. On
average, the transmission in the planar radiators is 65.5, 77.6, and 85.4% at
135, 150, and 165 nm, which matches our design criteria of 66, 77, and 85%
at these wavelengths. However, the low value at 135 nm is misleading: it is an
average which includes early ingots having low transmission due to an excess
of impurities. Later ingots produced radiators with transmissions at 135 nm
of up to 75%.

∼

3.3.2 Dielectric Coating of Radiator Crystals

Monte Carlo studies indicated that the Cherenkov angle reconstruction eﬃ-
ciency is enhanced if those radiator photons entering the RICH photon detec-
tors which have ﬁrst bounced oﬀ the bottom surface of a radiator crystal are
suppressed. Correspondingly, we coated the bottom surfaces of all 120 saw-
tooth radiator crystals with a thin layer of polystyrene. This dielectric has an
index of refraction well matched to that of LiF. Detailed tests conﬁrmed that
this material strongly absorbs at 150 nm.

3.3.3 Techniques for Sawtooth Radiators

The unique geometry of the sawtooth radiator crystals cannot be accomplished
using the fabrication methods described above. While the lower surface and
edges of the sawtooth radiators are ﬂat and may be polished using conventional
orbital lapping techniques, special procedures were developed to produce high-
quality VUV-polished faces in the “vee”-shaped grooves on the exit surface
of the crystals. These new techniques could, in principle, be adapted to other
new geometries.

Sawtooth radiator blanks are cut and ground to a thickness of 12.7 mm (i.e.,
0.7 mm oversized) in a manner identical to plane radiators. The blanks are
then mounted on a linear surface grinder to deﬁne the groove shapes. A set
of ten 6-inch diameter grinding wheels are mounted on a single spindle. These
wheels are edged with a 90◦ “vee” on their edges and rough-grit superabrasive.

17

Grooves are ground into the upper surface of each blank to within 1.0 mm of
the ﬁnal depth. Since there are 19 grooves in a sawtooth piece, this is done in
two operations. Following this step, the group of ten wheels is replaced with
a single grinding wheel with a 96◦ included angle and a ﬁne-grit bond. This
single wheel is then used to ﬁnish-grind the last
0.9 mm of depth in each of
the grooves, thereby minimizing groove-to-groove diﬀerences within a single
radiator crystal. As with the planar pieces, the ﬁne-grit operation was found
to reduce subsurface damage from the grinding process. The wheels need to be
maintained by dressing periodically to remove LiF build-up, and to re-deﬁne
the proﬁle of the edge which rounds after grinding. Care was taken to reduce
any spurious vibrations in the spindle during this procedure.

∼

Polishing is done using a conventional Bridgeport milling machine with au-
tomated travel. Unlike the grinding, which could address both left and right
faces of each groove simultaneously, the polishing is applied to one face of
all grooves ﬁrst and then applied to the remaining face in turn. The milling
head is set at a 42◦ angle from the vertical and a new head is mounted in
place of a milling bit. The polishing head was a 6-inch diameter aluminum
disk with a soft polishing pad attached on the bottom, as is used on the usual
lapping tables. The crystals are polished by applying a small tool pressure to
the groove faces with this rotating head, and wetting the part with a polish-
ing slurry. The part passes back and forth several times under the rotating
head which reaches down into the groove. Then the part is indexed to work
the next groove. After all grooves are done, the tool pressure is re-adjusted
and a second set of passes taken. The piece is rotated in order to polish the
opposite faces on the crystal. This entire procedure is repeated with a smaller
grit abrasive, in order to ﬁnish the piece.

In order to test the optical transparency of the sawtooth radiators, we com-
pared them to a calibrated prism of 42◦ inclination angle which was conven-
tionally polished and also met our transmission speciﬁcations. 7 To compare
a sawtooth radiator to the calibrated prism, we deﬂected the light incident on
the ﬂat face of the sawtooth or prism by 15◦ to avoid total internal reﬂection,
and the light intensity through the sawtooth compared to the prism. Fig. 11
shows the results of a transmission scan from a typical sawtooth crystal. As
the crystal was scanned through the light beam of the test setup, the light
is alternately transmitted then totally internally reﬂected, the beam passing
through left and right faces of the vee grooves. It is possible in this graph to
have a transmission that is better than our standard prism, hence a relative
transmission greater than 100%. As can be seen from the ﬁgure, however,
it was challenging to fully polish the sawtooth grooves all the way into the
bottom of the valley and to the top of the peak. This manifests itself as a

7 We fabricated two such prisms and measured the transmission of the two stacked
together for a VUV beam incident at 15circ angle to avoid total internal reﬂection.

18

Fig. 11. Relative transmission scan over one face of a sawtooth crystal. The measure-
ment scan is made relative to a standard polished prism, at three diﬀerent positions
along the groove. A slight enhancement at the middle of the face is evident, as are
the roll-oﬀs at the peak and valley.

Fig. 12. Average transmission of about 40 sawtooth crystals across a tooth, relative
to a reference crystal.

slight enhancement at the middle of the face, with a roll-oﬀ at the peak and
valley. This roll-oﬀ is generally limited to 0.5-1.0 mm at the valley and peak,
as shown in Fig. 12, which shows the data from scans of approximately 40
sawtooth crystals superimposed (the origin on the horizontal axis is the peak
of one tooth, and the vertical axis is the diﬀerence in transmission from the
average). Fig. 13 shows the average transmission of each of 38 faces for each
of 43 radiator crystals.

3.4 Radiation Damage in Fluoride Crystals

The crystals of the CLEO RICH are not expected to be exposed to signiﬁcant
levels of radiation. The RICH inner radius is 820 mm, and its outer radius
is 1020 mm. At these radii, the CLEO-II detector saw approximately 0.05

19

Fig. 13. The average transmission across the face of the sawtooth crystals for each
of 38 faces in 43 radiator crystals

Rad/day. This rate is expected to scale very nearly with instantaneous lumi-
nosity, so that in CLEO III the rate would be 0.1 Rad/day, or 37 Rad/year. 8
In CLEO-c, the numbers are expected to be about a factor of four higher. We
have investigated what eﬀect could be expected on the transmission of the
RICH crystals due to exposure to synchrotron radiation.

Twenty CaF2 and 20 LiF samples of the same thicknesses, as used in the
RICH, were exposed for various times to a 60Co source at rates of 200 to
5000 rad/hr. Transmissions of the samples were measured before and after the
exposure. The transmissions did not appear to depend signiﬁcantly on dose
rate, only on integrated dose. A control sample that travelled with the dosed
samples but was not exposed to the source did not experience transmission
changes greater than 1% at any wavelength. Fig. 14 shows the transmissions
of the crystals after exposure to the Co60 source. The observed absorption
250 nm and 170 nm correspond to known color center
bands in the LiF at
formation centers [17,18], as do the 190 nm and 250 nm centers observed in
the CaF2 [19,20]. At the 100–500 Rad exposure expected in CLEO III and
CLEO-c, however, the loss in transmission expected in our crystals would not
exceed a few percent in the 135–165 nm range.

∼

8 The scaling with luminosity is only valid at the outer radii of the CLEO detector,
where the penetrating radiation is shielded only by the inner detector material.
The radiation doses to which the inner detectors will be exposed will actually not
diﬀer much in CLEO III from those in CLEO-II due to improved shielding near the
beamline.

20

2

0 rad
3 rad
5 rad
22 rad
44 rad
4.5 krad
12 krad
58 krad

0
100

120

140

160

180

200

220

240

260

280

300

Wavelength (nm)

100

80

60

40

20

100

80

60

40

20

)

%

(
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m

s
n
a
r
T

)

%

(
 

n
o
i
s
s
i
m
s
n
a
r
T

0
100

120

140

160

180

200

220

240

260

280

300

Wavelength (nm)

Fig. 14. Transmissions of CaF2 (top) and LiF (bottom) crystal samples irradiated
by a 60Co source, for diﬀerent exposures, up to 80 krad.

4 MULTI-WIRE CHAMBER CONSTRUCTION and TESTING

The main issues of concern guiding the construction of the multi-wire chamber
photon detectors were: (1) ﬁeld stability, requiring electrodes to be parallel
over the full area of the detector, as well as have no local corona points, and
high material cleanliness; (2) mechanical stress relief, to avoid cracking the
thin CaF2 windows or breaking an anode wire; (3) gas tightness, to prevent
any VUV photon-absorbing gas from leaking into the expansion volume, or
any impurities into the chamber gas; and (4) long-term stability, since in
all practicality, the installed detector can never be accessed. Fig. 15 gives a
schematic view of the multi-wire chamber.

To reduce dirt and dust, a clean room was set up, with air ﬁltering, and
the requisite cleanliness protocols (masks, nitrile gloves, booties, etc.). All
chamber construction and testing of component parts occurred in this clean
room environment. We purchased a set of three ten-foot long granite tables

0 rad
3 rad
5 rad
22 rad
50 rad
4.6 krad
11 krad
80 krad

21

ﬂat to better than 0.0005 inch over the entire table, in order to establish an
accurate and stable reference. A mechanical prototype was constructed ﬁrst,
which was crucial in developing the detailed techniques and custom ﬁxtures
needed for the construction process.

The chamber construction procedure itself was a complex operation. The gen-
eral technique was to assemble and test the two halves of each chamber (called
the “wire plane” and the “window-plane”) separately, then mate them together
and test the completed chamber as a single unit. This procedure allowed care-
ful construction of the three electrode planes, helped in problem diagnosis,
and facilitated the production schedule.

For most of the construction procedures, two structural epoxies were used, as
well as two sealant epoxies. All were chosen for their strong adhesion prop-
erties, viscosity prior to curing, as well as ultra-low outgassing attributes, as
indicated in Table 1. All materials were checked for chemical comparability
using a special chamber held at elevated temperatures [21].

Table 1
Some special epoxies used in RICH construction.

Type

Epoxy

Consist- Outgassing [22]

Uses

ency

%TML,%CVCM

Struct. Armstrong A-12(a)

1.11, 0.01

LiF, CaF2

Struct. Delta Bond 152-Q/B-4(b)

0.49, <0.01

G10, Ceramic

paste

stiﬀ

Sealant Hysol RE2039/HD3561(c)

water

n.a.

Gas seal

Sealant Torr-Seal(d)

stiﬀ

0.92, 0.01

Gas seal

(a) Resin Technology Group, S. Easton, MA 02375.
(b) Wakeﬁeld Thermal Solutions, Inc., Pelham, NH 03076.
(c) Henkel Loctite Corp., Industry, CA 91746.
(d) Varian, Inc., Palo Alto, CA 94304 .

4.1 Wire Plane Construction and Testing

∼

The wire plane must be constructed in such a way as to maintain the 1 mm gap
between the anode wires and the cathode-pads as uniformly as possible over
the
2.5 m chamber length along which the wires are strung. Gain variation
at the wires would result if this spacing was not uniform, as well as variation
in the pad-gain, as a consequence of the capacitive coupling to the cathode-
pads [5]. In addition, sparking could occur if the gain becomes excessively large
at any place in the chamber. These requirement caused us to put a stringent
limit of 25 µm on the gap variation.

22

Fig. 15. Cross-section of full multi-wire chamber.

4.1.1 Cathode Board Design

The cathode board PCBs were designed to have cathode-pads on the front
side and connectors for the electronics readout on the back side. Each board
615 mm2 in area, and nominally 1.7 mm thick. Four boards
was about 205
40 arrays of pads. An
made up a single chamber. Each contained two 24
8
16 array of pads was routed to two linear connectors in a self-contained
manner, so symmetry allows simple tiling of the plane.

×

×

×

As shown in Fig. 16, the pads on the front were connected to the traces on
the back with small vias (0.5 mm diameter), which must all be sealed to
prevent leaks. Rather than glue each via individually (
8000 per chamber),
an additional layer of prepreg was added to the top of the lay-up stack, which
covered all vias and had cut-outs for connectors and ground connections. This
design provided an excellent solution for sealing the vias.

∼

4.1.2 Cathode Board Manufacturing and Flattening Procedure

The large-area cathode board PCBs were manufactured, 9 under pressure in a
stack in an autoclave. After manufacture, the boards were tested for continuity,
inspected for irregularities, and measured to determine mechanical size and
deformations. The connectors were then soldered to the board.

9 Speedy Circuits, Huntington Beach CA 92649.

23

Fig. 16. Diagram of the cathode board PCB, showing the lay-up of the pads and
layers. Black indicates a Copper layer, light gray a G10 core layer, and dark gray
sheets of G10 prepreg. Vertical scale is proportional; horizontal dimension is com-
pressed.

For a large-size thin PCB of this type, there were three major deformations
from a geometric plane: longitudinal bow, transverse bow, and twist. The
magnitude of the longitudinal and transverse bows were about 1.5 mm and 1
mm on average, respectively. The twist was small on this scale. In our design,
the transverse bow was the most problematic deformation.

A ﬂattening procedure was developed, in order to remove this bow. The boards
were baked under weight while supported along the long edge. The thermal
cycle was 2 hr at 150◦C, followed by a slow 12 hr cool-down. The amount and
placement of the
1 kg weights depended on the initial deformations of the
board. The process was repeated as warranted. The eﬀect of this procedure
was to reduce the transverse bow to under half of its original value, on average.
The longitudinal bow was not signiﬁcantly changed.

∼

4.1.3 Cathode Board Assembly

Four cathode boards were assembled into a plane by gluing them together end
to end on the granite table—weighted, edge-clamped, and pad face down to
assure geometric planarity of the ﬁnished pad array. 10 The end-joint between
PCBs was specially reinforced: a “vee” cut was milled on the back to allow a
larger contact area for epoxy and to ensure that no epoxy came through to
make the front (pad) surface irregular. (See Fig. 17.) This joint was covered on
the back by a G10 strip in a separate gluing operation for additional strength.
The appropriate ground straps between boards were added. Measurements
were made of the ﬂatness to monitor the gluing procedure.

Next, the four ﬁberglass box rib structures were screwed to “strongback” into

10 There was a variation up to 25 µm in the thickness of the etched pads themselves,
from board to board.

24

×

inserts previously glued into the box ribs. The strongback was made of full-
length 1
2 inch aluminum box channels. The box ribs were then epoxied
longitudinally on the back of the cathode PCBs. Enough glue was applied that
any surface non-uniformities in the cathode boards or ribs would be accom-
modated by the glue. In addition, G10 cross-pieces were epoxied transversely
between the ribs. (See Fig. 15.) The main purpose was to provide requisite
stiﬀness to the thin cathode board, when mounted in its ﬁnal conﬁguration.
A second purpose was to remove the residual deformations in the cathode
board (the longitudinal bow being removed more eﬀectively than the trans-
verse bow). Excessive twisting, for example, would increase the possibility of
breaking wires.

The strongback remained connected throughout the whole construction pro-
cedure until the completed chambers were attached to the cylinder superstruc-
ture.

Fig. 17. Diagram of longitudinal cross-section of multi-wire chamber, showing the
ceramic spacer and the end-joint reinforcement of the G10 cathode board PCBs.

A precision ceramic spacer was epoxied each 30 cm along the cathode plane,
near the window connections. This holds the wires at a precise distance from
the cathode-pads, as well as allow for containment of the failure mode in
which there was a broken wire. The ceramic spacer was cleaned before gluing,
and care was taken in handling it, so as not to allow any grease or dirt to
provide an eventual current path from the wires to the cathode-pads. The
wires were eventually epoxied to the ceramic strip which had a slot running
down the center to contain the glue bead. The area next to the spacer on the
cathode board was passivated by a strip of Kapton, as indicated in Fig. 17.
This extended over the edge of the nearest pad, and was done in order to
remove the potential problem of any corona points that could lead to high
voltage instability over time. Our experience with an early prototype showed
that this was necessary.

The anode PCBs, on which the wires were to be soldered, were then epoxied
into individually-milled grooves on top surface of cathode board, in order to
have precision control of the wire to cathode-pad distance.

25

4.1.4 Wire Stringing

The chamber wires were strung on a custom-made jig, consisting of a PCB
and a precision comb aligned and ﬁxed at each end of a rail structure, ap-
proximately 3 m long (longer than a chamber). The 70 central ﬁeld wires were
20 µm diameter Au-plated W wires 11 held at 60 g tension. The two outside
wires would produce higher ﬁelds so we used larger diameter 30 µm Au-plated
W wire 12 held at 90 g tension to keep the gain approximately at the same level
as the central wires. Each wire was held at the appropriate tension by means
of a frictionless pulley with a weight. The wire was carefully positioned in the
comb using transverse locator screws. It was then soldered at each end to the
PCBs. When done for all wires, a “temporary” plane of wires was created. As
much as possible, a single spool was used for the ﬁeld wires of a given plane.

This temporary plane was tested for wire tension using the standard resonance
frequency method. Any wire out of tolerance (
2 g) was replaced. Fig. 18
shows the distribution of tensions for a representative sample of wires.

±

25

20

15

10

5

0

20

40

60

80

Wire Tension (grams)

Fig. 18. Typical distribution of tension in wires, as strung.

4.1.5 Wire Transfer

After the cathode plane was prepared, as described above, the temporary wire
plane was ﬂipped over and lowered onto it by means of precision scissor jacks.
This was a delicate operation, since the wires had to be aligned to the solder
pads on the anode PCBs and just touching the ceramic spacers. When in
position, each wire in turn was soldered to two consecutive pads on each end,
approximately 5 mm in length, separated by 5 mm of non-pad surface. We
chose to use solder with silver added. 13

11 LUMA Type 861-60, W with 3–5% Au and 3% Re, LUMA-METALL AB, 391 27
Kalmar, Sweden.
12 Type F-77, 4% Au, Philips Elmet Corp., Lewiston, ME.
13 Ersin Type Sn62, Eutectic, Tin/Lead/Silver, Multicore Solders, Westbury, NY
11590.

26

The quality of the solder joint was then assessed, and inspected for sharp points
(important since the solder joints will sit in the chamber gas volume). The wire
was cut behind the back solder joints, and checked for electrical continuity.
Then anode PCBs were given a ﬁrst cursory cleaning with isopropyl alcohol.
The solder joints were covered completely in Delta Bond glue to prevent the
solder from being attacked by the TEA in the gas. This process transferred
the wires at tension from the temporary jig to the real cathode plane.

The anode PCBs were then populated with their requisite components, as
indicated in Fig. 19. This was a mixture of discrete and surface-mount com-
ponents. The novel feature here is that the large HV surface-mount capacitors
(size 1812) were mounted on their side edge, in order to retain the tight-
packing demanded by the wire spacing and the constraints on the overall
chamber length. A technique was developed which used a special jig and both
solder paste and solder cord, and this worked acceptably well for all chambers.
Afterwards, the PCBs were brushed with isopropyl alcohol, and the electronic
components tested.

Fig. 19. Circuit diagram of one high voltage cell. There are three such cells per
multi-wire chamber. The blocking and decoupling components are shown. The
wire-to-pad coupling Cc

0.1 pF/pad.

≈

The wires were then epoxied to the ceramic spacer. The glue bead was well-
contained in a groove atop the ceramic spacer, such that the bead itself was
smooth and there was no wicking along the wires. A bead of glue was also
made between the two solder joints on the anode PCBs at each end, ensuring
no loss of tension over time.

The last stage in the wire transfer procedure was a thorough ﬁnal cleaning of
the anode PCBs. This was accomplished by immersing the entire end of the
wire-plane in a large ultrasonic bath ﬁlled with isopropyl alcohol, and covering
all solder joints. The wire-plane (via its strongback) was mounted on a wall at
a 23◦ angle in order to submerge the anode PCB in the bath. Each end was
bathed for 30 mins at a time, and repeated three times with fresh isopropyl
alcohol. Afterward, it was rinsed with isopropyl alcohol and dry nitrogen. This
was not a completely eﬃcient procedure, since in many cases, there remained

27

a whitish residue around some components afterwards. This is a well-known
eﬀect due to solder resin, and simply needs to be cleaned by hand.

4.1.6 High Voltage Testing

After ground connections were made, the wire-plane was placed into a polycar-
bonate testing box, ﬁlled with CH4 gas and tested for high voltage stability. All
wire-planes were tested to 1600 V, with
10 nA current draw, in conditions
22◦C and <15% relative humidity.
of

≤

∼

In total, there were 35 wire-planes constructed. One was destroyed in subse-
quent testing, leaving 34 functional planes. They were stored in a low humidity
tent until mating with the window-planes.

The wire connections have been very reliable (due to the conservative tension).
One wire in the completed detector broke early in the operation due to the
chamber exceeding the operating temperature, which went undetected due to
insuﬃcient slow control monitoring at the start of the experiment.

4.2 Window-plane Construction and Testing

After production of the windows as described in Section 3.2, the full window-
plane was constructed. This consisted of a window frame into which the full-
length ladder of eight window segments was epoxied.

The individual window segments, wrapped in teﬂon, were epoxied in pairs.
They were butt-jointed with Torr-Seal, with a well-controlled glue bead. The
pair was held together in a custom-made jig, under gentle compression, during
the curing period. The interior surface of the butt-joint was “painted” using
Hysol. When completed, this procedure was repeated for two pairs, and then
once again, for a full-length ladder of eight window crystals. 14

The full window frame consisted of a long ﬁberglass side-rail, G10 end pieces,
and an Ultem plastic hinge, all epoxied together, as shown in Fig. 15. The G10
end pieces had holes bored through for gas ﬂow to the completed chamber.

The Ultem hinge was specially designed to allow some ﬂexibility when the
crystal window was glued to it, in order to take up any mismatch in thermal
expansion between the crystals and the stiﬀ frame. The full-length ladder
of windows was lowered onto the frame, and glued to the Ultem hinge using
Armstrong A-12. At the same time, a small metal foil was wrapped around the

14 Half-plate windows were made into full-plate windows by the same technique.

28

edge of each individual crystal window and glued to the interior trace bus-bar
by conductive epoxy. On the exterior, this foil was soldered to a teﬂon-coated
high voltage lead wire. 15

After curing, another bead of epoxy (Hysol) was put on top of the existing one,
in order to provide a secondary gas seal around the perimeter. Additionally,
the butt-joints between window crystals were reinforced by gluing a narrow
G10 strip over the joint, externally. This was again reinforced by a glue bead
(Torr-Seal) on either side. The Torr-Seal was also used to tack the high-voltage
wire along the frame. This operation may be seen in Fig. 20. The end-joints of
the windows overlap the position of the ceramic spacers on the cathode plane
to minimize the blockage of Cherenkov photons.

Fig. 20. Construction operations being performed on two multi-wire chambers.

The critical mechanical item used in this construction procedure was a set
of custom-made (multilayered) jigs, which established the proper referencing
surfaces to hold the tolerance in window-to-cathode board spacing. In total,
there were 34 window-planes constructed. After testing procedures, 33 usable
planes were produced.

4.3

Full Chamber Construction and Testing

In the next step a wire-plane was matched with a mechanically suitable
window-plane, and they were clamped together temporarily. The cathode-pad
to window gap was measured at many points along the length of the chamber.

15 Gore Type F01A080 Wire, W.L. Gore & Associates, Inc., Newark, DE 19711.

29

The distribution about the nominal 4.5 mm gap size is shown in Fig. 21 for
all chambers using approximately 32 measurements per chamber.

Fig. 21. Distribution of the residual about the nominal cathode-pad to window gap.

The mated chamber was tested with CH4-TEA gas, with nominal high voltage
on both wires and windows for a full month. Four special test boxes were used
in this testing phase, so that tests could be performed simultaneously. The
chamber was scrutinized heavily during this period. Relative chamber gain
was measured from the wires, upon excitation by a 106Ru β-source. Current
draws were monitored. Problems were diagnosed and ﬁxed. Typically, if the
chamber drew more than 10 nA, it was opened up and cleaned of stray dirt or
residual construction materials acting as corona points. These were the most
prevalent problems.

If a mated chamber passed this test period, the given window and wire-planes
were epoxied together and the chamber was completed. The full chamber was
then tested again for a month, under these same conditions.

One problem encountered later, when the chambers were mated with the ra-
diators, was leaking of chamber gas. This was attributed to certain of the
ﬁberglass side-rails, which were epoxy-starved and microscopically split under
small torsion applied during handling. This situation was rectiﬁed, using a
rather painful procedure, that required painting a coat of Hysol epoxy over
the side-rail, and reinserting the chamber before the glue dried; this often had
to be repeated.

A total of 33 chambers passed all tests. On the average, this phase of construc-
tion took
0.5 months per chamber. Parallel operations allowed a maximum
of eight chambers to be constructed in a single month.

∼

The last stage in individual chamber construction was mounting the electronics
chip-carriers and cables on the back. The hybrids (described in Section 7) were
screwed into small standoﬀs epoxied to the connectors, thus attaching them
with a squeezing action instead of pressing action which could deﬂect the
cathode board and possibly break wires.

30

5 RADIATOR CYLINDER CONSTRUCTION

5.1

Inner Carbon Fiber Cylinder

The RICH Inner Cylinder has 12 m2 of LiF crystals attached to a cylindrical
1.64 m outer diameter carbon ﬁber support shell [23] of 2.48 m length and
1.5 mm skin thickness. The shell has mean density 1.42 g/cm3, mean Young’s
modulus E
70 GPa, and is built from wrapping multiple layers of pre-
impregnated unidirectional tape 16 around a drum-shaped steel mandrel. After
serving as the form for the carbon ﬁber tape during autoclaving, the mandrel
provides mechanical support for the shell during transportation, radiator as-
sembly, insertion into the Outer Cylinder of photon detectors, and installation
of the entire RICH detector into CLEO.

≃

The mandrel rotates on a shaft that allows the shell to be rotated to an arbi-
trary azimuthal position. A large box-beam frame [24] supports the shaft so
that the total mass of the radiator system, including all its auxiliary mechan-
ical ﬁxturing, is 3500 kg.

5.2 Radiator Crystal Alignment and Mounting

The radiator cross-section is essentially a 30-sided polygon (“triacontagon”)
with each side corresponding to a longitudinal row of 14 radiators. (Each row
contains 13 full-sized crystals and two half-sized crystals at one end.) Con-
struction was accomplished by ﬁrst assembling and aligning rows of crystals
and then attaching the rows sequentially to the support shell. All radiator
assembly procedures are performed inside a class 100,000 clean room with
typical 25% relative humidity to reduce the risk of contaminating crystal sur-
faces with particulate matter or excessive water vapor. Test crystals placed
in the clean room were periodically measured for VUV transmission to verify
that the ambient environment did no damage to radiator crystals.

To construct a radiator row, a set of 13+2 crystals were selected on the basis of
VUV transmission and compatible mechanical dimensions. Each crystal was
attached temporarily, by a 50 µm thick Kapton belt, to a picture frame jig
that rests directly on top of it and that has vertical posts in each corner to
provide for temporary attachment to a transport jig. Each crystal with its
attached jig was then placed on an optical stage assembly with 6 degrees of
freedom (3 orthogonal linear displacements and 3 Euler angle rotations). The
15 stage assemblies were all attached to a single rigid optical rail.

16 Type RS-3/AS-4 unidirectional tape, YLA, Inc., Benicia, CA 94510.

31

The open picture frame allows a pair of 2.2 cm diameter dowel pins to be
placed directly on the crystal top surface. These pins support a precision
level so that each surface is made horizontal to a typical angular precision
of 150 µrad. A similar technique is used to limit vertical oﬀsets between top
surfaces of adjacent crystals to a precision of

50 µm.

∼

A 100 µm clearance gap between adjacent crystals was reliably set by the
thickness of the Kapton belts from adjacent crystal jigs. Pushing the same
edge of each crystal ﬂush against a set of tooling balls running parallel to the
optical rail ensures that one edge of a crystal row was straight within 75 µm
over its entire length.

Fig. 22. Photograph of one row of crystal radiators being aligned on the inner
carbon ﬁber cylinder. Previously epoxied rows are shown on the right half of the
cylinder. The inner half of the end ﬂange is visible in the forefront.

After a crystal row has been aligned, a second “transport” optical rail is po-
sitioned over the crystal jigs. Quick-setting epoxy temporarily ﬁxes the trans-
port rail to the vertical posts of each crystal jig. The transport rail, along with
the attached row of crystals, was then moved to the carbon ﬁber cylinder.

Linear translation optical stages positioned at opposite ends of the support
shell near its surface at the “twelve o’clock” position receive the transport rail,
as shown in Fig. 22. Reamed holes in these stages mate with dowel pins in
the transport rail so that the axis of the new crystal row is aligned with the
axis of the support shell. These stages eventually set the epoxy gap between
the crystal bottom surfaces and the cylinder surface to 25 µm precision. Gaps
between adjacent crystal rows on the cylinder were controlled by the azimuthal
rotation of the mandrel, settable by a micrometer actuator to a precision of

50 µm.

∼

32

After a crystal row has been appropriately positioned about the shell surface,
Armstrong A-12 was applied to the shell just below the center of each crystal.
No special preparation of the shell surface was performed. The crystal row
was then lowered by the stages to make a nominal 150 µm gap between shell
and crystal, forcing the epoxy to make a contact patch with nominal surface
area of 100 cm2. The jigging was left in place for a minimum of 8 hours before
removal. The shell was then azimuthally rotated 12◦ to a new position and
the entire alignment and epoxy process repeated until all 30 crystal rows were
attached.

5.3 Radiator Transport

Care was taken to prevent the LiF crystals from experiencing excessive vi-
bration or humidity during radiator transportation from its construction site
(Dallas, TX) to the detector integration site (Syracuse, NY). A dedicated
temperature-regulated shipping truck was used for the 2500 km trip. A local
atmosphere close to 0% relative humidity (measured as <1%) was achieved by
erecting a temporary plastic ﬁlm cocoon around the radiator and ﬂowing dry
N2 gas through the cocoon from gas bottles attached to the shipping frame.

Air bags attached to the four corners of the shipping/rotation ﬁxture cush-
ioned the radiator against mechanical shock and vibration. Acceleration of the
radiator and temperature inside the truck as functions of time were measured,
digitized and written to local non-volatile memory by special instrumenta-
tion 17 installed on the mandrel support frame. No damage to the radiator
was observed at the trip’s conclusion.

6

SUPERSTRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION

The guiding principles for the design and construction of the full cylinder me-
chanical superstructure were: (1) low mass, so as not to degrade the excellent
performance of the electromagnetic calorimeter surrounding the RICH; (2) no
internal obstructions, so as not to shadow the photon detectors; and (3) an
excellent gas seal.

The overall design of the superstructure consisted of an “Outer Cylinder” for
the multi-wire chambers, and an “Inner Cylinder” for the crystal radiators.
The expansion gap separated these and was contained by two large end ﬂanges
[12].

17 Model EDR-3C, Instrumented Sensor Technology, Inc., Okemos, MI 48864.

33

6.1 End Flanges

For construction purposes, the two annular end ﬂanges were each made of two
concentric parts, as shown in Fig. 23. The outer half was a structural element
for the Outer Cylinder, and the inner half was ﬁxed to the carbon ﬁber shell
of the Inner Cylinder. These two parts ﬁt together with an double gas seal,
as described below. The end ﬂanges were made of structural aluminum alloy,
and coated on the interior surface by low-outgassing black paint.

Fig. 23. Cross-sectional view of one the end of RICH detector, showing end ﬂange
construction.

6.2 Outer Cylinder

The construction of the Outer Cylinder used a scaﬀold, on which the multi-
wire chambers were mounted, as can be seen in Fig 24. It had long thin
aluminum rails supported between the outer halves of the end ﬂanges. The rails
were machined to ﬁt between the chambers, and contained an O-ring groove
that was the primary gas seal for the expansion gap at the Outer Cylinder.
As it was not very stiﬀ but had to maintain the requisite compression on the
O-ring, a clamp-strip was used to squeeze the chamber on the O-ring, with
screws spaced on 1 inch centers. Hence the chambers themselves eﬀectively
formed the outer radius of the detector. This is another reason why the box

34

rib reinforcements were needed.

Fig. 24. Photograph of Outer Cylinder during construction, supported on the
A-Frame, with “dummy panels” in place.

During assembly, the Outer Cylinder was held on a large custom-designed
A-Frame structure with three-point kinematic mounts, allowing free rotation
of the cylinder. Initially, the inner area of the end ﬂange was plugged, and
the thirty chamber spots were taken up by “dummy panels,” stiﬀ blanks that
allowed for gas tightness testing of the cylinder. In this condition, the out-of-
roundness deformation was measured, as shown in Fig. 25, to have a small
eccentricity.

Fig. 25. Out-of-roundness deformation of end ﬂange, under no-load condition.

As chambers were completed, the dummy panels were removed and the cham-
bers were mounted on the cylinder. A photograph of the interior during this
procedure is given in Fig. 26. It was only at this time that the strong-backs
could be removed. Leak-checking could then be done using He gas for high
sensitivity. This was particularly important at the corners of the long single
O-ring seal around the perimeter of the chamber. Often, the joints and corners
had to be hand-worked to seal at the level of 10−4 ml/s.

35

Fig. 26. Photograph of inside of Outer Cylinder with photon detectors installed.

6.3 Cylinder Mating and Gas-Sealing

The Inner and Outer Cylinders were mated in a precision mechanical process.
The inner half of one end ﬂange was ﬁrst epoxied to the carbon ﬁber shell while
the other inner ﬂange was free. The Outer Cylinder was rotated azimuthally
to align the ﬁxed inner-half ﬂange with its corresponding outer half and O-
rings were installed in both outer ﬂanges. The Inner Cylinder remained on the
mandrel and slipped into the Outer Cylinder, riding on two large box-beams.
The halves of the end ﬂanges were screwed together, providing the mechanical
coupling between the Inner and Outer Cylinders. An O-ring provided the
primary gas seal at this junction. Following our dictum to use redundant gas
seals on all mated surfaces, a secondary gas seal was made by a glue bead
around the joint. The previously free inner half of one end ﬂange was epoxied
to the carbon ﬁber shell as the mechanical connection was made

Thereafter, the completed structure could be supported by the mandrel. It
was then transported for installation in CLEO by a method similar to that
used for the radiator cylinder. Chambers and gas seals were then all tested
again, in situ. After additional iterations of hand-working and testing, the
expansion volume was sealed. Most leaks occurred when the inner and outer
cylinder were mated.

36

7 READOUT ELECTRONICS

7.1 System Description

The CLEO RICH electronics design is driven by two important considerations.
First of all, we need to operate the chambers at moderate gain, to improve
the stability of operation and the lifetime of the detector system. This re-
quirement is very important as the system is designed to operate throughout
the lifetime of CLEO without any access for repair. In this regime the single
photon response of the MWC used as photon detectors has an exponential
distribution, as shown previously in Fig. 5. Thus, low noise is a critical re-
quirement to maintain good eﬃciency. On the other hand, the exponential
distribution spans a wide dynamic range. Moreover we would like to be able
to reconstruct the charge deposited by a minimum ionizing particle, shown as
the bump on the right-hand side in the distribution of Fig. 5. This implies
that a wide dynamic range is also very important.

The cathode-pad segmentation is such that the charge signal induced by the
avalanche is spread around more than one pad, thus analog charge weighting
produces a better spatial resolution and also allows for easier separation of the
charge clusters produced by two nearby photons. Thus we chose to implement
an analog readout.

Fig. 27 shows a schematic view of the readout architecture for a multi-wire
chamber. Each chamber is divided into four sectors. Each sector contains three
daisy-chained rows, connected with 50-conductor shielded cable to the back-
end electronics, located in VME crates about 18 meters from the detector
cylinder.

Fig. 27. A schematic view of the readout architecture for a single multi-wire cham-
ber.

The front-end hybrids, shown in Fig. 28, are mounted on the back of the cath-
ode board in a mother board-daughter board conﬁguration. Five hybrids are
daisy chained and share the same bias sources. Each hybrid has an indepen-
dent diﬀerential output for faster data processing.

37

Fig. 28. Photograph of the front-end hybrids of the CLEO RICH. Two VA RICH
ASICs are visible, which are wire-bonded to the PCB. No protective caps are used.

A photograph of a quarter-section of the cathode board with the hybrids
attached in shown in Fig. 29.

Fig. 29. Photograph of 1/4 of a cathode plane.

7.2 The Front-End ASIC

The heart of the front end electronics is the VA RICH ASIC. It was designed
for our application by the engineering team at IDE AS, Norway [13], and is
an adaptation of the basic design of the very successful VA family, originally
developed to process the signals of silicon microstrip detectors, tailored to our
noise and dynamic range requirement.

Fig. 30 shows a conceptual diagram of this device. It features 64 individual
channels including a semi-Gaussian preampliﬁer and shaper circuit. The peak-
ing time can be adjusted by changing the biases of the shaper circuit around

38

a typical value of 2 µs. We tuned the peaking time to match the time when
a Level 1 decision is achieved. This section is followed by a sample and hold
circuit, which is designed to hold the peak level out of the shaper until the
output multiplexer is ready to transfer this level as a diﬀerential current. The
individual inputs are connected through a 64:1 multiplexer to a calibration
circuit, which allows injection of a test charge into each individual channel.
The ASIC is implemented in 1.2 µm AMS CMOS technology.

The equivalent noise charge dependence upon the input capacitance was mea-
sured on prototype single chip hybrid carriers, using a set of calibrated ca-
pacitors. The measured performance matches the predictions from the ASIC
simulation [25]. In our application, we expect a total equivalent noise charge
of 300 e−, without the cathode boards connected. Fig. 31 shows the analog
output voltage on 500 Ω resistors. Saturation occurs at an input charge level
of 80 fC. In the linear region, the preampliﬁer and shaper gain is 40 mV/fC,
for a load of 500 Ω.

Fig. 30. A conceptual diagram of the VA RICH ASIC.

Fig. 31. Typical VA RICH output response curve.

39

7.3 Bench-Test Characterization

The total number of hybrids produced was 2200, over a period of two years.
The hybrids produced were tested for functionality at IDEAS and then shipped
to Syracuse for more complete characterization. Our tests involved a noise
measurement by taking pedestal data, followed by a detailed mapping of the
individual channel gain with calibration pulses of diﬀerent amplitudes. Only
1800 were installed in the detector.

The noise measurement required great care in the grounding and shielding of
the hybrids and careful routing of the analog power supplies. Our goal was to
achieve a noise of the order of 400–600 e− with a simple and relatively quick
set-up of the measurement.

After this initial characterization, we performed a burn-in test of the hybrids,
maintaining them biased in their nominal working point at elevated tempera-
ture (70◦C) and performing electronic calibration cycles at regular intervals. In
order to perform these tests at a rate compatible with our installation sched-
ule, we produced a dedicated set-up where 32 hybrids could be biased and
monitored in parallel. After one week in the burn-in set-up, the hybrids were
tested for noise and gain with a quicker calibration procedure. The hybrids
that were rejected upon this procedure were only a few per thousand.

7.4 CLEO RICH Data-Boards

Fig. 32 shows a picture of the CLEO RICH data boards. They are 9U mixed
analog and digital environment boards that perform several very complex func-
tions. Note that the board is physically composed of two diﬀerent sections.
The ﬁrst is an analog section, providing the biases needed for the functionality
of the VA RICH ASIC, the transimpedance receivers, 12-bit ADCs digitizing
the serial analog information, and slow control monitoring ADCs. The second
is a pure digital section, based on a common CLEO data acquisition frame-
work, and containing two components speciﬁc to our application: a sequencer,
based on the ALTERA MAX FPGA, that contains the ﬁrmware necessary to
operate the VA RICH ASIC, and an Analog Devices ADSP-21061 DSP, used
to perform the common mode suppression and data sparsiﬁcation described
below.

The analog section features 15 receiver channels, organized into three cells
sharing the same ribbon cable interconnection to the front end hybrids. Each
2V analog power and several DACs that allow
cell encompasses dedicated
the adjustment of the bias currents and voltages that inﬂuence the working
point of the analog front end, as well as a slow control section that monitors

±

40

Fig. 32. Photograph of the CLEO RICH Data Boards: Analog board on the left,
Digital board on the right.

the values of these voltages and currents, and the temperature on diﬀerent
locations of the detector cylinder and on the data boards themselves. In ad-
dition, local pulse generators are used for the electronics calibration. All the
cells share a common regulated

2V digital section.

±

When an event occurs, all the 15 channels in a board receive the synchronous
serial information from the corresponding hybrid. In order to simplify the
digital section the 5 ADC channels in a cell are multiplexed into a common
FIFO buﬀer, with an oﬀset of 23.4 ns, determined by the local 42 MHz clock.

To maintain the low thresholds that are required to optimize the eﬃciency,
the hardware common mode noise suppression algorithm is crucial to suppress
the adverse eﬀects of coherent ﬂuctuations of all the channels in an ASIC.

8

SUPPORT SYSTEMS

8.1 Gas System

The gas system supplies several distinct volumes. The system must: supply
CH4-TEA to 30 separate chambers, supply ultra-pure N2 to the expansion
volume, supply ultra-pure N2 to a sealed single volume surrounding all the
chambers, called the “electronics volume,” since this is the region where the
front-end hybrid boards are present. In addition we need to test the CH4-TEA
mixture for the ability to detect photons and test the output N2 for purity.

41

It is of primary importance that the gas system must not destroy any of
the thin CaF2 windows. We use computerized pressure and ﬂow sensors with
programmable logic controllers (PLC).

8.1.1 System Design

The performance and mechanical integrity of the CLEO III RICH are criti-
cally dependent on the performance of its gas systems. In order to achieve its
design resolution, the RICH must eﬃciently detect 14-21 photons emitted by
charged tracks traversing the radiator. The eﬃciency of the RICH depends
on the expansion volume transparency. The photosensitive detector gas and
transparent nitrogen of the expansion volume are separated by fragile windows
on the inner faces of the detector modules. These windows could be destroyed
by a slight pressure diﬀerence between these volumes (of order 15” H2O). Such
an overpressure would be catastrophic to the RICH.

The gas systems were carefully designed to protect against such damage. A
highly automated design was chosen in order to minimize the possibility of
operator error and to provide fast response to dangerous conditions. Most
valves are controlled by the automated control system and most sensors are
read out and monitored electronically.

The two major subsystems are the expansion volume gas system (EVGS),
which purges the expansion volume with a large ﬂow of ultra-pure nitrogen,
and the detector gas system (DGS), which supplies the thirty detector modules
with photo-sensitive methane/TEA gas. Pressures in the detector and expan-
sion volumes are referenced to atmospheric pressure. Both the EVGS and DGS
employ triply-redundant overpressure and underpressure protection. The ﬁrst
tier of protection is based on readings from pressure transmitters connected
to the expansion volume and each of the thirty detector volumes, and has trip
points at +0.75” H2O and -0.5” H2O. The second is based on readings from
pressure switches which have trip points set at +1.5” H2O and -1.0” H2O. The
ﬁnal level of protection comes from mechanical relief valves with set points at
+2.5” H2O and -1.5” H2O. Valves which perform the most critical operations,
such as those which shut oﬀ the gas inputs, are equipped with position indi-
cating sensors and, in the most critical, redundant valves are implemented.

8.1.2 Control System

All critical operations of the RICH gas systems are controlled by a pro-
grammable logic controller (PLC). The PLC is an industrial control system
designed to be reliable and modular. The control system utilizes 112 analog
input, 8 analog output, 96 discrete output, and 128 discrete input channels.
The gas system is controlled through a small number of buttons on the main

42

control panel.

The basic operation of the EVGS and DGS is similar. Each has four states
of operation: RUN, IDLE, STOP, and ALARM. RUN mode is the normal
operating state of the system. In this state gas ﬂows through the detector and
the pressure is actively regulated by the PLC at 0.5” H2O to an accuracy of
0.02” H2O. IDLE mode is similar to RUN mode except that the pressure is
±
not actively regulated. IDLE mode is used in the system start up sequence.
ALARM mode is the safe state to which the system defaults in case of an
emergency. In this state, the input gas ﬂow is shut oﬀ and the exhaust side
of the detector is opened to track atmospheric pressure. After the system is
stopped by an alarm it is important that it be restored to RUN or IDLE
mode as soon as possible to prevent degradation of the CaF2 and LiF crystal
transparency when exposed to ambient humidity. After the oﬀending condition
is ﬁxed, alarms may be reset using a button on the control panel. When the
alarm is cleared, the system changes to STOP mode, which has the same
physical conﬁguration as ALARM mode. The system start up sequence is fully
automated and is initiated by pressing a single button. The start up sequence
consists of a purge of the input lines, followed by a ramp of the input ﬂow,
and ﬁnally a ramp of the pressure. All transitions in the system are gradual
in order to protect the RICH from possible pressure spikes.

All critical components of the gas system are powered through an uninter-
ruptable power supply which is backed up by a diesel-powered generator.

Interfaces to the operator and to the CLEO III detector control system are pro-
vided through the gas system monitor (GMON), consisting of LabViewTM [26]
programs running on a PC. The GMON programs collect sensor readings, sta-
tus, and alarm information from the PLC which it displays in several “active
schematics” corresponding to each of the major components of the EVGS
and DGS. The GMON relays this information to the CLEO III slow control
system.

The GMON also handles the display of alarms. “Fatal” alarms are generated
by the PLC and result in the system defaulting to ALARM mode in order to
protect the system from damage. All other “non-fatal” alarms are generated
by the GMON code, which monitors the status of all system parameters. The
system is heavily instrumented with sensors in order to allow problems to be
easily identiﬁed and repaired.

The GMON programs are also used to control some non-critical operations of
the gas system, such as the gas quality monitoring, and to set some system
parameters. The gas system does not depend on the PC or GMON programs
in order to run, however.

43

8.1.3 Expansion Volume Gas System (EVGS)

It is critical that the purity of the expansion volume be maintained in order
for the RICH to achieve its design resolution. Most impurities will absorb
the UV photons before they reach the detectors and must be kept below a
few ppm concentration. This purity is obtained by ﬂowing nitrogen at a rate
of approximately 1500 ℓ/h in a single-pass conﬁguration. Boil-oﬀ from liquid
nitrogen is used as the source for the expansion volume gas. Most of this
system is constructed from electropolished stainless steel and other materials
with low vapor pressure in order to minimize impurities.

Nitrogen gas from the dewar is processed by an automated puriﬁer subsystem.
This puriﬁer injects a regulated ﬂow of hydrogen corresponding to 40 ppm,
which reacts with the oxygen inside a catalyst cartridge to form water. A
slight excess of hydrogen is acceptable since it is known to be transparent
over the wavelength range of interest. Water and other large molecules are
removed by a large molecular sieve trap. The molecular sieve trap must be
regenerated occasionally by baking at 300◦ C for a day. The puriﬁer subsystem
contains two parallel puriﬁers to allow for continuous operation while one of
the sieves is being baked. The PLC controls the ﬂow ramping and switching
between puriﬁers as well as the temperature control and gas purge for the
baking sieve.

The operating ﬂow of nitrogen to the expansion volume is set with a manual
metering valve near the input to the expansion volume. Gas exiting the ex-
pansion volume passes through ten 1/2” stainless steel lines to a 1” manifold
outside of the CLEO III solenoid return yoke, where pressure is regulated by
a PLC-controlled metering valve based on feedback from a pressure sensor.

8.1.4 Detector Gas System (DGS)

The detector gas system is responsible for providing thirty separate photon de-
tector volumes with a mixture of methane and TEA. Because TEA is corrosive
to most materials, 316 stainless steel components were used wherever possi-
ble. Any other materials used in the system were ﬁrst subjected to stringent
chemical compatibility tests.

TEA vapor is introduced into the stream of methane gas by bubbling it
through liquid TEA at 15◦ C. The TEA bubbler system is automated us-
ing programs on the PLC for reliable and continuous long-term operation. It
utilizes a temperature-controlled bubbler chamber and elevated TEA reser-
voir with enough TEA for approximately two months of operation. The level
of TEA in the bubbler chamber is regulated by the PLC which ﬁlls from the
reservoir as needed. The reservoir may be depressurized and ﬁlled without
interrupting the operation of the system. Sensors monitor the level and tem-

44

perature of the TEA in the bubbler and the level of the TEA in the reservoir
and notify the user when reﬁlling is required.

In order to provide adequate pressure control, it is necessary to supply gas
to the chambers in a parallel conﬁguration rather than in series. The ﬂow is
split into thirty separate streams to provide even ﬂow to all 30 detectors. The
ﬂow in each branch is set manually and monitored electronically. The ﬂow is
ramped up and down automatically during start up and purge operations. A
total of ninety 1/4” stainless steel lines pass through the CLEO III solenoid
return yoke steel to connect to the thirty photon detector modules: one input,
one output, and one pressure sensing line.

Exhaust from the thirty modules is collected into a single exhaust manifold.
Gas from this manifold passes through a PLC-controlled pressure regulating
valve which maintains the average pressure of the thirty modules at 0.5” H2O.

8.1.5 Gas Quality Monitoring

A nitrogen transparency monitoring system measures the UV transmission of
the expansion volume gas as a function of photon wavelength. Monochromatic
light is produced by passing light from a deuterium lamp through a computer-
controlled monochromator. The monochromatic photon beam passes through
a gas sample tube and is detected by a photomultiplier. The sample tube can
be switched to sample the expansion volume exhaust gas or an ultra-pure
argon reference gas. A comparison of these two gives the transparency. The
GMON controls the transparency monitor and other gas monitoring devices.
Automated transparency scans are taken once per day. Graphical panels allow
the user to conﬁgure the scans and view the results.

Oxygen is the most likely and problematic contaminant, since it absorbs
strongly at 150 nm. The oxygen concentration of the output gas from the
expansion volume is also monitored using a precision oxygen sensor.

The CH4-TEA mixture is monitored by an electron capture detector. This
device consists of a cylindrical proportional drift chamber which utilizes a
beta source to produce ionization. Electrons produced near its outer diameter
drift through a
5 cm long path to an anode wire at the center of the chamber
where they are collected. A 0-5 VDC signal proportional to the time-integrated
drift current is monitored by the control system. Impurities or changes in the
gas composition can be detected as a change in the output of this device.

∼

45

8.1.6 Electronics Volume Purge System

The gas system also provides a purge ﬂow of nitrogen gas around the electron-
ics volume of the RICH in order to minimize the concentration of impurities
adjacent to the gas volumes of the RICH. This helps to reduce the inﬁltration
of oxygen into the expansion volume.

8.1.7 Performance

The gas system has been in operation since the early commissioning of the
RICH and has been running in its ﬁnal form since the Summer of 1999. The
most critical aspect of its performance is that it has protected the extremely
fragile CaF2 windows from damage. It has delivered nearly continuous service
for several years, with only a few short down-times for repairs. Identiﬁcation
and diagnosis of problems has been straightforward due to the wealth of in-
formation provided by the system.

The expansion volume transparency exceeds the speciﬁcations for the RICH
design. The EVGS typically delivers transparencies of >99.5% at 150 nm, as
shown in Fig. 33. This wavelength is near the peak of the RICH sensitivity
and is particularly vulnerable to oxygen contamination. The recovery time of
the expansion volume gas system is quite short due to the high purge rate and
careful choice of materials. After exposure to air, the expansion volume can
typically be restored to acceptable transparency within a half day.

Expansion Volume Transmission

n
n
o
o
i
i
s
s
s
s
i
i
m
m
s
s
n
n
a
a
r
r
T
T

1
1

0.95
0.95

0.9
0.9

0.85
0.85

0.8
0.8

0.75
0.75

0.7
0.7

0.65
0.65

120
120

140
140

160
160

180
180

200
200

Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)

Fig. 33. A typical spectrum of the expansion volume gas transparency. The RICH
response is centered at 150 nm and extends from approximately 135 nm to 165 nm.
The structure below 150 nm is due to the vibrational-rotational absorption bands of
nitrogen. The transmission at 150 nm is greater than 99.5%. (Note the suppressed
zero of the vertical scale.)

The RICH photon detectors show no evidence of aging due to reactions of
TEA with materials in the gas system and RICH. The DGS has provided
reliable and simple operation. In particular, maintaining and ﬁlling the liquid
TEA bubbler has proved to be quite simple and trouble-free.

46

The highly automated design of the RICH gas system has proved to be very
eﬀective at protecting the RICH and simple to operate. It has exceeded ex-
pectations of performance and reliability.

8.2 High Voltage System

−

The High Voltage System for the CLEO RICH was required to supply 90
channels of anode ﬁeld wire voltage (about +1500 V) and 240 channels of
cathode window trace voltage (about
1200 V), with a current monitoring
and trip circuit on each channel. The system was based on the LeCroy ViSyN
System [27], and consists of a Model 1458 mainframe containing slots for
16 Model 1469 modules, which have either positive or negative polarity. In
our implementation, we use 5 positive and 11 negative modules. The module
outputs are ganged together such that there are eight HV channels per so-
called “bulk” connector, a specially-designed LHV connector. There are three
bulk connectors per module. The system allows voltage setting at the bulk
connector level, so each channel in the bulk connector has the same voltage,
but may have diﬀerent current trip levels. The channels fan out to a patch-
panel so the proper high voltage can be routed to each chamber channel.
The value of the voltage setting on each of the 330 detector channels was
determined by an optimization procedure, as discussed in Section 9.2.

Control of the high voltage system is accomplished by a stand-alone server pro-
gram, on a dedicated linux station, that is integrated with the CLEO DAQ
System in order to synchronize the state of the system with accelerator oper-
ation.

Ramping of voltages are made at rates of 40 V/s (increasing) and 50 V/s
(decreasing) for both polarities. Care is taken to raise all voltages in a given
chamber simultaneously, in order to minimize electro-mechanical deﬂections.
All channels have current trip levels set to 10 µA, and are monitored at a
rate of
2 kHz. Individual channel status, currents and voltages are read back
and monitored as well. Any currents or voltages out of tolerance will cause
an alarm, requiring immediate operator intervention. During detector opera-
tion, communication between the server and the mainframe is maintained via
TCP/IP, and the status of all voltages and currents is displayed in a repre-
sentational color-coded GUI.

∼

8.3 Cooling System

The total power output of the VA RICH chips is approximately 360 W. In
order to provide heat removal necessary for the mechanical stability of the

47

chambers, four nylon cooling tubes run over the back of each chamber, and are
each modestly thermally coupled to the VA RICH hybrids by two-component
RTV. 18 Supplying these tubes with the hydrocarbon coolant PF-200IG is a
specially-designed CLEO cooling farm [28]. This coolant is used rather than
water because of concern that a leak could reach the water sensitive CsI
crystal, which would melt; an additional advantage is that PF-200IG is non-
conductive. The RICH cooling circuit is one of several driven by the cooling
farm through active-manifold platforms, with a coolant reservoir temperature
of 18◦C and ﬂow rate of
1 ℓ/min. Each RICH chamber line is equipped
with an embedded tip-sensitive 100 Ω platinum resistance temperature sensor
(RTD). For these RTDs, an array of “hockey-puck” style 4–20 mA transmit-
ters route signals to a custom-built multiplexer circuit used to read out these
transmitters every 10 s. The temperature signals are fed into a small logic
controller for real-time control and monitoring. The typical range of exit tem-
peratures from the 30 chambers when in operation is 21–23◦C, each held stable
to

0.5◦C.

∼

±

The status of the cooling system is continuously monitored by a LabVIEW
program which provides web-based diagnostic tools for real-time viewing of
the performance parameters on site and monitoring worldwide.

8.4 Slow Control System

A bit-serial data bus was implemented on the P3 connector on the RICH
AVME data board using diﬀerential signaling technique. This bus is referred
to as the SBUS. The maximum transfer rate of the SBUS is approximately
1 Mbit per second. Each RICH VME crate is equipped with one SBUS crate
controller. Each SBUS crate controller can be addressed uniquely. All eight
RICH VME crates are daisy chained to one SBUS controller module located
in a separate SBUS crate at the pit level.

The SBUS system is responsible for monitoring the operational status of the
VA RICH chips as well as that of the AVME data board. Important quantities
such as the reference voltages, the reference currents, and the temperature on
the chip carrier chain inside the RICH detector are being monitored period-
ically through the SBUS system. Analog signals from the RICH detector are
converted into digital signals with a 10-bit ADC (TI TLC1542/3CDW) on
the AVME data board for the SBUS read out. The SBUS can also be used to
download some of the EEPROMs on the DVME data board.

A server program running on an on-line computer communicates with the
SBUS controller module via CORBA calls. A monitor request is sent out

18 RTV 577 / RTV 9811, GE Silicones, Wilton, CT 06897.

48

every 15 minutes. This sampling interval is programmable and was chosen to
ensure both adequate monitoring and maximum system wide stability. The
data are shipped back to the server, archived locally in plain text ﬁles and
then processed to provide information on the front-end electronics status in
an easy-to-read HTML format on a Web server.

9 OPERATING EXPERIENCE

∼

The CLEO RICH detector has been in operation since September 1999. All
but
2% of the detector is functioning for data-taking. We lost 1.7% due to
the breaking of one wire after about one year of operation due, most likely,
to the un-monitored heating of chamber due to problems with slow control
software. We have also lost 2% of the electronics chips and suﬀered one broken
output cable, so the total number of lost channels is

5%.

∼

9.1 Normal Operation

In order to ensure proper functioning of the RICH over the long period of
its operation, a series of calibration and monitoring activities are performed
periodically as a part of its normal operating procedure.

To ensure the highest detection eﬃciency of the VA RICH chips, the elec-
tronics pedestals need to be measured routinely. This is done by performing
a special calibration procedure called “SmallCal.” During a SmallCal, the
VA RICH chips are set in calibration mode and the electronics noise from all
230,400 electronic channels are read out. The pedestals are then calculated
on-line and loaded to the VME crates to be used for sparsiﬁcation during
successive data-taking runs. This SmallCal procedure is carried out regularly
every eight hours.

Another type of calibration, the WirePulse run, is performed once per week.
The purpose of the WirePulse run is to measure the response of the RICH
electronics to a given input signal. During a WirePulse run, the anode wires are
pulsed with a sequence of several predeﬁned waveforms of diﬀering amplitudes.
The output from all electronic channels are analyzed oﬀ-line (see below).

As detailed above in Sec. 8, the high voltage server program monitors the
RICH HV status, by reading voltage and current values, and watching for
trips. Also as detailed above, the RICH gas system and the cooling system
adequately control critical operating parameters, but also provide for web-
based monitors which are checked twice per hour during normal operation.

49

For the gas system, the expansion volume transparency, the TEA bubbler
temperature and the expansion volume oxygen content are closely monitored.
For the cooling system, the chamber temperatures are watched. The operating
parameters of the readout electronics is checked using the web-based utilities
of the Slow Control system.

In addition, RICH performance is supervised oﬄine, with a set of quality-
monitoring plots produced from a prescaled sample of incoming events, from
the so-called CLEO pass1 analysis. These are examined after each run, and
include distributions of Cherenkov angles and photon yields from fast tracking,
as well as the more pedestrian distributions of raw hits and cluster pulse
heights (as described in Sec. 10).

This information has been suﬃcient to ensure that the CLEO RICH detector
produced data with a high degree of stability over many years.

9.2 Chamber Gain Equalization

The high voltage operating point for all chambers was determined by a gain
equalization procedure, which sought to make equal the pad-gain for single
photons averaged over each window module individually. The gains were set
to be below 25,000 in order to avoid discharges.

Gain changes were measured as a function of window and wire voltages. The
gains were determined for each window-sized module by ﬁtting an exponential
curve to the pulse-height spectrum. We parameterized the gain as a function
of the wire voltage, for each window voltage.

Gains of all of the chambers were varied by changing the voltages in an iterative
manner in order to make them equal. Our goal was to have a pad-gain of
23,000. Fig. 34 shows the distribution of gains as measured after the gains
∼
had been equalized. We ﬁnd a mean of 23,400 with an ﬁtted r.m.s. spread of
10%. Fig. 34 shows the distribution of gains as measured after the gains had
been equalized. We ﬁnd a mean of 23,400 with an ﬁtted r.m.s. spread of 10%.
This has remained stable during detector operation.

9.3 Electronics Performance in CLEO III and CLEO-c

During data taking we routinely perform two sets of measurements to check
the electronics performance. We measure the pedestal periodically, to verify
that no baseline shifts occurred. These data also allow us to monitor the value
of the total and incoherent noise of each channel. Typical noise distributions

50

20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2

80000

70000

60000

50000

40000

30000

20000

10000

 

t
n
u
o
C
C
D
A
4

 

.

0

 
/
 

s
e
i
r
t
n
E

0

10

20

30

40

3
Pad-gain (x10  )

Fig. 34. Distribution of measured pad-gains, segmented for each window module
separately.

0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16

ADC Counts

Fig. 35. Typical noise distributions for all channels in units of ADC channels (1
200 e−). The solid line shows the total noise while the dashed
ADC channel equals
line shows the incoherent component after the coherent noise subtraction.

∼

are shown in Fig. 35. The noise reduction produced by the coherent noise
suppression can be clearly seen. The noise levels are quite low, the peak of the
incoherent noise is at 425 electrons.

Fig. 36 shows a scatter plot of the intrinsic noise distribution across the de-
tector. The horizontal axis corresponds to the length of the chambers and the
vertical axis corresponds to the chamber number. It can be seen that the pro-
ﬁle is rather uniform. The darker areas correspond to break points between
diﬀerent chamber sectors, and are associated with additional noise sources at
the boundary between two adjacent sectors. Cross-talk or additional digital
noise in the chip carrier at the end of a chain may cause this higher noise level.

The overall noise performance has been extremely stable throughout the years.
Fig. 37 shows the time evolution of the mean value of the total noise and its

51

s
t
n
u
o
C
C
D
A

 

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d

 
l
a
h
t
u
m
h
t
a
 
n

i

i
 
#
 
p
h
C

i

)
s
t
n
u
o
c
C
D
A

 

(
 
e
s
o
N

i

 
l

a
t
o
T

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

5
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.2
4
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
3
0

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Chip # in beam direction

Fig. 36. Spatial distribution of the typical intrinsic noise on each VA RICH chip,
given in units of ADC counts. (The RICH cylinder is unfolded onto a plane.) There
are slightly elevated noise bands at each end of a chain.

CLEO-III CLEO-c

1000

2000

3000

Run Number

Fig. 37. Time evolution of the mean of the total noise. The time covered is about
5 years.

very stable value.

An additional quantity that needs to be monitored is the gain of the front
end electronics. In principle, we could undertake the same sort of electronics
calibration that was performed to verify that the hybrids were compliant with
all our speciﬁcations. However, the amount of data to be transferred is beyond
the capabilities of the data acquisition system. Thus, we use a method that
is much quicker and simpler, although not as accurate. We pulse the MWC
wires and the capacitive coupling between wire and pad produces the current
pulse ampliﬁed by the front end electronics. The advantage of this calibration
procedure is that the current originates at the same location as the real signal.
Thus it tests the integrity of the whole processing chain, including the wire
bond between input channel and hybrid trace and all the connectors along
the signal path. On the other hand, the pulse shape is not perfect because of

52

10000

8000

6000

4000

t
n
u
o
c
 
C
D
A

 
/
 
s
t
n
e
v
E

2000

Dead Ch.

0
0

50

100
Pulse Height (ADC counts)

150

200

Fig. 38. Distribution of signals on all pads from injecting pulses on the wires of
5
±
mV. The solid line shows positive signals and the dashed line negative signals. Data
is from the CLEO-c era.

the improper termination, thus the gain measurement is not very accurate, as
illustrated in Fig. 38, that shows the signal distribution on all the pads for
5 mV respectively. The wire pulse distribution is
input pulses of +5 mV and
also used to determine the number of dead channels. We have about 5% dead
channels, and the number has been relatively stable throughout the duration
of the experiment. These losses include one damaged multi-wire ribbon cable
and ASIC damage as well as lost wirebonds.

−

The most notable source of ASIC loss has been occasional latch-up of these
devices, due to the activation of parasitic PNPN paths in the device. The
symptoms include large current draw and a diﬀerent pedestal proﬁle along the
ASIC, much “ﬂatter” than in a functioning ASIC. This phenomenon occurred
more frequently in the early stages of the experiment, due to occasional faulty
start-up procedures, that caused some device destruction. After we reﬁned the
start-up procedure, to prevent regenerative loops from occurring, the number
of ﬂat ASICs has remained stable, with some signs of recent recovery.

In general, we can say that the operation of this system has been very stable
and reliable and no tuning of the bias voltages and currents has been necessary,
since the initial adjustment performed upon installation.

53

Fig. 39. Raw hit patterns produced by the particle passing through the plane
(left) and sawtooth (right) radiators. Each rectangle indicates a pad channel above
threshold.

10 DATA ANALYSIS AND PHYSICS PERFORMANCE

10.1 Introduction

Υ(5S) resonances
The CLEO III detector was used for studies at the Υ(1S)
from August of 2000 to March of 2003. The CLEO detector was then modiﬁed
by replacing the silicon strip vertex detector with a low mass wire chamber.
The magnetic ﬁeld was also lowered from 1.5 T to 1.0 T, to help increase the
machine luminosity. Data was then taken from October of 2003 until April of
2005. The results in this section refer to the ﬁrst period as CLEO III and the
second period as CLEO-c. More CLEO-c data will be forthcoming.

−

Coherent noise suppression and data sparsiﬁcation are performed on-line to
eliminate the Gaussian part of the electric noise. A small non-Gaussian compo-
nent of the coherent electric noise is eliminated oﬀ-line, by using an algorithm
too complicated for use in the data board DSP. The incoherent part of non-
Gaussian noise was eliminated by oﬀ-line pulse height thresholds adjusted to
keep occupancy of each channel below 1%. Finally, we eliminate clusters of
cathode pad hits that are extended along the anode wires, but are only 1–2
pads wide in the other direction.

→

We show in Fig. 39 the hit pattern in the detector for a Bhabha scattering
event (e+e−
e+e−) for track entering the plane (left image) and sawtooth
(right image) radiators. The shapes of the Cherenkov “rings” are diﬀerent in
the two cases, resulting from refraction when leaving the LiF radiators. The
hits in the centers of the images are produced by the electron passing the
RICH multi-wire chambers.

54

10.2 Clustering of Hits

×

The entire detector contains 230,400 cathode pads, which are segmented into
240 modules of 24
40 pads separated by the mounting rails and anode wire
spacers. We cluster pad hits in each module separately. Pad hits touching each
other either by a side or a corner form a “connected region.” Each charged
track reconstructed in the CLEO tracking system [29] is projected into the
RICH and matched to the closest connected region. If the matching distance
between the track projection and the center of the connected region is reason-
ably small and the total pulse height of the connected region suﬃciently high,
we associate this group of hits with the track. Local pulse height maxima in
the remaining connected regions, so-called “bumps,” are taken as seeds for
Cherenkov photons. We allow the pulse height maxima to touch each other
by corners if the pulse height in the two neighboring pads is small relative to
both bump heights. Hits adjacent to the bumps on the sides are assigned to
them in order of decreasing bump pulse height.

To estimate the position of the photon conversion point we use the center-
of-gravity method corrected for the bias towards the central pad. For many
Cherenkov photons we are able to detect induced charge in only one pad. Since
8 mm2, the position resolution in this case is
the pad dimensions are about 8
8 mm/√12 = 2.3 mm. For charged track intersections, which induce signiﬁcant
charge in many pads, the position resolution is 0.76 mm. The position reso-
lution for Cherenkov photons which generate multiple pad hits is somewhere
in between these two values. In any case, the photon position error is not a
signiﬁcant contribution to the Cherenkov angle resolution (see below).

×

10.3 Corrections to the Track Direction

The resolution of the CLEO tracking system is very good in the bending view
(the magnetic ﬁeld is solenoidal in CLEO) [29]. The track position and incli-
nation angle along the beam axis is measured less precisely. The r.m.s. of the
observed RICH hit residual is 1.7 mm. Since the RICH hit position resolution
is 0.76 mm as measured by the residual in the perpendicular direction, the
RICH can clearly help in pinning down the track trajectory. This, in turn,
improves Cherenkov resolution, especially for the ﬂat radiators for which we
observe only half of the Cherenkov image and thus are quite sensitive to the
tracking error. The improvement is as much as 50% is some parts of the de-
tector.

55

10.4 Reconstruction of the Cherenkov Angle

Given the measured position of the Cherenkov photon conversion point in
the RICH, the charged track direction and its intersection point with the LiF
radiator, we calculate a Cherenkov angle for each photon-track combination
(θγ). We use the formalism outlined by Ypsilantis and S´eguinot [6], except
that we adopt a numerical method to ﬁnd the solution to the equation for the
photon direction, instead of simplifying it to a fourth-order polynomial. The
latter would allow an analytical solution, but at the expense of introducing
an additional source of error. Furthermore, using our numerical method, we
calculate derivatives of the Cherenkov angle with respect to the measured
quantities which allows us to propagate the detector errors and the chromatic
dispersion to obtain an expected Cherenkov photon resolution for each photon
independently (σθ). This is useful since the Cherenkov angle resolution varies
signiﬁcantly even within one Cherenkov image. We use these estimated errors
when calculating particle ID likelihoods and use them to weight each photon
when measuring the average Cherenkov angle for a track.

10.5 Performance on Bhabha Events

We ﬁrst view the physics performance on the simplest type of events, Bhabha
events, and then subsequently in hadronic events. The distribution of Cherenkov
angles measured for each photon in Bhabha events is shown in Fig. 40.

We note that Bhabha events have very low multiplicity compared with our nor-
mal hadronic events. They have two charged tracks present while the hadronic
events have an average charged multiplicity of approximately 10 in CLEO III.
In addition, the hadronic events have on the average 10 photons, mainly from
πo decays. All of these particles can interact in the calorimeter and the splash-
back can hit the RICH photon detector.

The Cherenkov angle spectrum for single photons has an asymmetric tail and
modest background. It is ﬁt with a line-shape similar to that used when ex-
tracting photon signals from electromagnetic calorimeters [30]. The functional
form is

P (θ

θexp, σθ, α, n) =

|

(2)

A

exp

·



−



1
2  

θexp −
σθ

θ

!

2





for θ < θexp −

α

σθ

·

56

Flat radiators

6000

4000

2000

s
n
o
t
o
h
p
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

s
n
o

t
o
h
p
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

1600

1200

800

400

-50

-25

0
θ  − θ

γ

25
  (mrad)

expected

50

Sawtooth radiators

-50

-25

0

θ  − θ

γ

expected

25
  (mrad)

50

Fig. 40. The measured minus expected Cherenkov angle for each photon detected
in Bhabha events, (top) for plane radiators and (bottom) for sawtooth radiators.
The curves are ﬁts to a special line shape function (see text), while the lines are ﬁts
to a background polynomial.

2 α2

n
α
(cid:17)
(cid:16)
θexp−θ
σθ

n

e− 1
+ n

n

α

A

·

A−1

(cid:16)

≡

σθ

n
α

"

α −
1

n

1

−

(cid:17)
e− 1

2 α2

+

r

·

α

σθ,

for θ > θexp −
π
α
√2 !!#
2  

1 + erf

 

.

Here θ is the measured angle, θexp is the “true” (or most likely) angle and σθ is
the angular resolution. To use this formula, the parameter n is ﬁxed to value
of about 5.

The data in Fig. 40 are ﬁt using this signal shape plus a polynomial background
function. We compare the results of these ﬁts for the resolution parameter σθ
as a function of radiator ring 19 for data and Monte Carlo simulation in Fig. 41.
The single photon resolution averaged over the detector solid angles are 14.7
mr for the ﬂat radiator and 12.2 mr for the sawtooth.

19 Eﬀectively, this shows the dependence of the resolution on polar angle.

57

1

2

3

4

5
Radiator row

6

7

Fig. 41. The values of the Cherenkov angular resolution for single photons for
data compared with Monte Carlo simulation as a function of radiator ring number.
Sawtooth radiators are in rings 1 and 2, at the center of the detector.

Data 
Monte Carlo

Flat radiators

Data
Monte Carlo

0

10

20

30
Number of photons

40

Sawtooth radiators

Data

Monte Carlo

)
d
a
r
m

(
 
 

24

20

16

12

8

4

4000

s
k
c
a
r
t
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

3000

2000

1000

500

400

300

200

100

s
k
c
a
r
t
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

0

10

20

30

Number of photons

40

Fig. 42. The number of photons detected on Bhabha tracks (top) for plane radiators
and (bottom) for sawtooth radiators. The dashed lines are predictions of the Monte
Carlo simulation.

3σ of the expected Cherenkov angle
The number of photons per track within
for each photon is shown in Fig. 42 and shown as a function of radiator row

±

58

q
s
Data 
Monte Carlo

16

12

8

4

k
c
a
r
t
 
r
e
p
 
s
n
o
t
o
h
p
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

1

2

3

4

5
Radiator row

6

7

Fig. 43. The number of photons as a function of radiator row for Bhabha events.

in Fig. 43. Averaged over the detector, and subtracting the background, we
have a mean number of 10.6 photons with the ﬂat radiators and 11.9 using
the sawtooth radiators.

3σ of the ex-
The resolution per track is obtained by taking a slice within
pected Cherenkov angle for each photon and forming an average weighted by
1/σ2

θ . These track angles are shown in Fig. 44.

±

The r.m.s. spreads of these distributions are identiﬁed as the track resolutions.
We obtain 4.7 mr for the ﬂat radiators and 3.6 mr for the sawtooth. The
resolutions as a function of radiator row are shown in Fig. 45.

The Cherenkov angular resolution is comprised of several diﬀerent compo-
nents. These include: error on the location of the photon emission point, the
chromatic dispersion, the position error in the reconstruction of the detected
photons, and ﬁnally the error on determining the charged track’s direction
and position. These components are compared with the data in Fig. 46.

10.6 Performance on Hadronic Events in CLEO III

To resolve overlaps between Cherenkov images for diﬀerent tracks we ﬁnd the
most likely mass hypotheses. Photons that match the most hypothesis within
3σ are then removed from consideration for the other tracks. To study the
±
RICH performance in hadronic events in CLEO III 20 we use D∗+
π+D0,
K −π+ events. The charge of the slow pion in the D∗+ decay is opposite
D0
to the kaon charge in subsequent D0 decay. Therefore, the kaon and pion in
the D0 decay can be identiﬁed without use of the RICH detector. The eﬀect of
the small combinatorial background is eliminated by ﬁtting the D0 mass peak

→

→

20 Until now CLEO-c has been running below threshold for the production of D∗’s.

59

Flat radiators

s = 4.7 mrad

-20

-10

0

10
q expected

track

20

(mrad)

Sawtooth radiators

s = 3.6 mrad

s
k
c
a
r
t
 
f

o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

3000

2000

1000

s
k
c
a
r
t
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

800

600

400

200

)
d
a
r
m

(
 
 

k
c
a
r
t

4

8

6

2

0

Data 
Monte Carlo

60

-20

-10
track

0
q expected

10
(mrad)

20

Fig. 44. Measured Cherenkov angle for each track in Bhabha events, (top) for plane
radiators and (bottom) for sawtooth radiators.

5
Radiator row
Fig. 45. Cherenkov angle resolutions per track as a function of radiator row for
Bhabha events.

3

6

1

4

2

7

in the K −π+ mass distribution to obtain the number of signal events for each
momentum bin. The K −π+ invariant mass distribution selected by requiring
that the K −π+π+ - K −π+ mass diﬀerence be within 2.5 r.m.s. widths of the

q
-
q
-
s
plane            sawtooth          plane

- measured

total expected

chromatic

emission point

photon position

tracking

)
d
a
r
m

(
 
k
c
a
r
t
 
r
e
p
 
n
o
i
t
u
o
s
e
R

l

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

V
e
M
 
5
 
/
s
t
n
e
v
E

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

7 

6 5 4 3 2 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 

Radiator row (Z axis)

Fig. 46. Diﬀerent components contributing to the Cherenkov angle resolution per
track shown as a function of radiator row for Bhabha events. The points are data
and the solid line is the sum of the predicted resolution from each of the individual
components indicated on the ﬁgure.

1.75

1.8

1.95

2

1.9
1.85
Mass (GeV)

Fig. 47. The K ∓π± mass after selecting events with K −π+π+ - K −π+ mass dif-
ferences close to the known D∗

D mass diﬀerence.

−

know mass diﬀerence is shown in Fig. 47. Here both the kaon and the pion
are required to have momenta > 0.6 GeV/c.

Single-photon Cherenkov angle distributions obtained on such identiﬁed kaons
with the momentum above 0.7 GeV/c are plotted in Fig. 48. Averaged over
all radiators, the single-photon resolution is 13.2 mr and 15.1 mr for sawtooth
3σ of the
and ﬂat radiators respectively. The background fraction within
expected value is 12.8% and 8.4%. The background-subtracted mean photon
yield is 11.8 and 9.6. Finally the per-track Cherenkov angle resolution is 3.7

±

61

1500

1000

500

d
a
r
m
 
4
 
/
s
n
o
t
o
h
p
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

1500

1000

500

d
a
r
m
 
4
 
/
s
n
o
t
o
h
p
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

-60

-40

-20
track

20
0
q expected

40
(mrad)

60

-60

-40

-20

20

0
q expected

(mrad)

40

60

track

Fig. 48. The measured minus expected Cherenkov angle for each photon detected
in hadronic events, (top) for plane radiators and (bottom) for sawtooth radiators.
The curves are ﬁts to special line shape function (see text), while the lines are ﬁts
to a background polynomial.

mr and 4.9 mr.

10.7 Particle ID Likelihoods

For parts of the Cherenkov image for the sawtooth radiator, and for tracks
intersecting more than one radiator there are some optical path ambiguities
that impact the Cherenkov angle calculations. In the previous section we by-
passed this problem by selecting the optical path that produces the closest
Cherenkov angle to the expected one (θh
exp) for the given particle hypothesis
(h). There is some loss of information in this procedure, therefore, we use the
likelihood method to perform particle identiﬁcation instead of the per-track
average angle. The likelihood method weights each possible optical path by
the optical probability (Popt), which includes length of the radiation path and
the refraction probabilities obtained by the inverse ray tracing method:

62

q
-
q
-
0
1
/
s
k
c
a
r
t
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

120

80

40

0

-250

-125

125

250

0
2 ln( Lp /LK )

χ2
Fig. 49. Distribution of 2 ln (Lπ/LK)
and pions (open) identiﬁed with the D∗ method.

K −

χ2

∼

π for 1.0-1.5 GeV/c kaons (ﬁlled)

Lh =

Pbackground +

N o. of γs




Yj=1


P j
opt ·

opt
X

Psignal

θopt, j
γ

exp, σopt, j
θh

θ

|

(cid:16)




(cid:17)



where, Lh is the likelihood for the particle hypothesis h (e, µ, π, K or p),
Pbackground is the background probability approximated by a constant and
Psignal is the signal probability given by the line-shape deﬁned previously.
In principle, the likelihood could include all hits in the detector. In practice,
there is no point in inspecting hits which are far away from the regions where
photons are expected for at least one of the considered hypotheses (we use

5σ cut-oﬀ).

±

An arbitrary scale factor in the likelihood deﬁnition cancels when we consider
likelihood ratios for two diﬀerent hypotheses. The likelihood conveniently folds
in information about values of the Cherenkov angles and the photon yield for
each hypothesis. For well separated hypotheses (typically at lower momenta)
the photon yield that provides some discrimination. Since our likelihood deﬁ-
nition does not know about the radiation momentum threshold, the likelihood
ratio method can be only used when both hypotheses are suﬃciently above
the thresholds. When one hypothesis is below the radiation threshold we use
the value of the likelihood for the hypothesis above the threshold to perform
the discrimination.

The distribution of the 2 ln (Lπ/LK), is expected to behave as the diﬀerence
π. This χ2 diﬀerence obtained for 1.0-1.5 GeV/c kaons and pions iden-
χ2
χ2
K −
tiﬁed with the D∗ method is plotted in Fig. 49. Cuts at diﬀerent values of this
variable produce identiﬁcation with diﬀerent eﬃciency and fake rate. Pion fake

63

0.4

e
t
a
r
 
e
k
a
f
 
n
o
P

i

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

Momentum (GeV/c)

Fig. 50. Pion fake rate as a function of particle momentum for kaon eﬃciency of
80% (circles), 85% (squares) and 90% (triangles).

rates for diﬀerent values of kaon identiﬁcation eﬃciency are plotted as a func-
tion of particle momentum in Fig. 50. Here when the fake rates get below a
few percent there are other systematic eﬀects that enter. For example, doubly
Cabibbo suppressed decays where the Do decays into a K +π− rather than a
K −π+ have a relative branching fraction of 0.4% [33].

10.8 Eﬃciency and Fake Rates in CLEO-c

Here we use 180 pb−1 integrated luminosity of CLEO-c data produced in
e+e− collisions and recorded at the ψ′′ resonance (3.770 GeV). At this energy,
the events consist of a mixture of pure D+D−, DoD
, three-ﬂavor continuum
event and γψ′ events. There may also be small amounts of τ +τ − pairs and
two-photon events.

o

→

→

→

K −π+ and Do

K −π−π+π+, Do

In this study we select events containing at least one neutral D candidate in
K −π+πo.
the following decays Do
(Charge conjugate modes are also used.) Event candidates in these modes
are mostly signal with low background fractions. The Do candidate invariant
mass plots are shown in Fig. 51. These mass plots are constructed by selecting
decays where the sum of the measured energies is close to the electron beam
energy and then using the measured beam energy to form the mass [34]. We
use this sample to look for two oppositely charged tracks present in the other
side of the event not containing the tagged D. We then further select events
decays into K ±π∓. The momentum spectra of the kaon and
where the D
the pion from this decay when the D is produced on the ψ(3770) is shown in
Fig. 52.

o

64

6000

(a)

4000

2000

4000

(b)

V
e
M
 
5
.
0
/
s
t
n
e
v
E

3000

2000

1000

6000

(c)

4000

2000

1.84
o

1.86

1.88

D   Candidate Mass (GeV)

Fig. 51. Beam constrained mass distributions for (a)K −π−π+π+, (b) K −π+, and
(c) K −π+πo candidates.

o

→

K +π−π+π−
We start by describing the analysis of the joint decays D
K ±π∓. Here we deﬁne the decay into K −π+ as “right” sign and
and Do
the decay into K +π− as “wrong” sign. In this case the wrong sign decays
could result from one of three sources: background, doubly Cabibbo suppressed
decays or Do
mixing. We note that current measures of mixing limit it to
<0.045% [35], while current measures of doubly Cabibbo suppressed decays
∼
are larger. For example, the modes K −π+, K −π−π+π+ and K −π+πo have
rates of 0.35%, 0.42%, and 0.43%, respectively.

→

D

−

o

Fully reconstructed single tags for the K +π−π+π− mode (and its charge conju-
gate, which will not be explicitly mentioned in what follows) are reconstructed

65

pion

kaon

60

40

20

0.60

0.70

0.80

0.90

1.00

1.10

Momentum (GeV/c)

Fig. 52. The kaon and pion momentum spectra from D

K ±π∓ decays.

→

using the beam constrained mass. We use a 2σ cut on ∆E and require the
mass be between 1.86 and 1.870 GeV. We then form a double tag event using
either right or wrong sign Kπ decays. We use a tight cut on the Kπ of
,
|
the diﬀerence between the measured energy and the beam energy within 2σ,
where σ is the r.m.s. of the distribution. Since we need to use the RICH we
< 0.81, where θ is the angle
impose a cut that both tracks be within
|
of the track with respect to the beam line.

cos(θ)

∆E

|

|

At ﬁrst we do not use any RICH identiﬁcation on the Kπ. Using a total of 180
pb−1 we have 1158 such events where the kaon and pion are both in the RICH
acceptance that give the right sign and the same sample yields 642 wrong sign
events.

We now make three separate analyses: one where we identify only the kaon,
one where we identify only the pion and one where we identify both the kaon
and the pion. In the latter case we insist that there is signiﬁcant discrimination
in both cases or we do not accept the event.

Since the fake rates will be near 2%, the probability of getting both the kaon
10−4, so that asking for a double identiﬁcation is
and the pion wrong is
suﬃcient to ensure that we are getting the right answer for this level of tags.

×

∼

4

The results are shown in Table 2. We ﬁnd 1158 right sign events without
using any particle identiﬁcation, 970 right sign events with both particles
identiﬁed, 15 wrong sign events with both particles identiﬁed, 25 events with
only the kaon identiﬁed incorrectly and 36 events with only the pion identiﬁed
incorrectly.

The 15 doubly identiﬁed wrong sign events are the combination of background,
doubly Cabbibo suppressed decays and mixing. They correspond to a rate of

66

Mode

No ID

Single K

Single π

Double ID

(RS)

(WS)

(RS)

(WS)

(RS)

(WS)

(RS)

(WS)

K −π−π+π+; K ±π∓

1158

642

1021

K −π+; K ±π∓

307

199

273

K −π+πo; K ±π∓

1524

897

1350

Sum

2989

1738

2644

25

3

14

42

105

295

1444

2842

36

6

22

64

970

264

1287

2521

15

0

4

19

Table 2
Results of RICH identiﬁcation on double tag events. RS indicates right sign and
WS indicates wrong sign events.

±

these events of (1.5
0.4)%, consistent with them all being doubly Cabibbo
suppressed decays, but somewhat larger [33]. We subtract these events after
correcting for the eﬃciency for the wrong sign candidates. This gives us a kaon
fake rate of 1.1%, with an eﬃciency for events in the RICH of 88.5% and a
pion fake rate of 3.7%, with an eﬃciency of 93.7%. We note that background
is likely to be absent or small in these double tag events, but need to make a
quantitative assessment.

To ascertain the background level we plot the beam constrained mass of the
K −π+π+π− tag versus the K ±π∓ tag in Fig. 53. Events outside of the region
where both masses are greater than 1.858 GeV are background. There is only
one background event in the wrong sign plot indicating that the background
is much less than one event.

Fig. 53. Beam constrained mass for K −π−π+π+ versus K ±π∓; (a) Right sign
events, (b) wrong sign events.

We now consider the case where both neutral D’s decay into K ±π∓. One
diﬀerence in this case with other cases is that doubly Cabbibo decays are
forbidden due to Bose-Einstein statistics [36]. The results are presented in

67

Table 2. Here there is wrong sign doubly identiﬁed decay. This could be due
to (a) background (b) Do mixing or (c) where both particles were incorrectly
identiﬁed. We ﬁnd zero events in the wrong sign doubly identiﬁed decay. We
plot the beam constrained mass of the K −π+ tag versus the K ±π∓ tag in
Fig. 54.

(cid:13)

)

V
e
G

(

 
)
π
(cid:13)
K

(
 
 
 
 
 

M

C
B

1.890

1.880

1.870

1.860

1.850

1.840

1.830

1.840

1.850

1.860

1.870

1.880

1.890

M     (Kπ)  (GeV)

BC

Fig. 54. Beam constrained mass for K −π+ versus K ±π∓.

Our ﬁnal mode uses K −π+πo for the single tag. The results are also presented
in Table 2. To ascertain the background level we plot the beam constrained
mass of the K −π+πo tag versus the K ±π∓ tag in Fig. 55. Although there
appears to be some background in the right sign plot, the wrong sign shows
no evidence of background.

The 4 doubly identiﬁed wrong sign events are the combination of background,
doubly Cabbibo suppressed decays and mixing. They correspond to a rate of
0.2)%, consistent with them all being doubly Cabibbo
these events of (0.3
±
suppressed decays, but somewhat smaller.

±

±

0.4)%. The rate of kaons faking pions is (2.47

Using all three of these mode combinations we ﬁnd the rate of pions fak-
0.37)%, with a pion eﬃciency for events in the RICH of
ing kaons of (1.10
(94.5
0.38) %, with a kaon
eﬃciency for events in the RICH of (88.4
0.6)%. The lower kaon eﬃciency
arises because a signiﬁcantly larger fraction of kaons than pions decay in this
momentum region. It should be emphasized that these values are obtained for
the entire running period between October, 2003 and February of 2005, and
includes all possible system eﬀects.

±

±

68

Fig. 55. Beam constrained mass for K −π+πo versus K ±π∓.

11 CONCLUSIONS

We have successfully constructed and operated a large, complex RICH detector
in a particle physics experiment for over ﬁve years. The oxygen level has
been kept below a few ppm in the “expansion volume” and the TEA photon
conversion gas has been kept out, allowing for the Cherenkov photon yield to
remain almost constant over the running period. We have lost some photon
yield with a small
5% failure of electronics chips. One broken wire has caused
an additional 1.7% loss and does somewhat eﬀect the track eﬃciency. The total
“cylindrical” detector thickness measured perpendicular to the axis is 13% of
a radiation length.

∼

The RICH is used during the normal course of most physics analyses using a
standard set of criteria based on the minimum number of observed Cherenkov
photons, usually 3, and the relative liklihood that a track is given type, either
pion or kaon, for example.

The particle momenta for B meson decay products seen by CLEO III are less
than 2.65 GeV/c. The detector provides excellent separation between pions
and kaons at and below this cutoﬀ. Separation between kaons and protons
extends to even higher momentum, where it is used in charm studies. Thus,
the physics performance has met design criteria. The RICH has provided cru-
cially important particle separation in a number of important physics analyses
including measurements of charmless hadronic two-body B meson decays and
the ratio Γ(B
Dπ) [37], and measurement of the form-factors
in Do

→
K −ℓ+ν decays [38].

→
π−ℓ+ν and Do

DK)/Γ(B

→

→

CLEO currently is making an extensive study charm mesons and charmonium
decays (called CLEO-c [32]). For these measurements the beam energy is low-

69

ered and the maximum particle momenta is about 1.0
momentum the particle identiﬁcation fake rates are at the 1% level.

−

1.5 GeV/c. At these

12 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The CLEO RICH project was funded primarily by the U. S. National Science
Foundation which we deeply appreciate. We thank both the National Science
Foundation and Department of Energy for supporting the University groups.
We thank the late Tom Ypsilantis and Jacques S´eguinot for early work on a
similar system and for extensive discussions. Jeﬀ Cherwinka helped with many
engineering aspects of the system. Lee Greenler of PSL laboratories of Univ.
of Wisconsin did much of the mechanical design. We thank Einar Nygard and
Bjorn Sundal of IDEAS for their work on the front-end hybrid design. Paul
Gelling contributed to the electronics infrastructure. We especially appreciate
the eﬀorts of Charles Brown, Lou Buda and Lester Schmutzer of the Syracuse
Physics Dept. machine shop who made many of the components. We thank
Peter Reed, Heather Lane, Dave Smith, Don Moulton at Optovac for their
hard work during the four years of crystal production. Ken Powers helped
with the plating of the windows. We thank the accelerator group at CESR for
excellent eﬀorts in supplying luminosity.

Appendix A. VUV SPECTROPHOTOMETERS

The CH4-TEA photosensitive gas inside the RICH chambers has an apprecia-
ble photo-absorption cross-section in a narrow VUV band λ = 150
15 nm.
Satisfactory reconstruction of the Cherenkov cone geometry requires that the
windows and the radiator crystals (especially their top surface), be suﬃciently
transparent in this wavelength band. A crystal surface which is poorly pol-
ished or contaminated would reduce signiﬁcantly the number of photons emit-
ted from the radiator crystals and subsequently degrade the Cherenkov angle
measurement resolution.

±

Three VUV spectrophotometers used to measure the transmission of the crys-
tals were built and placed at the three locations associated with crystal pro-
duction and handling.

70

A.1. LiF VUV Transmission Spectrophotometer at SMU

Prior to installation of individual crystals onto the RICH Inner Cylinder,
each crystal’s transparency was measured using a specially constructed VUV
spectrophotometer at four wavelengths: λ = 135, 142.5, 150 and 165 nm. The
essential components of this transmission spectrophotometer are shown in
Fig. 56. A vacuum monochromator with a deuterium lamp is the VUV light
source. A test box 250 liter vacuum vessel contains the crystal to be measured,
along with a two-dimensional stage driven by stepper motors. The crystal’s
top surface is held perpendicular to the direction of the probe radiation and
collimators produce a beam spot of radius
1 mm on the crystal surface. The
stage can reliably position a crystal inside the vessel with a spatial precision
of better than 25 µm along each of the stage’s mutually perpendicular axes.
It moves the crystal perpendicular to the beam direction in a raster style and
periodically stops at discrete points while the transparency measurement is
made. The typical spacing between measurements points is 1 cm. For calibra-
tion purposes, during each motion along the width of the crystal, the stage
both moves the crystal completely out of the beam and completely blocks the
beam with its frame, so as to provide measurements along each row of the
scan that correspond to 100% and 0% transparency, respectively.

∼

Vacuum Vessel

 

2-D 
Motion 
Stages

crystal
frame

s
i
x
a
 
Y

collimator

collimator

Beam line

PMT1

Deuterium
Light Source

Monochromator

Fig. 56. Transmission measurement scheme for the LiF planar radiator crystals.

Both, the monochromator and the vacuum vessel, are evacuated by dedicated
turbomolecular vacuum pumps to minimize absorption of the probe radiation
by any residual air or water molecules. A photomultiplier tube (PMT), whose
front window is coated with an ultraviolet wave-shifting compound (sodium
salicylate [39]), is attached to the vacuum vessel and measures the intensity of
the transmitted VUV light from the monochromator after its passage through
the crystal. PMT output signals are ampliﬁed, ﬁltered, digitized and then pro-
cessed by a LabVIEW-based program to determine the crystal transparency
map in real time. Data is also written to disk for further oﬀ-line analysis.

X axis

~ 150 cm

71

The measurement process was necessarily highly automatic and the control
software ran on a PC, which in turn communicated with the data acquisition
system and the stage controllers. The software controlled the high voltage for
the PMT, monitored pressures in the two vacuum systems (monochromator
and test box), and through a standard GPIB interface adjusted the monochro-
mator grating to the desired wavelength. A graphical user interface allowed
the user to set eﬃciently a wide range of control parameters to measure radi-
ator crystals in a variety of modes, to measure crystal ingot test bars, and to
perform calibration runs of various types.

Extensive adjustment and calibration of the spectrophotometer system were
performed to minimize systematic errors and to measure overall system time
stability and reproducibility. For example, the linearity of the electronic read-
out chain was measured to be much better than 1% over the range of readout
voltages and transmission measurements separated in time by more than 1
500, 000
month of the same LiF sample show agreement within 1%. Overall,
individual LiF transmission measurements were made.

≃

A.2. VUV Spectrophotometer at Syracuse

A second VUV spectrophotometer similar in design was constructed at Syra-
cuse University for the purpose of testing the window crystals as well as the
sawtooth radiators.

The window crystals were measured in a manner substantially similar to that
described above for the planar radiators. Transmissions were measured at three
wavelengths (135 nm, 150 nm, and 165 nm), and over a grid of 30 positions
over the surface of the crystal window. For half-sized windows, there were 15
positions per crystal. The results are summarized in Section 3.2.

∼

In this spectrophotometer, however, systematic uncertainties in the transmis-
sion measurements were reduced using diﬀerent techniques. Before the light
beam enters the vacuum tank, it is passed through a chopper which opens
40 Hz. The resulting phototube current appears to be a square
and closes at
wave, with an amplitude that provides a measure of the light output, while
automatically subtracting stray light and dark current oﬀsets. Also, in general,
the transmission measurement is made by performing “crystal-in/crystal-out”
measurements: we divide the light output when the beam passes through a
crystal (as registered by the current in the phototube) by the light output
when the crystal is removed from the beam. Measuring this ratio attempts to
divide out drifts in the lamp output or gain variations in the PMT over time.
Making this reference measurement frequently means that the measurement
cannot drift appreciably from point-to-point within a scan. Individual trans-

72

mission measurements have a “statistical” uncertainty of typically 0.5–1.0%
due to averaging the photocurrent, and a 0.5–1.0% “systematic” uncertainty
due to signal drift over a typical measurement interval.

8 in.

6 in.

4 in.

2 in.

0 in.

F

L

M

E

K

C

B

J

H

G

A

Fig. 57. Transmission measurement scheme for the LiF sawtooth radiator crystals.
Components are: (A) monochromator light beam, (B) collimating slit, (C) VUV
mirror, (E) crystal holder tray mounted on X-Y stage, (F) sodium salicylate covered
glass window, (G) Photomultiplier tube, (H,K) X,Y-axis linear stage, (J) vacuum
tank wall, (L) 42◦ VUV-polished prism, and (M) sawtooth radiator. For illustrative
purposes, only four grooves of the sawtooth radiator are shown.

The sawtooth radiators required a special technique in order to measure their
transmission. For this, the spectrophotometer is conﬁgured as shown in Fig. 57.
The monochromator light beam enters through the bottom of the vacuum
tank, and passes through a 0.020 inch collimating slit. The pencil beam has
a Gaussian shape with σ = 25 µm. The light reﬂects oﬀ of an adjustable
mirror to produce a 15◦ deﬂection of the beam. It passes through a 42◦ VUV-
polished prism, which is mounted on the two-dimensional stage. The light is
wavelength-shifted by the sodium salicylate covered glass window, and de-
tected in the photomultiplier tube.

The angular deﬂection of 15◦ is set so as to probe the transmission at the
smallest possible angle that is not totally internally reﬂected and that accrues
appreciable signal. Although the Fresnel coeﬃcients are functions of incident
angle at an interface, the important point is that the prism has the same shape
as the sawtooth radiator grooves. Hence, by moving the stage such that the
prism and sawtooth crystal passes through the beam, a relative transmission
measurement using the prism as a standard may be made. Uncertainties were
at the 1% level.

73

A third spectrophotometer, a duplicate to this system, was constructed and
placed on site at the crystal manufacturing company in order to make quality
assurance measurements of the window and planar radiator crystals before
shipping.

References

[1] Y. Kubota et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 320 (1992) 66.

[2] M. Artuso, “Progress Towards CLEO,” in the Proceedings of the XXIX
International Conference on High Energy Physics, Vancouver, Ed. by A.
Astbury et al., World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, Vol. 2, p.1552, [hep-ex/9811031]
(1998).

[3] S.E. Kopp, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 384 (1996) 61.

[4] J. S´eguinot and T. Ypsilantis, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 343 (1994) 1.

[5] A similar system was tested previously, see R. Arnold et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth.
A 314 (1992) 465; J.-L. Guyonnet et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 343 (1994) 178;
J. S´eguinot et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 350 (1994) 430.

[6] T. Ypsilantis and J. S´eguinot, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 343 (1994) 30.

[7] J. S´eguinot, Les Compteurs Cherenkov, Lectures given at L’Ecole Joliot-Curie,

Maubuisson, France, 1988 (Les Editions de Physique, 1989).

[8] M. Artuso et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 441 (2000) 374 [hep-ex/9910054].

[9] M. Artuso et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 461 (2001) 545 [hep-ex/0008007].

[10] A. Eﬁmov and S. Stone, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 371 (1996) 79.

[11] R. Bouclier et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 205 (1983) 205.

[12] STADCO, Inc., Los Angeles, CA, 90031, www.stadco.com.

[13] IDEAS ASA, 1330 Fornebu, Norway, www.ideas.no.

[14] Optovac, Inc., North Brookﬁeld, MA 01535 (Now a part of Corning, Inc.,

Corning, NY 14831.)

[15] D.C. Stockbarger, Rev. Sci. Instr. 7 (1936) 133.

[16] F. Twyman, Prism And Lens Making, Hilger & Watts, London, 1957.

[17] J.V.R. Kaufman and C.D. Clark, J. Chem. Phys. 38 (1963) 1388.

[18] P. Gorlich, H. Karras, and R. Lehmann, Phys. Stat. Sol. 1 (1961) 389.

[19] R.T. Williams, , M.N. Kabler, , W. Hayes, , and J.P. Stott, Phys. Rev. B14

(1976) 725.

74

[20] P. Gorlich, H. Karras, and G. Kotitz, Phys. Stat. Sol. 3 (1963) 1629.

[21] S. Timm et al., “TEA Aging Studies,” CLEO Internal Note CBX 96-30 (1996)

[22] W.A. Campbell and J.J. Scialdone, Outgassing Data for Selecting Spacecraft
Materials, NASA RP-1124, Rev.2, 1990; data is available online at
outgassing.nasa.gov. Quantities quoted are Total Mass Loss (%TML) and
Collected Volatile Condensable Materials (%CVCM).

[23] Composite Optics, Inc. (formerly R-Cubed Composites, Inc), San Diego, CA

92121, www.coi-world.com.

[24] PSL

Engineering
www.psl.wisc.edu.

and

Instrumentation,

Stoughton, WI

53589,

[25] E. Nygard et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 301 (1991) 506.

[26] LabVIEW, National Instruments, Inc., Austin TX, www.ni.com.

[27] LeCroy Corporation, Chestnut Ridge, NY 10977; now sold by Universal

Voltronics Corporation, Brookﬁeld, CT 06804, www.voltronics.com.

[28] A. Warburton et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 488 (2002) 451.

[29] D. Peterson et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 478 (2002) 142.

[30] T. Skwarnicki, “A Study of the Radiative Cascade Transitions Between
the Upsilon-Prime and Upsilon Resonances,” DESY F31-86-02 (thesis,
unpublished) (1986).

[31] M. Artuso et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 502 (2003) 91 [hep-ex/0209009].

[32] D. Asner, “The CLEO-c Research Program,” in 9th Int. Conf. on B Physics at
Hadron Machines (Beauty2003), Pittsburgh, PA, Oct., 2003, p82, ed. Paulini
and Erhan, AIP, Melville, NY 2004.

[33] S. Eidelman et al. (PDG), Phys. Lett. B 592, 1 (2004).

[34] Q. He et al. (CLEO), “Measurement of Absolute Hadronic Branching Fractions
D ¯D Cross Sections at Ecm = 3773 MeV,”

of D Mesons and e+e−
[hep-ex/0504003].

→

[35] K. Abe et al. (Belle), Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 071801. [hep-ex/0408125].

[36] I. I. Bigi and A. I. Sanda, “CP Violation,” Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,

U. K. (2000), see problem 10.4, page 177.

[37] A. Bornheim et al. (CLEO) Phys. Rev. D68 (2003) 052002 [hep-ex/0302026].

[38] G. S. Huang et al. (CLEO) Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 011802 [hep-ex/0407035].

[39] J.A.R. Samson, Techniques of Vacuum Ultraviolet Spectroscopy, Pied

Publications, Lincoln NE, 1967.

75

