5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Distributed readout detectors using superconducting tunnel
junctions
∗

, Elmar Schmid, and Alex Zehnder
Iwan Jerjen, Eugenie Kirk
Paul Scherrer Institute, Laboratory for Astrophysics, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland

Abstract

Superconducting tunnel junctions (STJs) are able to measure the energy of single photons in the range from NIR
to X-rays. They provide simultaneous information of the impact time and wavelength of an absorbed photon. The
main diﬃculty of these detectors compared with conventional imaging detectors lies in their limited pixel number.
Each STJ has to be connected independently and therefore the wiring becomes technologically more demanding
as the number of STJs increases. One approach to solving this problem is to use a single large absorber and to
distribute STJs for position sensitive signal readout. This conﬁguration is able to detect single optical photons
with an energy resolution close to that of a single STJ pixel.

We have produced a Ta absorber strip with Ta/Al/AlOx/Al/Nb/Ta junctions at either end. The energy and
position of single photons were measured simultaneously. The energy resolving power approaches the theoretical
limit. We will present a simple Monte Carlo simulation which reproduces the measurement exactly.

Key words: Distributed readout, Monte Carlo simulation, superconducting tunnel junction
PACS: 85.25.Oj

1. Introduction

Superconducting tunnel junctions (STJs) can be
used as single photon detectors with a moderate
energy resolution from near infrared to X-rays.
However a drawback of this technology is the lim-
ited number and size of the junctions available in
one detector.

One approach to this problem is to separate the
absorption and the read-out processes by the use
of one large absorber and several distributed junc-
tions for readout [1,2,3]. The sum of the signals

∗

Corresponding author. Tel.: +41-56-310-4351.
Email address: eugenie.kirk@psi.ch (Eugenie Kirk).

of all junctions measures the energy of the photon
and the diﬀerence of the signal amplitudes allows
to calculate the position of the photon impact.

In this paper we will present the response of a
strip detector to optical photons and compare it
with a Monte Carlo simulation.

2. Experiment

We deposited a 135 µm long, 31.5 µm wide and
100 nm thick Ta absorber layer on a sapphire sub-
strate. At each end, on top of the absorber, we
fabricated 25 × 25 µm2 Ta-Al junctions with 38 nm

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

30 October 2011

thick Al layers. The device was cooled down to
a temperature of 0.32 K. We biased each junction
independently at about 100 µV where the ther-
mal current was ∼ 200 pA. A pulsed 592 nm LED
served as light source. We read out the signals with
a charge-voltage-conversion ampliﬁer. The signals
were digitalized and stored in a ﬁle for oﬄine anal-
ysis.

Figure 1 shows the response (black dots) of the
two junctions to the absorption of 592 nm photons
in the Ta layer. The black spot near zero is noise.
The ﬁrst and second banana curves correspond to
the absorption of one and two photons respectively.
The small curving of the middle part means that
the losses were not important in this short strip.
The increase of the signal amplitudes at the end of
the strip is due to a degradation of the gap under
the junctions which results in a higher number of
initially created quasiparticles [2].

was measured by applying a test pulse. The width
of the light source amounts to 1440 charges. By
subtracting these external noise sources from the
total noise we obtain an intrinsic noise of 4420
charges which corresponds to a 0.19 eV resolution
or a resolving power of 11. The theoretical resolv-
ing power obtained by taking into account the Fano
factor and the tunnel noise only and by assuming
that all the created quasiparticles take part in the
tunnel process is 16 [2]. However this theoretical
value can not be reached since a signiﬁcant frac-
tion of the quasiparticles is lost in the strip before
they reach the junctions.

Fig. 2. The sum of the signals is plotted against the nor-
malized diﬀerence which contains the position information.
The black spots are the measured values, the grey points
are the simulated ones.

3. Monte Carlo simulation

We propose a simple twodimensional Monte
Carlo simulation for modeling our strip detec-
tor. The absorption of a photon will create N0 =
Eγ/1.7∆ photons, where Eγ is the photon energy
and ∆ the Ta gap energy. To this number N0
we added a Gaussian noise corresponding to the
bandwidth of the light source and the Fano noise.
At each simulation step every single quasiparti-
cle moves a distance d in an arbitrary direction.
The distance d is a model parameter chosen to be
small compared to the junction dimensions. If a
quasiparticle would move out of the Ta strip it is
set back to the borders of the layer (i.e. it is not

Fig. 1. The response of a 135 µm Ta strip to 592 nm photons
is shown. The signals of the two STJs at the end of the
strip are plotted against each other. The black dots are
measured values and the grey points are simulated ones.

Figure 2 shows the same measurement by dis-
playing the sum of the signals (energy) as a func-
tion of the normalized diﬀerence (position). We
build a histogram out of the center values to obtain
the full width at half maximum which amounts to
6460 charges. An electronic noise of 4490 charges

2

created quasiparticles is not the gap at the bar-
rier as measured by the IV curve which is about
450 µeV. This agrees with the 4-quasiparticle-
populations model presented in our former work
[4,5].

Combining that model with a threedimensional
Monte Carlo simulation would allow us to calcu-
late the responsivity and energy resolution of STJ
distributed readout detectors.

Acknowledgements We are grateful to M. Furlan
and Ph. Lerch for valuable discussions and to F.
Burri for technical support.

References

[1] C.M. Wilson, K. Segall, L. Frunzio, L. Li, D.E. Prober,
D. Schiminovich, B. Mazin, C. Martin, and R. Vasquez,
Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 444 (2000) 449.

[2] P. Verhoeve, R.H. den Hartog, D.D. Martin, N. Rando,
A.J. Peacock, and D.J. Goldie, Proc. SPIE Vol. 4008
(2000) 683.

[3] E.C. Kirk, Ph. Lerch, J. Olsen, A. Zehnder, and H.R.

Ott, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 444 (2000) 201.

[4]

I. Jerjen, E.C. Kirk, Ph. Lerch, A. Mchedlishvili, M.
Furlan, D. Twerenbold, A. Zehnder, and H.R. Ott,
Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 520 (2004) 519.

[5]

I. Jerjen, E.C. Kirk, Ph. Lerch, A. Zehnder, and H.R.
Ott, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 15 (2005) 602.

reﬂected and will move in an arbitrary direction
again at the next simulation step). During each
step there is a certain probability that a quasi-
particle will be lost (Ploss,Abs and Ploss,STJ) or,
if it stays within the junction borders, that it is
trapped (Ptrap). There are two loss probabilities
to take into account that the quasiparticle lifetime
in the STJ is higher than in the absorber area
because in the junction area one has to consider
the mean lifetime of quasiparticles in Ta and Al
[4]. Once a quasiparticle is trapped it can’t move
out again in our model. Finally there is a certain
probability that a quasiparticle staying within the
junction borders contributes to the signal (Psig)
whereupon it is taken out of the simulation. To
the number of read out charges the tunnel noise is
added to obtain the ﬁnal signal. Since the Ta gap
is slightly reduced in the junction area we intro-
duced also a parameter F < 1 taking into account
that the number of charges created outside the
junctions is smaller.

Figures 1 and 2 include the results of the simula-
tion (grey points) which agrees well with the mea-
surement. The parameters were, for each step of
the Monte Carlo simulation: d = 6 µm, Ploss,Abs =
7·10−4 and Ploss,STJ = 5.1·10−4, Ptrap = 3.0·10−3,
Psig = 2.0 · 10−3, F = 0.875.

4. Summary

Our measurements conﬁrm the results of Ref. [2],
proving that a good energy resolution can be
achieved with a distributed readout scheme. We
have also shown that a simple Monte Carlo sim-
ulation reproduces the experimental values. One
result of the simulation is that the relevant energy
gap for the absorption is about 12.5 % smaller in
the Ta layer under the junction than in the strip.
This energy diﬀerence of 88 µeV is on the order
of the thermal energy (kBT = 28 µeV) and thus
the quasiparticles are not expected to be trapped
totally in the junction area. This agrees with the
fact that the photons absorbed at one end of the
strip are also detected by the junction at the oppo-
site end. Furthermore this indicates that the gap
energy relevant to calculate the number of initially

3

