EXPERIMENTS WITH PARAMETRIC X-RAY RADIATION

(PXR) FROM NON-RELATIVISTIC ELECTRONS

V.G.Baryshevsky, K.G.Batrakov, I.D.Feranchuk, A.A.Gurinovich, A.O.Grubich,

A.S.Lobko, A.A.Rouba, B.A.Tarnopolsky, P.F.Safronov, V.I.Stolyarsky, A.P.Ulyanenkov

Institute for Nuclear Problems, Belarus State University

11 Bobrujskaya Str., Minsk 220050, Belarus

Abstract

Interaction of non-relativistic electrons with single crystal target may produce coherent x-rays.

That is the result of interference between two known x-ray generation mechanisms having orien-

tational behavior, namely parametric x-rays and coherent Bremsstrahlung. Experiments aimed

to PXR research were performed with 50-100 keV electrons and its distinctive features were ob-

served. Requirements to the experimental set-up, detector instrumental response, and targets as

well as experiment geometry are discussed in detail. Series of PXR spectra in various conditions

were recorded and their distinctive features were observed. Tuning of radiation frequency with

crystal-target rotation was observed for the ﬁrst time for low energy electrons. Dependence of the

x-ray frequency on the beam energy was detected. Soft PXR peak with energy below 1 keV was

observed for the ﬁrst time. Possible applications of PXR for structure analysis and crystallography

are discussed. These results are obtained in the framework of ISTC project #B626.

5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Parametric x-rays produced by non-relativistic electrons passing through a single crystal

target were described in [1] on the basis of general theory of PXR [2]. Due to the fact

that the angular distributions of x-rays originated from all radiation mechanisms are almost

isotropic in this case, peaks produced by coherent eﬀects, i.e. parametric x-rays and coherent

Bremsstrahlung (CBS), are the result of PXR and CBS interference and may be observed on

the intensive uniform background. Their shape and intensity depend on the target thickness

and the detector spectral resolution. Some experiments with non-relativistic electrons are

currently known [3]-[5], but their authors outlined the eﬀect taking into consideration only

CBS mechanism. Model [1] presumably describes x-rays from non-relativistic electrons in

crystal targets more adequately.

To study x-ray properties followed from the theory [1], we have performed experiments

focused on the PXR research with 50÷100 keV electrons of the electron microscope. Let

us brieﬂy consider requirements of the PXR experimental observation.

In general case a

charged particle passing though matter undergoes elastic and inelastic collisions with the

atoms of a medium. As a result, the angular and energy distributions of electrons change

during beam passing through a medium. Inﬂuence of electron scattering on the spectral-
angular distribution becomes signiﬁcant if either the width of velocity distribution ∆ν

ν or the

width of angular distribution ∆θ∗ becomes larger or equal to the width of the spectral line:
∆ν
ν ≥ 1

c is the wave-vector of the radiated photon, L∗ is the

kL∗ , where k = ω

kL∗ or ∆θ∗ ≥ 1
electron path in the crystal.

Angles of multiple scattering and inﬂuence of inelastic scattering have been estimated

for several crystals at low electron energy.

It was obtained, that to observe coherent x-

radiation in wide frequency range the rigid requirements for target thickness and electron

beam parameters should be fulﬁlled. They are: the target thickness should not exceed

∼0.5 µm and the energy of electron beam should be above 50-60 keV (in this energy range
s >∼ E−2). Initial energy and angular dispersion of the

angle of multiple scattering < θ2
electron beam should be less than 10−1.

We propose to detect x-ray photons, which are radiated at small sliding angle ψ ≪ 1

with respect to the target surface in the direction, which is opposite to electron velocity.
In this case the detector would register the photons from the electron pass ∼ ψ/(kχ′′) (if

2

ψ/(kχ′′) < 1), here 1/(kχ′′) is approximately equal to the absorption length of radiation in
a crystal, χ′′ is the imaginary part of crystal susceptibility. Therefore, a part of electron

beams with less dispersion (< θ2

s >∼ L∗) radiates. This experiment can be realized for such

target and radiation frequency, which correspond to small absorption length. For example,
absorption length for LiH crystal is ∼1 µm for 10 ˚A radiation wavelength. Then, at the
angle ψ ∼0.1 (∼ 5.73◦) one can observe radiation from the 0.1 µm pass.

The PXR photons can be radiated at all directions. The frequency of PXR photons

depends not only on the angle between the electron velocity and crystallographic plane θH

but also on the angle θ between the electron velocity and direction of registration

ω(n)
H (θ) =

2πv cos θH
d(1 − v/c cos θ)

n, n = 1, 2, ...

where d is the interplanar interval, v is the electron velocity, c is the speed of light. When

the observation angle θ is ﬁxed, the PXR spectral width is deﬁned by the length of the

coherent interaction of the electron in crystal, that is before the multiple scattering becomes

essential. So, the eﬀective observation of PXR with the non-relativistic electrons is possible

for the single crystal ﬁlms with the thickness lower than eﬀective scattering length, L < Lsc.

In this case the relative spectral width of the PXR ”harmonic” is deﬁned by the coherent

interaction of the electrons with crystal and can be calculated as follows:

(1)

(2)

∆ω0
ω

=

v
Lω(n)

H (θ)

n

II. EXPERIMENT

Taking into account conditions described above, we have performed the experiment out-

lined in Fig. 1. Narrow electron beam falls on the surface of the single crystal target, ~v
is the velocity of electron beam (~v ↑↓ OZ). Axis OX is coplanar the target surface, ~N is
orthogonal to the crystal surface. Angle Θ0 is the angle between ~N and OZ, which deter-

mines crystal rotation around the axis OX. At Θ0 = 0 the target surface is orthogonal to
the velocity of electron beam. At crystal rotation around the axis OX, ~N moves in the

plane ZY . Detector window is placed at the angle ∼ π/2 to the velocity of electrons in the

direction OY .

3

N

Z

V

q0

e t

g

r

a

T

X

k

Y

j

deflector

detector

electron beam

crystal-target

Faraday cup

collimator

FIG. 1: Scheme and layout of the experiment

To provide requirements to the beam, we have applied electron beam of an electron mi-

croscope. Electron beam injector was thoroughly tested for stability and reliability of beam

shaping systems and to optimize beam parameters for CXR observation. Some measured

beam parameters are as follows:

• electron energy 50-100 keV

• relative instability of accelerating voltage 2*10−5

• brightness 7*104 /m2 sr.

Careful selection of optimal currents of lenses and voltage between Venelt cylinder and anode

minimized parasitic scattering inside the microscope and provide minimal x-ray background

inside the experimental area. To reduce background caused by electron scattered at the

target, we have applied electrostatic deﬂector made of two brass plates of the 50 mm length

positioned in the input window of the detector. The six kilovolts voltage was applied between

to them that decrease background rate signiﬁcantly.

We have used Si(Li) detector with thermoelectric cooling and Si(Li) detector with cryostat

both with 20 mm2 sensitive areas and thin polymer windows for soft x-ray detection supplied

by BSI (Riga, Latvia). Energy resolution of detectors was evaluated as ∼170 eV. Detector

angular aperture was 0.2 mrad. ORTEC 2056-C 4096-channel analyzer collected detector

output data. Oﬀ-line spectra processing was performed after spectra transferring to the

computer. It involved calibration, smoothing, baseline subtraction, and ﬁtting by the set of

Gauss peaks.

4

E

Si - KDB 0,01 <100>

FIG. 2: Sketch of Si (100) target of sub-micron thickness, E = epitaxial layer

Analysis above shows that optimal target thickness should be below half of micron. Ap-

plied target (Fig.2) is the silicon crystal substrate of 2x2 mm dimensions and ∼200 µm

thickness with ∼0.5 µm thickness membrane of 1.0 mm diameter. Basic plane has (100) or

(111) orientation. Membrane material is layer of pure epitaxial Si of ∼0.9–1.0 µm thickness

deposited on substrate of heavily doped p+ Si of KDB 0.01 <100> grade. Choice of such

structure was determined by electrochemical etching technique, in which pure epitaxial Si

serves as termination layer. For membrane of other thickness one should take structures

with epitaxial layer thickness close to desired one. Precise membrane thickness adjustment

can be performed by ion-beam etching with ∼10-15 nm/min rate.

We have used relatively simple technique to measure thickness of such ultra-thin Si

targets. As membranes with thickness of about micron and below are going to be semi-

transparent in visible light range, one can record their optical transmittance spectra. At

this spectra interference fringes can be observed and than thickness may be calculated.

Dispersion of measured thickness values normally is below 5%.

III. PRELIMINARY RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Experiments described below were performed with (111) Si target of ∼410 nm thickness.

Working current of ∼150 nA was chosen to provide count rate at detector below 3 kHz and

avoid peak distortion. Data acquisition time was 5,000 seconds for the majority of spectra.

Some spectra were recorded at 10,000 seconds, but due to equipment instabilities obtained

spectra did not have considerable improvement.

Fragments of raw (just smoothed by Savitsky-Golay algorithm) normalized PXR spectra

are shown in Fig.3. One can see dependence of PXR peaks frequency on beam energy.

PXR frequency is increasing with beam energy increase in conformity with formula (1).

Group of characteristic x-ray peaks in right part of spectra correspond to the microscope

5

FIG. 3: Raw PXR spectra at 50, 75, and 100 keV electron energy

FIG. 4: Raw PXR spectra at 50, 75, and 100 keV electron energy

constructional materials excited by electrons scattered by the target. Characteristic peak

of Si locates at ∼1.73 keV and it is not shown in picture because it is very intensive in

comparison with other peaks.

After more detailed PXR spectra examinations we can attribute peaks to corresponding

crystallographic reﬂexes, Fig.4. Most intensive peak in 2.5-2.9 keV region is related to (220)

reﬂexes with various indexes permutations. Reﬂex (131) can correspond to peak at 3.5 keV.

Region 4.9-5.2 keV can be attributed to (331) and (511) including permutations. Finally,

6

FIG. 5: PXR frequency tuning with crystal target rotation

region 5.4-6.0 keV is corresponding to (800) and (440) reﬂexes.

As followed from Eq.(1), PXR frequency must depend on beam incidence angle. Exper-

imentally observed frequency sifts are shown in Fig.5. Basically, peaks should be splitted

and distance must increase depending on incidence angle. At 3 degrees incidence angle split

should be about 0.2 keV, at 10 degrees it may be as high as 0.7 keV. One can see this split

in some spectra. Changes in spectra connected with incidence angle change are close to

calculated values.

IV. CONCLUSION

Series of PXR spectra in various conditions were recorded and their distinctive features

were observed. Tuning of radiation frequency with crystal-target rotation was observed for

the ﬁrst time for low energy electrons. Dependence of the x-ray frequency on the beam

energy was detected. Despite of their relatively low quantum yield, they can be considered

as prospective source for structure analysis and crystallography.

We have obtained and used big amount of targets made of various materials. Spectra of

acceptable quality were measured with only a few thin Si membranes. Expecting application

of PXR of non-relativistic electrons as base for a source of tunable x-rays, problem of thin

single crystal membrane target must be a matter of high-tech challenge.

7

These results are obtained in the framework of ISTC project #B626.

[1] I.D. Feranchuk, A. Ulyanenkov, J. Harada, J.C.H. Spence // Phys. Rev. E, v. 62, No3 (2000)

4225.

[2] V.G.Baryshevsky, I.D. Feranchuk // J. de Phys. (Paris), v. 44, (1983) 913.

[3] Yu.S. Korobochko, V.F. Kosmach, V.I. Mineev // Sov. JETP, v. 21 (1965) 834.

[4] G.M. Reese, J.C.H. Spence, N. Yamamoto // Philos. Mag. A, v. 49, No5 (1984) 697.

[5] K.S. Vecchio, D.B. Williams // Journ. of Microscopy, v. 147, pt. 1 (1987) 15.

8

