5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
1
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

2005 International Linear Collider Workshop - Stanford, U.S.A.

Monolithic CMOS Pixel R&D for the ILC at LBNL

M. Battaglia
Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley and
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, CA 94720, USA
G. Abrams, P. Denes, L.C. Greiner, B. Hooberman, L. Tompkins, H.H. Wieman
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, CA 94720, USA

An R&D program on monolithic CMOS pixel sensors for application at the ILC has been started at LBNL. This
program proﬁts of signiﬁcant synergies with other R&D activities on CMOS pixel sensors. The project activities after
the ﬁrst semester of the R&D program are reviewed.

1. INTRODUCTION

The anticipated ILC physics program requires pixel sensors with performances well beyond those obtained for the
experiments at LHC in terms of single point resolution and material budget. At the same time the ILC experimental
environment, with its lower event rate and radiation ﬂux, admits Si sensors that are substantially thinner, more precise
and more segmented than at the LHC and thus motivates new directions for R&D to achieve these performance [1].
LBNL has played a major role in Si detector development and it is currently engaged in a number of related projects,
including the ATLAS pixel project, thick CCD development for SNAP, CMOS pixel R&D for the STAR upgrade and
also CPCCDs and CMOS pixels for application at synchrotron light sources and electron microscopy. Monolithic
CMOS pixel sensors oﬀer several desirable features for application in collider experiments. The STAR experiment
at RHIC has engaged in the ﬁrst vertex detector based on CMOS pixels, under the guidance of the STAR group at
LBNL. The ILC R&D program aims at addressing key R&D issues, building on the signiﬁcant know how established
at LBNL, and exploiting synergies and opportunities at the interface between these diﬀerent ﬁelds of applications.

The R&D program on CMOS pixel sensors for the ILC started in Fall 2004 and it is addressing three main
issues: the characterization of pixel sensors and the simulation of their response in the ILC physics and background
environment, the test and characterization of thinned pixel sensors and the design and testing of new pixel test
structures embedding on chip data reduction capabilities to speciﬁcations set by the ILC requirements. This paper
reviews the project activities after the ﬁrst semester of the R&D program.

2. SENSOR CHARACTERIZATION

In order to perform tests of charge collection a setup based on an highly collimated light beam has been developed.
The system uses a set of LED and laser diodes of diﬀerent wavelengths, in the range 850 nm < λ < 1300 nm, pigtailed
to a single-mode Corning HI1060 optical ﬁber with a 6 µm core diameter and a numerical aperture of 0.14. The
light is focused through an achromatic doublet lens, with 5 mm focal length, onto the detector surface. The choice
of laser wavelength allows to probe the charge collection mechanism from a penetration depth of 15 µm to the full
wafer thickness. The system is mounted on a pneumatic isolation workstation to reduce the eﬀect of vibrations. The
light beam position on the detector plane and the focal distance is controlled by a computer-controlled x − y stage
with sub-µm resolution.

The laser diode can be operated both in DC and in pulsed mode. Laser pulses are generated by modulating a
DC current source with a fast pulse through a bias-tee (Picosecond Pulse Lab Model 5550B). The drive pulse is
generated by a Picosecond Pulse Lab pulser (Model 2600) and allows pulse lengths in the range 0.5-100 ns which

0811

N
S

/

20

15

10

5

0

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-6

-4

-2

0

2

6

4

Figure 1: Single pixel cluster generated by a LED pulse focused on a MIMOSA-5 pixel detector.

can be triggered from the FPGA controlling the chip readout, thus ensuring its synchronization with the detector
readout cycle. In order to reduce the sensor noise, measurements can be conducted in a test chamber able to reach
−75oC.

The set-up has been tested using several MIMOSA-5 chips [2]. Light can be focused to a spot smaller than the pitch
size of 17 µm, such that the induced signal appears on a single pixel (see Figure 1). In these conditions, extensive
scans can be performed to determine the cluster size and the charge collection properties as a function of the position
of the light spot to the reference pixel.

In the test set-up the detector is mounted on a mezzanine card, speciﬁc to the chip design, connected to a readout
board. This includes a Xilinx FPGA for controlling the readout sequence and 12-bit ADCs. Data is transferred
from the board to the DAQ PC through a National Instruments I/O card. Data reduction can be performed online
within a LabView program. This program controls also the x − y stage position, the laser and the chip bias voltage
and current. It computes pedestals and noise, in absence of signal, and performs correlated double sampling (CDS)
and pedestal subtraction. The data is then transformed into the LCIO format, which is the standard as persistency
model for ILC data, and written to disk for the subsequent oﬄine analysis. A C++ program performs pedestal
and noise initialization, if not already done on-line, updates their values through the run and produces tuples for
further analysis and cluster visualization in ROOT. Chip pedestal, noise and dead or noisy pixels can also be stored in
a condition database and retrieved for analysis. The use of a standard LCIO format, allows the same clustering and
reconstruction software to be applied to both real lab test data and events simulated using GEANT 4.

3. SENSOR BACK-THINNING

Sensor thickness is a major issue in the design of the ILC Vertex Tracker. The requirement to obtain a multiple
scattering term as low as ≃ 10 (µm/GeV) /pt in the track extrapolation accuracy, for a multi-layered detector, pushes
on the sensor thickness. Further, the amount of material located in front of the calorimeter needs to be minimized to
allow for optimal energy ﬂow performance. CMOS pixel sensors, with their active epitaxial layer of only few µm to
≃ 15 µm, can be back-thinned without losing, in principle, any signiﬁcant fraction of the collected signal. However,
there are several factors which need to be veriﬁed. Signal losses may arise both from disturbances to the charge
collection mechanism introduced by the back-thinning process as well as by the loss of charge carriers created in the
bulk. Several MIMOSA-5 chips have already been back-thinned to 50 µm [3], tested with a 55F e source and found to
function. The thinning has been performed on diced chips with an yield of ≃94% and a thickness constant to better
than 5 µm. In order to carefully assess the eﬀects of the back-thinning process on the charge collection mechanism,
a new set of tests is presently being conducted. They aim at a full characterization of the same pixel sensors, both
before and after back-thinning, for various thickness values. A set of six MIMOSA-5 chips are being used for these
tests. The test procedures includes the characterization of the chip response to laser light of diﬀerent wavelengths

0811

and to a collimated 55F e X-ray source. The procedure being adopted is as follows. Detectors are ﬁrst mounted on a
bare mezzanine card using WaferGrip dissolvable thin ﬁlm adhesive and wire-bonded. Afterward the detector chip is
masked and the mezzanine card is loaded with its components. After having been fully characterized in the test setup
described above, the detector is removed and sent for back-thinning [3]. The thinned detector is then glued back on
the mezzanine card and wire bonded. This procedure has already been successfully tested. The back-grinding process
is able to accommodate for the small residue of bond wire left on the bonding pads and deliver the chips ground to
the correct thickness and with parallel sides. We begin by characterizing the detector gain by calibrating to the 55F e
5.9 keV peak. Since the gain depends on the reference voltage supplied to each of the 4 sectors of the detector this
also allows to optimize the voltage setting. The study of the charge collected for the 5.9 keV X-rays converting under
a single pixel, will provide a ﬁrst characterization of the charge collection properties of the sensors before and after
thinning. The detector response to the collimated laser spot, will allow to compare the charge collection process for
charge carriers produced at diﬀerent depths, depending on the laser wavelength.

4. CHIP DESIGN

We are leveraging developments in other areas in order to support vertex detector R&D for the ILC. As a ﬁrst step,
we have made a small active pixel test chip in the AMS 0.35 µm OPTO process. Processes speciﬁcally for CMOS
imagers (so-called OPTO) are excellent candidates for particle detection applications, as they have thicker epitaxial
regions, and thus better signal to noise performance, and much lower leakage current compared to conventional digital
processes. The circuit consists of arrays of 3-transistor active pixels. An identical 3T layout is repeated at 10, 20 and
40 µm pitch in order to study charge collection properties and optimize the pixel size (see Figure 2). Five analog
outputs are provided, and the column multiplexers are arranged so that ﬁve adjacent pixels are output at the same
time. Testing of the chip will be carried out in Fall 2005.

Figure 2: Layout of the CMOS pixel chip designed at LBNL and produced in the AMS 0.35 OPTO process. The chip has
48×144 10 µm pixels, 24×72 20 µm pixels and 12×36 40 µ pixels.

Although this ﬁrst test circuit has only analog outputs, a device for the ILC should have on-chip digitization. We
have begun to study ADC options. One possibility is to use a per-column Wilkinson architecture. Active pixel sensors
in 0.25 µm CMOS have already been developed at LBNL, for a diﬀerent application, with 10-bit Wilkinson ADCs

0811

on a 19 µm pitch. Although the Wilkinson architecture is attractive, as it is simple and has a low power dissipation,
speed capabilities are marginal for the ILC application. Therefore we are presently considering a pipelined approach
for a pixel architecture with analog CDS. An N-bit pipelined ADC can, in principle, be constructed from N cells
consisting of a 1-bit ADC, a 1-bit DAC and a gain 2 ampliﬁer. As the operation is pipelined, each stage can make
use of the full digitizing time, i.e. a 4-bit pipelined ADC running at 50 MHz would provide a digital output every
20 ns, with a 60 ns latency and each cell would use the full 20 ns for the 1-bit operation. The 1-bit approach fails
when oﬀsets are taken into account, so 1.5-bit ADCs and DACs are used. As precision requirements are reduced,
the pipelined approach improves in speed, power consumption and size, so that a 4-5 bit pipelined ADC on a 20 µm
pitch at ≃1 mW/channel should be feasible.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Director, Oﬃce of Science, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract
No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. This research used resources of the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing
Center, which is supported by the Oﬃce of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-
AC03-76SF00098. This activity is carried out in collaboration with IReS, Strasbourg (France). We wish to thank
Marc Winter for sharing with us precious know how and providing several chips developed by his group. We are also
grateful to Howard Matis and Michelle Tuchscher for their help.

References

[1] M. Battaglia, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 530 (2004), 33.
[2] Yu. Gornushkin et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 513 (2003), 291.
[3] The back-thinning

commercial process done

is

a

(http://www.aptekindustries.com/).

at Aptek

Industries,

Inc.,

San Jose, CA

0811

