5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
2
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Three-dimensional visualisation of tracks in OPERA
nuclear emulsion ﬁlms

J. Dameta, E. Pereiro L´opezb, A. Sasovc

a

Laboratoire d’Annecy-le-vieux de Physique des Particules,
LAPP,9 Chemin de Bellevue - BP 110 F-74 941 Annecy-le-Vieux CEDEX - France
European Synchrotron Radiation Facility
6, rue Jules Horowitz - BP 220 F-38 043 Grenoble - France
c SkyScan, Vluchtenburgstraat 3, B-2630 Aartselaar, Belgium

b

Abstract

The possibility of a three-dimensional visualisation/reconstruction of
tracks in nuclear emulsion ﬁlms using X-ray imaging is described in this
paper. The feasibility of the technique is established with experimental
results.

1 Introduction

Photographic emulsions have been proposed as detectors in 1952 for the study
of high energy interaction in the cosmic radiation [1]. Nuclear emulsions are
since used as high resolution tracking devices to study charged particles. The
photographic method has been developed for the study of nuclear processes and
used for discoveries concerning the mesons. One of the early use of emulsion
was in 1959 in the study of the composition of the Van Allen belts [2].
More recently, neutrino physics experiments used emulsions for unambiguous
detection of charged tau lepton in ντ interactions. Using nuclear emulsion de-
tectors, the CHORUS experiment has set competitive limits on neutrino oscil-
lations [3] and the DONUT experiment has established the existence of the ντ
lepton [4]. The OPERA experiment [5] actually under construction at the Gran
Sasso laboratory aims to conﬁrm the neutrino ﬂavour change.

For our experimental study we used OPERA-like emulsions which are dis-
cribed in section 2. Results obtained with a new X-ray nano-tomograph system
developped by SkyScan are discussed in section 3. Samples have been scanned
at the ID19 beamline of the ESRF, results are shown in section 4.

2 OPERA nuclear emulsions

OPERA nuclear emulsion plates developped jointly by the FujiFilm company
and the department of Fundamental Particle physics laboratory of the university

1

of Nagoya are produced in an industrial mode. Dimensions of the sheets are
10 × 12.5 cm2 large and 300 µm thin. Each plate is composed of a 50 µm layer
of emulsion on both side of a 200µm thick plastic base. A schematic outline
is shown in Fig.1. Emulsion layers consist of gelatin containing silver bromide
crystals.

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of an OPERA-like nuclear emulsion with an emul-
sion layer on both side of a plastic base. A 1µm plastic layer is inserted in the
middle of each emulsion layer.

As a charged particle passes through the emulsion plate, silver bromide crys-
tals are ionised and form after development metallic silver grains (smaller than
a micrometer in diameter) opaque to light. Tracks hence appear as a serie of
aligned silver grains.
The read out of the nuclear emulsions in OPERA is done by automatited op-
tical microscopes. The microspcope moves along the perpendicular axis of the
emulsion. During the displacement, images are grabbed. The emulsion is thus
virtually sliced into layers on which silver grains appear as black clusters and
tracks inside an emulsion layer (micro tracks) are reconstructed by using a pat-
tern recognition algorithm.

The X ray scanning technique can improve the reconstruction of microtracks
with a precise localisation of the silver grains and can give a direct visualisation
of the segments. Moreover this technique could lead to a precise counting of
the grains along tracks and could thus be used as a powerful tool for particle
identiﬁcation. Indeed the location of grains with optical microscopes is limited
by the focal depth of the objectives ( 3µm in the case of the OPERA scanning
system.)

3 SkyScan-2011 NanoTomograph

Precise tree-dimensional internal structural analysis of elements is now possible
by X-ray nanotomography [6]. SkyScan-2011, illustrated in Fig.2, is a compact
laboratory X-Ray system for the nondestructive three-dimensional reconstruc-
tion of the objects internal microstructure with spatial resolution of 150 to 250
nanometers. No preparation, coating or vacuum treatment is needed.

2

Figure 2: The SkyScan-2011 system.

3.1 Results

We performed a test using an OPERA-like emulsion that had not been exposed
to any beam. The emulsion had been checked using a simple optical microscope.
Tracks from cosmics rays have been clearly identiﬁed although the emulsion has
smaller dimension than standard OPERA sheets. The emulsion layers were no
thicker than 30 µm.

A small sample from the emulsion has then been scanned with the SkyScan-
2011 nano-tomograph. Two typical kinds of shapes are identiﬁed in the emul-
sion: A cluster of silver grains with big absoption as shown in Fig.3 and small
aligned silver grains as shown in Fig.4. Both ﬁgures correspond to the same
sample at diﬀerent depth. Lighter thin bands ( 30µm large) on the sides are
emulsions layers, the darker large band in the middle ( 190µm large) is the plas-
tic base of the sheet.
From the image data set, a three-dimensional reconstruction of the track inside
the emulsion layer is done as illustrated in Fig.5. The reconstructed microtrack
is more likely to be a track generated by an alpha particle.

The scanning time for a sample (1mm long) is one hour. The 3D reconstruc-

tion is done oﬀ-line.

3

Figure 3: Large cluster of silver grains in a layer of an OPERA-like emulsion
ﬁlm in a view of 500x500 µm2.

4 High-resolution Diﬀraction Topography Beam-

A second test has been performed at the high-resolution diﬀraction beamline
ID 19 of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility. A measurement with a
spatial resolution of 0.7 µm has been performed.

line

4.1 Results

As shown on Fig:6, particle tracks can clearly be identiﬁed in both emulsion
layers, albiet the slight movement of the sample during the tomography scan.
They appear as brigth star shapes or lines due to this displacement. More pre-
cise measurements can be done by ﬁxating the sample in the resin.

Once the image is treated base-tracks (connected segments from each emul-

sion sides) can be identiﬁed, as illustrated on Fig:7
Results of this test patently show track segments are identiﬁed in both layers
of the emulsion. Few of these segements can be connected and are most likely
tracks generated by cosmics.

4

Figure 4: Aligned sliver grains in a layer of an OPERA-like emulsion ﬁlm in a
view of 500x500 µm2.

5 Summary and outlook

We demonstrated that tracks of charged particles inside nuclear emulsions can
be reconstructed in a three dimensional view using X-ray microtomography. The
present limitation of the size of samples to be scanned restricts the use of this
technique, but results presented in this note indicate that this is an auspicious
starting point as fast technological improvements are expected in the coming
years.
Modern X-ray imaging systems oﬀer unprecedented possibilities of 3D recon-
struction and measurements of charged tracks in nuclear emulsions.
Performances to reconstruct tracks as required in OPERA would require inten-
sive test beam compaign and could be described in future papers.

References

[1] M. Kaplon, B. Peters and D. M. Ritsin, Phys. Rev. 85, 900-903 (1952)

5

Figure 5: Three-dimensional track from cosmics ray in the top side of an OPERA
emulsion ﬁlm.

[2] Stanley C. Freden and R. Stephen White, Phys. Rev. Lett. 3, 911 (1959)

[3] Eskut, E. et al. (CHORUS Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B497 (2001) 8-22.

[4] T. Patzak et al., Europhysics News (2001) Vol. 32 No. 2

[5] The OPERA Collaboration. OPERA proposal, CERN/SPSC 2000-028,

SPSC/P318, LNGS P25/2000

[6] A. Sasov, Proc. SPIE Vol. 5535, p. 201-211, Developments in X-Ray To-

mography IV; Oct.2004.

6

Figure 6: Aligned sliver grains in both layers of an OPERA-like emulsion ﬁlm.

7

Figure 7: Exemples of identiﬁed base-tracks, i.e. Connected segments of aligned
sliver grains in both layers of an OPERA-like emulsion ﬁlm.

8

