5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
7
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
5
1
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Neutrino Factory R&D ∗
K.Long a

a High Energy Physics Group, Department of Physics, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road,
London SW7 2BZ.

Elegant experiments are being carried out, or are in preparation, to improve the precision with which the solar
and atmospheric neutrino-oscillation parameters are known, and to attempt to make a ﬁrst measurement of the
small mixing angle θ13. The compelling case for the development of an accelerator-based neutrino source to serve
the programme of precision measurements of neutrino oscillations and sensitive searches for leptonic-CP violation
that is required to follow these experiments is brieﬂy reviewed. The Neutrino Factory, an intense high-energy
neutrino source based on a stored muon beam, is widely believed to yield a precision and sensitivity superior to
other proposed second-generation facilities. The alternatives are identiﬁed and the case for a critical comparison
of the performance of the various options is presented. Highlights of the exciting international R&D programmes
which are designed to demonstrate the feasibility of the required techniques are then reviewed. The steps that the
international community is taking to produce, by the end of the decade, a full conceptual design for the facility are
described. The ambition of the Neutrino Factory community is to demonstrate the feasibility of a cost-eﬀective
design such that, should forthcoming measurements show that it is required, the facility could be brought into
operation in the second half of the next decade.

1. Introduction

Beams of high-energy electron- and muon-
neutrinos will be produced from intense stored
muon beams at the Neutrino Factory [1]. A
schematic diagram of the main sub-systems of the
accelerator facility is shown in ﬁgure 1. The pro-
cess of generating the stored muon beam starts
with the bombardment of a suitable target with
a high-power pulsed proton beam of moderate en-
ergy (∼ 5−15 GeV). Pions and kaons produced in
the target are captured and allowed to decay to
produce muons; the muons must be accelerated
rapidly to ∼ 20 − 50 GeV before being injected
into the storage ring. The muon beam initially
occupies a very large phase space, making it nec-
essary to develop fast, aﬀordable, large-aperture
acceleration systems and/or a phase-space reduc-
tion (cooling) technique that is rapid when com-
pared to the muon lifetime. The feasibility of
such a Neutrino Factory has been addressed in a
number of studies [2,3,4,5,6]. These studies de-
ﬁned the programme of R&D required to estab-

∗Talk presented at the High Intensity Frontier Workshop,
La Biodola, Isola d’Elba, Italy, 28th May – 1st June 2005.

lish technological solutions for each of the key ac-
celerator systems. The main purpose of this con-
tribution to the proceedings of the High Intensity
Frontier Workshop is to review the status of these
R&D programmes (section 3).

In making the case that the Neutrino Fac-
tory is the tool of choice for the era of precision
measurements of neutrino oscillations and high-
sensitivity searches for leptonic-CP violation, it is
necessary to review the Neutrino Factory physics
reach in the context of the present generation of
experiments and the performance of other pro-
posed second-generation neutrino facilities (such
as second-generation super-conventional beams
[7,8] or beta-beams [9]). Furthermore, the impor-
tance of the study of the neutrino is such that
it is essential to bring into operation the best
possible second-generation programme at around
the time the present-generation experiments are
being completed. The experimental programme
planned for the next ﬁve years is discussed in sec-
tion 2 and used to identify the timescale on which
it would be desirable to make the case for the
Neutrino Factory.

1

2

-

H

 linac

Proton

driver

Target

and

capture

Phase rotation

and bunching

Ionisation

cooling

Muon acceleration

Muon

storage

Figure 1. Schematic drawing showing the major
sub-systems in the Neutrino Factory accelerator
complex.

2. Motivation

tions

2.1. Phenomenology of neutrino oscilla-

The phenomenon of neutrino oscillations is
readily described by extending the Standard
Model (SM) to include three neutrino mass eigen-
states; ν1, ν2, and ν3 with masses m1, m2 and m3
respectively [10]. The ﬂavour eigenstates, νe, νµ,
and ντ , are obtained by rotating the mass eigen-
states using the unitary matrix U which may be
written:

U = U23U13U12

(1)

where

U23 = 


0
1
0
c23
0 −s23

U13 = 


U12 = 


c13
0
−s13e−iδ
s12
c12
−s12
c12
0
0

,



0
s23
c23,

0 s13eiδ
1
0

0
c13

,





0
0
1

,





(2)

(3)

(4)

12 = m2

23 = m2

2 and ∆m2

the cosines and sines of the three mixing angles
θ12, θ13, and θ23 are denoted c12 etc., and δ is
a phase parameter. Measurements of neutrino-
oscillation probabilities can not be used to deter-
mine the absolute neutrino-mass scale but, since
the probabilities depend on the mass-squared dif-
ferences, ∆m2
2 −m2
3 −m2
1,
neutrino oscillations can be used to determine the
mass hierarchy. Electron neutrinos produced in
the sun undergo elastic scattering with electrons
in the material of the sun. This, the MSW eﬀect
[10], modiﬁes the eﬀective mass that appears in
the electron-neutrino oscillation probability and
has been used to determine the sign of ∆m2
12.
The sign of ∆m2
23 can be determined in oscillation
experiments for which the baseline is suﬃciently
long (& 1000 km) and for which the neutrino en-
ergy is suﬃciently high (Eν & 10 GeV).

Leptonic-CP violation will occur if δ 6= 0 (and
sin θ13 6= 0). Measurements of the diﬀerence be-
tween the oscillation probabilities for neutrinos
and anti-neutrinos can be used to determine δ.
Such measurements require large data sets and
appropriately chosen baselines and neutrino ener-
gies. To obtain the required neutrino-interaction
rate requires either a very large detector or a very
intense source (or both).

The challenge to the neutrino community is to
measure all the mixing angles of the MNS ma-
trix as precisely as possible, to determine the
sign of ∆m2
23 and to measure precisely ∆m2
12
and ∆m2
23, and, by measuring δ, to discover
leptonic-CP violation if it occurs. The funda-
mental
importance of the search for leptonic-
CP violation is self-evident. Precision measure-
ments of the parameters that govern neutrino os-

cillations are essential if a complete understand-
ing of the nature of the neutrino is to be ob-
tained.
Such measurements will either estab-
lish the minimal model outlined above or, by
establishing parameter sets inconsistent with it,
point to the existence of entirely new phenom-
ena; for example, the three-generation scenario
would have to be abandoned should MiniBOONE
[11] conﬁrm the presently unexplained LSND re-
sult [12,13,14,15]. The second-generation neu-
trino source must, therefore, be capable of doing
both.

2.2. Context and timescales

Data from the Sudbury Neutrino Observa-
tory (SNO) [16,17] and KamLAND [18,19] ex-
periments,
together with data from Super-
Kamiokande [20] and elsewhere have been used
to determine θ12 with a precision of around 10%
and ∆m2
12 with a precision of 10% – 20%. The
parameters sin2 θ23 and ∆m2
23 have been de-
termined using atmospheric neutrino data from
Super-Kamiokande [21] and veriﬁed using an
accelerator-based neutrino source by the K2K ex-
periment [22]. With ﬁve to seven years of run-
ning, the MINOS long-baseline experiment [23,
24], which has begun to take data, will determine
θ23 and ∆m2
23 with a precision of around 10%.
The two CNGS experiments OPERA [25] and
ICARUS [26,27], which are designed to observe
ντ appearance and are scheduled to start data
taking in 2008, will verify aspects of the mixing
formalism outlined above. Two ﬁrst-generation
super-beam experiments, T2K in Japan [28,29]
and NOνA in the US [30], are being mounted with
the objective of demonstrating that sin2 2θ13 is
greater than zero. The T2K experiment will start
in 2009 and, after ﬁve years of data taking, will
be sensitive to sin2 2θ13 down to about 0.005 at
90% C.L. NOνA, which has recently been granted
scientiﬁc approval by the FNAL PAC, will yield
a comparable sensitivity. Both T2K and NOνA
will improve the determination of θ23 and ∆m2
23
to the level of a few percent after ﬁve years of
data taking. However, neither T2K (Phase I) nor
NOνA will have the sensitivity required to dis-
cover leptonic-CP violation or to deliver the pre-
cision measurements of the parameters that are

3

required for a full understanding of neutrino os-
cillations.

To take the study of neutrino oscillations fur-
ther requires a second-generation facility ready
to begin operation in the second half of the next
decade. This facility must be capable of making
high-precision measurements of the mixing an-
gles and mass-squared diﬀerences and of making
searches for leptonic-CP violation of great sensi-
tivity. The precision of the measurements must
be such that sensitive tests of the consistency of
the theoretical framework can be made. Three
types of facility have been proposed to provide
the neutrino beams required to serve this second-
generation programme. The Neutrino Factory
gives the best performance over almost all of the
parameter space and is believed to be the ‘facility
of choice’. Second-generation super-conventional-
beam experiments may be an attractive option in
certain scenarios. A beta-beam, in which elec-
tron neutrinos (or anti-neutrinos) are produced
from the decay of stored radioactive-ion beams,
in combination with a second-generation super-
beam, may be competitive with the Neutrino Fac-
tory [31].

Following the feasibility studies that were car-
ried out at the turn of the century, an inter-
national programme of R&D into the accelera-
tor complex has grown up, fostered in part by
the ‘NuFact’ (Neutrino Factory, super-beam and
beta-beam) workshop series which was initiated
in 1999. The programme of hardware develop-
ment, reviewed below, is now reaching maturity.
To put in place the facility (or facilities) required
to serve the second-generation programme of pre-
cision measurement requires that a conceptual de-
sign be prepared by the end of the decade to-
gether with as broad a consensus as possible on
the roadmap for its implementation. A step on
this road was taken at NuFact05 with the launch
of a one-year international ‘scoping study’ of a
future Neutrino Factory and super-beam facility
[32]. The objectives of the scoping study are to
[33]:

• Evaluate the physics case for a second-
generation super-beam, a beta-beam facil-
ity and the Neutrino Factory and to present

4

a critical comparison of their performance;

• Evaluate the various options for the acceler-
ator complex with a view to deﬁning a base-
line set of parameters for the sub-systems
that can be taken forward in a subsequent
conceptual-design phase; and to

• Evaluate the options for the neutrino de-
tection systems with a view to deﬁning a
baseline set of detection systems to be taken
forward in a subsequent conceptual-design
phase.

The conclusions of the scoping study will be pre-
sented at NuFact06 and published in a written
report in September 2006.

3. Neutrino Factory R&D

It is not possible in a short article such as this
to do justice to the Neutrino Factory R&D pro-
grammes that are being carried out in Europe,
Japan and the US which, together, cover all as-
pects of the facility. The following paragraphs
therefore emphasise the key elements of the pro-
gramme.

3.1. The proton-driver front-end

The Neutrino Factory proton driver is required
to deliver 1 − 4 MW of proton-beam power at
an energy of 5 − 15 GeV in ∼ 1 ns bunches.
Machines of similar speciﬁcation are required to
drive a next generation spallation-neutron source,
a radioactive heavy-ion facility, and to gener-
ate intense ‘super-conventional’ neutrino beams.
Futhermore, high-power proton sources are re-
quired to serve applications such as the transmu-
tation of nuclear waste. Such CW sources share
many of the technological challenges presented by
high-power pulsed proton beams.

The activation of the accelerator elements
through the loss of a fraction of the primary beam
power is the principal issue for the development
of a high-power proton driver. To keep the acti-
vation within acceptable limits requires that the
beam-loss rate should be no more than 1 W/m
[35]. To achieve this challenging speciﬁcation re-
quires that the beam quality at injection be ex-
ceptionally good. Several programmes aimed at

developing the technologies required to produce
such high quality beams are underway [36]. The
programmes emphasise the front end of the ac-
celerator, i.e.
from the ion source up to ener-
gies of a few MeV. For pulsed proton beams, the
development of high-quality beam choppers is of
particular importance.
‘Choppers’ are designed
to remove unwanted bunches from the beam with
100% eﬃciency and are required if low-loss in-
jection into accumulator or compressor rings or
clean on-oﬀ transitions are to be achieved.

Such parallel developments are a strength as
they allow the sharing of expertise and informa-
tion and give conﬁdence that the front-end of the
Neutrino Factory accelerator complex will be de-
veloped on an appropriate timescale.

3.2. Target and capture

Eﬃcient pion production may be achieved by
bombarding a rod-like high-Z material with the
primary proton beam. For solid targets, fatigue
caused by beam-induced thermal shock is the
principal issue that must be addressed in the de-
sign of the target [37]. To reduce the eﬀect of
shock damage to solid targets may require that
the target be replaced every beam pulse. Sev-
eral solid-target schemes have been proposed [38].
A free-ﬂowing liquid-mercury-jet target is a con-
ceptually simple alternative [38]. Shock-induced
processes cause the break-up of the jet, therefore
the jet velocity must be chosen such that a new
volume of liquid mercury is exposed to the beam
every pulse.

Two schemes have been proposed by which the
particles produced in the target may be captured.
The ﬁrst uses high-ﬁeld solenoid magnets to cap-
ture both positive and negative particles at the
same time [3]. The second calls for a magnetic
horn to focus either positive or negative parti-
cles into the subsequent transport and decay sec-
tions [5]. The horn scheme has the advantage that
the focussing element closest to the target itself is
relatively simple. The advantage of the solenoid
scheme is that an eﬃciency gain of a factor of
two can be achieved if the downstream accelera-
tor complex is designed to manipulate and store
µ+ and µ− simultaneously [4]. In each case, sig-
niﬁcant engineering work needs to be carried out

to ensure that the target station can be operated
safely.

Particle production in the target has been stud-
ied [34]. Though particle-production models give
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent rates and spectra, the re-
sults indicate that a proton driver with an energy
in the range ∼ 5 − 15 GeV is likely to be suit-
able. In order to optimise the target and capture
system, it will be important to bench-mark the
various simulation codes against measured parti-
cle distributions. Two experiments, HARP [39]
at CERN and MIPP [40] at FNAL have been
(or are being) carried out to measure these dis-
tributions. The HARP experiment has recently
presented results for forward-particle production
[41]. The large-angle data, which is expected to
be ﬁnalised soon, will be important in tuning the
particle-production models.

3.2.1. Characterisation of materials

The development of the conceptual design for
the Neutrino Factory target station rests on an
understanding of the properties of the various
proposed materials under extreme conditions. Ir-
raditation studies of solid targets are being car-
ried out at BNL and at CERN [38]. These studies
include the investigation of the degree to which
the bombarded material can be annealed by bak-
ing at high temperature. The intensity, repetition
rate, and beam time available for these studies are
insuﬀucient to simulate target exposures compa-
rable to long-term (several months to a year) use
at the Neutrino Factory. The UK Neutrino Fac-
tory collaboration is therefore developing a tech-
nique in which a high-current pulse is used to gen-
erate, in a sample of tantalum wire, energy den-
sities comparable to those expected in the Neu-
trino Factory target [42]. The current-pulse tech-
nique will be used to mount a ‘life-time’ test. The
numerical techniques needed to extrapolate these
measurements to the Neutrino Factory target us-
ing LS-DYNA [43] are being developed in parallel.
Measurements of the eﬀect of intense proton-
beam pulses on liquid mercury have been car-
ried out at BNL, and studies of the development
of mercury jets both with and without magnetic
ﬁeld have been carried out at Grenoble and at
BNL respectively [44]. For liquid-jet targets, the

5

energy deposited by the beam can be suﬃcient to
cause voids to be created in the body of the jet by
the shock-induced transient pressure waves. This
process, referred to as cavitation, is being stud-
ied experimentally at CERN using a high-power
laser impinging on a jet of water [45]. Numerical
studies of the passage of particle beams through
mercury-jet targets have been developed and now
give a good description of the measured behaviour
[46].

3.2.2. The liquid-mercury-jet target

The liquid-metal option for a pion-production
target capable of operating with a multi-MW
pulsed proton beam at a Neutrino Factory will be
tested in the MERIT experiment [47]. MERIT,
which has recently been given scientiﬁc approval
at CERN and will be carried out by an inter-
national collaboration, will expose a mercury jet
of 1 cm diameter and ﬂowing at 20 m/s in a
15 T solenoidal magnetic ﬁeld to an intense pro-
ton beam from the CERN PS. MERIT is sched-
uled to begin to take data in 2007.

A schematic diagram of the experiment is
shown in ﬁgure 2. The proton beam from the
PS is horizontal and enters the experiment from
the right. The experiment is tilted so that the
angle between the proton beam and the mercury-
jet axis is 100 mrad. Liquid nitrogen will be used
to cool the copper coils of the solenoid magnet to
80 K. The magnet, pulsed with a 5 MVA power
supply, will deliver a 15 T ﬁeld for a duration
of 1 s. The mercury jet will be injected into the
15 cm diameter warm bore of the magnet and the
beam-target interaction will be recorded through
viewing ports by high-speed cameras via ﬁbre-
optic cables.

Short bunch trains containing between one and
four bunches of 5 − 7 × 1012 protons will be ex-
tracted from the PS. If all four bunches are ﬁlled,
a total of 28 × 1012 protons will impinge on the
target within a 2 µs spill giving a peak energy
deposition of 180 J/g. By varying the pattern of
ﬁlled proton bunches the experiment will also be
able to study the eﬀect of cavitation.

6

Figure 2. Schematic diagram of the MERIT ex-
periment at the neutron time-of-ﬂight (nToF) fa-
cility at CERN [47].

3.3. Ionisation cooling

The muon beam that emerges from the decay
channel ﬁlls a large phase space. For example, in
US Study II the transverse emittance at the exit
of the decay channel is 12 mm [3]. The spread of
the muons in the longitudinal phase space is also
very large (∼ 60 mm in Study II). Eﬃcient, cost
eﬀective, acceleration of the muon beam requires
that the phase space be modiﬁed. The phase-
rotation and bunching systems that follow the de-
cay channel are required to produce a beam with
an energy spread of ∼ 60 MeV which is appropri-
ately bunched to match the subsequent cooling
sections.

Each of the ﬁve Neutrino Factory conceptual
design studies have considered the beneﬁt of re-
ducing the emittance of the muon beam (cooling)
before injecting it into the acceleration and stor-
age systems. There are two principal motivations
for this: to increase the number of muons inside
the acceptance of the downstream accelerators;
and to keep the cost of the muon acceleration
system to a minimum.

At the end of the decay channel, the muons
have a momentum of roughly 200 MeV/c. The
time-dilated lifetime of the muon is short (∼
4.7µs) making it essential that cooling and ac-
celeration take place as rapidly as possible. Ioni-

sation cooling, a process in which the muon beam
is caused to pass through an alternating series of
liquid-hydrogen absorbers and accelerating RF-
cavities, is the technique by which it is proposed
to cool the muon beam prior to acceleration. Var-
ious ‘gain factors’ have been deﬁned to quantify
the gain in performance due to the cooling chan-
nel (see table 1). Systems that give gain factors
of between 2 and 10 have been devised. Since a
factor of Γ gain in stored muon-beam intensity
implies a reduction, by a factor Γ, in the running
time required to achieve a particular total neu-
trino ﬂux, and a decrease in emitance of the muon
beam entering the acceleration section is likely to
lead to signiﬁcantly lower costs for muon acceler-
ation, it will be important to make a careful op-
timisation, for performance and cost, of the cool-
ing and acceleration systems. The engineering
demonstration of the ionisation-cooling technique
will be carried out by the international Muon
Ionisation Cooling Experiment (MICE) collabo-
ration [48]. The MICE experiment, which has
been approved, will take place at the Rutherford
Appleton Laboratory (RAL), using muons pro-
duced by the ISIS 800 MeV proton synchrotron.
The status of the experiment is reviewed in the
paragraphs that follow.

3.3.1. The international Muon Ionisation

Cooling Experiment

The principal components of the MICE exper-
iment are shown in ﬁgure 3. Two, functionally
equivalent, spectrometers are placed upstream
and downstream of a single lattice cell of the
Study II cooling channel. In the Study II design
approximately 1014 µ/s pass through the chan-
nel. The lateral dimensions of the beam are such
that space-charge forces can be ignored making
it possible to run MICE as a single particle ex-
periment in which the Neutrino Factory bunch is
reconstructed oﬄine using an ensemble of parti-
cles recorded in the experiment. At the nominal
input emittance of ǫin = 6π mm a cooling eﬀect
(ǫout/ǫin − 1, where ǫout is the output emittance)
of ∼ 10% is expected. The cooling eﬀect will be
measured with a precision of 1% (i.e. (ǫout/ǫin−1)
will be measured with an absolute precision of
0.1%).

7

Table 1
Survey of the gain aﬀorded using ionisation cooling in a number of conceptual design studies of the
Neutrino Factory.
Design

Number of
cooling cells
26

Gain factor Cooling Comment
per cell (%)
6

7

Study II [3]

Study IIa [4]

CERN [5]

26

36

–

2

10

2

7

–

NuFact-J [6]

1.5 − 2

Increase in phase-space density
in acceptance of downstream
accelerator.
Increase in number of muons
in acceptance of subsequent
muon acceleration section.
Increase in muon yield at
2 GeV over optimised Neutrino
Factory without cooling.
Acceleration based on FFAGs.
Performance improvement when
absorber is included in FFAG
ring giving 6D cooling eﬀect.

The MICE cooling channel consists of three
(AFC) modules and two
absorber/focus-coil
accelerating-cavity/coupling-coil (RFCC) mod-
ules. The AFC modules each contain a 21 l
liquid-hydrogen absorber inside a pair of super-
conducting coils that bring the beam to a fo-
cus in the centre of the absorber. Liquid hydro-
gen is the most eﬃcient ionisation-cooling ma-
terial because it has a large speciﬁc ionisation
and a comparatively large radiation length. Safe
operation of the system in the presense of liq-
uid hydrogen leads to signiﬁcant engineering con-
straints. The AFC modules and the hydrogen
system each have both active and passive safety
systems. The hydrogen will be stored in the
form of metal hydride when the absorber is emp-
tied. A vigorous R&D programme is underway
to demostrate the safe operation of the hydro-
gen system. The super-conducting coils and the
liquid-hydrogen vessel itself are refrigerated using
closed-cycle ‘cryo-coolers’ [49].

The RFCC module must restore the energy-
lost by the muons as they pass through the ab-
sorber. The coupling coil, a short, large diameter
solenoid, provides the magnetic ﬁeld that trans-
ports the muons through the module. The accel-
eration is produced by four 201 MHz copper cavi-
ties which produce a gradient of 8 MV/m. To pro-

duce the required ﬁeld gradient, the cavities must
be electrically closed, yet, to preseve the cooling
eﬀect, the amount of material through which the
beam passes must be minimised. Thin berylium
windows have been developed for this purpose.
The degree of emission from the cavity surfaces is
signiﬁcantly enhanced by the Lorentz force pro-
duced by an intense magnetic ﬁeld [50]. While
reducing the ﬁeld emission in a Neutrino Factory
cooling channel, in which the cavities must oper-
ate at 16 MV/m, is a challenging problem, it has
been estimated that for operation in MICE, the
emission can be kept within acceptable bounds.
The muon beam that enters the experiment
may contain a small pion contamination. The
instrumentation upstream of the cooling chan-
nel is therefore required to distinguish pions from
muons and to measure the phase space coordi-
nates of the muons entering the channel. Down-
stream of the cooling channel, the instrumenta-
tion is required to identify electrons produced in
the channel by muon decays and to measure the
muon phase-space coordinates. The upstream
particle identiﬁcation will be performed using
a scintillator-based time-of-ﬂight (TOF) system
and a threshold Cherenkov counter. The TOF
system will also be used to trigger the experi-
ment and to determine the phase of the RF ﬁelds

8

Figure 3. Drawing of the MICE experiment [48]. The beam enters the experiment from the bot-
tom left-hand corner. The beam ﬁrst passes through one of the scintillator hodoscopes that form the
time-of-ﬂight system. After passing through the upstream spectrometer, the beam passes through three
absorber/focus-coil modules and two cavity/coupling- coil modules before it passes through the down-
stream spectrometer and a second time-of-ﬂight hodoscope, the downstream Cherenkov counter and is
stopped in the electromagnetic calorimeter. The beamline and upstream instrumentation are not shown.

in the cavities as the muon traverses the experi-
ment. The upstream and downstream spectrom-
eters are each composed of a 4 T superconducting
solenoid instrumented with a scintillating-ﬁbre
tracking device. Downstream of the cooling chan-
nel a ﬁnal TOF station, a Cherenkov counter and
a calorimeter are used to distinguish muons and
electrons.

The MICE collaboration will take enough data
to make the uncertainty on the measured cooling
eﬀect systematics limited. It is therefore crucial
that the systematic errors are understood in de-
tail. To do this, the experiment will be built up
in stages. A ﬁrst measurement of cooling, using
the two spectrometers and one AFC module, is
scheduled for 2008. The ﬁrst RFCC module and
a second AFC module will then be installed and
the full MICE cooling channel will be assembled
in 2009.

The MICE experiment will be mounted on ISIS

at the CCLRC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory.
The preparation of the MICE Muon Beam on
ISIS, the MICE Hall and the ﬁrst phase of the
MICE experiment are proceding to schedule. The
ﬁrst data-taking period, in which the muon beam
will be characterised, the instrumentation cali-
brated and the relative systematics of the two
spectrometers will be measured, will begin in
April 2007.

3.4. Acceleration and storage

The short lifetime of the muon leads to the
requirement that the acceleration be as rapid
as possible. Past studies have considered re-
circulating linear accelerators in various topolo-
gies. More recently it has been proposed that
ﬁxed ﬁeld alternating gradient (FFAG) acceler-
ators may oﬀer advantages [51]. Unlike con-
ventional synchrotrons, the magnets within the
FFAG are not ramped with the consequence that

the radius of the particle orbit increases during
acceleration. The radial proﬁle of the magnet
pole-pieces is carefully designed to give a ﬁeld
that varies with radius so as to produce the same
focussing eﬀect for all momenta. Several ‘scaling’
FFAGs, in which the magnetic ﬁeld scales with
radius, have been built in Japan [52]. The scal-
ing FFAG programme is reaching maturity with
the machine proposed for the PRISM experiment
[53]. An alternative to the scaling FFAG is the
‘non-scaling’ FFAG [54].
In a non-scaling ma-
chine the magnets are standard quadrupoles or
combined-function dipoles. However, the settings
are carefully optimised so as to reduce the radial
displacement of the beam during acceleration. An
international collaboration (EMMA) is develop-
ing a proposal to construct a proof-of-principle
non-scaling FFAG [55].

Progress has also been made in developing
schemes for the storage ring, the design of which
is complicated by the need to serve two or more
detectors at diﬀerent long base-lines [56]. To fully
engineer the storage ring will require that the
power radiated from the muon beam in the form
of decay electrons and bremsstrahlung photons be
dealt with using appropriate absorbers.

The experience gained in the construction of
PRISM and EMMA and in the design of the stor-
age rings themselves will be important input to
a future Neutrino Factory design study in which
the cooling, acceleration and storage systems will
have to be optimised together for performance
and cost.

4. Conclusions

A programme of precision measurement of the
properties of the neutrino is important because
the measurements may lead to the discovery of
CP violation in the lepton sector and of the
physical principles that explain the tiny neutrino
masses and the very large neutrino mixing angles
can. It is likely that these measurements will have
a profound impact in astro-physics and cosmol-
ogy, well beyond the conﬁnes of particle physics.
The Neutrino Factory oﬀers better sensitivity and
precision than other second generation facilities,
and the accelerator systems required are being

9

developed by an energetic international commu-
nity. The time is therefore right for the Neutrino
Factory community to take the next bold step, to
produce a conceptual design report by the end of
the decade. If the community is successful in es-
tablishing the conceptual design around the end
of the decade and the results of the present gener-
ation of experiments conﬁrms that the Neutrino
Factory is needed, then the case to expedite the
construction of the Neutrino Factory will be very
strong indeed.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank the organisers for giv-
ing me the opportunity to present this review.
I gratefully acknowledge the help, advice, and
support of my many colleagues within the inter-
national Neutrino Factory community who have
freely discussed their results with me and allowed
me to use their material.

REFERENCES

1. S. Geer, Phys. Rev. D 57 (1998), 6989.

[Erratum-ibid. D 59 (1999), 039903].

2. D. Finley, N. Holtkamp,

eds, “Feasibil-
ity Study on a Neutrino Source Based
on a Muon Storage Ring”,
(2000). See
http://www.fnal.gov/projects/muon collider
/reports.html.

3. S. Ozaki,

J.

eds,

June

Study-II

R. Palmer, M.

Gallardo,
of

Zisman,
”Feasibil-
a Muon-Based Neu-
2001,

and
ity
trino Source”, BNL-52623,
http://www.cap.bnl.gov/mumu/studyii
/FS2-report.html.
et
Beta

tory
and
FNAL-TM-2259,
http://www.cap.bnl.gov/mumu/study2a/.

Fac-
Beam Experiments
BNL-72369-2004,
See

and
Development”,

LBNL-55478.

“Neutrino

al,

4. C. Albright

of

ed,
European

5. A. Blondel,
a
complex”,

ies
tory
http://preprints.cern.ch/cernrep/2004/
2004-002/2004-002.html.
6. NuFactJ working group,

“ECFA/CERN stud-
fac-
neutrino
CERN-2004-022,

“A Feasibility

10

7. A. Blondel

et al.

Study of A Neutrino Factory in Japan”. See
http://www-prism.kek.jp/nufactj/nufactj.pdf
“Workshop on
physics with a Multi MW proton source”,
CERN-SPSC-2004-024, SPSC-M-722. See
http://physicsatmwatt.web.cern.ch
/physicsatmwatt/.

eds.,

8. M.G. Albrow et al., “Physics at a Fermilab

Proton Driver”, hep-ex/0509019.

9. P. Zucchelli, Phys. Lett. B 532 (2002), 166.
10. See for example, B. Kayser, “Neutrino mass,
mixing, and ﬂavor changes” in “The review
of particle physics”, S. Eidelman et al., Phys.
Lett. B592, 1 (2004).

11. S.J. Brice, MiniBooNE Collaboration, Nucl.

Phys. Proc. Suppl. 143, (2005), 115.

12. A. Strumia, Phys. Lett. B 539, (2002), 91.
13. O.L.G. Peres and A.Y. Smirnov, Nucl. Phys.

B 599 (2001), 3.

14. B. Armbruster et al., KARMEN Collabora-

tion, Phys. Rev. D65 (2002), 112001.

15. A. Aguilar et al., LSND Collaboration, Phys.

Rev. D 64, (2001), 112007.

16. B. Aharmim et al., SNO Collaboration,

arXiv:nucl-ex/0502021.

17. Q. R. Ahmad et al., SNO Collaboration,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002), 011301.

18. T. Araki et al., KamLAND Collaboration,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005), 081801.

19. K. Eguchi et al., KamLAND Collaboration,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (2003), 021802.

20. S. Fukuda et al., Super-Kamiokande Collab-

oration, Phys. Lett. B 539 (2002), 179.

21. Y.Ashie et al., Super-Kamiokande Collabora-
tion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004), 101801.
22. Aliu et al., K2K Collaboration, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 94 (2005), 081802.

23. E. Ables et al., MINOS Collaboration, “P-
875: A Long baseline neutrino oscilla-
tion experiment at Fermilab”, FERMILAB-
PROPOSAL-0875.

24. R. Saakian, MINOS Collaboration, Phys.
Atom. Nucl. 67 (2004), 1084 [Yad. Fiz. 67
(2004), 1112.

25. M. Guler et al., OPERA Collaboration,

CERN-SPSC-2000-028.

26. P. Cennini

ICARUS Collabora-
tion,“ICARUS II: A Second generation pro-

et al.,

ton decay experiment and neutrino observa-
tory at the GRAN SASSO laboratory: Pro-
posal”, ICARUS-PROPOSAL (Sep 1993).
27. F. Arneodo et al., ICARUS Collaboration,
“The ICARUS Experiment: A Second gen-
eration proton decay experiment and neu-
trino observatory at the GRAN SASSO labo-
ratory:” LNGS-P28-2001, (Mar 2001), arXiv:
hep-ex/0103008.

28. Y. Itow et al.,“The JHF-Kamioka neutrino

project”, hep-ex/0106019.

29. Y. Hayato, T2K Collaboration, Nucl. Phys.

Proc. Suppl. 143 , 269 (2005).

30. D.S.Ayres

et al., NOvA Collaboration,
“NOvA proposal to build a 30-kiloton oﬀ-axis
detector to study neutrino oscillations in the
Fermilab NuMI beamline”, hep-ex/0503053.
al.,

example,

S.Brice

for

et

31. See

Nucl.Phys.Proc.Suppl.149:111-118,2005.
32. The WWW page for the international scop-
ing study of a future Neutrino Factory
and super-beam facility can be found at
http://hepunx.rl.ac.uk/uknf/wp4/scoping.

“An

33. ISS/2005/01,
scoping
tory
http://www.hep.ph.ic.ac.uk/iss/iss-notes/
ISS Doc1 v02 13-7-2005.pdf.

international
Fac-
facility”,

of
super-beam

study
and

a Neutrino

34. S. Brookes, “Computed Pion Yields from a
Tantalum Rod Target”, contributed paper to
the 7th International Workshop on Neutrino
Factories and Superbeams, NuFact05, Labo-
ratori Nazionali di Frascati, Frascati (Rome),
June 21 - 26, 2005.

35. M.A. Clarke-Gayther et al., Nucl. Phys. B

(Proc. Suppl.) 149 (2005) 323-325.

36. S. Machida, “Proton driver: the evolution of
J-Parc”, contributed paper to the 7th Inter-
national Workshop on Neutrino Factories and
Superbeams, NuFact05, Laboratori Nazionali
di Frascati, Frascati (Rome), June 21 - 26,
2005;
G. Apolllinari, “Proton driver: prospects in
US”, contributed paper to the 7th Interna-
tional Workshop on Neutrino Factories and
Superbeams, NuFact05, Laboratori Nazionali
di Frascati, Frascati (Rome), June 21 - 26,
2005;

R. Garoby, “Proton driver: prospects in Eu-
rope”, contributed paper to the 7th Interna-
tional Workshop on Neutrino Factories and
Superbeams, NuFact05, Laboratori Nazionali
di Frascati, Frascati (Rome), June 21 - 26,
2005.

37. J.R.J Bennett, Nuclear Physics B (Proc.

Suppl.) 149 (2005) 262.

38. H. Kirk, “High-Power Targets and Parti-
cle Collection”, contributed paper to the 7th
International Workshop on Neutrino Facto-
ries and Superbeams, NuFact05, Laboratori
Nazionali di Frascati, Frascati (Rome), June
21 - 26, 2005.

39. M.G. Catenesi et al., “Proposal to study
hadron production for
the neutrino fac-
tory and for the atmospheric neutrino ﬂux”,
CERN-SPSC/99-35, SPSC/P315. For more
details of the experiment see the HARP home
page at http://harp.web.cern.ch/harp/.

40. Y. Fisyak et al.,

“P-907:

Proposal

the MIPP collabo-
to Measure
ration,
Particle Production in the Meson Area
Using Main Injector Primary and Sec-
ondary Beams”, proposal to FNAL PAC,
http://ppd.fnal.gov/experiments/e907/
Proposal/P00 Proposal.pdf.

41. E. Radicioni, “Hadron production cross sec-
tions”, contributed paper to the 7th Interna-
tional Workshop on Neutrino Factories and
Superbeams, NuFact05, Laboratori Nazionali
di Frascati, Frascati (Rome), June 21 - 26,
2005.

42. J.R.J Bennett, et al., “Solid target studies in
the UK”, contributed paper to the 7th Inter-
national Workshop on Neutrino Factories and
Superbeams, NuFact05, Laboratori Nazionali
di Frascati, Frascati (Rome), June 21 - 26,
2005.
43. Livermore

Software Technology Corp.

http://www.lstc.com/.

44. H. Kirk et al, “Target Studies with BNL E951
at the AGS”, proceedings of the Particle Ac-
celerator Conference, PAC01, Chicago, 2001;
A. Fabich et al, J. Nucl. Mater. 318 109–112;
J. Lettry et al., J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys.
29 (2003) 1621–1627.

45. J. Lettry and E. Robert,

“Non cylin-

11

in

symmetric

liquid
Shocks
presentation to the BENE Tar-
15th March 2005,

drical
jets”,
get Working Group,
http://hepunx.rl.ac.uk/uknf/wp3/bene
/2005-03-16/Jacques Lettry-
ENGMarch05.pdf.

46. R. Samulyak, “Target Simulations”, pre-
the Muon Technical Ad-
sentation to
2005,
25–26 April
visory Committee,
http://www.cap.bnl.gov/mumu/conf/
MUTAC-050425/talks/Samulyak.pdf.

47. J.R.J. Bennett et al., “Studies of a Tar-
get System for a 4-MW, 24 GeV Pro-
ton Beam”, proposal to the CERN INTC
Committee, INTC-P-186, (April 26, 2004),
http://puhep1.princeton.edu/mumu/target
/cern proposal.pdf.

48. G. Gregoire et al.,

the MICE collabora-
tion, “MICE, an international Muon Ionisa-
tion Cooling Experiment: proposal to the
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory”, submitted
to CCLRC and PPARC on the 10th January
2003: http://hep04.phys.iit.edu/cooldemo
/micenotes/public/pdf/MICE0021/
MICE0021.pdf.

49. http://www.janis.com/p-a4k10.html.
50. J. Norem, “Breakdown in RF cavities”,
TPPT025, paper contributed to PAC05, the
Particle Accelerator Conference, Knoxville,
Tennessee, USA, 16 – 20 May 2005.

51. J. Scott Berg et al., ”FFAGs for Muon Accel-

eration,” PAC03, p. 3413.

52. M.Aiba et al., “Development of a FFAG pro-
ton synchrotron”, Proceedings of European
Particle Accelerator Conference (EPAC2000)
pp581-583 (2000);
T.Adachi et al., “A 150 MeV FFAG syn-
chrotron with a return-yoke free magnet”,
Proceedings of Particle Accelerator Confer-
ence (PAC2001) pp3254-3256 (2001);
S.Machida et al., “Status of 150 MeV
FFAG synchrotron”, Proceedings of the 2003
Particle Accelerator Conference (PAC2003)
pp3452-3454 (2003).

53. The

PRISM Working Group,
- A Muon

“The
Source
by
submitted to J-PARC

PRISM Project
of
Phase Rotation”,

the World-Highest Brightness

12

of

Intent

Letter
http://www-ps.kek.jp/jhf-np/LOIlist/
LOIlist.html.

L24,

unpublished,

54. C. Johnstone and S. Koscielniak, Work-
shop on High Intensity and High Brightness
Hadron Beams (HB2002);
W. Chou et. al. eds. AIP Conference Proceed-
ings, p. 207 (2002).

55. R. Edgecock for the EMMA Collaboration,
contributed paper to the 7th International
Workshop on Neutrino Factories and Super-
beams, NuFact05, Laboratori Nazionali di
Frascati, Frascati (Rome), June 21 - 26, 2005.
56. F. Meot, “The acceleration of muons in the
Neutrino Factory”, contributed paper to the
7th International Workshop on Neutrino Fac-
tories and Superbeams, NuFact05, Laboratori
Nazionali di Frascati, Frascati (Rome), June
21 - 26, 2005.

