5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Development of an Indium Bump Bond Process for Silicon Pixel
Detectors at PSI
Ch. Broennimann a F. Glaus a J. Gobrecht a S. Heising a M. Horisberger a R. Horisberger a
H. C. K¨astli a J. Lehmann a T. Rohe a,1 S. Streuli b
aPaul Scherrer Institut, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland
bETH Z¨urich, IPP, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland

Abstract

The hybrid pixel detectors used in the high energy physics experiments currently under construction use a three
dimensional connection technique, the so-called bump bonding. As the pitch below 100 m m, required in these
applications, cannot be fullﬁlled with standard industrial processes (e.g. the IBM C4 process), an in-house bump
bond process using reﬂown indium bumps was developed at PSI as part of the R&D for the CMS-pixel detector.
The bump deposition on the sensor is performed in two subsequent lift-oﬀ steps. As the ﬁrst photolithographic
step a thin under bump metalization (UBM) is sputtered onto bump pads. It is wettable by indium and deﬁnes
the diameter of the bump. The indium is evaporated via a second photolithographic step with larger openings and
is reﬂown afterwards. The height of the balls is deﬁned by the volume of the indium. On the readout chip only
one photolithographic step is carried out to deposit the UBM and a thin indium layer for better adhesion. After
mating both parts a second reﬂow is performed for self alignment and obtaining a high mechanical strength.

For the placement of the chips a manual and an automatic machine was constructed. The former is very ﬂexible
in handling diﬀerent chip and module geometries but has a limited throughput while the latter features a much
higher grade of automatisation and is therefore much more suited for producing hundreds of modules with a well
deﬁned geometry.

The reliability of this process was proven by the successful construction of the PILATUS detector. The con-

struction of PILATUS 6M (60 modules) and the CMS pixel barrel (roughly 800 modules) will start in 2005.

1. Introduction

The CMS experiment, currently under construc-
tion at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN
(Geneva, Switzerland), will contain a hybrid pixel
detector for tracking and vertexing [1]. It requires
bump bonding with a minimal pitch of 100 m m
which is below the industrial standard. In order to

1 Corresponding author; e-mail: Tilman.Rohe@psi.ch

achieve the highest ﬂexibility during prototyping
and a fast turn-over an in-house bump bond pro-
cess was developed. It makes use of the infrastruc-
ture present at the Paul Scherrer Institut (PSI).
The process was successfully appied for the PILA-
TUS 1M detector [2], a single photon counting hy-
brid pixel detector with an area of 24.3 × 20 cm2.
In this process sketched in Fig. 1 the bumps are
deposited onto the sensor part of the hybrid pixel
module while the amount of indium deposited onto

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

29 February 2008

the readout chip is very little. The bumps (de-
posited on the sensor) are reﬂown to balls before
the parts are joined. For self alignment and to pro-
vide a good mechanical strength a second reﬂow is
performed after the chip ﬂip procedure.

2. Bump deposition on the sensor

The metal deposition on the sensor is done in

two separate lift-oﬀ steps followed by a reﬂow.

2.1. Underbump Metalization

The under bump metalization (UBM) consists
of three metal layers which are added on top of the
last metalization layer of the sensor (see Fig. 1 (a)-
(g)). The ﬁrst one is about 10 nm titanium that
acts as a barrier and an adhesive layer. It is fol-
lowed by roughly 50 nm nickel which is wettable
with indium and a roughly 50 nm thick protective
gold layer.

This sandwich is deposited in a so-called lift-oﬀ
process. First (after a cleaning procedure) a two-
layer photoresist is spinned onto the wafer. The
lower one is a 1.2−1.5 m m thick lift-oﬀ resist (LOR)
which is not light sensitive. The top layer is a neg-
ative resist with a thickness of about 3.5 m m. Neg-
ative means that the resist gets developed in the
non-exposed areas and a light-ﬁeld mask is used
on which the bumps appear as dark points. After
exposure (Fig. 1 (b)) the non-exposed parts of the
resist are developed. As the LOR is not light sensi-
tive it is over-developed and an overhanging edge,
a so called undercut, is created (Fig. 1 (c)).

The choice of the resist polarity is purely his-
torical. In the ﬁrst attempts “generic” masks were
used and the alignment was done using the bumps
themselves. This requires a mask which is essen-
tially transparent. The disadvantage of negative
resist is its sensitivity to stray light. If during ex-
posure light is scattered at a rough metal surface
into the shadowed region of the bumps, some re-
sist might harden there. This leads to a remain-
ing undeveloped resist layer on the bottom of the
openings and the deposited metal layer is removed
with the resist. As the sensor metalization is large

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

2

Sensor wafer (100 mm)

CMOS wafer (200 mm)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(l)

(m)

(n)

Aluminium
Passivation

Resist spin−on

and exposure

Mask
Photo Resist
"LOR"

Resist development

Sputtered UBM

Wet lift−off

Evaporated Indium

Wet lift−off

Reflow

(o)

(p)

(q)

Reflow

Fig. 1. Schematic ﬂow diagram of the bump bonding pro-
cess consiting of the bump deposition onto the sensor
(a)-(h), metal deposition on the readout chip (i)-(n), and
the chip ﬂip procedure (o)-(q).

Wafer
Water
cooling

Indium
vapor

Vaccum
Indium

Mo−Boat

the removable top cover. The side wall of the ves-
sel is water-cooled which considerably reduces the
thermal budget on the photoresist.

The removal of the photoresist is done similarly
to the UBM process. After the lift-oﬀ the indium
forms a rather ﬂat octagon as shown in Fig. 3 (a).
As the bumps are relatively insensitive to mechani-
cal damage in this state and the wafers can be han-
dled without special care, it is the right moment to
dice the wafers and again test the individual sen-
sors on a probe station.

In order to form balls from the indium the
devices have to be heated. When the indium is
molten, the balls are created by the surface ten-
sion. The size of the ball is deﬁned by the diameter
of the wettable UBM pad and the volume of the
evaporated indium. The result of the reﬂow pro-
cess is shown in Fig. 3. The distance of the bumps
is 100 m m. The width of the deposited indium oc-
tagon is in this case 50 m m and its thickness about
2 m m. This leads to a volume of about 4000 m m3
per bump or a bump diameter of about 20 m m.

The reﬂow is performed in an microprocessor
controlled oven, regulating temperature proﬁle,
ﬂux gas pressure, etc. which was designed and built
at PSI.

3. Metall deposition on the readout chip

For the readout chips the same lift-oﬀ mask is
used for the UBM and the Indium as indicated in
Fig. 1 (i)-(n). This is possible because the amount
of Indium deposited on the chips is much smaller
and no bump balls will be formed here. As the
metal surface of the CMOS wafers is usually very
plain and stray light is not an issue, the use of lift-
oﬀ resist (LOR) is not necessary. Only a layer of
about 3.5 m m negative resist is spinned onto the
200-mm-wafers. The undercut of the edges is cre-
ated by a suitable choice of exposure and develop-
ment times.

The UBM is then sputtered onto the wafer di-
rectly followed by the evaporation of a thin 1−2 m m

Fig. 2. Schematic cross section through the indium evapo-
ration vessel. When the vacuum is established the indium
in the molybdenum boat is heated. It evaporates and con-
denses on the wafer mounted on top.

2.3. Reﬂow

The deposition of

around the bump pad and the surface is rather
rough light scattering appears sometimes, but is
eﬀect is eliminated by the use of the LOR.
the three metal

layers
(Fig. 1 (d)) is done in a multi-target magnetron
sputtering machine. The thickness of the UBM is
very small and cannot cover the overhanging edges
of the resist.

When the photo resist is removed (lifted-oﬀ),
the thin metal foil on top of it is also removed. The
metal remains only in the area of the bump pad
(Fig. 1 (e)). As the LOR is not soluble in acetone,
this process has to be done with a special remover
at an elevated temperature of about 60 ◦ C. The
area of the deposited metals is very small causing
this lift-oﬀ process to be slow. Process times of
more than 12 hours are common.

2.2. Indium bump deposition

The Indium bumps are deposited using a similar
lift-oﬀ process. The only diﬀerence is the thickness
of the resist and the increased size of the openings.
To safely exceed the layer thickness of the evapo-
rated indium of 2 − 3 m m, the resist is spinned on
with a total thickness of about 7 m m (3.5 m m LOR
plus 4.5 m m photoresist).

The indium is deposited in a 50 cm high cylin-
drical vessel (see Fig. 2) with a diameter of about
30 cm that can be evacuated down to a few
10−5 mbar. When this level is reached the indium
in a molybdenum boat at the bottom is heated. It
evaporates and condenses on the wafer mounted at

3

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. A scanning electron micrograph of indium bumps before (a) and after (b) reﬂow. The distance between the bumps
is 100 m m, the deposited indium is 50 m m wide, the reﬂown bumps have a diameter of about 20 m m.

indium layer. Due to the use of “normal” photore-
sist, the lift-oﬀ can be done at room temperature
using acetone, which alleviates this process a lot.
After the lift-oﬀ process the wafers are thinned
and diced. The task of the thin indium layer is
to improve adhesion after the chip ﬂipping. The
chips are however not reﬂown before the ﬂip chip
procedure.

Microscope

Mirror

Vaccum chuck

Readout chip

Prism

Sensor

Stage

4. Chip placement

The readout chips and the sensors are joined to
form a bare module. As in most cases several rad-
out chips (16 for CMS and PILATUS modules) are
placed onto one sensor, the latter is mounted on a
table and the chips are placed successively. This is
done either in a manual or automatic chip place-
ment machine. While the former is very ﬂexible
and used for prototype and single chip assemblies,
the latter is automated to a high degree and allows
the throughput necessary for the construction of
larger pixel detectors. After the placement of the
chips, the modules are reﬂown to establish the me-
chanical connection. Further the surface tension
of the molten indium provides s elf alignmet (see
Fig. 1(o)-(q)).

4

Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of the working principle of the
manual chip placement machine. Both parts are aligned
in respect to each other using a prism placed in between
them. After alignment the prism is removed and the chip
is pressed onto the sensor.

After the reﬂow, the module is robust enough for
further handling and will be tested before feeding
it into the module production line.

4.1. Manual chip placement

The manual chip placement machine was de-
signed for the fast and ﬂexible production of a
small quantity of modules in the prototyping stage
of the CMS pixel detector. Its working principle

is schematically shown in Fig. 4. The sensor is
mounted onto a movable stage while the read-
out chip is held with its face down on a vacuum
chuck. Both parts can simultaneously be observed
through a prism. When both parts are aligned with
respect to each other, the prism is removed and
the chuck with the readout chip is pressed onto the
sensor. A force up to about 50 N is applied.

The machine is designed and constructed to ﬂex-
ibly handle diﬀerent module sizes and geometries
which is very important in the R&D phase of a
project. However, the manual alignment procedure
is somewhat tedious and results in 3–4 h needed for
the placement of 16 chips on a sensor. The through-
put of the machine is limited to a few modules per
week which is not suﬃcient for building detectors
with hundreds of modules.

In case one of the chips does not pass the elec-
trical test, it is put back onto the gel-pack and a
reserve chip from an additional gel-pack (not vis-
ible in Fig. 5) is used instead. This should rarely
happen as all chips were tested on-wafer and only
good dies are picked from the dicing tape. However,
during the dicing and picking procedure and the
subsequent handling a small fraction of the chips
might be damaged.

The placement of 16 chips on a sensor takes
about 50 min including the chip test plus about
15 min for loading the machine and preparing the
components. During the chip placement no human
intervention is necessary. This allows a throughput
of several modules per day, suﬃcient for the con-
struction of a vertex detector with some hundreds
of modules.

4.2. Automatic chip placement

4.3. Reﬂow

In order to overcome the limitations of the man-
ual chip placement machine, a fully automated one,
shown in Fig. 5, was designed and built. It consits
of a table which can automatically move with a pre-
cision of one micrometer in the horizontal plane.
The vertical movements and possible rotations are
performed with the pick-and-place tool which is
ﬁxed to the very massively built bridge.

After equipping the table with the sensor and
the readout chips, the position of the sensor is pre-
cisely measured with a microscope mounted next
to the pick-and-place tool. This is done automat-
ically using alignment marks on the sensor and a
pattern recognition algorithm.

Then a ﬁrst read-out chip placed face down on
a gel-pack is picked by the pick-and-place-tool and
held by vacuum. Its position is also precisely mea-
sured with the (a) microscope looking up which is
integrated into the moving table. The chip under-
goes an eletrical functionality test using the probe
card mounted on that table. Only working chips
are placed on the sensor. Placing can be done as the
sensor and chip position within the machine frame
are known from the position measurements. It is
pressed down with a force of 30 N (about 8-10 mN
per bump) and held for 1 min. This procedure is
repeated for all 16 readout chips.

After the chip placement is ﬁnished the assem-
bly undergoes a second reﬂow similar to the one
described in Sect. 2.3. As the module is very fragile
before this step, the transfer from the chip place-
ment machine to the reﬂow oven has to be done
with special care. After melting a stable mechan-
ical connection is established. Further the surface
tension of the indium in addition provides self-
alignment.

4.4. Tests

The reﬂown module, called bare module, is ro-
bust enough for handling and tests can be per-
formed.

4.4.1. Pull Test

A correctly joined assembly is resistant to about
2 mN pulling force per bump which adds up to
about 8 N for a CMS-readout chip with 4160 bump
bond connections. To test the quality of the bumps,
every chip is pulled with a force of about 1.8 N
applied through a vacuum cup. If this test fails,
which happens very rarely, it is an indication for
a serious mistake either during chip placement or
reﬂow. In this case the module is excluded from

5

Fig. 5. Automatic chip placer.

all further production steps and the reason for the
failure has to be investigated.

4.4.2. Geometrical Veriﬁcation

A very eﬃcient way of testing the correctness
of the chip placement is to measure the distance
between readout chips. Due to the self alignment
during the reﬂow, the distance between the readout
chips in a correctly bump bonded module diﬀers
less than ﬁve micrometres from its nominal value.
The measurement of the distance can easily be
performed using the automatic chip placement ma-
chine. The bare module is positioned with the chips
down on the moving table and the distance be-
tween alignment marks on the chip parts that ex-
tend over the edge of the sensor can be measured
automatically.

If a chip is found to be misplaced the module is
excluded from all further processing. This would
indicate a serious error during chip placement or
handling.

4.4.3. Tests of the Readout Chips

While failure modes described in Sect. 4.4.1
and 4.4.2 are expected to occur only in the proto-
typing stage, when the procedures are not, yet, well
established, the experience of other pixel projects
[3,4,5] shows that the failure of readout chips af-
ter bump bonding cannot completely be avoided.

Fig. 6. Tool for removing a readout chip from a bare module

The damage is often caused by silicon pieces which
fall oﬀ the chip edges during or after dicing. If the
size of such a piece exceeds the bump height, it
is pressed into the surfaces of the sensor or/and
the readout chip which in most cases causes seri-
ous damages like power shorts in the readout chip.
In order to detect such failures each chip of a bare
module is tested with a probe card.

6

4.5. Rework

If a faulty chip is detected on a bare module it
is not further assembled. However, at this stage of
the module assembly it is still possible to replace
chips.

To remove a readout chip the bare module is
placed on a heatable chuck and held by vacuum as
shown in Fig. 6. The removal tool is then lowered
onto the faulty readout chip and is also heated.
When a suﬃcient temperature is reached the chip
is grasped by vacuum and the tool is lifted. The
heating temperatures and the lifting speed have to
be adjusted in a way that the indium balls stick to
the sensor and not to the readout chip.

After this procedure a new readout chip can be
placed in the vacant position and the reﬂow has to
be repeated. The bump yield of replaced chips will
not reach the level of the initial ones and therefore
all measures to minimize the fraction of bare mod-
ules to be reworked are taken. A careful inspection
and cleaning of the readout chips as single dies is
essential. The introduction of a dry cleaning step
using a very soft sponge just before the ﬂip chip
procedure has reduced the number of chip failures
drastically.

The completely and tested bare module is then
glued onto a base plate. At this point a repair is
not possible anymore. A complete description of
the module assembly is given in [6].

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 7. Determination of the bump yield using illumination
with X-rays. (a) Determination of broken channels in the
readout chips, (b) illumination with X-rays, (c) missing
bump bonds

5. Bump Yield

The bump yield of a module can be measured
either directly with particles and X-rays or indi-
rectly using the inﬂuence of the bump bond con-
nection on the analogue behavior of the readout
chip as discussed in Ref. [7].

The bump yield determination of a PILATUS
module with X-rays is illustrated in Fig. 7. As a
ﬁrst step the electronics channels not reponding
to calibrate pulses are detected. The black pixels
following a circular shape in the upper middle of
Fig. 7 (a) probably suﬀer from a localized high
sensor current leading to a saturation of the pix-
els’ preampliﬁers. These pixels are excluded from

further analysis. As the second step the response
of the module to X-rays is measured as shown in
Fig. 7 (b). The number of dead channels is deter-
mined by looking for pixels which do respond to
calibrate pulses but not to X-rays. In this case ten
pixels (see Fig. 7 (c)) were found representing a
fraction of less than 0.05 %.

The experience gained with the production of
a few tens of modules and some hundreds read-
out chips shows that, if no problems in the pho-
tolithographic steps occur, the bump yield is ei-
ther above 99.9 % or the bump bonding failes com-
pletely (bump yield < 90 %). The occurrence of
such failures is rare and indicates a funadamental
problem in the assembly procedure of this partic-
ular module.

7

[5] T. Fritzsch, Experiences in fabrication of multichip-
modules for the atlas pixel detector, these proceedings.

[6] S. K¨onig, et al., Assembly of the CMS pixel barrel

modules, these proceedings.

[7] A. Starodumov, et al., Qualiﬁcation procedures of the

CMS pixel barrel modules, these proceedings.

6. Conclusions

A bump bonding process was developed at PSI
in the frame work of the R&D for the CMS pixel
detector. It features an underbump metalization
(UBM) composed of titanium, nickel and gold on
both senor and readout chip. The indium bumps of
about 20 m m height are deposited onto the sensor
and reﬂown, while on the readout chip only a thin
indium layer is evaporated. After both parts are
joined another reﬂow is performed to establish the
thermo-mechanical connection and to perform self
alignment.

The bump yield of successfully built modules ex-
ceeds 99.9 %. The fraction of such modules is not
yet known, but the present experience is very en-
couraging and there is some hope to achieve a suf-
ﬁcient yield without reworking.

The process was used to build the PILATUS 1M
pixel detector with 18 modules [2]. The commis-
sioning of a fully automatic chip placer increases
the throughput considerably and the construction
of large systems requiring hundreds of modules,
like the CMS pixel detector, becomes feasible and
will start in early 2006.

7. Acknowledgments

Thanks are due to Stefan Ritter for the micro-
graphs of the bumps (Fig. 3) and Beat Henrich for
providing the bump yield measurement (Fig. 7).

References

[1] The CMS Collaboration, CMS Tracker, Technical
Design Report LHCC 98-6, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
(1998).

[2] G. H¨ulsen, C. Broennimann, E. F. Eikenberry,
Distortion calibration of the PILATUS 1M detector,
NIM A 248 (2005) 540–554.

[3] P. Riedler, et al., Overview and status of the ALICE

silicon pixel detector, these proceedings.

[4] G. Alimonti, et al., Analysis of the production of ATLAS

pixel modules with indium, these proceedings.

8

