Neutron Shielding for Particle Astrophysics Experiments

J.E.McMillan
Department of Physics and Astronomy,
University of Sheﬃeld
j.e.mcmillan@sheﬃeld.ac.uk

February 2, 2008

Abstract: Particle astrophysics experiments often require large volume neutron shields which
are formed from hydrogenous material. This note reviews some of the available materials in
an attempt to ﬁnd the most cost eﬀective solution. Raw polymer pellets and Water Extended
Polyester (WEP) shields are discussed in detail. Suppliers for some materials are given.

5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
8
1
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sheﬃeld, Sheﬃeld S3 7RH, UK

Introduction

Neutron shielding is required in current dark matter experiments both on detector systems and on
neutron source test and calibration systems. In both applications, large volumes are required, so
low cost materials are desirable. The ability to form the shielding material into arbitrary shapes,
particularly voids in existing equipment, is important.

Detector systems operated underground must be shielded from environmental neutrons pro-
duced primarily by alpha-neutron knock-on reactions as a result of trace uranium and thorium
in the rock surrounding the experimental caverns [11]. In this application, since neutron ﬂuxes
are low and since the detector systems discriminate against gammas, there is no requirement to
minimize (n-γ) production in the shield. Low background materials are essential to ensure that
the shield does not contribute to the detector background. The ability to incorporate gadolin-
ium, lithium or other elements in a homogeneous manner might be required for future neutrino
experiments.

At the surface, experimental systems (and personnel) associated with neutron-beam or neutron-
source tests and calibrations of dark matter detectors require neutron shielding. Here attenuation
factors need to be as high as possible, so it may be worth using boron loaded material. On some
detector systems it may be necessary to minimize (n-γ) production in the shield so lithium loading
should also be considered as lithium has a high neutron absorption cross-section without gamma
production. Where 14MeV neutrons are produced, neutron activation of the shielding materials
may become a problem.

The dimensions of shields depend primarily on the neutron attenuation factor required. First
order approximations can be obtained from the graphs and tables presented in the standard
shielding texts [13, 8, 9, 17], while more detailed simulations are best performed with MCNP [4]
as this has more detailed cross-section data and better variance reduction capabilities than any of
the alternative montecarlo codes.

Hydrogenous Materials

Fast neutrons, 1 to 15 MeV, are most eﬀectively shielded by materials containing large amounts
of hydrogen. The scattering of fast neutrons in collision with hydrogen atoms reduces the energies
of the neutrons to epi-thermal and eventually to thermal energies where absorption cross-sections
are much higher. The hydrogen may be held as water or as some hydrogenous organic compound.
There are many hydrogenous materials which may be useful as neutron shielding. Almost all these
materials have a density of ≈ 1.0, Table 1 shows a range of hydrogenous materials which have
been considered for shielding, together with suppliers and current prices.

Neutron-monitors, used for low energy cosmic ray modulation studies, were some of the ear-
liest particle-astrophysics experiments to require neutron shielding. A review of neutron-monitor
designs is given by Hatton [6] and it is interesting to note just how many of the considerations
are still relevant to current experiments. The primary requirement was to isolate the experiment
from the local background neutron environment. In the early designs 280mm thick paraﬃn wax
shields were used, while in the later designs, extruded polyethylene slabs 75mm thick were used.
It was realized that at this thickness the experiment would not be completely isolated from its

water
paraﬃn oil
paraﬃn wax
polypropylene pellets
polyethylene slabs
polyethylene slabs
polyethylene slabs
borated polyethylene slabs
boro-silicone
polypropylene slabs
water extended polyester (WEP)
WEP + polypropylene pellets
resin neutron isolator
neutron isolator

£0.00 /kg
£0.76 /kg
£1.15 /kg
£0.48/kg
Albis [1]
£1.35/kg
John Caunt JC213 [10]
£2.11/kg
Barkston [3]
£2.53/kg
IPSL [7]
£2.13/kg
John Caunt JC201 [10]
£34.84/kg
John Caunt JC237 [10]
£3.46/kg
IPSL [7]
Scott Bader Crystic 1381PA [15] £1.02/kg
£0.70/kg
£47.54/kg
£7.92/kg

John Caunt JC243 [10]
John Caunt JC244 [10]

Table 1: Hydrogenous neutron shielding materials

environment but the choice was a compromise based on the high cost of the extruded material.
The expense of extruded or cast slab polymer lies not only in the cost of the raw material, but
also in the production of moulds or extrusion dies and the processing. It is still not easy to ensure
that slabs are ﬂat and void-free over the large scales required by typical experiments.

Polymer Pellets

An alternative approach is to use raw polymer in small pellets, as delivered by the polymer
manufacturer, as a neutron shield [16]. Since the requirement is purely for hydrogen solidiﬁed
as polymer, there is no interest in melting point, average molecular weight or any of the other
parameters used by the plastics industry. Even the “high-density” and “low-density” speciﬁcations
used make no more than a few percent diﬀerence to the number of hydrogen atoms per unit volume.
Additionally, there appears little to choose between polyethylene and polypropylene pellets. This
means that practically any material such as short runs, end-of-batch or similar, may be used to get
the best possible price. Care should be taken that it is virgin pure polymer rather than pigmented
or re-ground recycled material, primarily to avoid mineral ﬁllers and the risk of contamination by
trace radioactive material. Suitable polypropylene pellets have been obtained from Albis (UK)
Ltd [1] at a price per kilo three or even four times less than the prices quoted for slab material.
Pelleted material has a measured packing fraction of about 0.6, so shields made with this material
must be made proportionately thicker than slab material. The main disadvantage of pellets is
that they are not load-bearing and some form of containment must be provided.

A system has been developed for NAIAD in which the lead and copper shielding castle is
surrounded by an 150mm thick jacket of polypropylene pellets. These pellets are held in woven
polypropylene fabric sacks 800mm×100mm which were ﬁlled in-situ. On the outside of the neutron
shield is a retaining wall of plywood held in place by steel structural frame. The sacks full of pellets
are located between the lead and the retaining wall and the spaces between sacks ﬁlled with
additional pellets. The pellets are simple to position by pouring and can easily be removed with
an industrial vacuum cleaner. This modular construction technique was found simple to assemble
and oﬀers the possibility of easy disassembly and re-use of the material on future experiments.

Water Extended Polyester

Oliver and Moore [14] recognized that water extended polyester (WEP) was a promising material
for neutron shielding since it was essentially 50% water held in a solid form. This material is a
liquid thermosetting polyester resin into which water can be incorporated to form a thick emulsion
which then hardens to a material similar to a ﬁne-grained plaster. The droplets of the emulsion are
in the range 1–5µm and when cured, the aqueous phase remains trapped in these droplets within
the rigid polyester matrix. The ﬁnal material can be easily drilled or machined and will bear
substantial loads. A substantial shield for a 252Cf source fabricated from WEP is described by
Veerling [18]. Two currently available commercial versions of WEP have been identiﬁed, namely
Aropol TM WEP 662P from Ashland Chemical [2] and Crystic 1381PA from Scott-Bader [15].

Crystic 1381PA

Experiments have been performed using Crystic 1381PA, a material which will blend with more
than 60% water and still harden. The polyester contains carbon, oxygen and carbon, and while the
manufacturer’s notes give no details, other polyesters are in the ratio C5H4O2, while the material
used in [14] is quoted as C 25.3% H 9.7% and O 65% by weight when cured. The resin also contains
an emulsifying agent, [14] mentions cobalt octoate and dimethylanaline, so traces of both cobalt
and nitrogen may be expected. The curing catalyst is primarily methylethyl ketone peroxide, a
powerful and extremely unpleasant oxidising agent.

The uncured material contains a high proportion of styrene monomer which has a pungent
aromatic odour and consequently the mixing and preparation of WEP must be done in a well
ventilated building, or preferably outdoors during ﬁne weather. The styrene is fully polymerized
during curing and the resulting material has no residual odour. During curing, considerable heat
is evolved and consequently it cannot be cast in thicknesses greater than about 100mm. Exceeding
this will cause loss of water and in extreme cases, the polyester will begin to degrade and even
char.

The resin, as supplied, must be blended with water using a high-shear blender. On an experi-
mental scale, any domestic blender capable of making mayonnaise can be used, on a medium scale

Colemanite, hydrated calcium borate hydroxide CaB3O4(OH)3·H2O Bainbridge[12] £1.07/kg
Bainbridge[12] £9.08/kg
Lithium carbonate, presumably fairly pure (ﬂux grade) Li2CO3
Petalite, lithium aluminium silicate Li2OAl2O·SiO2
Bainbridge[12] £0.96/kg
Borax (domestic), hydrated sodium borate Na2B4O7·10H2O
£1.63/kg
Boots

Table 2: Inorganic neutron capture materials

an industrial blender would work, while a DOE study [5] describes systems capable of producing
more than one tonne per day. When the water has been satisfactorily blended, the curing catalyst
is added and thoroughly dispersed in the material. The resin emulsion can then be poured into
moulds and allowed to set. This happens in about 15 minutes if the speciﬁed ratios are used.
Cleaning the blender and containers is not diﬃcult but must be done well before the material be-
gins to harden. The costs quoted in table 1 are the raw material costs without any consideration
of the expenses of labour or mould production.

An experiment was performed in which Crystic 1381PA was mixed with polypropylene pellets,
in order to avoid the packing fraction problem encountered when only pellets are used. The result
was a solid concrete-like composite material in which the aggregate was polypropylene pellets.
While little care was taken in the production, the result contained very few entrapped air bubbles.
This composite is clearly considerably cheaper to produce than pure WEP. It would make an
attractive material for use where sacks of pellets are not feasible or where a low cost load bearing
shielding material is required.

No experiments have yet been performed on the shielding properties of Crystic 1381PA, though
the original work of Oliver and Moore [14] gives some measurements. These and considerations of
the constituents of WEP suggest that its neutron shielding capabilities will be similar to those of
PMMA(Lucite, Perspex).

WEP can easily be blended with inorganic salts or oxides to provide loaded hydrogenous
shielding. These inorganic materials can either be inert powders or dissolved in the water phase.
It is not thought that inorganics will aﬀect the hardening or emulsifying properties of the resin,
provided that strong reducing agents are avoided. Oliver and Moore [14] performed experiments
with dissolved sodium metaborate and boric acid which had no eﬀect on hardening. They also
claim that the emulsion was suﬃciently stiﬀ to withstand the incorporation of lead shavings
without settling. Recent work commissioned by the DOE [5], in which WEP was successfully used
to encapsulate radioactively contaminated sludges and salt solutions, indicates that inorganic
materials can be blended and that the expected lifetimes of the resulting resins are high.

For neutron shielding, the materials most used would be compounds of Boron and Lithium,
both of which have large capture cross-sections at thermal energies. Clearly, for shielding appli-
cations, there is little requirement for chemical purity, so domestic materials or ﬁnely powdered
minerals intended for ceramic glazes may be used with considerable savings in cost. Table 2 shows
some materials which have been identiﬁed as potential loading materials for WEP neutron shields.

Disclaimer

The suppliers mentioned are primarily British while the prices quoted are those of 2002/3. The
lists are in no sense exhaustive.

Bibliography

[1] Albis (UK) Ltd. Parkgate Industrial Estate, Knutsford, Cheshire, WA16 8XW. see also

http://www.albis.com/uk/.

[2] Ashland Specialty Chemical Company. 900 Wilshire Dr., Suite 110 Troy, MI 48084, United

States. see also http://www.ashchem.com/home/index.asp.

[3] Barkston Plastics Ltd. Unit 11, Riverside Place, Bridgewater Road, Leeds, LS9 0RQ,

England. see also http://www.barkstonplc.co.uk.

[4] J.F. Briesmeister. MCNP - a general monte carlo N-particle transport code; Version 4B.
Technical Report LA-12625-M, Version 4B, Los Alamos National Laboratories, New
Mexico., 1997.

[5] Department of Energy. Mixed waste encapsulation in polyester resins. Technical Report
DOE EM-480, Oﬃce of Science and Technology, Department of Energy, Washington DC,
1999.

[6] C.J. Hatton. The neutron monitor. Prog Elem Part Cos Ray Phys, 10:96–100, 1971.

[7] Industrial Plastics (Sheﬃeld) Ltd. 156 Arundel Street, Sheﬃeld S1 4RE, England. see also

http://www.ipsl.net.

[8] R.G. Jaeger et al. Engineering Compendium on Radiation Shielding: Vol 1 Shielding

Fundamentals and Methods. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1968.

[9] R.G. Jaeger et al. Engineering Compendium on Radiation Shielding: Vol 2 Shielding

Materials. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1975.

[10] John Caunt Scientiﬁc Ltd. PO Box 1052, Oxford, OX2 6YE, England. see also

http://dspace.dial.pipex.com/johncaunt : The materials from Reactor Experiments Inc.,
504 Airport Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87505, USA appear to be identical, see also
http://www.reax.com.

[11] V.A. Kudryavtsev et al. Neutron background at Boulby Mine. to be published in

Proceedings, IDM2002, 2002.

[12] Les Bainbridge Ceramics. The Crescent, Heath Grove, Loggerheads, Market Drayton, TF9

4PE. see also http://www.btinternet.com/ Lb.Ceramic/cat.htm.

[13] National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements. Protection against neutron
radiation. Technical Report NCRP-38, National Council on Radiation Protection and
Measurements, Washington DC., 1971.

[14] G.D. Oliver and E.B. Moore. The neutron-shielding qualities of water-extended-polyesters.

Health Phys, 19:578–580, 1970.

http://www.scottbader.co.uk/.

[15] Scott Bader Co. Ltd. Wollaston, Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, NN29 7RL. see also

[16] S.C. Sharma and J.T. Hood. Polyethylene pellets in the design and construction of a

storage safe, a transport vessel and a portable shield for californium-252. Health Phys,
35:496–498, 1978.

[17] J.K. Shultis and R.E. Faw. Radiation Shielding. American Nuclear Society, Illinois, 2000.

[18] J.P. Veerling et al. A storage and handling facility for californium-252 medical sources.

Health Phys, 25:163–167, 1973.

