A small sealed Ta crucible for thermal analysis of volatile metallic samples

Y. Janssen,1, 2, ∗ M. Angst,1 K. W. Dennis,2 P. C. Canﬁeld,1, 3 and R. W. McCallum2, 4
1Condensed Matter Physics, Ames Laboratory, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA
2Materials and Engineering Physics, Ames Laboratory, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA
3Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA
4Department of Materials Science and Enigineering, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Diﬀerential thermal analysis on metallic alloys containing volatile elements can be highly problem-
atic. Here we show how measurements can be performed in commercial, small-sample, equipment
without modiﬁcation. This is achieved by using a sealed Ta crucible, easily fabricated from Ta
tubing and sealed in a standard arc furnace. The crucible performance is demonstrated by measure-
◦
ments on a mixture of Mg and MgB2, after heating up to 1470
C. We also show data, measured on
an alloy with composition Gd40Mg60, that clearly shows both the liquidus and a peritectic, and is
consistent with published phase diagram data.

5
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
1
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 81.70.Pg, 81.30.Bx, 64.70.Dv

Diﬀerential thermal analysis (DTA) is an important
tool for determining both phase-diagram and thermal-
processing information for advanced-materials develop-
ment. It is particularly helpful in the solution growth of
single crystals1. For a typical commercial, small-sample,
DTA, in this case a PerkinElmer Pyris DTA 7, the stan-
dard crucible is an open Al2O3 crucible. This presents
two problems, one of stability and one of volatility. To
close the crucibles, Al2O3 caps are available, but they
do not provide suﬃcient sealing for samples containing
highly volatile components. In addition, elements such
as Li, Mg, and rare earths attack Al2O3.

For metallic alloys that do not attack it, Ta is often
the crucible material of choice. Ta is easily fabricated
into crucibles and has been found to remain inert dur-
ing lengthy high-temperature growth experiments for a
wide range of metallic alloys. Moreover, in growth cru-
cibles2, Ta caps can be welded onto the crucibles in a
standard arc furnace, resulting in a sealed crucible with
an Ar room temperature pressure of ∼1 bar. For growth
of crystals that involves volatile elements, such as Mg,
Li or Yb, such sealed Ta crucibles2 have been shown to
yield well-formed single crystals. In order to replicate the
growth environment1, small sealed Ta crucibles, usable in
a commercial DTA, are required. Given the high melting
point of Ta, ∼3000◦C, and the small dimensions of the
crucible, careful consideration must be given to the heat
ﬂow during the sealing process.

In the diﬀerential thermal analyzer, Al2O3 crucibles
are placed in Pt sample and reference cups with Pt-based
thermocouples inserted through the bottom so that they
contact the crucibles. If Ta is placed in direct contact
with the Pt, there is a possibility that at elevated tem-
peratures (> 1000◦C), Ta may diﬀuse into the Pt, and
thereby change the thermocouple calibration, or it may
create a diﬀusion bond between the Pt parts and the Ta.
Therefore, the Ta crucibles are placed inside the standard
Al2O3 crucibles, which can be reused multiple times in
this application.

The body of the crucible consists of small-diameter Ta

tubing.
In order to successfully seal volatile metals in
such a crucible, it is necessary to keep their temperature
as low as possible. However, the radiant heat produced
while sealing the crucible was found to be suﬃcient to
volatilize Mg. The incorporation of a radiation shield
inside of the crucible adequately addressed this problem.

FIG. 1: The diﬀerent steps in manufacturing the sealed
volatile-element DTA crucible, as described in the text.

In Fig. 1 the components of the crucible (a-h) are dis-
played. The Ta crucibles are made of pieces of Ta tubing
10-12 mm length, 2.15 mm inner diameter and 3.2 mm
outer diameter (b). Two pieces of Ta of about 120 mg
and another one of about 75 mg are melted in a standard
Ar-atmosphere arc furnace, to make Ta balls, which form
naturally upon melting, because of surface tension. The
larger two balls (a and e), are larger than the inner di-
ameter of the Ta tube and are used to form the ends
of the crucible, whereas the smaller ball (d), which just
ﬁts inside the tubing, will act as a radiation shield that
protects the sample (c).

To form an unsealed Ta crucible, the Ta tube (b) is
clamped in the water-cooled copper hearth of an Ar-
atmosphere standard arc furnace, and one of the larger
Ta balls (a) is placed on top of it. The ball is carefully

2

FIG. 2: Relevant part of the DTA curves of a sample of
Mg and MgB2 measured upon heating and cooling with a
◦
10
C/min rate. The melting (and solidiﬁcation) event near
◦
640

C can clearly be distinguished.

FIG. 3: Relevant part of the DTA curves of a sample
of Gd40Mg60 measured upon heating and cooling with a
◦
C/min rate. The melting (and solidication) events near
10
◦
C can clearly be distinguished.
750

◦
C and 850

melted (with a low operating current), so that it forms
a closed lid of the crucible without making it wider than
the original tube. This crucible is the standard Ta cru-
cible that we have used before1,3,4. A similar crucible can
be made by mounting the tubing in a lathe and spinning
one end closed, but this requires a skilled machinist, and
can thin the walls and leave a small hole at the tip.

Next, the sample (c) is placed inside, and a pair of cut-
ters is used to pinch indentations in the crucible (f). The
purpose of the indentations is to position the radiation
shield (d), the smaller Ta ball, above the sample so that
the shield is in contact with the crucible but with neither
the sample nor the lid (e). The assembly is then sealed
by carefully melting the lid, the second larger Ta ball, on
top of the crucible, as above, to form the sealed crucible
(h). Finally, the standard Al2O3 crucible (g) will hold
the crucible in the DTA.

We have made no attempt to accurately determine the
maximum sample temperature as the crucible is sealed
with the radiation shield in place. However, we have
used this technique to encapsulate several pieces of Mg
and then opened the crucible to inspect the contents. The
results indicated that partial melting of some of the Mg
pieces occurred, but the pieces were still distinct. This
suggests that, although there was suﬃcient radiative heat
to bring the irregular pieces of Mg to near their melting
temperature, upon the occurrence of surface melting, the
increase in thermal contact with the crucible prevented
complete melting of the sample. Since the vapor pressure
of Mg at its melting temperature (650◦C) is only about
∼ 3 mbar (Ref. 5) the increase in pressure within the
crucible is not suﬃcient to displace the molten ball of Ta
(Fig. 1e), so that the crucible is successfully sealed. As-
suming that the average temperature inside the crucible
was about 600◦C, the room-temperature Ar pressure in-
side the sealed crucible was approximately 1/3 bar.

The eﬀectiveness of these crucibles was tested by a

series of DTA measurements made in an attempt to de-
termine solution-growth parameters for growing MgB2,
from a mixture of Mg and MgB2. 9.7 mg Mg and 0.71
mg MgB2 (which amounts to Mg0.93B0.07) were sealed
in a crucible as described above, and subject to sev-
eral DTA runs. The highest temperature reached was
1470◦C, which lies outside of the calibration range of
the instrument. The curve obtained from one of the
runs after the sample had been at 1470◦C, is displayed
in Fig. 2. The sample was heated and cooled between
450 and 1200◦C at a rate of 10◦C/min. Upon heating,
only one endothermic event, with an onset temperature
of about 640◦C, was observed, and upon cooling only
one exothermic event was observed, also with an onset
temperature of about 640◦C. These results are consis-
tent with the published Mg-B phase diagram6, which
shows no exposed liquidus for MgB2 at ambient pres-
sures, and a eutectic (essentially just the melting of pure
Mg) at ∼650◦C. Furthermore, the results indicated that
solution-growth parameters cannot be determined in this
way.

This experiment demonstrates quite clearly the good
performance of the crucible. The sealed crucible allowed
repeated heating cycles up to 1470◦C, and its appearance
did not change visibly due to the temperature cycles. The
strength of the DTA signal due to the melting and solid-
iﬁcation did not visibly change in any of the several runs
that we performed, consistent with no Mg loss during
the experiments. Note that at 1470◦C, the partial pres-
sure of Mg is about 12 bar and the Ar partial pressure is
estimated at about 2 bar.

A second example demonstrates the usefulness of the
sealed Ta DTA crucible for the determination of phase-
diagram data. A total of 40.9 mg of Gd and Mg, corre-
sponding to the composition Gd40Mg60, was sealed in a
crucible, as described above. After alloying the elements
by heating the crucible to above 1200◦C, the DTA signals
were recorded. The DTA results, measured upon heating

3

to 1100◦C and cooling to below 400◦C at 10◦C/min are
shown in Fig. 3. In both curves, two events can clearly be
observed. Upon heating, a sharp peak occurs at ∼750◦C,
followed by an event typical of a liquidus event1, ending
near ∼850◦C. Upon cooling, an event, that is also typ-
ical of a liquidus, occurs with an onset temperature of
∼840◦C, followed by a sharp peak with an onset tempera-
ture of ∼750◦C. No further events were observed at lower
temperature. These results are consistent with published
phase diagram data7, where the liquidus temperature for
the composition Gd40Mg60 is reported near 850 ◦C, be-
low which the compound GdMg solidiﬁes, followed by the
(peritectic) formation of GdMg2, at 755◦C.

Both sealed and unsealed Ta crucibles fabricated as de-
scribed above have been used routinely for DTA measure-
ments in our laboratory for over one year. With experi-
ence, the failure rate in sealing the crucibles is minimal.

Rare failures in sealing are easy to identify and discard
and no successfully sealed crucible has failed during mea-
surement, so that the instrumentation has not been ex-
posed to reactive vapors. It should be noted that the use
of Ta crucibles requires an extremely clean environment
within the DTA, since Ta will oxidize rapidly and become
brittle. The overall cost of the Ta crucibles is approxi-
mately the same as that of the commercially available
ceramic crucibles.

The authors are grateful to M. Huang, J. Frederick,
S. A. Law, and S. Jia for useful discussions and sample
preparation. Ames Laboratory is operated for the U.S.
Department of Energy by Iowa State University under
Contract No. W-7405-Eng-82. This work was supported
by the Director for Energy Research, Oﬃce of Basic En-
ergy Sciences.

∗ Email:yjanssen@ameslab.gov
1 Y. Janssen, M. Angst, K. W. Dennis, R. W. McCallum,
and P. C. Canﬁeld, cond-mat/0506587, to be published in
J. Cryst. Growth (2005).

2 P. C. Canﬁeld and I. R. Fisher, J. Cryst. Growth 225, 155

(2001).

3 Y. Janssen, S. Chang, B. K. Cho, A. Llobet, K. W. Dennis,
R. W. McCallum, R. J. McQueeney, and P. C. Canﬁeld, J.
Alloys Compd. 389, 10 (2005).

4 M. Huang, D. Wu, K. W. Dennis, J. W. Anderegg, R. W.
McCallum, and T. A. Lograsso, J. Phase Equilib. Diﬀ. 26,

209 (2005).

5 R. Loebel, in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics,
edited by R. C. Weast (CRC Press, Cleveland, Ohio, 1969).
6 A. A. Nayeb-Hashemi and J. B. Clark, in Desk Handbook
Phase Diagrams for Binary Alloys, edited by H. Okamoto
(ASM International, Materials Park, Ohio, 2000).

7 H. Okamoto, in Desk Handbook Phase Diagrams for Binary
Alloys, edited by H. Okamoto (ASM International, Materi-
als Park, Ohio, 2000).

