5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
9
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The CMS Silicon Strip Tracker

Paolo Azzurri1
Scuola Normale Superiore, piazza dei Cavalieri 7, 56100 Pisa, Italy

E-mail: paolo.azzurri@cern.ch

Abstract. With over 200 square meters of sensitive Silicon and almost 10 million readout
channels, the Silicon Strip Tracker of the CMS experiment at the LHC will be the largest
Silicon strip detector ever built. The design, construction and expected performance of the
CMS Tracker is reviewed in the following.

1. The CMS experiment at the LHC
The Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment is scheduled to start data taking in summer
2007 at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN where 7 TeV proton beams will collide head
on at a center-of-mass energy of 14 TeV. The LHC is projected to reach a peak luminosity of
1034 cm−2 sec−1. The LHC will operate with a bunch crossing rate of 40 MHz (25 ns) and
at peak luminosity about 20 interactions are expected per crossing, producing on average 2000
charged particles per crossing. Severe radiation conditions are expected, corresponding to a ﬂux
of 1018 hadrons per year from interaction points.

1.

Figure
A three-
dimensional view of the CMS
experiment and it’s various
The Silicon
subdetectors.
Strip Tracker will be placed
in the inner part of the ex-
periment, around the beam
line and the interaction point,
immersed in the 4 Tesla
solenoidal magnetic ﬁeld.

The complete CMS experiment will be a cylinder 20 m long and 14 m in diameter, with
12,000 tons of total weight. CMS will be composed of an external high precision muon

1

on behalf of the CMS Tracker Collaboration

spectrometer in the return yoke of a 4 Tesla superconducting solenoidal coil cylinder 12.5 m
long and 6 m in diameter. The coil will contain a sampling brass hadron calorimeter, a lead-
tungstate scintillating electromagnetic calorimeter, and, closest to the beam line, an internal
Silicon Tracker, as shown in ﬁgure 1.

2. The CMS Inner Tracker
The CMS Silicon tracker [1] is composed of diﬀerent substructures. Closest to the Interaction
Point (IP) is a Silicon Pixel detector, with about 66 million 100×150 µm2 pixels arranged at
distance of 4 to 11 cm from the beam line on a cylindrical barrel and end-caps structure with
total length of 92 cm, this detector will not be further described in this paper. The Silicon
Strip detectors are divided in the inner barrel part (TIB), the inner disks (TID), the outer
barrel (TOB) and outer end-caps (TEC). The layout of the Tracker substructures is sketched in
ﬁgure 2.

Figure 2. Projected view of one quarter of the CMS tracker layout in the r − z plane, showing
the pseudorapidity coverage. Segments represent detector modules, lighter ones are single sided
and darker ones double-sided.

As it can be seen in ﬁgure 2, the TIB and TOB systems are composed respectively of four and
six concentric layer barrel shell structures. The TID system is made of three disk structures on
each side, each divided in three concentric rings, while the TEC is made of nine disk structures
on each side, each made of four to seven rings. The whole inner tracker will be housed in a
cylindrical support structure with a diameter of 2.4 m and a total length of 5.6 m. An active
thermal screen will keep the tracker volume at at temperature of -10◦C and at 30% relative
humidity, to avoid the reverse annealing of the silicon sensors, and to protect the silicon detectors
from the increased leakage current coming from radiation damage. A cooling system will extract
the 60 kW power that the front-end electronics dissipate.

3. Tracker Modules
The Tracker will be composed of 15,148 detector modules distributed among the four sub-
systems (TIB, TID, TOB, TEC) described above. Each module has one or two silicon sensors,
for a total of 24,244 sensors. Modules are supported by a carbon-ﬁber or graphite frame, with a
kapton layer to isolate the silicon and provide the electrical connections to the sensor backplane.
The readout and auxiliary chips are housed on a ceramic multiplayer hybrid, and a glass pitch

adapter between the hybrid and the sensor, brings the signals from the sensor strips to the
readout input pads. An example of a TIB detector module is shown in ﬁgure 3.

Figure 3. A module for the CMS tracker inner barrel (TIB). The external black structure is
the carbon ﬁber frame. The larger rectangular central grey area is the silicon sensor, surrounded
by the kapton circuit for insulation and bias. At the left edge of the sensor, in light grey, is the
glass pitch adapter, bringing the signal to the front-end hybrid and chips, on the far left of the
frame, and to the cable out of the module on the left.

The front-end hybrid hosts four or six APV25 readout chips. The APV25 chip has 128
amplifying channels and is designed in 0.25 µm CMOS technology to be radiation hard with
low noise and a fast signal readout [2]. The signal shaping with a de-convolution ﬁlter has a
shaping time of 25 ns. Further a pipeline buﬀer of 192 columns can store LHC bunch crossings
over 4.8 µs, to allow a decision from the CMS ﬁrst level trigger system.

In each module large number of micro-bond wire connections are necessary to bring signals
between (i) the sensors, if two are present, (ii) the sensor and the pitch adapter, and (iii) the
pitch adapter and the readout hybrid. For all modules, a total of approximately 25 million wire
bonds are necessary, and are made with the help of programmable automatic micro-bonding
stations.

The CMS tracker modules come in a variety of shapes and dimensions. The outer modules of
the TOB structure and of the three outer TEC rings, hold two sensors, all the other TIB, TID
and four inner TEC rings, have a single sensor. As for the modules shapes, the TIB and TOB
barrel modules are rectangular, while the TID and TEC disc modules have a wedge shape, in
order to form rings. A sketch with the diﬀerent shapes and dimensions of the tracker modules
is shown in ﬁgure 4

Roughly half of the modules in the tracker layout are in fact double-sided modules, made
of two independent single-sided modules glued together back-to-back with a relative rotation of
100 mrad respect to each other. This allows a determination of the ionization in the z coordinate
in the barrel modules, and in the r coordinate in the disks, i.e. the determination of a full space
point where the double sided modules are present. These double-sided modules are mounted in
the ﬁrst two layers of the TIB and TOB, in the ﬁrst two TID rings, and in rings 1, 2 and 5 of
the TEC structure.

4. Tracker Sensors
The design of the CMS tracker sensors is rather simple, and has been studied in collaboration
with industry to ease the mass production needed to build such a large silicon system. This is

Figure 4. Shapes and dimensions of the CMS tracker modules mounted on the Inner Barrel
(TIB, upper left), Outer Barrel (lower left) and End-Caps inner (upper right) and outer (lower
right) rings .

why only single-sided sensors are produced. Also the 15 diﬀerent sensor types ﬁnally designed
for the tracker make use of the maximum area available on the 6 inch wafers commonly used in
sensor production lines.

The choice of the material is of n-type silicon with 512 or 768 p+ single sided strips, of
resistivity in the 1.25-7.5 KΩ cm range, with thickness of 320 µm or 500 µm, and <100> crystal
orientation. Design choices have been driven by many factors, and most of all radiation hardness.
Silicon is inherently radiation hard and the most important macroscopic eﬀects of irradiation
are the increase of the leakage current, that is linear with the radiation ﬂuence, and the
conversion of the n-type bulk into p-type bulk with the increase of the carrier concentration.
As a consequence the bias voltage needed for depletion increases with the radiation damage,
and this can lead to the detector current breakdown. For these reasons the inner parts of the
tracker (TIB, TID and the four innermost TEC rings) have been instrumented with sensors of
lower resistivity (1.25-3.25 KΩ cm) and standard 320 µm thickness, while the outer parts of the
tracker have higher resistivity (3.5-7.5 KΩ cm) and thicker 500 µm sensor wafers.

The lower resistivity of the inner sensors will require higher operational voltages at startup
(300V) but this will give more margin for the bulk type inversion caused by the damage from
higher radiation levels closer to the interaction point. In this way even at the end of 10 years
of operation, even the sensors that are most exposed to irradiation will require maximum
operational voltages, after the bulk inversion, similar to the startup ones. The choice of the
lattice orientation <100> is also driven by radiation hardness considerations as it minimizes the
surface damage and thus the increase of inter-strip capacitance after irradiation [3].

The inter-strip distance (strip pitch) in diﬀerent sensors varies from 80 µm to 205 µm, but the
ratio of the strip pitch to the strip width is 0.25 for all types. The strips width, pitch and length
are chosen in order to minimize inter-strip capacitance, optimize the resolution and occupancy,
and assure high voltage operational stability. The evolution of strip length and pitch with the
radius of the detector position to the beam line is shown in ﬁgure 5. In the inner 320 µm thick
sensors the strip lines cover a surface of 0.1 cm2 per channel, in the outer 500 µm thick sensors
strip lines cover 0.4 cm2, this leads to an expected occupancy around 1% with the expected
LHC track densities at high luminosity.

Strips are AC coupled to aluminum readout lines of 1.2 µm minimum thickness, and the

Figure 5. Silicon sensors strips length and pitch as a function of the module radius to the
beam line. Markers are barrel sensors, lines are end-cap ring sensors.

coupling insulation is achieved with two layers of dielectric SiO2 and Si3N4. The high voltage
operational stability of the module is enhanced by the metal overhanging of the aluminum
readout strips over the p+ implants, and by introducing a ﬂoating p+ guard ring around the
p+ bias ring, to avoid high ﬁeld near cut edges. The bias ring is connected to the p+ strips
with an array of polysilicon resistors, each 1.5±0.5 MΩ. DC pads in direct contact with the p+
strips implants are available for testing, while two series of AC pads are available for the wire
micro-bonding of each strip to the readout electronics. A sketch view of a typical corner of a
CMS tracker silicon sensor is shown in ﬁgure 6.

Figure 6.
View of a corner region of a
wedge-type silicon strip sensor for the CMS
tracker. The bias ring runs around the sensor
and brings the depletion voltage to the p+
strips through the bias resistors. The ﬂoating
guard ring runs around the bias ring and
protects the sensor at high voltage operations.
The series of DC pads are in direct contact
with the p+ strip implants, while the two
series of AC pads are in contact with the
superﬁcial aluminum strips, and serve for
the wire bonding connections to the readout
electronics.

5. Sensor production and quality assurance
The production of the CMS silicon sensors has been awarded to two companies, Hamamatsu
Photonics (Hamamatsu, Japan) for thin (320 µm) sensors and ST Microelectronics (Catania,
Italy) for thick (500 µm) sensors. The acceptance test for the quality assurance of produced

sensors have been performed in four stages. The ﬁrst stage of measurements is done at the
manufacturing centers, while the following three are done at CMS centers that perform a full
sensor quality control, a process control on test structures and irradiation test on a small fraction
of sensors.

The sensor quality control, performed at Karlsruhe, Rochester, Perugia, Pisa and Vienna,
include (i) an optical inspection of possible sensor damages, (ii) a scan of the sensor capacitance
and leakage current as a function of the bias voltage up to 550 V, (iii) a measurement of
strip parameters with a 400 V bias. The process controls, performed at Florence, Strasbourg
and Vienna, are another set of ten standard electrical measurements to be compared to the
speciﬁcations and to monitor the production. The irradiation test are performed at Louvain
and Karlsruhe on small samples of sensors at -10◦C up to the ﬁnal doses expected in CMS, and
serve to conﬁrm the expected radiation hardness of the detectors.

Both the quality and process control test have revealed diﬀerent problems in the sensor
production and feedback has been given to the manufacturing companies to correct the
production faults. Just recently (2005) the full production of all fully qualiﬁed silicon sensors
for the CMS tracker has been accomplished.

6. Module production and quality assurance
The assembly of the 15,232 modules of the tracker is performed in a semi-automatic way by
gantry stations. Such stations can localize speciﬁc markers with a pattern recognition program
and, using pickup tools, can position and glue the module components with precisions better
than 10 µm in positioning and better than 5 mrad in alignment. The six CMS assembly stations
operate at a rate of 90 modules per day.

After the assembly stage, the modules are sent to the bonding and testing centers, where
the sensor strips are bonded to the front-end hybrid channels, and diﬀerent electrical test are
performed [4]. The test procedures include (i) an optical inspection of possible damages, (ii)
a scan of the sensor leakage current with bias voltage up to 450 V, (iii) pedestal, noise and
pulse shape measurements for each channel in four diﬀerent data acquisition modes, (iv) a LED
illumination test of the sensor, to spot open or pinhole channels. Channels with shorts or pinholes
can cause readout problems; they are therefore disconnected and become open channels. At the
end of the test each channel can be ﬂagged as bad because it is too noisy, open, dead or has
other readout problems.

Currently (December 2005) over 10,000 modules have been assembled and tested at CMS
production centers, and about 3.5% of produced modules do not pass the quality requirements.
A module fails the requirements on the leakage current behavior if either it has a current larger
than 10 µA at 450 V, or if it shows a resistive/breakdown I-V curve at lower voltages. About
1% of produced modules fail these I-V requirements. Another 0.5% of produced modules have a
number of bad channels greater that 2% of the total channels, and are classiﬁed bad for strips,
while the total number of bad strips in good modules is at the level of 0.1%. Problems with
the front-end hybrid electronics cause another 0.5% of produced modules to be classiﬁed as bad.
The remaining bad modules (1-1.5%) have other assembly problems but a good fraction of these
can probably be recovered.

After the standard full electrical tests modules go through a long term test where they are
thermally cycled in the -20◦C to +25◦C range for 72 hours in a dry box and readout in operating
conditions are simulated. Only 0.1% of produced modules are seen to fail at this stage of testing.
All the bad modules not passing the quality requirements are collected in four specialized repair
centers for further diagnosis and possible recovery.

7. Integration and test of larger structures
As qualiﬁed modules are built they are also mounted on their ﬁnal structures at the integration
centers. At present hundreds of modules have been assembled on their supporting mechanics and
subsystems, like the one pictured in ﬁgure 7. Coming out from the modules front-end hybrids,
the data are converted into optical signals, travels in optical ﬁbers to the back-end, where they
are converted back into electrical signals, digitized and processed.

Figure 7. One half of the inner
barrel layer three shell assembled
the INFN Pisa
and cabled at
Single-sided
integration facility.
silicon strip modules are mounted
on both the internal and external
surfaces of the barrel.

Substructures like the one in ﬁgure 7 are also tested inside large cold rooms, where the
functioning of the cooling, controls and data acquisition of large substructures can be tested in
normal operational conditions. Starting at the beginning of 2006 the substructures assembled
and tested at the integration centers will be transported to the CERN Tracker Integration
Facility (TIF), where ﬁnally the full tracker structure will be assembled and tested. The
completed and tested silicon tracker will then be delivered at the CMS experimental area at
the end of 2006.
In the meanwhile a test of smaller substructures of the tracker, built with
modules that were not fully qualiﬁed, will also be tested inside the operating CMS magnet, with
parts of other CMS detectors, with the goal of triggering and measuring cosmic rays.

8. Tracker physics performances
The CMS silicon strip tracker will be located inside the 4 Tesla solenoidal magnetic ﬁeld and
will provide measurements of 10 to 14 hits for charged tracks originating near the interaction
point within a pseudorapidity acceptance of |η| <2.5. Combinatorial Kalman ﬁlters are used to
reconstruct charged tracks trajectories both with inside-out and outside-in seeding techniques [5].
As it can be seen in ﬁgure 8 the track reconstruction eﬃciency for muons is expected to be
close to 100% in the acceptance range. Electrons and hadrons are expected to have slightly
worse eﬃciencies ranging from 95% in the central region to 80% in the forward region.

The transverse momentum resolution for reconstructed tracks is 1-2% for 100 GeV/c pT
muons in the central region (ﬁgure 8). The resolution is better for lower momentum muons in
the 1-10 GeV/c pT range, but is degraded in the forward region due to the reduced level arm.
The resolution for the tracks impact parameter is expected to be at the level of 20 µm for high
energy tracks (pT =100 GeV/c), but degrades at lower momenta because of multiple scattering.
The resolution on the impact parameters of reconstructed tracks will be a key factor for an
eﬃcient identiﬁcation of ﬁnal states with b quarks and tau leptons, crucial for measurements in
the higgs sector with a light higgs decay (h→ bb), for top physics (t→bW+), and for searches
for new physics like supersymmetric particles.

-1

10

T
p
/
)

T
p
(

, pT = 100 GeV/c
, pT = 10 GeV/c
, pT = 1 GeV/c

, pT = 100 GeV/c
, pT = 10 GeV/c
, pT = 1 GeV/c

, pT = 100 GeV/c
, pT = 10 GeV/c
, pT = 1 GeV/c
p , pT = 10 GeV/c

y
c
n
e
c
i
f
f

i

E

 
l
a
b
o
G

l

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-2

10

300

)

m

200

(
 
)

0
d
(

100
90
80
70
60
50

40

30

20

10
9

0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1 1.25 1.5 1.75 2 2.25 2.5

0

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

1.25

1.5

1.75

2

2.25

0

0.25 0.5 0.75

1

1.25 1.5 1.75

2

2.25 2.5

Figure 8. Performances of the CMS tracker reconstruction of charged particles. Left: track
reconstruction eﬃciencies as a function of pseudo-rapidity |η| for muons and pions of diﬀerent
tranverse momentum pT . Center : track transverse momentum resolutions for muons as a
function of |η| and for diﬀerent pT values. Right : track impact parameter resolutions for muons
as a function of |η| and for diﬀerent pT values.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the EPS NPDC19 Conference organizers G. Viesti, A. Zenoni and
A. Fontana for kindly inviting me to give a presentation on the CMS tracker, and for their
patience for my delay in sending this contributed paper.

References
[1] The CMS Tracker Technical Design Report, CERN/LHCC 98-6 CMS TDR 5

Addendum to the CMS Tracker TDR, CERN/LHCC 2000-016

[2] French J, et al. 2001 Nucl. Instr. and Meth.A462 359
[3] Braibant S, et al. 2002 Nucl. Instr. and Meth.A485 343
[4] Aﬀolder A, et al. 2004 Nucl. Instr. and Meth.A535 374
[5] Speer T, et al. 2005 CMS CR 2005/014

h
m
m
m
h
s
m
m
m
h
s
m
m
m
m
