5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
2
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LNF-05/30 (P)
22 dicembre 2005

MICROMETRIC POSITION MONITORING
USING FIBER BRAGG GRATING SENSORS
IN SILICON DETECTORS

E.Basile(*), F.Bellucci (***), L. Benussi, M. Bertani, S. Bianco, M.A. Caponero (**),
D. Colonna (*), F. Di Falco (*), F.L. Fabbri, F. Felli (*), M. Giardoni, A. La Monaca,
F.Massa (*), G. Mensitieri (***), B. Ortenzi, M. Pallotta, A. Paolozzi (*), L. Passamonti,
D. Pierluigi, C. Pucci (*), A. Russo, G. Saviano (*)†.
Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati dell’INFN, v.E.Fermi 40 00044 Frascati (Rome) Italy

presented by S.Bianco at ICATPP05, Villa Olmo (Como) Italy 2005

We show R&D results including long term stability, resolution, radiation hardness and characterization of
Fiber Grating sensors used to monitor structure deformation, repositioning and surveying of silicon detector
in High Energy Physics.

Abstract

∗

∗∗

∗∗∗

Permanent address: “La Sapienza” University - Rome.
Permanent address: ENEA Frascati.
Permanent address: “Federico II” University - Naples.

†This work was supported by the Italian Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare and Ministero dell’Istruzione,
dell’Universit e della Ricerca. This work was partially funded by contract EU RII3-CT-2004-506078.

1

INTRODUCTION

FBG sensors are widely used in telecommunication as optical ﬁlters. For the ﬁrst time we have used FBG

sensors as optical, low-noise, high-resolution strain gauges to monitor structure deformation, repositioning,

and surveying silicon (pixel and microstrips) detectors for HEP experiments at hadron machines. We show

R&D results including long term stability, precision, resolution, radiation hardness and characterization.

2

FBG SENSORS

Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG) sensors have been used so far as telecommunication ﬁlters, and as optical

strain gauges in civil and aerospace engineering [1], and, only recently, in HEP detectors [2]. The BTeV

[3] detectors utilize FBG sensors to monitor online the position of the straw tubes, pixels, and microstrip.

The optical ﬁber is used for monitoring displacements and strains in mechanical structures such as the straw

tube-microstrip support presented here. A modulated refractive index along the FBG sensor produces Bragg

reﬂection at a wavelength dependent on the strain in the ﬁber (Fig.1), permitting real-time monitoring of

the support. According to these properties, an FBG sensor is going to be plced in the M0X structure be-

tween the Rohacellr foam and the CFRP shell. Sensors will be located in spots of maximal deformation,

as predicted by FEA simulation. Figure 2 shows long-term behaviour of FBG sensors while monitoring

micron-size displacements, compared to monitoring via microphotographic methods.

3 LONG-TERM STABILITY AND RADIATION HARDNESS

The optical ﬁber is used for monitoring displacements and strains in mechanical structures such s the pre-

sented straw tubes-microstrip support. A wavelength selective light diffraction grating (Fig.1) along the

FBG sensor is placed in the ﬁber, and it permits an on-time monitoring of the support. Fig.2 shows long-

term behaviour of FBG sensors while monitoring micron-size desplacements, compared to monitoring via

photograﬁc methods.

Sensors have been tested for radiation damage. Fig.3 shows spectral response up to a neutron ﬂuence of
1.6 · 1013 14-MeV neutrons/cm2, corresponding to 6 months BTeV integrated dose.

4 THE OMEGA-LIKE REPOSITIONING DEVICE

FBG sensors have been also applied to instrument a novel repositioning device with micrometric resolution.

The Omega-like device (shown as prototype in Fig.4,5) follows the displacement of the pixel detector

designed for the BTeV experiment at the Fermila Tevatron which, at each accelerator store, has to be

moved out and in of the beamline. Fig.6 shows a Finite Element Analysis of the Omega-like device. FBG

2

sensor are located on area of largest strain in order to maximize sensitivity. Preliminary results show how a
repositioning precision of about 10 µm is reached. Work is in progress to reach the required 3 µm precision.

Figure 1: Principle of FBG sensors operation. A laser pulse is injected in the ﬁber and reﬂected selectively
according to the grating pitch. Strain ∆ε changes the grating pitch thus changing the wavelength of reﬂected
pulse. The sensors is also sensitive to temperature changes.

Figure 2: FBG long-term monitoring stability results. FBG output (crosses) is validated by TV camera
(bars).

3

Figure 3: Radiation hardness of FBG sensors. Spectral response up to neutron ﬂuence of 1.6 · 1013 14-MeV
neutrons/cm2, corresponding to 6 months BTeV integrated dose. No frequency shift is observed up to max
irradiated dose.

Figure 4: Sketch of BTeV pixel detector and its Carbon Fiber Reinforced Plastic support frame.

Figure 5: The Omega-like repositioning device, equipped with FBG sensors, follows the pixel support
structure in and out of beam, assuring repositioning accuracy.

4

Figure 6: Finite Element Analysis of the Omega-like repositioning system. Sensors are located on the areas
of larger mechanical strain in order to maximize sensitivity.

5 CONCLUSIONS

We have used FBG sensor in HEP for the ﬁrst time as precise, stable, optical devices for micrometric

position monitoring of silicon pixel and strips detectors. FBG sensors provide position monitoring with

micrometric resolution. Under radiation with doses typical of year-long operation at hadron colliders they

show no sign of spectral response shift. We have used sensors to characterize and optimize pixel support

structures in Carbon Fiber Reinforced Plastic. Finally, we have proposed a novel device to precisely repo-
sition the pixel detector in and out of the beams at each accelerator store. Preliminary results show a 10µm
resolution, improvements are undergoing and we expect to reach the 3µm precision required by the experi-

mental operation.

References

[1] S. Berardis et al., ”Fiber optic sensors for space missions” 2003 IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceed-

ing, Big Sky Montana, March 8-15, 2003, pp. 1661-1668.

[2] L. Benussi et al., ”Results of Long-Term Position Monitoring by Means of Fiber Bragg Grating Sensors

for the BTeV Detector”, Frascati preprint LNF-03/15(IR).

[3] Fermilab Experiment E-0897/E-0918, J. Butler, S. Stone co-spokepersons; see www-btev.fnal.gov.

5

