5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
2
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LNF-05/31 (P)
22 dicembre 2005

TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL
RECONSTRUCTION AND ANALYSIS OF
THE STRAW TUBES TOMOGRAPHY IN
THE BTEV EXPERIMENT

E.Basile(*), F.Bellucci (***), L. Benussi, M. Bertani, S. Bianco, M.A. Caponero (**),
D. Colonna (*), F. Di Falco (*), F.L. Fabbri, F. Felli (*), M. Giardoni, A. La Monaca,
F.Massa (*), G. Mensitieri (***), B. Ortenzi, M. Pallotta, A. Paolozzi (*), L. Passamonti,
D.Pierluigi, C. Pucci (*), A. Russo, G. Saviano (*)†.
Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati dell’INFN, v.E.Fermi 40 00044 Frascati (Rome) Italy

F.Casali, M.Bettuzzi, D.Bianconi
University of Bologna and INFN, Bologna, Italy

presented by F. Massa at ICATPP05, Villa Olmo (Como) Italy 2005
Abstract

A check of the eccentricity of the aluminised kapton straw tubes used in the BTeV experiment is
accomplished using X-ray tomography of the section of tubes modules. 2 and 3-dimensional images of the
single tubes and of the modules are reconstructed and analysed. Preliminary results show that a precision
better than 40 µm can be reached on the measurement of the straw radii.

∗

∗∗

∗∗∗

Permanent address: “La Sapienza” University - Rome.
Permanent address: ENEA Frascati.
Permanent address: “Federico II” University - Naples.

†This work was supported by the Italian Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare and Ministero dell’Istruzione,
dell’Universit`a e della Ricerca. This work was partially funded by contract EU RII3-CT-2004-506078.

1

INTRODUCTION

of the module sections.

2 BTEV DETECTOR

Image of LabVIEW.

The BTeV experiment [1] uses straw tubes glued in modules and embedded in a structure mechanically un-

tensioned [2], where straw and microstrip detector are integrated, allowing a minimum amount of materials.

A check of the eccentricity of the straw tubes and their position is accomplished using X-ray tomography

Experiment straw section is scanned orthogonal to the vertical axis of the tomograph with 27 µm resolu-

tion. Data are initially reduced in a numerical 8-bit matrix of 1024x1024 points, then converted to an IMAQ

Figure 1 show the raw tomographic image of a straw tube section (section♯10, 1024x1024 pixels, 27

µm/pixel, 256 values of greys). Not all the tubes of the module are contained in the ﬁeld of view. Fig-

ure 1 also shows evident traces of glue, deposited on the external surfaces of the straw tubes, especially

in the points of contact of adjacent tubes. Only the internal surfaces are well deﬁned in the images and,

in order to detect and to measure possible mechanical deformations of the tubes, this forces to study the

geometry of the these surfaces. Figure 2 shows the distribution of the greys values of the previous ﬁgure.

An improvement of the signal-to-noise con be obtained just setting an upper threshold of the intensity, as

it is shown in Fig.3, reporting the effect of a threshold of 210 of the image of Fig.1. As an example, an

arbitrary straight of the pixels along this line is shown if Fig.4, where the two peaks point out the positions

of the crossing points (Edges) of the line with the internal surfaces of the two adjacent tubes. The transfor-

mation of the Edges coordinates from the line reference to the image reference is easily obtained from the

coordinates of the line end points in the image reference. On this base, an automatic procedure is deﬁned

in order to obtain the Edges of 14 tubes of a section of the module.

The procedure is as follows. First an image containing a Region of Interest is built, then the patterns recog-

nising such a region are extracted from the tomography. At the Edge pointed out on the base of contrast

ﬁgures, three orthogonal coordinates X,Y,Z, deﬁned in the tomograph system (Tomo reference), are at-

tributed, where the Z is common to all the Edges of the same section. This allows the reconstruction of the

2 and 3-dimensional images of single tubes and of the entire module.

We do not expect a perfect positioning of the module on the tomograph reference plane, and even in the

case of perfect positioning we would not expect a perfect parallelism between the tubes of the module.

Therefore, the section Edges of each straw tube are ﬁtted to an ellipse. The centres of the ellispes of all

sections are in turn ﬁtted to a straight line: the axis of the straw tube.

Projecting the Edges of a section on the plane orthogonal to the axis of its straw tube the contribution to an

elliptical conﬁguration due to a not perfect vertically of the tube is eliminated.

2

3 RESULTS

We ﬁt the data points to an ellipse, and deﬁne as Ellipse Parameter the quantity

(P F1 + P F2)/2

where P is a point on the ellipse, F1,2 are the ellipse foci, and P Fi their distances.

In order to evaluated the amount of the mechanical deformation of the straw tubes cross section from the

expected circular shape, we then ﬁt the data to a circle. Figure 5 shows the standard deviation of the

histograms of the Edge radius, and the width of gaussian ﬁt to the Ellipse Parameter of the projected edges

for the 14 straw tubes analyzed. In the worst case the mechanical deformation respect to the circular cross

section have a distribution with a standard deviation of about 1.5 pixel, corresponding to about 40µm,

largely contained in the 100µm speciﬁcation in order not to spoil the electric ﬁeld inside the straw tube.

The precision of our technique in determining the variation of the straw cross-section from circularity cam

be estimated by the difference in quadrature of the two variances in Fig.7, which is about 1.2 pixels at most,

corresponding to about 30µm. The three-dimensional rendering of slices reconstructed is shown in Figure

8.

Figure 1: Example of raw tomography image of straw tubes module (1024x1024 pixel, 27µ/pixel)

3

Figure 2: Grey intensity histogram of Fig.1

Figure 4: Intensity along the line of Fig.3.

4

Figure 3: Same tomography of Fig.1 with a grey intensity threshold of 210. The intensity distribution along
the segment is shown in Fig.4.

Figure 5: Edges of 14 straw tubes of the section♯10 of the module. Each Edge is chosen as the ﬁrst met
in the arrow direction, from the inside to the outside of the Region of Interest, pointing out to the internal
surface of the straw tube. Circles ﬁtting the Edges, their centers and order number are also shown

Figure 6: Axis and Edges of Section ♯130 of the straw tube♯4 in Tomo reference. The Straw axis is at 9
degree respect to the tomograph vertical axis (the ﬁgure axis is not in scale respect the horizontal ones)

5

Figure 7: Standard deviation of the histogram of the Edge radius (red) and sigma of the gaussian ﬁt to the
ellipse parameters of the projected edges (green) for 14 straw tubes.

Figure 8: 3-D reconstruction in Tomo reference of the 14-straw module.

6

We have developed a new technique to visualize lw-mass surface of cylindrical shapes widely used in HEP

detectors, such as straw tubes. The technique uses x-ray computed tomography, implemented with an orig-

inal optical recognition, pattern recognition and analysis code, Labview-based. Preliminary results show

how the precision of our technique in determining deviation from circular shapes are better than 30µm.

4 CONCLUSIONS

References

[1] Fermilab Experiment E-0897/E-0918, J.Butler, S.Stone co-spokespersons; see www-btev.fnal.

[2] E.Basile et al., ”A Novel Approach for an Integrated Straw tube-Microstrip Detector”, accepted by

Transactions on Nuclear Science (2005).

7

