6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
9
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Talk presented at the 14th International Workshop on Vertex Detectors (VERTEX2005),
November 7-11 2005, Chuzenji Lake, Nikko, Japan.

Sensor simulation and position calibration
for the CMS pixel detector

V. Chiochia a,∗

, E. Alag¨oz a, M. Swartz b

aPhysik Institut der Universit¨at Z¨urich-Irchel, 8057 Z¨urich, Switzerland
bJohns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA

Abstract

In this paper a detailed simulation of irradiated pixel sensors was used to investigate the eﬀects of radiation
damage on charge sharing and position determination. The simulation implements a model of radiation damage
by including two defect levels with opposite charge states and trapping of charge carriers. We show that charge
sharing functions extracted from the simulation can be parameterized as a function of the inter-pixel position and
used to improve the position determination. For sensors irradiated to Φ = 5.9 × 1014 neq/cm2 a position resolution
below 15 µm can be achieved after calibration.

1. Introduction

The CMS experiment, currently under construc-
tion at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) will in-
clude a silicon pixel detector [1] to allow tracking
in the region closest to the interaction point. The
detector will be a key component for reconstruct-
ing interaction vertices and heavy quark decays in
a particulary harsh environment, characterized by
a high track multiplicity and heavy irradiation. At
the full LHC luminosity the innermost layer, with
a radius of 4.3 cm, will be exposed to a particle
ﬂuence of 3 × 1014 neq/cm2/yr.

In order to evaluate the eﬀects of irradiation and
optimize the algorithms for the position determi-
nation a detailed simulation of the pixel sensors
was implemented. In [2] we have proven that it
is possible to adequately describe the charge col-
lection characteristics of heavily irradiated silicon
pixel detectors in terms of a tuned double junction
model which produces a doubly peaked electric

∗

Corresponding author
Email address: vincenzo.chiochia@cern.ch

(V. Chiochia).

ﬁeld proﬁle across the sensor. The modeling is sup-
ported by the evidence of doubly peaked electric
ﬁelds obtained from beam test measurements pre-
sented in [3]. The dependence of the modeled trap
concentrations upon ﬂuence was presented in [4]
and the temperature dependence of the model was
discussed in [5]. Charge sharing and hit reconstruc-
tion after irradiation was investigated in [6] us-
ing the so called “η-technique”. In this paper we
present an alternative approach to hit reconstruc-
tion and calibration based on charge sharing func-
tions extracted from the sensor simulation.

This paper is organized as follows: The sensor
simulation is described in Section 2, in Section 3
the hit reconstruction and calibration is discussed.
The conclusions are given in Section 4.

2. Sensor simulation

The results presented in this paper rely upon a
detailed sensor simulation that includes the mod-
eling of irradiation eﬀects in silicon. The simula-
tion, pixelav [2, 7, 8], incorporates the following
elements: an accurate model of charge deposition

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

by primary hadronic tracks (in particular to model
delta rays); a realistic 3-D intra-pixel electric ﬁeld
map; an established model of charge drift physics
including mobilities, Hall Eﬀect, and 3-D diﬀusion;
a simulation of charge trapping and the signal in-
duced from trapped charge; and a simulation of
electronic noise, response, and threshold eﬀects.
The intra-pixel electric ﬁeld map was generated
using tcad 9.0 [9] to simultaneously solve Pois-
son’s Equation, the carrier continuity equations,
and various charge transport models.

The simulated devices correspond to the base-
line sensor design for the CMS barrel pixel detec-
tor. The sensors are “n-in-n” devices, designed to
collect charge from n+ structures implanted into
n- bulk silicon. The simulated samples were 22x32
arrays of 100x150 µm2 pixels. The substrate was
285 µm thick, n-doped silicon. The donor concen-
tration was set to 1.2 × 1012 cm−3 corresponding
to a depletion voltage of about 75 V for an unir-
radiated device. The 4 T magnetic ﬁeld was set as
in the CMS conﬁguration and the sensor temper-
ature to -10◦ C. The simulation did not include
the “punch-through” structure on the n+ implants
which is used to provide a high resistance connec-
tion to ground and to provide the possibility of on-
wafer IV measurements.

The eﬀect of irradiation was implemented in the
tcad simulation by including two defect levels in
the forbidden silicon bandgap with opposite charge
states and trapping of charge carriers. The activa-
tion energies of the donor and acceptor traps were
set to (EV + 0.48) eV and (EC − 0.525) eV, respec-
tively, where EV and EC are the valence and con-
duction band energy level, respectively [10]. The
trap densities and the capture cross sections for
electrons and holes were obtained by ﬁtting the
model to beam test data as described in [2,4]. The
simulated irradiation ﬂuence was Φ = 5.9 × 1014
neq/cm2 and the reverse bias was set to 300 V.

3. Hit Reconstruction and Position
Calibration

The simulation has been used to study how the
sharing of charge among neighboring pixels is af-

2

fected by radiation damage. A description of this
behavior is needed to adjust the pixel hit recon-
struction algorithm as the detector ages. In what
follows we refer to the reconstruction of barrel hits
in the r − φ plane, where the charge drift is af-
fected by the Lorentz deﬂection. Simulated tracks
are perendicular to the sensor plane along the
r − φ direction. Hits in the pixel detectors are re-
constructed by ﬁrst searching for clusters of pixels
with signals above the readout threshold of 2000
electrons. The signals are then summed along the
rows and columns of the cluster to produce 1-D
projected signal proﬁles. In the pixel barrel, the az-
imuthal Lorentz drift produces 2-pixel and 3-pixel
wide projected clusters in the local y-direction
(global φ-direction). The charge fraction is deﬁned
as f = QL/(QF + QL) where QL is the signal of
the last projected pixel in the cluster and QF is
the signal of the ﬁrst projected pixel. The charge
fraction of a number of simulated hits is plotted
in Fig 1(a) as a function of the track coordinate y
at the midplane of the sensor. The y-coordinate is
plotted from the center of one pixel (y = 0) to the
center of the neighboring pixel (y = 100 µm). The
two-pixel hits are plotted as open diamonds and
the three-pixel hits are plotted as crosses. These
functions y = F2(f ), F3(f ) are quite linear and
have non-negligible width due to ﬂuctuations in
the deposited charge. After irradiation, the intro-
duction of trapping states dramatically increases
the leakage current and produces space charge in
the detector bulk. The sign of space charge varies
from negative near the n+ implant to positive near
the p+ implant resulting in a doubly-peaked elec-
tric ﬁeld [10]. The presence of the doubly-peaked
ﬁeld and the trapping of the signal carriers aﬀect
the charge sharing functions which are shown in
Fig. 1(b) for a ﬂuence of Φ = 5.9 × 1014 neq/cm2.
We note that nearly all of the 3-pixel clusters have
vanished, the shape of the 2-pixel function F2(f )
has become non-linear, and there are now 1-pixel
clusters near the inter-pixel wall (shown as f = 0
points).

The large radiation-induced change in charge
sharing that occurs during detector operation re-
quires the implementation of a calibrate-able hit
reconstruction algorithm. The algorithm should be
based upon calibration parameters that can be var-

induced asymmetry when the cluster size is one
pixel.

The performance of a reconstruction algorithm
based upon equation 1 is shown in Table 1 for sam-
ples of simulated events with new and irradiated
sensors (Φ = 5.9 × 1014 neq/cm2). The means and
the RMS widths of the diﬀerences between the re-
constructed and true hit positions are tabulated
as functions of the total cluster charge. The large
cluster charge events are likely to have energetic
delta rays that spoil the resolution. It is clearly im-
portant to develop a parameterization of the reso-
lution for use in track reconstruction. The optimal
hit reconstruction parameters used in equation 1
vary considerably before and after irradiation. In
particular, the exponent α for the two-pixel clus-
ters varies from 1.00 before irradiation to 0.575 af-
ter irradiation.

The parameters of the pixel hit reconstruction
algorithm are sensitive to bias voltage, operating
temperature, and irradiation ﬂuence. One can an-
ticipate that diﬀerent regions of the detector will
require diﬀerent parameter sets and that all will
change in time. We believe that it will be possible
to use data to tune the pixelav simulation and
then use the simulation to derive the parameters
to track the detector aging eﬀects. However, it is
also possible to extract the shapes of the charge
sharing functions F (f ) directly from data using the
traditional “η-technique” [6]. The technique works
as follows. It is assumed that a group of pixels is
uniformly illuminated by a set of parallel tracks.
The traditional formulation uses the variable η ≡
(QL − QF )/(QF + QL) = 2f − 1 and with the uni-
form illumination assumption, it permits the ex-
traction of F (f ) = F (η) up to an unknown inte-
gration constant C,

dN
dη

→ y =

=

w
N

dN
dy
η

Z
−1

dy
dη

=

N
w

dy
dη

dη

′ dN
dη′ + C.

(2)

This provides a signiﬁcant constraint on F (f ) but
still requires input from the simulation or another
technique to determine C. The constant C is re-
lated to Lorentz-drift which has traditionally been

3

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. The azimuthal charge-sharing functions for 2- and
3-pixel clusters in the CMS pixel barrel for new sensors
(a) and sensors irradiated to a ﬂuence of Φ = 5.9 × 1014
neq/cm2 (b). The fraction of charge found in the last pixel
as compared with both end pixels is plotted as a function
of the local coordinate y in microns.

ied in time to remove biases and to ensure the use
of a technique that optimizes the use of the avail-
able information. The charge sharing functions are
well described by the following expression

y = 


yc + y2 + (w + y1 − y2) · f α 0 < f < 1
yc + ∆ ≃ yc + (y1 + y2) /2

f = 0

(1)



where: yc is the coordinate of the center of the ﬁrst
pixel in the cluster, w is the pixel size, y1 and y2
deﬁne the f = 0 and f = 1 intercepts, the exponent
α describes the linearity of the function, and the
oﬀset ∆ is needed to account for the Lorentz-drift-

New Sensor Irr. Sensor: w/o calibration Irr. Sensor: with calibration

Cluster Charge Fraction ∆y RMS ∆y

Q/Qavg < 0.7

2% 0.1µm 5.4µm 26µm

0.7 < Q/Qavg < 1.0

62% 0.1µm 7.7µm 29µm

1.0 < Q/Qavg < 1.5

30% 0.4µm 16µm 29µm

1.5 < Q/Qavg

2% 19µm 63µm 34µm

All Q

100% 1µm 18µm 29µm

RMS

14µm

12µm

17µm

52µm

19µm

∆y

0.0µm

0.3µm

0.2µm

11µm

0.6µm

RMS

7.7µm

9.4µm

15µm

53µm

18µm

Table 1
Simulated bias ∆y and resolution (RMS) of the pixel hit reconstruction algorithm for diﬀerent cluster charge bins before
and after irradiation to Φ = 5.9 × 1014 neq/cm2. The fractions of the sample in each cluster charge bin are also listed.

studied by searching for an azimuthal cluster size
minimum as a function of track angle. Unfortu-
nately, the small azimuthal angular acceptance of
a pixel barrel module (∼ ±10◦) and the large size
of the Lorentz angle in the pixels (∼ 23◦) precludes
this approach. An alternative method, based on
the measurement of the Lorentz deﬂection of long
clusters was proposed in [3]. This method allows
the measurement of the Lorentz deﬂection and the
extraction of the electric ﬁeld as function of the
sensor depth.

4. Conclusions

In this paper a detailed simulation of the silicon
pixel sensors for the CMS experiment was used to
study charge sharing and the calibration of the po-
sition reconstruction after heavy irradiation. The
simulation shows that position resolution can be
improved after irradiation by parameterizing the
dependence of charge sharing on the inter-pixel po-
sition. The procedure requires the tuning of the
PIXELAV simulation along the operation of the
CMS pixel detector, using data collected with col-
liding beams.

References

[1] CMS: The Tracker Project, Technical Design Report,

CERN/LHCC 98-6. CERN, Switzerland.

[2] V. Chiochia, et al., Simulation of heavily irradiated
silicon pixel sensors and comparison with test beam

4

measurements, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 52 (2005) 1067–
1075.

[3] A. Dorokhov, et al., Electric ﬁeld measurement in
heavily irradiated pixel sensors. Presented at the 13th
International Workshop on Vertex Detectors for High
Energy Physics, Menaggio, Italy, 13-18 September
2004. Accepted for publication in Nucl. Instrum.
Meth., eprint [physics/0412036].

et al., A double
silicon

junction model
[4] V. Chiochia,
for LHC,
of
irradiated
the 10th European Symposium on
presented at
Semiconductor Detectors, June 12-16 2005, Wildbad-
Kreuth, Germany. Accepted for publication in Nucl.
Instrum. Meth., eprint [physics/0506228].

sensors

pixel

[5] M. Swartz,

et al., Observation, modeling, and
temperature dependence of doubly peaked electric
ﬁelds in irradiated silicon pixel sensors, presented at
the Int. Workshop on Semiconductor Pixel Detectors
for Particles and Imaging, September 5-8 2005, Bonn,
Germany. Accepted for publication in Nucl. Instrum.
Meth., eprint [physics/0510040].

[6] E. Alag¨oz, V. Chiochia, M. Swartz, Simulation and hit
reconstruction of irradiated pixel sensors for the CMS
experiment, presented at the Workshop on Tracking
in High Multiplicity Environments (TIME 2005),
October 3-7 2005, Z¨urich, Switzerland. Submitted
for publication in Nucl.
Instrum. Meth., eprint
[physics/0512027].

[7] M. Swartz, CMS pixel simulations, Nucl. Instrum.

Meth. A511 (2003) 88–91.

[8] M. Swartz, A detailed simulation of the CMS pixel
sensor, CMS Note 2002/027, July 2002. Available
online:
http://cmsdoc.cern.ch/doc/notes/doc/NOTE2002 027.

[9] Synopsys Inc., Mountain View CA (USA), TCAD 9.0

User’s Manual, http://www.synopsys.com.

[10] V. Eremin, E. Verbitskaya, Z. Li, The origin of double
peak electric ﬁeld distribution in heavily irradiated
silicon detectors, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A476 (2002)
556–564.

