6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
7
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
2
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LA-UR-06-1881

High Voltage Test Apparatus for a Neutron
EDM Experiment and Lower Limit on the
Dielectric Strength of Liquid Helium at Large
Volumes

J. C. Long ∗
LANSCE-NS, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos NM 87545 USA

P. D. Barnes, J. G. Boissevain, D. J. Clark, M. D. Cooper
J. J. Gomez, S. K. Lamoreaux, R. E. Mischke, S. I. Penttila

Physics Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos NM 87545 USA

Abstract

A new search for a permanent electric dipole moment (EDM) of the neutron is un-
derway using ultracold neutrons produced and held in a bath of superﬂuid helium.
Attaining the target sensitivity requires maintaining an electric ﬁeld of several tens
of kilovolts per centimeter across the experimental cell, which is nominally 7.5 cm
wide and will contain about 4 liters of superﬂuid. The electrical properties of liquid
helium are expected to be suﬃcient to meet the design goals, but little is known
about these properties for volumes and electrode spacings appropriate to the EDM
experiment. Furthermore, direct application of the necessary voltages from an ex-
ternal source to the experimental test cell is impractical. An apparatus to amplify
voltages in the liquid helium environment and to test the electrical properties of the
liquid for large volumes and electrode spacings has been constructed. The device
consists of a large-area parallel plate capacitor immersed in a 200 liter liquid he-
lium dewar. Preliminary results show the breakdown strength of normal state liquid
helium is at least 90 kV cm−1 at these volumes, at the helium vapor pressure corre-
sponding to 4.38 K. These ﬁelds hold for more than 11 hours with leakage currents
less than 170 pA (about 20% of the maximum tolerable in the EDM experiment).
The system is also found to be robust against anticipated radiation backgrounds.
Preliminary results for superﬂuid show that ﬁelds of at least 30 kV cm−1 can be
sustained at the volumes required for the EDM experiment, about 60% of the design
goal. These results are likely limited by the low pressure that must be maintained
above the superﬂuid bath.

Key words: Liquid helium, Superﬂuid helium (He II), Dielectric properties,
Instrumentation, Power applications

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

14 January 2014

PACS: 07.20.Mc, 13.40.Em, 77.22.d, 84.70.+p

1 Introduction

The search for a permanent electric dipole moment (EDM) of the neutron has
been the subject of experimental investigations for nearly 50 years [1]. It has
generally been of interest as a test of the discrete space-time symmetries, and
has more recently emerged as one of the most sensitive tests of physics beyond
the Standard Model [2].

×

6.3

A nonzero EDM (de) would be a signal of time-reversal symmetry viola-
tion and has yet to be observed. The most sensitive upper limit to date,
10−26 e-cm (90% C. L.), is derived from experiments performed on
de ≤
ultracold neutrons (UCN) [3]. UCN have kinetic energies of a few hundred na-
noelectron volts—less than the Fermi potential of many substances—and are
easily trapped. The neutron velocities in these experiments are small and ran-
domized, which is very advantageous for the suppression of systematic eﬀects
associated with motional magnetic ﬁelds. A new EDM search, with potentially
unprecedented sensitivity, is underway using UCN produced via the superther-
mal process (the downscattering of cold neutrons by phonons) in a superﬂuid
helium bath and subsequently held in the bath [2,4,5].

The statistical sensitivity σd of these experiments can be approximated by the
expression:

~

σd ≥

E√T Nt

(1)

where ~ is Planck’s constant, E is the electric ﬁeld to which the neutron sample
is exposed, T is the experimental measurement cycle time, N is the number
of neutrons sampled per cycle, and t is the cumulative storage time. For the
106, using
experiment under construction, the target neutron sample is N
neutrons downscattered from a dedicated beam at the Spallation Neutron
Source (SNS) under construction at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The
target sample time is T
500 s, which is expected to be determined primarily
by the beta decay lifetime of the UCNs held in the very inert environment of
105 measurement cycles are expected,
the superﬂuid bath. A total of about 2
108 s. The target electric ﬁeld is 50 kV cm−1.
for a cumulative storage time of

∼

×

∼

×

1

∗ Corresponding author. Present address: Indiana University Cyclotron Facility,
Bloomington IN 47408 USA

∼

2

The dielectric properties of liquid helium (LHe) are expected to be suﬃcient
to meet the electric ﬁeld design parameter, however, very little is known about
these properties for volumes and electrode spacings appropriate to the experi-
ment. The reference design calls for a measurement cell with a volume of about
4 liters of superﬂuid (SF) LHe, positioned between a set of parallel-plate high
voltage (HV) electrodes of nominal area Ae = 2000 cm2. The electrode spacing
and hence the cell width is nominally ze = 7.5 cm.

The existing data for the electric breakdown strength of LHe are summa-
rized in Fig. 1, which is adapted from [6]. At electrode spacings below 1 mm,
breakdown ﬁelds well in excess of 300 kV cm−1 are observed. This reduces
to 150 kV cm−1 for gaps of 1 cm, however. Furthermore, as of the inception
of the project described in this work, reliable data for larger spacings were
not available in the literature. The extrapolation of the breakdown voltage to
larger spacings suggested in [6] is Vb = Cz0.8, where Vb is in kV cm−1, z is in
cm and C = 136 kV cm−0.8. This extrapolation is illustrated in Fig. 1, and
suggests an expected breakdown ﬁeld of about 95 kV cm−1 at the nominal
electrode spacing. This is well above the design target, if an extrapolation of
nearly an order of magnitude in the electrode spacing is to be trusted.

As emphasized in [6], however, electric breakdown in cryogenic liquids is inﬂu-
enced by many factors, including the volume of stressed liquid. In particular,
the expression

Eb2 = Eb1

−1/m

S2
S1 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(2)

is cited in [6] as an order-of-magnitude estimate for the reduction in break-
down ﬁeld Eb2 as a function of the overall stressed volume S2, relative to
reference values Eb1 and S1. Suggested values of the exponent 1/m range in
the literature from about 0.08 to 0.17. According to [7], the data in Fig. 1 are
obtained from an experiment with spherical electrodes of radius r = 3.1 cm.
Assuming circular plate electrodes of the same radius for simplicity and the
sake of an order-of-magnitude estimate, the stressed volume S1 is given by
πr2z, where z is the separation. Substituting this and the relation S2 = Aez
for the stressed volume in the EDM experiment into Eq. 2 yields an estimate
for the expected reduced breakdown ﬁeld between the EDM electrodes rela-
tive to the experiment in [7]. As the breakdown voltage scales with the ﬁeld
for the parallel plate electrodes, scaling the extrapolated curve in Fig. 1 by
(S2/S1)−1/m yields the plots labeled “size eﬀect limits” in that ﬁgure. This
is the modiﬁed expectation for the breakdown voltage in the EDM experi-
ment. The upper and lower bounds correspond to the exponent 1/m = 0.08
and 0.17, respectively, suggesting a wide possible range in the vicinity of the
design voltage (about 375 kV for the 7.5 cm electrode gap).

3

 Breakdown Strength vs Electrode Spacing

 Published data (0.1 MPa)

600

b

V

 = (136 kVcm

) z

-0.8

0.8

 

size effect

limits

)

V
k
(
 
l

a

i
t

t

 

n
e
o
P
n
w
o
d
k
a
e
r
B

800

700

500

400

300

200

100

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Electrode Spacing (cm)

Fig. 1. Breakdown voltage vs. electrode spacing for saturated LHe. The black
dots are existing experimental data from [7]. The extrapolation suggested in [6] is
shown, together with the further reduction (“size eﬀect limits”) expected in the
EDM experiment due to the larger volume of LHe relative to that in [7].

Additional factors inﬂuencing breakdown cited in [6] include surface rough-
ness, stressing time, and liquid pressure, for which understanding and pre-
dictability are partial at best. Furthermore, the foregoing data and discussion
apply only to saturated LHe in the normal state. Evidence presented in [6]
suggests additional reduction in breakdown strength for the SF state relevant
to the EDM experiment. This state of aﬀairs motivates a direct experimental
assessment of the dielectric properties of LHe at large volumes and electrode
spacings, and in the SF state.

In addition to the breakdown strength of LHe at large volumes, several other
engineering parameters are of interest to the neutron EDM experiment. Of
greater interest than the pure breakdown strength is a stable operating point,
deﬁned as the maximum voltage attainable with a breakdown probability of
at most a few percent over the entire anticipated integration time of the ex-
108 s). This value will ostensibly be chosen as the experimental
periment (
operating voltage in order to protect the EDM detection system, which will be
SQUID–based and likely damaged in the event of a spark discharge. The elec-

∼

4

tric ﬁeld stability over time ∆Et is also of interest, with a target of ∆Et ≤
1%
required over the course of a measurement cycle to suppress false EDM signals
generated by stray magnetic ﬁelds [5]. This translates into a leakage current
upper limit of about 1 nA for the EDM HV system. The electric ﬁeld unifor-
mity ∆EV is of similar importance, with a target of ∆EV ≤
1% required over
the experimental cell volume to further control systematics associated with
motional magnetic ﬁelds [5,8].

Finally, direct application of the required voltages from an external power
source would require electrical feedthroughs impractically large for the cryo-
genic environment. Therefore, an apparatus has been designed to test a simple
in-situ ampliﬁcation mechanism in addition to testing the parameters listed
above. In this mechanism, a small initial potential is used to charge a vari-
able, parallel–plate capacitor in the LHe volume. The potential source is then
disconnected and the voltage ampliﬁed by separating the plates and reducing
the capacitance. In the reference design of the ﬁnal version of the EDM ex-
periment, the ampliﬁer (variable) capacitor is connected in parallel to a pair
of ﬁxed capacitors (with the nominal electrode dimensions mentioned above)
that ﬂank the actual measurement cells [5]. In the test system described here,
only the variable capacitor has been prototyped, which should be suﬃcient to
test the dielectric properties of LHe and to verify the ampliﬁcation principle.

2 Apparatus

2.1 Central Volume

The design chosen for the central volume of the test apparatus is shown in
Fig. 2. It consists of a parallel-plate capacitor with cylindrical electrodes,
mounted horizontally on the central axis of a cylindrical LHe tank.

The electrodes of the parallel–plate capacitor are shown in Fig. 3 and their
dimensions listed in Table 1. Both electrodes consist of hollow cylindrical shells
of type 6061 aluminum. Two small holes are bored into the outer edges of each
electrode to allow for ﬁlling with LHe during operation.

The HV electrode is ﬁxed to the inner surface of the central volume end ﬂange
with three insulating stand-oﬀs. The movable ground electrode has the same
diameter as the HV electrode but is narrower in proﬁle. An aluminum rod
attaches to the rear of the electrode and connects to a welded bellows for
position control along the axis normal to the electrode surfaces.

The ﬁxed HV electrode is charged via a second movable electrode mounted

5

Fig. 2. Assembly drawing (elevation, to scale) of HV test system central volume.

Fig. 3. HV test system electrodes before installation in the central volume. The
HV electrode is in the center. It is ﬁxed to the solid aluminum plate at the left with
three G-10 insulating stand–oﬀs. The plate is in turn bolted (and grounded) to the
inner surface of the central volume ﬂange.

on the side opposite the ground electrode. It consists of a solid type 6061
aluminum disk with rounded edges. The electrode is attached to a G-10 tube
which connects to a second bellows for position control. A steel spring attaches
to the back of the electrode and leads out of the HV system through the G-10

6

Table 1
HV test system electrode dimensions

Surface roughness, all electrodes

1.6 µm rms

Surface ﬂatness, all electrodes

Diameter, HV and ground electrodes

Diameter, charger electrode

Wall thickness, HV and ground electrodes

Length, HV electrode

Length, ground electrode

Length, charger electrode

Edge curvature radius, HV electrode

Edge curvature radius (average), ground electrode

Edge curvature radius, charger electrode

Length, HV electrode insulators

Diameter, HV electrode insulators

0.005 cm

45.8 cm

7.6 cm

0.6 cm

10.2 cm

2.5 cm

1.3 cm

5.1 cm

1.9 cm

0.64 cm

14.0 cm

5.1 cm

tube to an external power supply.

The central LHe volume (Table 2) of the test system consists of a stainless steel
vessel closed with a wire-seal ﬂange. The ﬂange is a standard part except that
the number of bolt holes has been doubled to help insure against superleaks,
and is itself a prototype component to be tested for the ﬁnal version of the
EDM experiment. To minimize heat loads, the central volume is held in place
with a sling made from two Kevlar ropes anchored in the surrounding copper
radiation shield (Sec. 2.2) with specially–designed jigs.

Control of the movable ground and charger electrodes is provided by welded
bellows attached to either end of the central volume with indium seals. Each
bellows consists of two welded sections attached in series with a rigid center
ring between the sections (Fig. 4). Rods attached to the movable electrodes
exit the central volume via bearings mounted in G-10 blocks, and connect to
the inner surfaces of the center rings. During operation, the bellows ﬁll with
LHe through a series of holes in the G-10 blocks. The bearings are standard
parts with stainless steel balls in plastic casings from which all oil is removed
before installation. Friction is a concern and operation of the apparatus tests
whether the LHe itself can serve as an adequate lubricant. The bellows are
operated by control rods attached to the exteriors of the center rings, so that
one bellows section extends while the other compresses, maintaining a constant

7

Table 2
HV test system central LHe volume dimensions

Inner length (excluding ﬂange spaces)

Inner diameter (excluding ﬂange spaces)

Side wall thickness

Welded end wall thickness

Wire-seal ﬂange thickness

Bellows length (HV side)

Bellows mean inner diameter (HV side)

Mass

LHe volume (including ﬂange spaces and bellows)

44.0 cm

66.0 cm

0.5 cm

0.6 cm

4.4 cm

37.3 cm

10.8 cm

300 kg

≈

180 l

LHe volume in the bellows.

Fig. 4. Bellows system for position control of charger electrode, before attachment
to HV test system central volume. The charger electrode protrudes from the right
end. The ceramic feedthrough used to bring the initial HV potential into the LHe
volume can be seen in the foreground before being welded into place in the small
hole in the left end-cap of the bellows assembly.

2.2 Vacuum System

The complete design for the EDM HV test system is shown in Fig. 5. The
central volume is supplied with LHe via an auxiliary 20-liter cryostat mounted
to the top. The central and upper LHe volumes are surrounded by thin-walled
copper radiation shields, cooled to about 100 K via thermal contact with
a 10-liter liquid nitrogen reservoir surrounding the upper volume. All LHe
volumes and radiation shields are wrapped with 15–20 layers of aluminized

8

Mylar superinsulation.

Fig. 5. Assembly drawing (to scale) of HV test system vacuum volume. Rods for
electrode motion control exit the ends of the vacuum system via external bellows
and connect to automated linear slides (Fig. 6).

1 m3 aluminum vacuum chamber. The
The entire assembly is placed inside a
10−6 torr at room temperature
chamber can typically be maintained at 1
×
500 l s−1 turbomolecular pump mounted at the bottom. The vac-
with a
uum has been observed to improve by more than an order of magnitude with
cryopumping.

∼

∼

The HV interface between air and LHe consists of two standard ceramic
feedthroughs (Table 3). One feedthrough is mounted to a ﬂange on the outer
arm of the vacuum system above the charger electrode control bellows (Figs. 5
and 6), and a smaller feedthrough is welded into the end-cap of the HV bel-
lows (Fig. 4). The upper ceramic portion of the small feedthrough protrudes
completely into the LHe volume (Fig. 2); operation of the system tests its per-
formance in the cryogenic environment. The bottom tips of the feedthrough
conductors are soldered together, and the upper tip of the smaller feedthrough
is soldered to a stainless steel spring. The spring attaches to the charger elec-
trode through the G-10 tube.

The control rods for the ground and charger electrodes attach to the inner end-

9

Table 3
HV feedthrough parameters

Air–vacuum feedthrough ceramic length

29.2 cm

Air–vacuum feedthrough ceramic outer diameter

8.9 cm

Air–vacuum feedthrough breakdown rating

Vacuum–LHe feedthrough ceramic length

100 kV

24.0 cm

Vacuum–LHe feedthrough ceramic outer diameter

3.8 cm

Vacuum–LHe feedthrough breakdown rating

40 kV

caps of small welded bellows mounted externally to either end of the vacuum
system (Fig 6). The external bellows are in turn attached to screw–driven
linear slides controlled by servo motors. With this system, the minimum gap
between the HV and ground (charger) electrodes can be adjusted from 0 to
10 cm (7 cm) over a wide range of speeds, with a nominal accuracy of less than
0.1 mm. The gap between the electrode surfaces is viewable through a series
of 5 cm diameter quartz view ports in the side walls of the central volume and
vacuum chamber.

2.3 Data Acquisition

The view ports are designed to permit the eventual use of a laser to monitor
the electric ﬁeld via the Kerr eﬀect in the LHe [9]. For the present studies, the
small charger electrode is used as a capacitive probe of the voltage between
the HV and movable ground electrodes. The equivalent circuit of the HV
apparatus is shown in Fig. 7. In a typical HV ampliﬁcation and measurement
cycle, a 50 kV HV power supply is connected to the air–vacuum feedthrough
via a 6 m cable. The gap between the ground and HV electrodes is set to an
initial value of a few millimeters. The charger electrode is brought into contact
with the HV electrode, and a potential of a few tens of kV is applied. With
the power supply still engaged, the charger is retracted to a reference position
several centimeters behind the HV electrode. The power supply is switched
oﬀ, and the cable is moved from the power supply output to the input of a
charge-sensitive meter. The meter records the change in charge ∆QC on the
charger electrode as the gap between the HV and ground electrode is increased
to amplify the voltage.

From the diagram in Fig. 7, the change in voltage across the variable capaci-

10

Fig. 6. Fully assembled HV test system. The vacuum system arm surrounding
charger electrode control bellows is visible in the foreground, with the air-vacuum
HV feedthrough attached at the top. The small external bellows, control rod, and
motor–driven linear slide for the charger electrode control are visible in front of the
arm. The supply cryostat is visible on top of the main vacuum volume. The ﬂexible
tubing for pumping on the LHe bath stretches down from the top of the supply
cryostat.

tance CHG is given by:

∆VHG = ∆QC (cid:18)

1
CHC

+

1
CCF + CM F (cid:19)

(3)

11

CHC

FT

CHG

CHF

CCF

CMF

Q

Fig. 7. HV test system equivalent circuit. The point labeled FT corresponds to
the upper tip of the air-vacuum feedthrough and forms the output of a capacitive
divider. One side of the divider is formed by the capacitance between the HV and
ground electrode (CHG), in series with the capacitance of the HV and charger
electrode (CHC). The other side is formed by the ﬁxed capacitance of the charger
electrode and ground (CCF ). CHF is the ﬁxed capacitance of the HV electrode with
respect to ground. When the system is connected to a charge–sensitive meter (Q),
CCF is in parallel with the ﬁxed capacitance of the cable plus the meter with respect
to ground (CM F )

In practice, a sensitive current ampliﬁer is used in place of a charge meter and
the output is integrated over time during the measurement.

The complete schematic of the HV test system is shown in Fig. 8. A 10 MΩ
resistor is put in series with the cable to provide some protection for the elec-
tronics from spark discharges. For data acquisition after charging, the cable is
switched manually to the current ampliﬁer. The current ampliﬁer is read out
with a PC-based digital–to–analog converter, at a software-limited rate (for
this work) of 130 Hz. For diagnostic purposes during cool-down, temperatures
are monitored at various points on the central volume and radiation shield
with a series of silicon diode sensors. During operation, LHe temperature is
controlled by pumping on the main bath with a 25 l s−1 (air) oil-sealed me-
40 l s−1 with a roots blower), and
chanical pump (occasionally boosted to
temperature is inferred from the He vapor pressure. The motors running the
linear slides are PC-controlled via servo drives. Initial HV–ground electrode
spacing is measured with a surveyor’s transit focused on the electrode surfaces
through the view ports.

∼

12

HV POWER SUPPLY
Gamma RR50-1.25R

out

in

CURRENT AMPLIFIER
Stanford Research
SR570-A

RG8
6m, 500 pF

10 MW

8 psig

Mensor
2107

to air-vacuum
feedthrough

to LHe bath

to insulating
vacuum

( HV test
system )

to charger
electrode
control rod

to ground
electrode
control rod

to temperature
sensors

ADC
National
Instruments
PCI 6024e

PC

RS-232

LINEAR SLIDES
Thomson
2DB-12-OUB L18

SERVO MOTORS
Thomson BLX234
(0.9 Nm)

MOTOR DRIVES
Thomson
ODM-010i

4 x 8 sensors

TEMPERATURE
MONITOR
Lakeshore 218

GPIB

Fig. 8. Basic schematic of complete system.

BOC Edwards
E1M80

Leybold
RUVAC
WAU 251

Varian TURBO-V
551 Navigator

Varian
TriScroll 300

3 Results

3.1 Cryogenic Performance and HV Test Conditions

Conduction cool-down of the radiation shields from room temperature to
100 K takes approximately 72 hr. Liquid nitrogen pre–cooling of the cen-
tral volume is done in steps over the course of about 12 hr so as to minimize
thermal gradients across the large wire–seal ﬂange. This is further aided by
spraying the liquid in radial jets onto the side walls of the central volume and
relying on the thermal conductivity of the walls to cool the ﬂange uniformly.
Initial ﬁlling of the LHe main volume from a standard 500 l storage dewar
takes approximately 45 min. SF production is achieved by pumping on the
main bath. To ensure quantities of SF suﬃcient to completely immerse the
electrodes are obtained, both the LHe supply and HV system volumes are
pre–cooled via pumping to just above the lambda point. The HV system bath
90 torr) before being
is then topped oﬀ with LHe at low vapor pressure (
pumped to below the lambda point.

∼

During normal operation, typical LHe boil–oﬀ rates of 2–3 l hr−1 (liquid)
are observed. This rate corresponds to a total heat load of 1.6- 2.3 W, likely
dominated by conduction through the upper neck of the small supply cryostat.
No appreciable changes in the insulating vacuum are observed (resolution
∼
10−7 torr) during SF production or operation, indicating the feasibility of using
the standard wire–seal ﬂange technology for large volumes of SF in the EDM
cryostat. No degradation in the range and precision of the position control
of the electrodes is observed at cryogenic temperatures. However, moving the
factor 3) torque from the motors
electrodes requires signiﬁcantly higher (
than at room temperature. While the reason is unclear, this factor remains
constant over the course of operation of the system, suggesting a stiﬀening of

∼

13

the bellows as opposed to an increase in bearing friction.

Tests are performed on saturated LHe with vapor pressures ranging from 27.3
to 880 torr, corresponding to temperatures of 2.05 K to 4.38 K. By the two–
ﬂuid model, SF concentrations reach as high as 25% at the lowest temperature
attained. The lambda transition consistently occurs at 36 torr (2.16 K) in the
system, inferred from the rapid and complete cessation of turbulence and rising
He vapor bubbles observable in the view ports.

3.2 Calibration

Use of Eq. 3 requires knowledge of the HV–charger capacitance (CHC) and
ﬁxed capacitance (CCF ) when the gap between these electrodes is set to its
reference value at which the electrical measurements are made. The reference
spacing is 5.0 cm, as given by the motor driver software. With the system full
of LHe just below the lambda point, the HV electrode is grounded by closing
the gap between it and the movable ground electrode. A digital capacitance
bridge is connected between the upper tip of the air–vacuum feedthrough and
the nearest point on the exterior of the (grounded) insulating vacuum chamber.
Bridge readings are then recorded as the charger is moved back from the HV
electrode.

Results are shown in Fig. 9. Data represent the parallel sum of the capacitances
CHC and CCF (Fig 7). To extract separate values for these capacitances, CHC
is modeled as a parallel-plate capacitor and the data are ﬁt the expression

C = CCF + CHC = CCF +

A

z

−

.

z0

Here, A is a constant, z is the electrode separation, and z0 is an oﬀset re-
ﬂecting the uncertainty in the absolute separation. The ﬁt returns a value of
132.2
0.2 pF for CCF . Using the values of A and z0 returned from the ﬁt
and substituting z = 5.0 cm for the reference separation yields the reference
.05 pF. As CHC is less than 1% of CCF (and in any
value for CHC of 1.05
case CHC << CM F ), Eq. 3 reduces to

±

±

1

∆VHG =

(cid:18)

CHC (cid:19) Z

idt

where i is the output of the current ampliﬁer.

An assessment of the leakage current from the HV electrode at a given HV–
ground electrode gap (Sec. 3.5) requires a knowledge of the total capacitance

(4)

(5)

14

 HV - Charger Capacitance vs. Gap

Data: 06/05/05

Model: C = C

 + A|z-z

|

CF

0

Weighting: 

n

2

C

w = 1/(0.05 C)

  

2

  

CF

z

0

/d.o.f = 0.56

C

132.2

–0.2

0.010

–0.003

A

5.14

–0.20

n

-1.00

(fixed)

 

210

200

190

180

)
F
p
(
 

C

170

160

150

140

130

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Z (cm)

Fig. 9. Charger–HV electrode capacitance as a function of separation. A statistical
error of 0.5% is assumed on each point. The legend shows the result of a least-squares
ﬁt.

of the HV electrode with respect to ground at the particular gap setting. This
capacitance is very closely approximated by CHG + CHF in Fig. 7. With the
bridge still connected as above, both the ground and charger electrodes are
brought into contact with the HV electrode. Bridge readings are then recorded
as the ground electrode is stepped back from the HV electrode. The data
are shown in Fig. 10. This curve yields a direct measurement of the desired
capacitance as a function of the gap.

3.3 Voltage Ampliﬁcation and Breakdown Strength

Ampliﬁcation tests are performed with an initial gap between the HV and
ground electrodes of 2–3 mm. At this gap, the highest possible potential is
established with the power supply. This is typically achieved after several at-
tempts in which spark discharges occur across the gap at lower potentials.
Presumably these discharges are initiated by sharp points and/or frozen con-
taminants on the electrode surfaces, and they decrease in frequency as con-
taminants are destroyed by successive sparks in a process analogous to the
“conditioning” observed in vacuum–insulated systems. During tests with the
initial gap set to a few cm, the HV electrode can usually be charged to the

15

 Total HV Electrode Capacitance vs. HV-Ground Gap

 

1800

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0

)
F
p
(
 

C

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Z (cm)

Fig. 10. Total HV electrode capacitance as a function of HV-ground electrode
separation. A statistical error of 3% is assumed on each point. The line connecting
the points is a spline interpolation.

full capacity of the power supply (50 kV) with the system full of LHe above
or below the lambda point. This indicates that the vacuum-LHe feedthrough
can withstand voltages 25% higher than its nominal breakdown rating in air
when immersed in LHe.

Voltage ampliﬁcation data are shown in Fig 11. Output of the current ampli-
ﬁer is plotted as a function of the time since the start of a data acquisition
cycle. With the exception of a few transients, the current traces in Fig 11
remain at zero for the ﬁrst few seconds after the data acquisition is started,
consistent with no current ﬂow—that is, no transfer of charge to the charger
electrode—when the ground electrode is at rest. When the ground electrode
retraction is begun (after approximately 10 s) the current immediately rises
(for example, to about 10 nA in the case of Fig 11a). The current then slowly
decays (for example, over the next 85 s in Fig 11a) as the retraction pro-
ceeds at constant velocity. In the limit of an ideal parallel–plate capacitor,
the current would be expected to remain constant for a constantly increasing
plate separation; the decay observed in Fig 11 is a consequence of the ﬁxed
capacitance between the HV electrode and ground (CHF ∼
40 pF, as inferred
from bridge measurements). The current drops back to zero when the ground
electrode retraction stops (for example, after 95 s, corresponding to a gap of
7.8 cm, in Fig 11a).

16

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Fig. 11. Ampliﬁcation data showing output of the current ampliﬁer in nA vs. time in
seconds. Data sets correspond to the largest voltages attained with the test system.
In (a), the data are obtained with the LHe bath at 34.5 torr (2.14 K), an initial
gap (visible in the transit) of 2.9 mm, and an initial potential of 13 kV at this gap.
The ground electrode is retracted at 5.08 cm min−1. In (b), the LHe bath pressure
is 880 torr (T = 4.38 K), the initial gap is 3.0 mm, the initial potential is 42 kV,
and the electrode retracted at 2.54 cm min−1. In (c), the LHe bath pressure is 31.9
torr (T = 2.11 K), the initial gap is 3.0 mm, the initial potential is -11.5 kV, and
the electrode retracted at 5.08 cm min−1. In (d), the LHe bath pressure is 654 torr
(T = 4.06 K), the initial gap is 3.1 mm, the initial potential is -31 kV, and the
electrode retracted at 2.54 cm min−1.

The total charge ∆QC accumulated on the charger electrode, as the ground
electrode is retracted, is computed from the sum

∆QC =

(tn+1

tn)(in+1 + in)/2,

Xn

−

(6)

where tn and in represent the time and current values of the nth point in the
data set. A value for Eq. 5 is obtained by dividing this sum by CHC, and
the total voltage is found by adding the value of the initial potential between
the plates. The voltage at any value of the electrode separation is found by
truncating the sum in Eq. 6 at each time point and converting the time axis to
electrode separation. The voltage as a function of separation derived from the

17

data in Fig. 11 is shown in Fig. 12. In each case, the range of values deﬁned
by the 1-sigma error bars is shown.

Fig. 12. Voltages obtained in HV test system as function of electrode spacing. The
data curves are labeled only in the legend. The data curves deﬁne the range (as
determined by the 1-sigma error bars) of the maximum voltages obtained in LHe,
for positive and negative initial potentials, above and below the lambda point. The
extrapolated breakdown curve and size eﬀect breakdown estimates from Fig. 1 are
also shown.

The extrapolated breakdown and size eﬀect curves from Fig. 1 are also shown
for reference. Direct comparison between the data and the extrapolated break-
down curves is misleading in that, ﬁrst, the data curves represent the highest
voltages successfully maintained in the system without breakdown during sin-
gle, complete sweeps of the ground electrode. The shape of the data curves is
determined by the capacitance of the high voltage electrode with respect to
ground as the spacing changes, and not by breakdown events observed at each
value of the spacing. As expected for the parallel plate geometry, the voltage
increase is approximately linear with the spacing for the ﬁrst 1-2 cm, then lev-
els oﬀ in the presence of the large ﬁxed capacitance. Second, the normal state
data suggest that voltages larger than the dielectric strength measured in pre-
vious experiments are attained below 1 cm (see Fig. 1). Here it is important

18

to note that the normal state data (positive voltage) in Fig. 12 are obtained
at a pressure of 880 torr. This is approximately 20% higher than for the data
in Fig. 1 and, as described in the next section, dielectric breakdown in LHe
is a strong function of pressure. Normal state data with negative voltage in
Fig. 12 are obtained just above atmospheric pressure in the lab at Los Alamos
and most closely approximate the conditions of the experiment in Fig. 1.

Three contributions to the error bars are considered. First, a 5% uncertainty
results from the error in CHC, as derived from the ﬁt in Fig. 9. Second, the
output from the current ampliﬁer corresponding to zero current is observed to
drift by as much as 0.1 nA over several tens of seconds, based on observations
of the tails of the raw data plots (Fig. 11) corresponding to when the ground
electrode is at rest. An average zero oﬀset of this magnitude translates into a
3% shift in the summation in Eq. 6, and a corresponding shift in the mea-
±
sured voltage. The third (and usually the largest) eﬀect is due to the transient
spikes observed in the raw data traces. While it is unlikely that the transients
represent an actual accumulation or loss of charge on the electrodes during
ampliﬁcation and can be ignored for the purpose of determining the voltage
(see Sec. A below), the evidence as of this writing is anecdotal, therefore the
eﬀect of the transients is accounted for in the uncertainty. To determine the
eﬀect of the transients, the data sets in Fig. 11 are partitioned into 1 s time
bins. The minimum absolute current is determined in each bin, and all in-
dividual points in a given bin with current values greater than 20% of the
minimum are removed. Eq. 6 is used again to ﬁnd the voltage vs. separation
from the reduced data set, which is then subtracted from the value obtained
from the original data set. For the case of positive initial potentials, removal of
transients from the SF (normal state) data reduces the voltage by an average
of 13% (6%).

The eﬀect of the transients is positive (negative) in the case of positive (neg-
ative) initial HV electrode potential, so the contribution of the transients to
the error bars is one–sided. At maximum electrode separation (7.8 cm for the
measurement in SF and 7.2 cm for the measurement in normal state LHe), the
largest positive voltages attained are 240+34
−41 kV, respectively.
The largest negative voltages are -215−37
+27 kV, respectively.
These values represent lower limits on LHe breakdown strength below and
above the lambda point at large electrode separations; the stressed LHe vol-
umes are 12.8 liters for SF and 11.8 liters for the normal state.

−14 kV and 688+58
+13 kV and -443−31

3.4 Pressure Dependence of Breakdown Strength

The maximum voltages attainable in the HV test system below the lambda
point are about 30-50% of those attained above, and are roughly 60% of the

19

design goal for the EDM experiment. It is unlikely that the reduced perfor-
mance of the HV test system below the lambda point is due exclusively to
an intrinsic property of the SF component of the LHe. This is illustrated in
Fig. 13, which shows the maximum voltages attained in the system at various
pressures and temperatures.

 Maximum Potential vs Vapor Pressure and Temperature

1.95

2.16

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.53

 Temperature (K)

-point

 

|
)

V
k
(
 
l

a

i
t

 

t

n
e
o
P
m
u
m
x
a
M

i

|

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

20

100

1000

Vapor Pressure (torr)

Fig. 13. Maximum voltages attained in HV test system over 12 hour period as
a function of pressure and temperature. Statistics below lambda point are highest
values measured in 0.05 K bins above 27.3 torr (2.05 K) obtained in a series of many
tests over a 6 hour period. Remaining data are obtained over subsequent 6 hours in
which system is warmed continuously by the

2 W heat load.

∼

From the ﬁgure, comparable maximum voltages are attainable in the system
both above and below the lambda point at vapor pressures of 100 torr and be-
low. This is consistent with several previous reports of comparable breakdown
strength of saturated normal state and SF LHe [6]. While the data above
the lambda point were taken over the course of a 6 hour warm up period,
this period occurred immediately after an interval of comparable duration in
which the system was kept below the lambda point and during which many
breakdown tests were performed. Therefore it is unlikely that the observed
improvement with pressure is the result of conditioning. It seems reasonable
that, as in at least one previous experiment [6], some of the resistance against
breakdown observed in the system near atmospheric pressures can be recov-

20

ered by pressurizing a sealed volume of LHe kept below the lambda point.
Based on the compressibility of SF LHe (10−7 Pa−1 [10]), the pressurization
would only require a variable volume of a few liters in series with the HV test
system main volume and is a possible design improvement in the near future.

3.5 Leakage Current Limits

Stability of the voltage between the electrodes over time is assessed by estab-
lishing the highest possible charge on the electrodes at maximum separation
under the desired conditions, waiting for the longest possible period under
which the conditions can be maintained, and re-measuring the charge at the
end of this period. The initial charge is measured in the usual way (Eq. 6)
during the outward stroke of the ground electrode; the charge remaining after
the holding period is measured by applying Eq. 6 to the data obtained as
the ground electrode is returned to its original gap. The diﬀerence in charge
measured over the holding period is then expressed as a leakage current. Data
used for leakage current measurements in SF and normal state LHe are shown
in Fig. 14

The leakage current from the HV electrode (iHV ) is determined from the
expression for the voltage, multiplied by the total capacitance of the electrode
CHG +CHF in Fig. 7) and divided by the holding
at maximum spacing (CHV ≈
time ∆t:

iHV =

CHV
CHC

δQC
∆t

.

(7)

Here, δQC is the diﬀerence in the charge accumulation determined from the
data corresponding to the outward and inward strokes of the ground electrode
in Fig 14. From Figs. 14a and b, this diﬀerence as measured below the lambda
point is consistent with zero, when accounting for the uncertainties associated
with ampliﬁer zero drift and transients. The 95% C. L. upper limit on the
charge diﬀerence is 14 nC. The time ∆t between the outward and inward
6 s, limited by concern over the liquid level dropping below
strokes is 1009
the top edges of the electrodes after several hours of tests. From Figs. 14c and
d, the charge diﬀerence as measured at atmospheric pressure is also consistent
with zero; the 95% C. L. upper limit is 160 nC. In this case the system had been
topped oﬀ with LHe just before the ﬁrst measurement and was left overnight,
resulting in time ∆t = 41520
600 s. The electrode capacitance at maximum
separation (again, 7.8 cm for the SF data and 7.2 cm for the normal state)
is found from the curve in Fig. 10 to be CHV = 55
2 pF,
respectively.

2 pF and 57

±

±

±

±

Using the above measurements in Eq. 7 results in 95% C. L. upper limit

21

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Fig. 14. Output of the current ampliﬁer in nA vs time in seconds for leakage current
assessment. In (a), the data are obtained with the LHe bath at 27.3 torr (2.05 K),
an initial gap (visible in the transit) of 2.9 mm, and an initial potential of -6 kV at
this gap. The ground electrode is retracted at 5.08 cm min−1. Fig. (b) shows data
from the return stroke of the ground electrode after a holding time of 16.8 min at
the maximum gap of 7.8 cm; the LHe bath pressure is 30.0 torr (T = 2.09 K), and
the electrode is returned at 5.08 cm min−1. In Fig. (c), the LHe bath pressure is 600
torr (T = 3.98 K), the initial gap is 3.0 mm, the initial potential is 29 kV, and the
electrode is retracted at 2.54 cm min−1. Fig. (d) shows data from the return stroke
of the ground electrode after a holding time of 11 hr and 32 min at the maximum
gap of 7.2 cm; the LHe bath pressure is 600 torr (T = 3.98 K), and the electrode is
returned at 2.54 cm min−1.

estimates of the leakage current of 733 pA for the HV electrode in SF and
169 pA in normal state LHe. While these results are consistent with zero,
the large uncertainty on the SF measurement allows for values near the 1 nA
design limit for the EDM experiment and is of some concern. These results are
however, preliminary, and provision for several hours of holding time below
the lambda point will be made in subsequent tests of the system.

22

3.6 Neutron Radiation Eﬀects

The Spallation Neutron Source will use a beam of high energy protons (nomi-
nally 1 GeV with a 60 Hz repetition rate) directed at a liquid mercury target to
produce fast neutrons which will be partially moderated by a liquid hydrogen
cell. The EDM experiment is scheduled to be installed on a dedicated beam
line with a neutron momentum centered at 8.9 ˚A (the optimum momentum
for the production of UCN via downscattering in SF LHe.) While the series of
monochromators and frame deﬁnition choppers used to select the momentum
is expected to provide a narrow bandwidth, there is some concern that perfor-
mance of the HV and other systems in the EDM experiment will degrade in
the presence of a fast neutron background. To check the operation of the HV
test system under extreme background conditions, charging and ampliﬁcation
tests are performed in the presence of a 7 Ci PuBe neutron source.

The charging test (at atmospheric pressure) is performed in three phases. With
the gap between the electrodes ﬁxed at 3 mm, the HV electrode is charged to
the maximum possible potential in the absence of the source. The charging is
repeated with the source placed next to the exterior of the insulating vacuum
system, behind a 2 cm thick slab of polyethylene, at a point approximately
50 cm from the center of the front surface of the HV electrode. Finally, the
charging is repeated once more with the polyethylene slab removed. The max-
imum voltages attained, together with the estimated neutron ﬂux for each
phase, are shown in Table 4. The results are consistent with a slight improve-
ment of the charging capability of the system in the presence of an increasing
fast neutron background. However, the test began less than 1 hr after a re-
ﬁll of the LHe volume and after a few minutes of conditioning, so the slight
improvement could also be due to some extra conditioning.

With the source still in place, the system is again charged to 30 kV and an am-
pliﬁcation test is performed. The electrodes are held at maximum separation
(7.2 cm), but only for a few minutes in the interest of reducing activation of
the system components. The voltage attained at this separation is 475+38
−29 kV
with no anomalous behavior observed, consistent with the performance of the
system at atmospheric pressure in the absence of neutron radiation.

For the ampliﬁcation tests below the lambda point, the PuBe source is placed
in the same location but left on top of the polyethylene slab, resulting in a
neutron ﬂux similar to that in the third row of Table 4. Tests at both positive
and negative initial voltages are performed; data corresponding to the out-
ward stroke of the ground electrode with positively charged HV electrode are
shown in Fig. A.1a. Voltages obtained at maximum electrode separation are
259+52
+16 kV. These values are consistent with nominally better
performance than in the absence of the fast neutron background (Fig. 12).

−16 kV and

274−55

−

23

Table 4
Neutron radiation eﬀects on HV electrode charging. The HV–ground gap is set to
3.0 mm, LHe bath pressure = 600 torr (T = 3.98 K). Tests began
30 min after
LHe ﬁll, with

5 min prior conditioning.

∼

Breakdown V (kV)

Comments

Time (min)

∼
n-ﬂux in gap

(Background)

s−1,
106
E
1 MeV
with 10% 1 keV
admixture

∼

s−1, E

106
1 MeV

∼

1 no source

30

34

±

±

2

behind
source
2 cm polyethy-
lene

0.0

3.0

36

2 polyethylene re-

7.0

±

moved

However, the pervasive transients observed in the data are a concern, and the
large uncertainty associated with them leaves the repeatability of these results
in question.

4 Conclusions and Outlook

A prototype HV ampliﬁcation system, consisting of a large, variable parallel–
plate capacitor has been constructed for a proposed neutron EDM experiment
in SF LHe. The system has been used to amplify voltages in the range of
about 10 kV to 240 kV or greater across an electrode gap of 7.8 cm in SF
LHe. This is roughly 60% of the design goal for the EDM experiment, which
will have electrodes with a comparable gap, and represents a lower limit on
the dielectric breakdown strength of SF LHe at large volumes. These results
are not appreciably changed in the presence of a high background ﬂux of fast
neutrons. Upper limits to detectable leakage currents have been set at about
750 pA, nominally tolerable in the ﬁnal experiment. Considerable improve-
ment in voltage tolerance and leakage current is observed with the system full
of normal state LHe at 4 K, performance that will likely be recoverable at
lower temperatures by pressurizing the LHe bath. Additional statistics at low
temperatures with highly polished electrodes will be acquired to establish a
stable operating voltage, and to better understand the conditions for bubble
formation which is likely responsible for measurement noise as well as reduced
breakdown strength. Electric breakdown studies of candidate materials for the
EDM experimental test cells, using samples mounted behind the HV electrode
in the prototype system, are also anticipated in the near future.

24

Acknowledgments

The investigators would like to thank V. Sandberg of Los Alamos National
Laboratory for suggesting the voltage ampliﬁcation method, and J. Jarmer of
Los Alamos and J. Price of the University of Colorado for advice on cooling
the large LHe volumes in the HV test system to below the lambda point.

A The Eﬀect of Transients

The transient current signals in the data traces (Figs. 11, 14, A.1) have con-
siderable inﬂuence on the uncertainty of the measured LHe properties. This
section summarizes the observed characteristics of the transients and proposes
a model for their explanation.

An expanded view in time of a transient is shown in Fig. A.1b. Typical tran-
sients have an amplitude of about 1-25 nA. The usual rise time (10%-90%),
FWHM, and decay times are about 20 ms, 100 ms, and 150 ms, respectively.
Observations relating to transient formation include:

(1) Transient signal shape (amplitude, rise and decay times, FWHM) does

not change signiﬁcantly with helium vapor pressure.

(2) Transients are almost exclusively positive (negative) when the HV elec-
trode is positively (negatively) charged (compare Figs. 11a and 11c).
(3) Transient density (number per unit time) increases at lower helium vapor

pressures (compare Figs. 11a and 11b).

(4) Transient density increases with applied ﬁeld, at least at low vapor pres-

sure (compare Figs. 14a and b, and 11a and c).

(5) Transient density at low vapor pressure increases further in the presence

of neutron radiation (compare Figs. 11a and A.1a).

Since the ampliﬁcation signal is essentially DC, HV data are taken with the
input ﬁlter on the current ampliﬁer set to low-pass. Speciﬁcally the cutoﬀ
frequency is set to 3 Hz and the roll-oﬀ to 12 dB/octave. To simulate these
conditions, tests are performed with a signal generator connected to the input
of the ampliﬁer, with the same ﬁlter settings, through a 20 MΩ series resistor.
Output signals similar in rise time, FWHM, and decay time to the transients
in the HV data can be obtained with square pulses 10 ms long and separated
in time by a few hundred ms. The pulse amplitude is attenuated by about a
factor of 5. It is therefore probable that the transient signal shape in the HV
data is determined largely by the ampliﬁer input ﬁlter. The actual transient
phenomena are likely signiﬁcantly faster (at most a few ms) and larger (up to
a few tens of nA).

25

(a)

(b)

Current HnAL vs time HsL

7

6

5

4

3

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Fig. A.1. Output of the current ampliﬁer in nA vs time in seconds illustrating
transient eﬀects. Fig. (a) shows an ampliﬁcation test in the presence of a PuBe
source. The LHe bath pressure is 33.8 torr (T = 2.13 K), the initial gap is 2.8 mm,
the initial potential is 13 kV, and the electrode retracted at 5.08 cm min−1. Fig. (b)
is a 1 s time slice of an ampliﬁcation data trace, showing a typical transient.

The last three observations enumerated above suggest that transients increase
under conditions progressively more favorable for bubble formation on the
cathode electrode. Bubbles with radii on the order of r
0.1–1 mm are ob-
served to form on the ground electrode during the initial charging of the system
before an ampliﬁcation test. They usually appear after a positive potential of
10 kV or more has been established across the 2–3 mm gap, though detailed
observations of bubble formation and the conditions under which it occurs or
is enhanced have yet to be made.

∼

The formation of bubbles in the gap can lead to a coincident increase in the
observed current at a particular gap voltage. This is because the dielectric
constant of helium vapor or vacuum (κ = 1.00) is lower than that of the
normal state or SF liquid (κ = 1.05); bubble formation leads to a decrease
in the HV–ground electrode capacitance. To estimate this eﬀect, the change
in capacitance ∆C due to the formation of a bubble of radius r is ∆C =
4πǫ0r∆κ. For bubbles of radius r
0.1–1 mm, ∆C = 0.5–5 fF. A bubble
protruding 0.1–1 mm from the ground electrode in a typical ﬁeld between in
the gap of 20 kV cm−1 sits at an average potential of 200–2000 V. While the
time evolution of bubble formation in the system has not been studied, the
formation of one of the larger bubbles on a time scale of ∆t
1 ms would
≤
lead to a current spike on the order of V ∆C/∆t
10 nA, consistent with the
amplitude of the observed transients. The sign of this current signal follows
the sign of the voltage, also consistent with observations.

≥

∼

While this model provides an ostensible explanation of the transients, one
drawback is that current signals of opposite sign, associated with the recovery
of the capacitance once the bubbles detach from the electrode and drift out

26

of the gap, are expected to be observed as well. A lower limit on the average
escape time of a bubble from the gap can be estimated from the buoyant and
drag forces on the bubbles in the liquid.

Once detached from the electrode, bubbles ﬂoat toward the surface of the LHe
under the inﬂuence of the buoyant force Fb = Vbρlg, where Vb is the bubble
volume, ρl is the liquid density (assumed constant through the bath depth at
102 kg m−3) and g is the acceleration due to gravity. For bubbles with
1.3
r = 1.0 mm, this force is initially about 5 µN.

×

Motion of the bubble up through the liquid is opposed by a drag force Fd,
as well as an added–mass force Fm′ induced by the displacement of the ﬂuid
surrounding the bubble as it rises [11]. For the case of spherical bubbles in a
viscous ﬂuid,

Fd = 12πηrv; Fm′ =

Vbρl
2

a.

Here, η = 1.6
the LHe at 2.1 K, and v and a are the bubble velocity and acceleration.

10−6 Pa s is the viscosity of the normal-state component of

×

Setting the buoyant force equal to the sum of the drag and added–mass forces,
and neglecting the bubble mass, the equation of motion for a rising bubble
reduces to:

(A.1)

(A.2)

2g +

a

−

18η
r2ρl

v = 0.

Due to the low density of the LHe, the hydrostatic pressure at any point along
the electrode surfaces is determined almost exclusively by the vapor pressure
above the bath, even for the lowest vapor pressures (
30 torr) attained.
Therefore the radius of a rising bubble remains essentially unchanged, and
the coeﬃcient of the v term is constant. For a bubble with r = 1 mm, the
coeﬃcient is about 0.1 s−1, implying that a rising bubble does not reach an
10 s and accelerates out of
appreciable fraction of its terminal velocity for
the gap with a
2g. Assuming on average that bubbles form near the middle
of the electrode, bubbles have to ﬂoat up from rest through about 20 cm of
LHe to escape the gap; the average escape time is at least 100 ms.

∼

∼

∼

The recovery of the capacitance presumably occurs as the bubble drifts out
though the fringe ﬁeld near the rounded edge of the electrode, over a time
period shorter than but on the order of the escape time. If this interval is 10 ms
or greater, the observed (opposite–sign) current transient for a bubble escaping
the gap would be at most about 1 nA, just above the resolution determined
by the noise in the readout (see, for example, the baseline in Fig. A.1b). This

27

suggests that only the largest bubbles escaping the gap would have a nominally
visible eﬀect, though the full implication for the model as to whether bubbles
must remain attached to the electrodes (or must otherwise be prevented from
a fast escape from the gap) is unclear.

Nevertheless, if correct, the model suggests that the transients do not corre-
spond to an actual accumulation of charge during ampliﬁcation and can be
removed from the data sets to assess the actual voltages attained in the HV
system. However, the model is based only on a few casual observations during
initial operation of the system. More careful studies of the actual signal pro-
ﬁles of the transients, as well as of bubble formation, size, and number density
as a function of time, vapor pressure, applied voltage and electrode surface
roughness will need to be carried out in the near future.

28

References

[1] Smith, J. H., Purcell, E. M., and Ramsey, N. F., Phys. Rev. 108 (1957) 120.

[2] Khriplovich, I. B., and Lamoreaux, S. K., CP Violation Without Strangeness

(Berlin, Springer Verlag, 1997).

[3] Harris, P. G., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 904.

[4] Golub, R. and Lamoreaux, S. K., Phys. Rep. 237 (1994) 1.

[5] EDM Collaboration, “A New Search for the Neutron Electric Dipole Moment,”

Los Alamos Report LA-UR 02-2331 (2002).

[6] Gerhold, J., Cryogenics 38 (1998) 1063.

[7] Gerhold, J., Dielectric properties of cryogens,

in Seeber, B., Handbook of
Applied Superconductivity 1 D, Cooling Technology for Superconductors, Inst.
of Phys., Bristol, 1998.

[8] Lamoreaux, S. K., Phys. Rev. A 53 (1996) 3705.

[9] Sushkov, A. O., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004) 153003, physics/0403143.

[10] Keller, W. E., Helium-3 and Helium-4 (New York, Plenum Press, 1969).

[11] Lamb, H., Hydrodynamics, 6th Ed. (New York, Dover, 1945) 124.

29

