6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
4
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
9
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Concept, realization and characterization of serially powered pixel
modules (Serial Powering)
D.B. Ta a, T. Stockmanns aF. H¨ugging aP. Fischer aJ. Grosse-Knetter a, ¨O. Runolfsson a,
N. Wermes a
aPhysikalisches Institut der Universit¨at Bonn
Nussallee 12, D-53115 Bonn, Germany
Tel.: +49/228/73-2352, Fax: -3220
email: ta@physik.uni-bonn.de

Abstract

We prove and demonstrate here for the example of the large scale pixel detector of ATLAS that Serial Powering of
pixel modules is a viable alternative and that has been devised and implemented for ATLAS pixel modules using
dedicated on-chip voltage regulators and modiﬁed ﬂex hybrids circuits. The equivalent of a pixel ladder consisting
of six serially powered pixel modules with about 0.3 Mpixels has been built and the performance with respect to
noise and threshold stability and operation failures has been studied. We believe that Serial Powering in general
will be necessary for future large scale tracking detectors.

1. Introduction

Modern particle detectors require on the one
hand a large solid angle coverage and high gran-
ularity, on the other hand fast read-out and low
power consumption. Especially particle trackers
require in addition a minimum of passive material
inside their active region. The high granularity re-
sults in building a detector from a large number of
identical active modules. The usual power scheme
is the individual, parallel powering of the modules
with a constant voltage. However, this is disadvan-
tageous for a large scale detector such as a pixel
detector.

The pixel detector as the innermost sub-detector
of many large scale particle detectors has a very
high granularity. The ATLAS pixel detector com-

prises 1744 active pixel modules containing about
80 million channels [2]. It makes use of deep sub-
micron (0.25 µm) chip technology for the read-out
which is necessary to achieve a radiation toler-
ant, compact, and high granularity detector design.
Each hybrid module is composed of a 250 µm thick
silicon sensor and 16 Front-End chips with a total
of approx. 46 000 pixels with a size of 400 × 50 µm.
In order to achieve a fast operation of the detec-
tor, the electronic circuits must be powered with
high currents (approx. 2 A) at low voltages (1.6 V
analog, 2.0 V digital). Therefore a high power den-
sity of the detector comes with the high granular-
ity. Since the power supplies are located outside
the active detector volume, the power is transmit-
ted over a long distance (which can easily attain
100 m) and the voltages are regulated remotely
from outside the active volume of the detector (for

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

9 January 2014

listed in the next section, concerning stability and
reliability, can be solved if a dedicated Serial Pow-
ering design is used.

2. Example calculation on the ATLAS pixel
detector

Every module is connected to 8 power cables, i.e.
two power lines and two sense lines for every volt-
age. The total voltage drop from the power sup-
plies in the control room to the module is 6.4 V and
the power losses in the cables are 191 W maximum.
This is ∼ 2.81 times of the power consumption of
the 13 modules. The total lengths of all cables in
the active region are 121 m, this corresponds to an
average radiation length of 0.073 %X0.

Since the modules of the pixel detector are orga-
nized in 114 pixel ladders (staves) with 13 modules,
this suggests that the 13 modules of such a stave
form a chain of serially powered modules. The ad-
vantages of a serially powered chain of 13 modules
follow from an example calculation (table 1):
- Passive material, i.e. power cables in the detector
is reduced by a factor of 50 compared to the Par-
allel Powering scheme. This corresponds to 15%
of the radiation length of the parallel scheme.
- Power losses in the cables are reduced by a factor

10.

- Reduced power losses in the cables also reduce

heat-pick up by other detector systems.

- Voltage regulation is done on-chip, i.e. close to
the consumer. The regulation can respond faster
to voltage changes due to varying power con-
sumptions.
Apparently also several concerns about Serial
Powering arise. The ﬁrst concern that the local
power consumption of the module is higher than for
parallel powered modules can be rejected partially
from a separate calculation which includes the to-
tal heat load for the cooling system. The heat load
from the cables 1 that are closest to the module is
transferred to the modules and the decrease of the
heat load due to less cables counterbalances the
increase of the module heat. The heat that must

1 The heat load per cable is approx. 2 W.

Fig. 1. Serial Powering Scheme, in which the voltages for
the chips/modules are produced from a constant current
by shunt and linear regulators. Only two power cables are
needed to power a chain of modules, instead of four (eight,
if sense lines are included) power cables for each module.

a large scale detector the distance can be larger
than 10 m). Further, the power cable diameter is
small inside the detector volume (typically 300 µm
diameter Al wires). Together with the low volt-
ages and high currents the power losses in the ca-
bles exceed the actual power consumption of the
modules. Moreover, the further the granularity in-
creases, the more cables are needed. This results
not only in an increase of the power losses, but also
increases the passive material in the active detec-
tor volume. Hence, from a certain granularity on-
wards the parallel powering concept has more and
more disadvantages and it will become more favor-
able to change to the new serial powering scheme.
For the Serial Powering concept [1] a chain of
modules is powered in series by a constant current.
Only two power lines per chain are needed. The
voltages are generated by shunt and linear regula-
tors implemented on the chip itself (see ﬁgure 1).
Serial Powering oﬀers a drastic reduction of power
lines and therefore a reduction in passive materi-
als in the active detector region as well as a reduc-
tion of power losses in the cables. A positive side
eﬀect is the reduction of the heat from the power
lines that can uncontrollably heat up other detec-
tor systems.

In this paper we demonstrate for the ATLAS
Pixel Detector that Serial Powering is a viable al-
ternative for a possible upgrade of the ATLAS In-
ner Detector and that all the possible problems

2

Table 1
Comparison between Parallel (using numbers from [3]) and
Serial Powering, the power consumption is given for a lad-
der of 13 modules. The diﬀerent Serial Powering schemes
diﬀer in the voltage that drops across a module.

Power supplies

No. of power lines

Parallel Serial Factor

13

104

1

2

13

52

Total cable length (mm)

121160 2780

43.6

radiation length per layer x/X0 0.073 % 0.011 % 6.5

Cable power losses

191 W 19.2 W 9.97

Module (Shuntreg. 2.0 V)

67.9 W 78 W 0.87

Module (Shuntreg. 2.7 V)

105.3 W 0.65

Sum (Shuntreg. 2.0 V)

259 W 97.2 W 2.67

Sum (Shuntreg. 2.7 V)

124.5 W 2.08

be cooled by the cooling system decreases by 7%
(Serial Powering scheme with 2.0 V voltage drop
across a module) or increases maximally by 17%
(scheme with 2.7 V voltage drop across a module).
Additionally, the heat is now produced close to the
cooling and as mentioned above there is less heat
pickup by other detector systems, so that the slight
increase of the heat load has overall positive eﬀects
on the detector.

The fear of loss of a whole chain due to one de-
fect regulator is addressed by the Serial Powering
scheme (see ﬁgure 3). The major concern of noise
pickup of the chain by noise sources or noisy mod-
ules is rejected by the measurements in 4.2.

3. General Serial Powering Scheme

There are three shunt regulators on the AT-
LAS pixel production chip, DSHUNT, AOVER
and DOVER that have design threshold voltages
of 2.0 V, 2.4 V, and 2.7 V, respectively. The two
linear regulators ALINREG and DLINREG have
adjustable output voltages in four steps from 1.5 V
to 1.8 V or 1.8 V to 2.4 V, resp. Both regulators are
described in detail in [1] [4] and [6]. The diﬀerent
powering schemes are realized by proper connec-
tions between the input pads of the diﬀerent regu-
lators on the chip (ﬁgure 2 show the schematically

Fig. 2. Schematic of the powering components of a chip.
The analog/digital circuits of the chip is indicated by FE.
The diﬀerent powering schemes are realized by proper con-
nections between the input pads (pads 5 and 6 are only
necessary for Parallel Powering).

Fig. 3. A chain of serially powered modules, each built
according to the Extended Serial Powering scheme

the powering components of a chip).

Figure 3 shows a chain of serially powered mod-
ules (Extended Serial Powering scheme [1], by con-
necting pad 3, 4 and 7 in ﬁgure 2 to the constant
current source). A constant current source is con-
nected to the power input of the ﬁrst module. The
ground of the module is then connected to the
power input of the next module etc. The current
consumption is determined by the highest current
consumption of one module in the chain. The sup-
ply voltages of the chips are generated by the two
types of regulators. One is a shunt regulator which
behaves like a Zener diode. The other one is a lin-
ear voltage regulator.

On a module the shunt regulators of all 16 chips
are connected in parallel. This stabilizes the output
voltage. The fear of a loss of a whole module chain
is also addressed this way. The redundant use of
the shunt regulators can maintain the voltage reg-
ulation and the chain remains uninterrupted even
if one or more regulators should break (i.e. creates

3

Fig. 4. Schematic of the Simple Serial Powering scheme
using only one linear regulator (only one single serially
powered module, further modules are added as shown in
ﬁgure 3).

an open-circuit). Thus the risk of loosing a whole
chain is minimized. The common output voltage
of the shunt regulators is the input voltage for
the two linear regulators of every chip. The out-
puts of the regulators are already internally con-
nected to the analog and digital part, respectively.
The suitable regulators for this scheme are there-
fore the two linear regulators that are powered by
the DOVER regulator. As the modules now have
diﬀerent ground potentials, the read-out must be
done via AC coupling of the signals (as indicated
in ﬁgure 3 by a symbolic capacitor).

One alternative Serial Powering schemes can
also be considered. The Simple Serial Powering
scheme (ﬁg. 4 by connecting pad 1, 5 and 7 to
the constant current source) uses the DSHUNT
regulator to power the digital part and the analog
linear regulator. In this scheme the total voltage
which drops across a module is lowest (2.0 V) and
therefore also the power consumption of a single
module is the lowest. A disadvantage is that the
digital voltage is ﬁxed to the threshold voltage of
the shunt regulator.

4. Operation of a serially powered module
ladder

After testing and comparing single serially
powered modules [1] [6], which were built with
already existing ATLAS pixel chips and a ded-
icated ﬂex-hybrid, six Serial Powering modules
were composed to a ladder, a so called half-stave,
containing about 0.3 MPixels. The measurement
setup is shown in ﬁgure 5. The same original me-
chanical support structure for module ladders was
used except for the reduced number of modules.
The serial connections between the modules was

4

Fig. 5. Picture of the measurement setup with (A) the mod-
ule ladder (half-stave) with six serially powered modules
containing about 0.3 Mpixels, (B) cooling pipes, (C) power
cables, (D) AC coupling read-out and power routing board,
(E) constant current power supply, (F) pixel read-out elec-
tronics, (G) power supplies for read-out electronics

made by original power cables (type-0) which
were connected to a special board that routes
the current serially through all modules. Addi-
tionally it AC-couples the LVDS signals between
the modules and the external read-out electronics
through a pair of capacitors and a LVDS buﬀer
for each data line. The operation commands, i.e.
commands that injects test charges into the pixels
and initiates the read-out chain, could be sent to
all modules at the same time. This emulates the
situation in the detector when all modules are in-
dividually having digital and analog activities and
varying power consumptions. As ﬁrst qualitative
proof of operation, ﬁgure 6 shows the spectrum of
a 241Am point source placed above and between
two modules and recorded simultaneously. Only
shown is the left hit map which corresponds to
the module that was on the left side of the source.
In the spectrum two peaks can be seen. The peak
at higher deposited charge is due to the absorbed
59.54 keV-photon 2 . This tests the whole detection
chain from the charge collection in the sensor, the
hit processing in the chip to the output of the hit
data. It is a qualitative proof of the full module
functionality.

2 The second peak results from gamma rays that trans-
verse the sensor in an shallow angle so that charge is shared
among two pixels. In one of the pixels the charge fraction
is below the threshold. This results in a second peak which
is shifted by threshold.

Fig. 6. Spectrum of a 241Am source placed between two
modules and recorded simultaneously (picture shows only
the left module)

4.1. Performance Characterization

The performance of each module while serially
powered with ﬁve other actively working modules
was measured (multi-module operation mode).
The measurements were repeated until all six mod-
ules were read out. Figure 7 shows the threshold
maps and the noise maps of the six modules 3 and
table 2 shows the threshold (THRES), threshold
dispersion (σTHRES) and the noise performance of
the six modules. The noise diﬀerence between the
single serially powered operation (only one single
active, serially powered module) and the multi-
module operation mode is given in brackets. This
is the ﬁrst time that such a large chain of serially
powered modules was powered and that all mod-
ules were operated at the same time. The results
in comparison to singly serially powered opera-
tion and parallel powered modules show hardly
any inﬂuence of the modules on each other during
normal operations.

4.2. Failure Mode Studies

Two types of failures were studied in order to
test the reliability of the Serial Powering scheme.

3 Some modules are without sensor or with some defect
chips because of cost reasons, still the vast amount of pixels
can give a good impression of the module’s performance.

5

Fig. 7. Thresholds and noise maps of the six serially pow-
ered modules (some modules without sensor or with defect
chips) on the module ladder (half-stave)

Table 2
Threshold, threshold dispersion and noise of six serially
powered modules on a module ladder (in brackets: noise
diﬀerence to singly serially powered). Except for module
6 all modules were built according to the Extended Serial
Powering scheme.

Module

THRES (e−) σTHRES (e−) noise

(e−)

M1

M2

M3

M4

M5

M6

Parallel

+ without sensor

4134

4156

4173

4162

4132

4160

4062

57

69

70

70

58

91

50

127+ (4)

182 (-1)

186 (-0)

183 (-4)
133+ (0)

172 (-5)

160

The ﬁrst was the study of the eﬀect of a noisy
module in the chain. This was achieved by lower-
ing the detection threshold of one module to al-
most zero, so that this module sees noise hits all
the time. That involves a permanent analog and
digital activity as well as permanent changing cur-
rent consumptions which can modulate the power-
ing of the other modules by permanently changing
the potentials across the modules. The measure-
ment was repeated six times, so that each time a
diﬀerent module was made noisy and the eﬀect on
the other modules was investigated. Table 3 shows
the noise diﬀerence of every module between the
failure mode measurement and the normal opera-
tion. Each row is a diﬀerent measurement with a
diﬀerent noisy module.

Table 3
Noise diﬀerence of the modules on the module ladder be-
tween normal operation and operation with one noisy mod-
ule in the chain. Each row is a diﬀerent measurement with
a diﬀerent noise module. Except for module 6 all mod-
ules were built according to the Extended Serial Powering
scheme.

Noisy module

M1
(e−)

M2
(e−)

M3
(e−)

M4
(e−)

M5
(e−)

M6
(e−)

Module 1

Module 2

Module 3

Module 4

Module 5

Module 6

— 13

2

— 10

2

5

— 2

13

0

0

3

9

3

9

2

1

2

— 0

15 — 20

2

0

—

6

0

1

10

0

2

9

2

2

The increase in noise for neighboring modules in
the chain is small (max. 20 e−) compared to the
normal noise of 170 e− to 200 e− and it is well below
the ATLAS requirement for the maximum noise.
This shows that the ﬁltering and the regulation
of the supply voltages is suﬃcient enough to ﬁlter
such a disturbance on the power lines.

The second type of failure mode tested is a noisy
module emulated by an external switchable load
connected in parallel to one module. The distortion
was tuned to diﬀerent frequencies up to 40 MHz.
The load varied between 300 mA and 500 mA. This
constitutes a much more massive interference to
the supply current than a noisy module. The eﬀect
on the chain is again a shift in potentials for all
modules.

Figures 8 and 9 shows the frequency dependence
of the noise of module 3 which was parallel to the
switchable load. During the whole measurement
module 3 could be conﬁgured and read out sequen-
tially without any problems. Only in two regions
around 25 kHz and around 3 MHz the noise rises
to undesired values of 350 e− resp. 230 e−. More
important is to observe the eﬀect on the other
modules, whether neighboring modules pick up the
higher noise from module 3. Figure 9 shows the fre-
quency dependence of the noise of the three neigh-
boring modules in the chain. Clearly the change in
noise is small for all modules 4 . Therefore there is
hardly any noise pick up by Serial Powering mod-

4 module 5 is again without sensor

Fig. 8. Frequency dependence of the noise of the module
that was parallel to the switchable load

Fig. 9. Frequency dependence of the noise of the modules
neighboring the module that was parallel to the load

ules from noise on the power line. We consider this
experimental test a very important demonstration
that the Serial Powering scheme is reliable.

5. Summary

We have demonstrated that Serial Powering is
a viable concept to provide operation power to a
large pixel detector system such as the ATLAS
pixel detector at LHC. A powering scheme that
powers a chain of modules with a constant current
and uses dedicated on-chip voltage regulators and
modiﬁed ﬂex hybrid circuits has been devised and
implemented for ATLAS pixel modules.

An example calculation shows that such a chain
of 13 modules oﬀers a reduction in power losses of
the cables by 90% and a reduction in passive ma-
terials by 98%, this is a reduction of 85% in ra-
diation length. It has been shown that the spread
in quality of the voltage regulators, as the key ele-
ments to this powering scheme, is suﬃciently small
and the voltage stability of the linear regulators
is excellent, so that the voltage regulators are ap-
plicable for Serial Powering. The serially powered
modules have been intensively tested in the lab.
The comparison between parallelly powered and
serially powered modules has shown no diﬀerence

6

between the two powering schemes. Finally, the
equivalent of a pixel ladder consisting of six seri-
ally powered pixel modules with about 0.3 Mpixels
has been built and the performance with respect
to operation failures has been studied. Measure-
ments with artiﬁcially noisy modules mimicked by
inducing noise on the power lines have only shown
a marginal increase in noise of the other modules
in the chain. We strongly believe that Serial Pow-
ering is not only a viable powering scheme for an
upcoming upgrade of the ATLAS pixel detector,
but is also viable, if not necessary for future large
scale tracking detectors.

References

[1] T. Stockmanns et al. Serial powering of pixel modules.
Nucl. Instr. & Meth. A511 (2003) 174–179.
and
T. Stockmanns. Multi chip module development for the
ATLAS pixel detector. PhD thesis BONN-IR-2004-12
(2004) (in German).

[2] The ATLAS Pixel collaboration.

ATLAS Pixel
Detector, Technical Design Report. CERN/LHCC/98-
13 (1998).

[3] M. Olcese et al. Requirements for pixel detector services.

ATLAS Internal Report ATL-IP-ES-0007 (2004).

[4] I. Peri´c. Design and Realization of Integrated Circuits
for the Readout of Pixel Sensors in High-Energy Physics
and Biomedical Imaging. PhD thesis BONN-IR-2004-
23 (2004).

[5] J. Grosse-Knetter (for the ATLAS Pixel collaboration).
The ATLAS Pixel Detector. in print at Nucl. Instr. &
Meth. A, ref 1687.

[6] D.B. Ta Development and Demonstration of Serial
Powering on ATLAS Pixel Modules and Moduleladders
Diplomathesis
(Fuctionality and Reliabilitytests)
BONN-IB-2005-04 (2005) (in German)

The thesis of the university of Bonn can be found
under hep1.physik.uni-bonn.de under the sec-
tion Publications.

This paper is a short version of the following

paper:

D.B. Ta et al. Serial Powering: Proof of principle
demonstration of a scheme for the operation of a
large pixel detector at the LHC Nucl. Instr. & Meth.
A557 (2006) 445–459.

7

