6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
3
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

August 12, 2013

3:4 Proceedings Trim Size: 9in x 6in

drollinger

GETTING READY FOR PHYSICS AT THE LHC
WITH THE CMS DETECTOR

V. DROLLINGER

∗

Universit`a di Padova,
Dipartimento di Fisica ”Galileo Galilei”,
Via F. Marzolo, 8, 35131 Padova, Italy
E-mail: drollinger@pd.infn.it

In order to get ready for physics at the LHC, the CMS experiment has to be set
up for data taking. The data have to be well understood before new physics can
be investigated. On the other hand, there are standard processes, well known from
previous experiments and from simulation, which will help to understand the data
of the detector in the early days of the LHC.

1. Goals and Needs

The main goals for physics at the LHC are searches for new physics and
precision measurements. One of the main tasks at the LHC is to probe
the existence of the Higgs boson or the source of electroweak symmetry
breaking in general. Furthermore, many models with new physics wait
to be investigated experimentally. In particular, for phenomena that are
expected to show up at high energies, the LHC is reaching completely new
territory. In general, precision measurements are somewhat less important
than searches at hadron colliders, but there are cases where high statistics
is a beneﬁt, or new production channels are open. A prominent example is
precision physics with top quarks.

Knowing the goals it is not diﬃcult to imagine what the needs are.
First of all, it is essential to have a well working detector, which allows
continuous data taking over several hours. The quality of these data has
to be high in the sense that none of the detector subsystems has major
failures, and that the resolutions are suﬃcient to carry out the triggering,
reconstruction and selection of events with a high precision. In addition to
a high event-reconstruction eﬃciency, it is necessary to have a good particle
identiﬁcation in order to keep the corresponding fake rates as low as pos-
sible, which is essential to avoid the huge backgrounds at hadron colliders.
Furthermore, the detector needs to be synchronized, aligned and calibrated
in order to reach the ultimate detector performance. In particular at the

∗Work supported in part by the European Community’s Human Potential Programme
under contract HPRN-CT-2002-00326, [V.D.].

1

August 12, 2013

3:4 Proceedings Trim Size: 9in x 6in

drollinger

2

LHC, a high performance trigger system is needed in order to reduce the
event rate by about six orders of magnitude.

Since it is clearly impossible to review this complex subject in ﬁve pages,

a brief overview is presented and a few examples are given.

2. The CMS Experiment
The CMS detector1 is a general purpose detector, which is designed to
meet the goals mentioned above. Figure 1 shows schematic views of
the CMS detector and the structure of the trigger and Data Acquisition
(DAQ). The CMS detector is designed like a classical collider detector with

Figure 1. Drawing of the CMS detector, and of the trigger and DAQ scheme.

tracker (including pixel vertex detectors) and muon system acceptance up
to η = 2.5, an electromagnetic calorimeter acceptance up to η = 3, and
hadron calorimetry up to η = 5. The calorimeters are designed to be able
to contain jets in the TeV range, and a superconducting magnet provides
a magnetic ﬁeld of 4 T, which allows transverse momentum measurements
up to about 1 TeV. A large fraction of the CMS detectors has been built
and is currently tested, as illustrated in Figs. 2 and 3.

The trigger and DAQ system is designed to cope with initial event rates
of 40 MHz (100 Tbyte/s), which is reduced by the Level 1 (L1) trigger to
100 kHz (100 Gbyte/s), and further reduced to about 100 Hz (100 Mbyte/s)
by the High Level Trigger (HLT). Whereas the L1 trigger consists of ded-
icated trigger boards, the HLT trigger is running CMS reconstruction and
selection software on a computer farm.

Also on the software, simulation and reconstruction side a lot of progress
have been made and is described in detail in Ref. 1. The preparation for

August 12, 2013

3:4 Proceedings Trim Size: 9in x 6in

drollinger

3

Figure 2. Left: barrel components (front: hadron calorimeter, back: magnet and muon
system) of the CMS detector. Right: forward components (muon system) of CMS.

physics analyses is going on and will be documented in an upcoming CMS
Physics Technical Design Report. It is also important to setup strategies
on how to perform the analyses, such as background normalization from
the data itself, employing advanced analysis techniques.

3. From Cosmic Rays to ﬁrst LHC Collisions

After many test beams for individual detector components has been carried
out, the main focus at present is the test of groups of detectors with cosmic
rays. One example of the inner tracker is shown in Fig. 3. A large scale
test, including many diﬀerent detector types and the entire magnet with
all iron return yokes, the “Magnet Test Cosmic Challenge” in preparation.
In order to arrive at a fully operational experiment, many steps are
necessary and the comparison of simulation and data is very helpful to
understand each step. On one hand, the simulation is employed to model
the detector and to make accurate predictions of many things like trigger
rates, eﬃciencies, resolutions, fake rates. On the other hand, the data can
be used to tune the simulation to describe the reality even more accurately.
One example of a detailed simulation is the tracker alignment, shown in
Fig. 3, where the transverse momentum momentum resolution of the CMS
tracker is predicted for three alignment scenarios. The performance of
the long-term alignment scenario gets close, but is not identical, to the
performance of a perfectly aligned tracker.

The LHC pilot run in the year 2007 will be the ﬁrst source of collision
data. The numbers of events of important Standard Model processes, ex-
pected for one particular scenario2, are summarized in Table 1. Even for

August 12, 2013

3:4 Proceedings Trim Size: 9in x 6in

drollinger

4

Figure 3. Left:
Right: cosmic rays seen with one endcap of the inner tracker of CMS.

simulation of three tracker alignment scenarios with single muons.

a low luminosity and a short running period the number of minimum bias
events and di-jet events is huge. These events are important to study the
calorimeter response and to understand the general structure, e.g. the un-
derlying event, of events at the LHC. Energetic leptons, coming from W or
Z decays, are produced with suﬃcient statistics in order to study electron
and muon triggering, reconstruction, identiﬁcation and the corresponding
eﬃciencies. Only a moderate number of top quarks, important as a sig-
nal and as a background, is expected in the beginning of the LHC. Even

Table 1. Expected number of events for the pilot run of the LHC with √spp = 14 TeV.
One month of running with a luminosity of L = 1030 cm−2 s−1 is assumed.

process

min.bias

jets ET >60 GeV W±

ℓ±ν

Z

ℓ+ℓ−

# events

& 1012

& 108

& 5

104

→

×

→

5

≈

×

103

ℓ±ν jets

t¯t

→

3

≈

×

102

during the pilot run, new physics could be potentially produced, but it is
rather unlikely that such events can be recognized without understanding
the detector in detail.

4. Help from Others

Many aspects, discussed above, are not completely new. Clearly, a lot of
experience on experimental aspects is available from other (collider) exper-
iments, and an eﬀort has been started to propagate the knowhow to the
LHC experiments3. In addition, it is very important have a good idea of
what kind of physics to expect at the LHC and collaborations with theorists
have been established4. Theoretical predictions are required for setting up
physics analyses, but also for designing the detector and optimizing the
reconstruction software.

August 12, 2013

3:4 Proceedings Trim Size: 9in x 6in

drollinger

5

One concrete example of how the LHC experiments can beneﬁt from
previous collider experiments and from theoretical work is bottom frag-
mentation in top (t → Wb) and Higgs (h → b¯b) decays5. In order to un-
derstand bottom fragmentation in these processes, a Monte Carlo event
generator is tuned to e+e− data by matching the B-hadron spectra xB, the
energy fraction of the B-hadron normalized to the energy of the b-quark, of
the Z → b¯b decays, shown in Fig. 4.
In a second step, the tuned event gen-

Figure 4. Bottom fragmentation in Z
Wb and h
(left) and predictions for t

b¯b decays of PYTHIA tuned to e+e− data
b¯b decays (right).

→

→
→

erator is employed to predict xB spectra for other processes than Z → b¯b,
namely t → Wb and h → b¯b which are of interest at the LHC and at the
TeVatron, too.

5. Conclusions

The main goal, studying physics at the LHC, is coming closer: a big fraction
of the CMS detector has been built and is currently tested with cosmic
rays. In context with the CMS Physics Technical Design Reports, many
aspects of the detector an physics performance have been studied in detail
in preparation for the CMS physics program.

References

1. CMS Collaboration, cmsinfo.cern.ch, cmsdoc.cern.ch/cms/cpt/tdr,

and references to Technical Design Reports therein.

2. G. Rolandi, private communications.
3. TeV4LHC, conferences.fnal.gov/tev4lhc;
HERA/LHC, www.desy.de/%7Eheralhc.

4. Physics at TeV Colliders, wwwlapp.in2p3.fr/conferences/LesHouches.
5. G. Corcella and V. Drollinger, Nucl. Phys. B730, 82-102 (2005).

