6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
0
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

COMPUTATION OF NEARLY EXACT 3D ELECTROSTATIC FIELD IN
GAS IONIZATION DETECTORS

N. Majumdar, S. Mukhopadhyay
Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics
1/AF, Bidhannagar, Kolkata-700064, India∗

Abstract

The three-dimensional electrostatic ﬁeld conﬁguration in
gas ionization detectors has been simulated using an efﬁ-
cient and precise nearly exact boundary element method
(NEBEM) solver set up to solve an integral equation of
the ﬁrst kind. This recently proposed formulation of BEM
and the resulting solver use exact analytic integral of Green
function to compute the electrostatic potential for charge
distribution on ﬂat surfaces satisfying Poisson’s equation.
As a result, extremely precise results have been obtained
despite the use of relatively coarse discretization leading to
successful validation against analytical results available for
two-dimensional MWPCs. Signiﬁcant three dimensional
effects have been observed in the electrostatic ﬁeld con-
ﬁguration and also on the force experienced by the anode
wires of MWPCs. In order to illustrate the applicability of
the NEBEM solver for detector geometries having multiple
dielectrics and degenerate surfaces, it has been validated
against available FEM and BEM numerical solutions for
similar geometries.

racies near the boundaries. They also necessitate relatively
complicated mathematics.

In this work, we propose the application of a recently
formulated Nearly Exact BEM solver (NEBEM) [1] for
the computation of electrostatic ﬁeld in gas detectors. The
BEM is a numerical implementation of boundary integral
equation (BIE) based on Green’s function method by dis-
cretization of the boundary only. For electrostatic prob-
lems, the BIE can be expressed as

φ(~r) =

G(~r, ~r

)ρ(~r

)dS

′

′

′

(1)

ZS

where φ(~r) represents the known voltage at ~r, ρ(~r′) rep-
resents the charge density at ~r′, G(~r, ~r′) = 1/4πǫ|~r − ~r′|
and ǫ is the permittivity of the medium. In order to de-
velop a solver based on this approach, the charge carry-
ing boundaries are segmented on which unknown uniform
charge densities (ρ) are assumed to be distributed. The un-
known ρ and the known φ are related through the inﬂuence
matrix A

INTRODUCTION

A .ρ = φ

(2)

Electrostatic forces play a major role in determining gas
detector performance. Hence, a thorough understanding of
electrostatic properties of gas detectors is of critical impor-
tance in the design and operation phases. Computation of
electrostatic ﬁeld is conventionally carried out using one of
the following options: analytical approach, ﬁnite-element
method (FEM), ﬁnite-difference approach and boundary
element method (BEM). While the ﬁrst of these possibil-
ities offers the most precise estimation, it is known to be
severely restricted in handling of complicated and realis-
tic detector conﬁgurations. The FEM is the most popular
being capable of producing reasonable results for almost
arbitrary geometries [2]. However, for the present task,
the FEM is not a suitable candidate because through this
method it is possible to calculate potentials only at spe-
ciﬁc nodal points in the detector volume. For non-nodal
points, interpolation becomes a necessity reducing the ac-
curacy signiﬁcantly. Moreover, numerical differentiation
for obtaining ﬁeld gradients leads to unacceptable electric
ﬁeld values in regions where the gradients change rapidly,
for example, near the anode wires of an MWPC. The BEM,
despite being capable of yielding nominally exact results
while working on a reduced dimensional space(unknowns
only on surfaces rather than volumes), suffers from inaccu-

∗ nayana.majumdar@saha.ac.in

where Aij of A represents the potential at the mid point
of segment i due to a unit charge density distribution at the
segment j. By solving (2), the unknown ρ can be obtained.
Major approximations are made while computing the in-
ﬂuences of the singularities which are modeled by a sum of
known basis functions with constant unknown coefﬁcients.
These approximations ultimately lead to the infamous nu-
merical boundary layer due to which the solution at close
proximity of the boundary elements is severely inaccurate.

PRESENT APPROACH

In the present approach, we have proposed to use the
analytic expressions of potential and force ﬁeld due to a
uniform distribution of singularity on a ﬂat rectangular sur-
face in order to compute highly accurate inﬂuence coef-
ﬁcients for the A and for calculations subsequent to the
solution of ρ. By adopting such an approach, it is possi-
ble to improve up on the above-mentioned assumption of
singularities concentrated at nodal points and move to uni-
form charge density distributed on elements. In general,
the potential φ at a point (X, Y, Z) in free space due to uni-
form source distributed on a rectangular ﬂat surface on the
XZ plane and having corners at (x1, 0, z1) and (x2, 0, z2)

is known to be a multiple of

φ(X, Y, Z) =

z2

x2

Z
z1 Z

x1

dxdz
(X − x)2 + Y 2 + (Z − z)2

p

(3)
Closed form expressions for the above integration and also
for the force vectors have been obtained and used as the
foundation expressions of the NEBEM solver described in
[1]. It should be noted that these new foundation expres-
sions are valid throughout the physical domain including
the close proximity of the singular surfaces. In the present
work, we have extended the NEBEM solver to solve the
electrostatic problem of gas detectors as follows.

For gas detectors, it is also be useful to model the elec-
trostatics of a wire. For this purpose, we have considered
the wires to be thin in comparison to the distance at which
the electrostatic properties are being estimated. Under this
assumption, the potential φ at a point (X, Y, Z) due to a
wire element along the Z axis of radius r and length L is
as follows:

φ = 2πrlog( p
p

X 2 + Y 2 + (Z − h)2 − (Z − h)
X 2 + Y 2 + (Z − h)2 − (Z + h)

)

(4)

where r is the radius of the wire and h is the half-length of
the wire element. Similar expressions for the force ﬁeld
components have also been obtained which are not pro-
vided here due to the lack of space. In addition to the ex-
pressions given in [1], (4) and the companion force ﬁeld
expressions have been incorporated in the NEBEM solver
to compute the electric potential and ﬁeld in ionization de-
tectors.

NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION

In this work, we are going to present results related to
Iarocci tube, MWPC and RPC. These devices have ﬂat
surfaces as their boundaries. The Iarocci tube and the
MWPC have anode wires, in addition to the ﬂat conduct-
ing surfaces. We have considered Iarocci tubes and MW-
PCs of various cross-sections (5mm × 5mm to 16mm ×
16mm), lengths (5mm to 160mm) and anode wire diam-
eters (20µm to 100µm). The anode wires have been as-
sumed to be held at 1000V whereas the other surfaces are
assumed to be grounded. The ﬂat surfaces in all these de-
tectors have been segmented in to 21×21 elements. The an-
ode wires have been modeled as cylindrical polygons of 12
sides. Along the axial direction, these cylinders have been
segmented in to 21 sub-divisions. These are once again
ﬂat surfaces and, thus, have been modeled by the same ap-
proach as discussed above. The anode wires have also been
represented as thin wires for which (4) and related expres-
sions have performed as foundation expressions. The max-
imum number of elements with a wire representation for
an Iarocci tube has been 1785 while that for a MWPC with
ﬁve wires have been 1869. Under the assumption of cylin-
drical polygons, these have increased to 2016 and 3024.
These numbers are quite modest and the resulting system

can be easily solved on modest desktop computer. Please
note that the solver solves a complete three-dimensional
problem. We have executed our codes on a Pentium IV
machine with 2GB RAM running Fedora Core 3 and it took
approximately half an hour of user time to solve the most
complicated problem.

RESULTS

In this section, we will concentrate mostly on the electric
ﬁeld, rather than the potential, to save space. In Fig.1, we
have compared the midplane electric ﬁelds computed by
the present approach and analytic electric ﬁeld computed
by [2] for a 5mm × 5mm × 50mm Iarocci tube. It can
be seen that the two results match perfectly well. However,
when the length of the tube is reduced to 5mm, the three-
dimensionality of the device becomes relevant even at the
mid-plane. Thus, in Fig.2 the difference between the two
values have become apparent. In order to illustrate the ef-

Figure 1: Comparison of electric ﬁeld at the midplane

Figure 2: Comparison of electric ﬁeld at the midplane

Garf ield

fect of three-dimensionality, we have presented the relative
deviation deﬁned as Error(%) = Garf ield−P resent
× 100
for various Iarocci detectors in Figs.3 and 4. In these ﬁg-
ures, results for wires represented as thin wires, as well
as cylindrical polygons have also been presented. All the
electric ﬁelds are at the mid-plane of the 3D detector, the
length of which has been varied from 50mm to 5mm. It
can be seen that the deviation becomes apparent (close to
1%) as the detector length becomes twice the side of the
square detector. When the length is the same as that of

the side, the error is as large as 10% near the cathode sur-
faces. In the latter case, it is more than 2% near the an-
ode wire, which is huge considering the magnitude of the
electric ﬁeld near the anode wire. Fig. 4 illustrates the
same point more clearly and, in addition, shows the dif-
ference between the two representations of wire. It may
be noted that electric ﬁeld computed by the wire represen-
tation seems to be consistently higher than that obtained
using the polygon representation.

Figure 3: Deviation of electric ﬁeld at the midplane

Figure 5: Comparison of normal ﬁeld along the axial direc-
tion

out for an MWPC having ﬁve anode wires with a wire pitch
of 2.5mm leading to similar conclusions. There is one fea-
ture which is considered to be important mainly for MW-
PCs, namely, the electrostatic force that acts on the anode
wires in an MWPC, especially, its positional variation. In
Fig.6, we present the variation of the horizontal force act-
ing on the different anode wires in a ﬁve-wire MWPC as
we move along the length of the wire. It should be men-
tioned here that the edge wires in the presented case are of
100µm diameter, while those inside are of 20µm. It is seen

Figure 4: Close up of deviation of electric ﬁeld at midplane

Next, we present the normal electric ﬁeld computed
along the axial direction of the Iarocci tube in Fig.5. The
reference straight line has been provided by using [2] and
is the analytic solution for a 2D tube. It can be seen that
the 2D value remains valid for almost 85% of the detector
along the axial direction. However, in the remaining 15%,
3D effects are quite prominent and hence, non-negligible.
There is one more very important point to be noted. Be-
cause of the nature of FEM, it almost produces oscillatory
results in potential and ﬁeld (less in the former and more
in the latter) near the cathode surface and anode wires. But
these are the locations where the results need to be most
accurate! By using NEBEM, it has been possible to pro-
duce perfectly smooth results without any hint of oscilla-
tion. This precision can only be attributed to the exact
nature of the foundation expressions of this solver. This
remarkable feature of the present solutions should allow
more realistic estimation of detector behavior in any situa-
tion.

Similar validation and comparisons have been carried

Figure 6: Variation of horizontal force along the axial di-
rection

that the horizontal force becomes quite considerable as we
move towards the edge of the detector despite the use of
larger diameter wire as guard wires.

In the following Fig.7, we have presented the normal
electric ﬁeld contour at the mid-plane of the detector. The
sharp increase in the magnitude of this ﬁeld is quite evident
near the wire locations.

Several detector conﬁgurations in current use such as
MSGC, RPC, GEM have multiple dielectric conﬁguration.
They also have extremely thin charged surfaces such as the
graphite coatings of RPCs. Such surfaces may necessitate
treatment of degenerate surfaces. As a result, in the follow-
ing, we have tried to validate the NEBEM solver by com-
puting the electrostatic properties of such conﬁgurations
and comparing them with FEM and Dual BEM (DBEM)
results given in [3] where the problem geometry is dis-
cussed in detail. In the following Tables 1, 2 and 3, we
present the comparison among the potentials as computed

Table 3: Comparison for R = 10

Location
24.0,16.5
6.5,12.0
22.5,6.0
4.0,3.5

FEM
0.514489
0.230147
0.3638855
0.1108643

DBEM NEBEM
0.5247903
0.52181
0.2398346
0.23801
0.3451232
0.34638
0.1058357
0.10623

Figure 8: Electric ﬁeld in an RPC

been carried out for gas ionization detectors using the
Nearly Exact BEM (NEBEM) solver.

• The NEBEM yields precise results for a very wide
range of realistic electrostatic conﬁgurations includ-
ing multiple dielectric systems.

As future plans we have the following aspects

• Optimization of the NEBEM solver.
• Multiphysics nature of NEBEM needs to be explored.
After all, the foundation expressions represent new so-
lutions to the Poisson equation which is one of the
most important equations in physics!

• Applications to other areas will be explored

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to acknowledge the help and encourage-
ment of Prof. Bikash Sinha, Director, SINP and Prof.
Sudeb Bhattacharya, Head, Nuclear and Atomic Physics,
SINP throughout the period of this work.

REFERENCES

[1] S.Mukhopadhyay, N.Majumdar, ”Development of a BEM
Solver using Exact Expressions for Computing the Inﬂuence
of Singularity Distributions”, ICCES05, Chennai, December
2005.

[2] http://garﬁeld.web.cern.ch/garﬁeld

[3] S-W Chyuan, Y-S Liao, J-T Chen, ”An efﬁcient technique
for solving the arbitrarily multilayered electrostatic problems
with singularity arising from a degenerate boundary”, Semi-
cond. Sci. Technol. 19, R47(2004).

Figure 7: Surface and contour plots of the normal electric
ﬁeld

by the above three approaches. It is obvious from these re-
sults that the agreement is excellent despite the use of only
11 × 11 discretization of the surfaces. Please note that in
the tables R denotes the ratio between the permittivity of
two slabs placed on top of another (upper/lower) and the
locations are expressed in microns.

Table 1: Comparison for R = 10

Location
18.0,3.0
4.0,9.0
25.0,16.0
5.0,17.0

FEM
0.1723103
0.2809692
0.6000305
0.679071

DBEM NEBEM
0.1740844
0.17302
0.2807477
0.27448
0.5991884
0.59607
0.6785017
0.67492

Table 2: Comparison for R = 0.1

Location
18.0,3.0
4.0,9.0
25.0,16.0
5.0,17.0

FEM
0.01741943
0.0281006
0.4883313
0.5929200

DBEM NEBEM
0.0171752
0.017302
0.0286358
0.027448
0.4828946
0.480640
0.5926387
0.589690

Finally, in Fig.8, we have presented the electric ﬁeld con-
ﬁguration of an RPC computed using NEBEM. The RPC is
assumed to have 2mm gas gap enclosed by two 2mm glass.
On the two outer surfaces of the glass, graphite coating has
been applied. The upper graphite coating has been raised to
8kV, while the lower one is grounded. The RPC is 10mm
wide, enclosed on the left and right sides by glass and has
a similar spacer in the middle. The variation of the elec-
tric ﬁeld along the vertical direction (Y) on the midplane
at various X locations have been presented. It can be seen
that the normal electric ﬁeld rises up to around 40kV/cm in
the gas gap of the RPC.

CONCLUSION

Thus, it may be concluded that

• Precise computation of three-dimensional surface
charge density, potential and electrostatic ﬁeld has

