6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A novel automatic ﬁlm changer for high-speed analysis of nuclear
emulsions.
K. Borera, J. Dametab, M. Hessa, I. Kresloa, U. Mosera, K. Pretzla, N. Savvinova, H.-U. Sch¨utza, T.
W¨alchlia, M. Weberac.

aLaboratory for High Energy Physics, University of Bern, Sidlerstrasse 5, Bern, 3012, Switzerland

bNow at LAPP, IN2P3-CNRS and Universit`e de Savoie, Annecy, France

cNow at Fermi National Laboratory, Chicago, USA

This paper describes the recent development of a novel automatic computer-controlled manipulator for emulsion
ﬁlm placement and removal at the microscope object table (also called stage). The manipulator is designed for
mass scanning of emulsion ﬁlms for the OPERA neutrino oscillation experiment and provides emulsion changing
time shorter than 30 seconds with an emulsion ﬁlm positioning accuracy as good as 20 µm RMS.

1. Introduction

The extensive use of nuclear emulsions as pre-
cise tracking detectors in experimental physics
has been made possible due to recent advances
in the production of novel nuclear emulsion ﬁlms
and to the development of automatic scanning de-
vices. The emulsions with dimensions as small
as 12.5 × 10 cm2, as used in the CERN-LNGS
OPERA experiment, are commercially produced
by the Fuji Film1 company. The scanning speed
of such scanning devices has reached 20 cm2 of
emulsion surface per hour. However, so far the
emulsion ﬁlms were fed to the microscope by the
hands of an operator. Given the present scanning
speed the development of an automatic emulsion
ﬁlm changing system has become mandatory.

2. Motivation and requirements

2.1. The OPERA neutrino oscillation ex-

periment

The direct observation of νµ − ντ oscillations in
a νµ beam is the main goal of the OPERA exper-
iment [1]. The neutrino beam is provided by the
CERN CNGS facility. The detector is placed at
the distance of 732 km in the underground hall

1Fuji Film, Minamiashigara, 250-0193, Japan

1

of the Laboratory of Gran-Sasso (LNGS). The
Emulsion Cloud Chambers (further - ECC) tech-
nique is used to precisely reconstruct the topology
of τ decays produced in ντ CC interactions with
a massive lead/nuclear emulsions target.

The OPERA detector has a mass of 1.8 kton
and consists of a lead/emulsion ﬁlm sandwiched
target, a target tracker to localize the event
within the target and a muon spectrometer[1].
The OPERA target is composed of about 200000
ECC bricks of 12.7 × 10.2 × 7.5 cm2 each , result-
ing in 11.4 million emulsion ﬁlms (see Figure 1)
with a total surface area exceeding 130000 m2.

The expected number of bricks to be processed
is about 20 per day for an average beam inten-
sity with peak load of about 50 per day. As-
suming about 20 scanning stations available in
the OPERA collaboration, the expected average
rate will be 1 brick per scanning station per day.
Scanning of one brick (57 emulsion ﬁlms) must
be done in a few passes. Therefore, the number
of times that the emulsion ﬁlm must be placed
onto the table of the microscope may easily ex-
ceed 100 per day. In order to handle this large
number of operations the ﬁlm placement must be
automatized.

2 K. Borer, J. Damet, M. Hess, I. Kreslo, U. Moser, K. Pretzl, N. Savvinov, H.-U. Sch¨utz, T. W¨alchli, M. Weber.

2.3. Requirements: Positioning accuracy

The reference coordinate system for ﬁnding
particle tracks in emulsions is based on so-called
”ﬁducial marks” printed on the emulsion surface
by a dedicated projecting system. Such marks
can be recognized by the scanning microscope [7]
and their position with respect to some arbitrary
reference point may be measured with submicron
precision. By measuring a minimum of 3 marks,
an unambiguous aﬃne transformation is estab-
lished between the two coordinate systems.

The mark search is performed along a spiral
path with 200 µm pitch (the microscope view is
about 390×310 µm2). One step on this path takes
about 300 ms. Hence, the time needed to ﬁnd
a mark rapidly increases with the distance from
the search start point to the mark position: T =
T0 · (D/P )2/2 where P =200 µm is a search step
pitch, T0=300 ms is the time needed for one step
and D is the distance to the mark. The ﬁrst task
of the manipulator is to place the emulsion in such
a way that marks will be within one microscope
view from their nominal position, so that they
will be found within 300 ms each. This implies
the requirement of a placement accuracy better
than 300 µm peak-to-peak.

2.4. Requirements: Operation speed

The number of emulsion replacement opera-
tions may exceed 100 per day. The time spent
for scanning is presently estimated to be about
16 hours per brick on average. The minimum
time needed to establish the reference coordinate
system (scan ﬁducial marks) is 30 s per emul-
sion. Hence, the time that can be spent for one
placement operation is limited to 3 minutes per
emulsion ﬁlm for a single replacement.

2.5. Requirements: Failure rate

The only repeating failure that is tolerable dur-
ing the operation of the emulsion manipulator is
the emulsion loss during taking from the micro-
scope table or from the bank. The system is sup-
posed to perform scanning in automatic mode 24
hours a day. An emulsion loss would require hu-
man intervention that can be reasonably made
only during 8 hours a day. For this reason the
rate of such failures must be limited to less than

Figure 1. Emulsion ﬁlms and lead plates used for
the ECC bricks of the OPERA experiment.

2.2. Automatic scanning microscopes

In the old days emulsion scanning was per-
formed by human operators by means of opti-
cal microscopes. This technique (so called ”Eye
scan”) requires large manpower, operators must
be highly trained and qualiﬁed in order to achieve
good track recognition eﬃciency. As the scale of
experiments has grown, the necessity of a com-
puter controlled automatic procedure became ev-
ident.

An important step in this direction was made
at Nagoya University. The system called Track
Selector was developed in 1982 and used in WA75,
CHORUS[2] and DONUT[3] experiments.
It
evolved its scanning ability from 0.2 microscope
views per second in 1982 to 30 views per sec-
ond in 2001 [4,5]. A similar progress has been
made recently in Europe. A system able to scan
20 cm2/hour of emulsion surface with real-time
track reconstruction has been developed by Eu-
ropean groups of the OPERA collaboration [6,7].
The automatic emulsion ﬁlm manipulator de-
scribed in this paper has been designed and built
as an add-on to the existing design of the OPERA
European Scanning System (ESS).

A novel automatic ﬁlm changer for high-speed analysis of nuclear emulsions.

3

one per 103 placements in order to ensure the
dead time being within 5%.

2.6. Mechanical requirements

The manipulator must be mounted onto the
support of the automated emulsion scanning mi-
croscope [7]. This sets a limit to the tolerable
level of vibrations generated by the manipulator.
The maximum acceptable horizontal acceleration
of the table during emulsion scanning is very low.
Since the plate changing is only performed when
scanning is ﬁnished, the limit is derived just from
the mechanical stability of the system. Rough es-
timations result in the requirement that the mov-
ing part must not apply an inertial force to the
microscope support in excess of 10 kg.

3. Mechanical design

3.1. Support

The general view of the manipulator mounted
on the emulsion scanning microscope table is
shown in Figure 2. The manipulator horizontal
drive is attached by two aluminum brackets to
the microscope ground plate at the two extreme
corners. The OPERA scanning microscopes in
Europe have three diﬀerent designs for this plate.
The shortest one is used by most of the labora-
tories and is 90 cm wide. This is only enough to
accommodate two emulsion boxes, which repre-
sents the minimal conﬁguration.
In some labo-
ratories a longer table design is used (Figure 2).
Such table can host up to four bank boxes on it,
making loading and unloading of emulsion piles
easier. Three emulsion bricks can be scanned si-
multaneously without human intervention.

3.2. Linear Drives

The movement of the vacuum arm is performed
within two degrees of freedom. Two Rexroth2 lin-
ear drives are utilized for this purpose. The hor-
izontal drive MKR15-65 is ﬁxed directly to the
microscope ground plate with two brackets. The
vertical drive PSK-50 is mounted onto the car-
riage of the horizontal drive and moves with it.
The arm is mounted on the carriage of the verti-

2Bosch Rexroth Schweiz AG (Bosch Group), Hemrietstr.
2, 8863 Buttikon, Switzerland.

Figure 3. Manipulator design: the vertical drive.

cal drive. The horizontal drive positions the ver-
tical drive in front of a given bank box or of a
microscope table, while the vertical drive moves
the arm up and down in order to take emulsion
ﬁlms or place them.

3.3. Emulsion bank boxes

The emulsion ﬁlms are supplied to the manipu-
lator from bank boxes located next to the micro-
scope object table. The number of boxes varies
from two to four. Each box is equipped with
brushes at the upper edge (see Figure 4). These
brushes help the manipulator in separating the
target ﬁlm from the underlying ﬁlms, which may
stick to it. The robot makes a predeﬁned number
of passes across these brushes to ensure reliable
separation.

In order to achieve high scanning eﬃciency
the OPERA emulsions have to keep relatively
high water content within the gelatin layer, which
makes them somewhat sticky. Therefore it is not
possible to pile them up without special low adhe-
sion separating plates. In order to avoid sticking
0.3 mm thick polystyrene sheets are used as such
plates.

4 K. Borer, J. Damet, M. Hess, I. Kreslo, U. Moser, K. Pretzl, N. Savvinov, H.-U. Sch¨utz, T. W¨alchli, M. Weber.

Figure 2. Scanning stations equipped with the novel automatic emulsion ﬁlm manipulator. Top - long
table design, bottom - short table design.

A novel automatic ﬁlm changer for high-speed analysis of nuclear emulsions.

5

Figure 4. Bank box loaded with emulsion ﬁlms
and plastic separators.

Figure 5. Microscope object table.

3.4. Vacuum table

The object table (see Figure 5) has been devel-
oped by the INFN Bologna group of OPERA [7].
In order to avoid air bubbles between the emul-
sion and the glass surface a few tiny grooves are
etched on it. They go across the glass part of
the table from one side to the other connecting
the broad mechanically-made vacuum channels
(0.5 mm wide) on sides of the plate (see Figure 6).
The width of these etched grooves is about 50 µm
and the depth 30 µm. The etching mask made
of an elastic acrylic paint was deposited onto the
glass surface and scratched by a sharp blade along
the grooves position. The grooves are etched in
a 20% aqueous solution of ammonium biﬂuoride
at 20◦C for about 10 minutes. They allow the air
to be removed from below the emulsion within 30
seconds. The scan of the ﬁducial marks is not af-
fected by the presence of this air and can be done
in parallel.

When emulsion ﬁlm needs to be taken from
the table, a positive air pressure is applied to
the groove channel to simplify the detachment of
the emulsion. Both vacuum and positive pres-
sure are generated by miniature vacuum pump

with ejector pulse VADM-I-70-P by Festo.3 This
pump needs a supply of an air with the pressure
in the range of 2-8 atm and generates vacuum
down to 0.2 atm. The air consumption is less
than 20 l/min.

3.5. Vacuum arm

The manipulator vacuum arm consists of a yoke
and a head. The head hosts 10 vacuum cups (Fig-
ure 8) that hold the emulsion ﬁlm during arm mo-
tion. The cups are located on the lower surface of
the head in such a way that they pick emulsions
against the vacuum grove on the microscope ob-
ject table. This conﬁguration provides reliable
emulsion removal from the table. Vacuum for the
arm is generated by another vacuum pump with-
out ejector pulse VADM-70-P by Festo (Figure 7).

4. Electronics

The block scheme of the manipulator control
electronics is shown in Figure 9. The main con-
trol module is realized in a standard 19” 6U rack
mounted case. It is connected to the microscope
table and to the manual control box by a series
of cables. The RS232 transceiver and the main

3Festo AG Moosmattstr. 24, 8953 Dietikon / ZH, Switzer-
land.

6 K. Borer, J. Damet, M. Hess, I. Kreslo, U. Moser, K. Pretzl, N. Savvinov, H.-U. Sch¨utz, T. W¨alchli, M. Weber.

Figure 9. Block scheme of electronic control module of the manipulator.

A novel automatic ﬁlm changer for high-speed analysis of nuclear emulsions.

7

Figure 6. Etched groove (vertical) on the glass
table.

Figure 8. Manipulator arm.

control logics are realized in Altera FLEX10K
FPGA. The transceiver has a 2-level FIFO for
2×16 commands, which are executed sequentially.
The only exception is the ”Q” command: ”Query
system status”. This command is not queued but
executed immediately allowing to make real-time
status polling.

The power motors of linear actuators are driven
by Rexroth Drive Control modules. In order to
avoid any possible mechanical damage of the ma-
nipulator structure due to improper movements
(for example horizontal motion when the arm is
in low position may break the arm) a set of sen-
sors is installed on both horizontal and vertical
drives. Signals from these sensors are used by
interlock logics to prevent such a risk. The verti-
cal motion of the arm is only permitted when the
horizontal position matches ﬁlm boxes or the mi-
croscope table. In turn the horizontal motion is
only allowed when the arm is in the top position.
The manual control module has four buttons
to slowly move the arm in both horizontal and
vertical directions. To move fast to the prede-
ﬁned position the position number must be set
by the dedicated switches. Pressing the ”GO”
button then executes the motion. The arm and
table vacuum and pressure switches are mounted

Figure 7. Venturi vacuum pump FESTO VADM-
70-P.

8 K. Borer, J. Damet, M. Hess, I. Kreslo, U. Moser, K. Pretzl, N. Savvinov, H.-U. Sch¨utz, T. W¨alchli, M. Weber.

at this module as well. The manual control is
activated by a switch, which at the same time
disables control signals from the RS232 line.

In order to improve the operation safety, sound
and light alarms located at the microscope table
are activated when the arm is about to move. The
delay between the warning and the actual move-
ment can be selected between 0 and 4 s.

The status of the switches, sensors and drive
control modules is displayed on the front panel
of the main control module by a set of LED in-
dicators. All the switches of the manual control
module are duplicated at the front panel of the
main control module, since the former is located
away from the manipulator (i.e. in the control
room), and the latter is mounted in the vicinity
of the drives.

5. Control software

5.1. Hardware control level

The manipulator communicates with the con-
trol PC via an RS232 COM port by sending com-
mands and receiving status messages. The com-
mand contains the key (an ASCII character) and
optional operands. The PC can send to manip-
ulator commands to control vertical (”Y” com-
mand), horizontal (”X” command) drives and
vacuum pumps (”V” command). In addition it
can query the manipulator status by sending the
”Q” command. The communication speed can be
9.6 or 19.2 kBaud adjustable with the switch at
the rear side of the electronic box. The instruc-
tion for the horizontal drive, the vertical drive
and the valves consist of 2 bytes. The 1st byte
(key) deﬁnes the direction or valves, the 2nd byte
(operand) deﬁnes the position to go to.

5.2. Algorithmic level : SySal

The oﬃcial software framework to perform the
routine scan of the OPERA emulsions is called
SySal4.
It is written in VC++ and works un-
der control of WinXP OS. The framework is
written with the use of the COM architecture.
The manipulator interface is implemented as
a dynamically linked library (DLL). The DLL
provides to the framework following interface

4https://sysal2000.sa.infn.it

Figure 10. The manipulator interactive interface
within the SySal emulsion scanning framework.

methods: LoadPlate(ﬁlm identiﬁer) and Unload-
Plate(). DLL also provides visual interactive in-
terface to perform brick/emulsion load/unload
operations as well as low level operations, such
as arm motions, which may be used for debug-
ging purposes (Figure 10).

5.3. Algorithmic level : ROOT

An alternative framework more suitable for de-
velopment purposes has been developed as a part
of the FEDRA5 emulsion reconstruction frame-
work used for data analysis in OPERA. This
package is written using ROOT6 conventions and
libraries. The manipulator control
is imple-
mented as an object named AcqPlateChanger in-

5http://ntslab01.na.infn.it/fedra/
6http://root.cern.ch

A novel automatic ﬁlm changer for high-speed analysis of nuclear emulsions.

9

Emulsion position

310·

Entries 
Entries 
Mean x 
Mean x 
Mean y 
Mean y 
RMS x  
RMS x  
RMS y  
RMS y  

 963
 963
 -1.354e+05
 -1.354e+05
 1.156e+05
 1.156e+05
  19.86
  19.86
  10.62
  10.62

s
n
o
r
c
i
m

 
,

Y

115.7

115.68

115.66

115.64

115.62

115.6

115.58

-135.45

-135.4

-135.35

-135.3

310·

-135.25
X, microns

Figure 11. Emulsion placement precision: posi-
tion of the emulsion ﬁlm ﬁducial mark in the co-
ordinate system of the table.

herited from standard ROOT ancestor TObject.
In addition to the main methods LoadBrick(),
UnloadBrick(), LoadPlate() and UnloadPlate(),
a set of low level commands is implemented. The
RootCINT C++ interpreter allows the operator
to communicate to the object interactively, while
the scanning supervisor program is realized as a
ROOT script.

6. Performance

6.1. Positioning precision

The emulsion ﬁlm placement accuracy is deter-
mined by the following contributions. The ﬁlm in
the bank box is positioned loosely with a certain
gap. This gap is deﬁned by the tolerances on the
emulsion size, which, according to producer (Fuji
Film) speciﬁcations, is 100 µm for each trans-
verse dimension. The bank size corresponds to
the maximum emulsion ﬁlm size. Therefore, an
average emulsion has the freedom up to 100 µm.
This value limits the absolute positioning accu-
racy. However, relative positioning accuracy or
positioning repeatability can be much better. On
the ”X” axis it is mainly deﬁned by the arm rigid-
ity and the horizontal drive positioning accuracy.

Figure 12. The time sequence of the emulsion ﬁlm
placement. (F.M. - ﬁducial mark)

On the ”Y” axis the main contribution comes
from the elasticity of the vacuum cups.

Placement precision was measured by repeat-
edly placing of one emulsion ﬁlm from the bank
to the microscope table, each time measuring the
emulsion ﬁlm position by ﬁnding special mark
printed on it by automatic scanning microscope.
The mark position measurement accuracy is bet-
ter than 1 µm, so it does not contribute to the
result. The measured mark coordinates are plot-
ted in Figure 11. The accuracy on the ”Y” axis
is about 10 µm and on the ”X” axis about 20 µm
due to arm vibration. Maximum (peak-to-peak)
relative displacement is well within 100 µm. This
precision largely satisﬁes the OPERA require-
ments to have placement accuracy better than
one microscope view (about 390 × 310 µm2).

6.2. Operation speed

The manipulator operation is composed of a
number of elementary actions: move the arm hor-
izontally to predeﬁned position Xi, move the arm
vertically to predeﬁned position Yi, switch the
arm vacuum on, switch the table vacuum oﬀ, etc.
The combinations of these basic steps form three
main algorithmic actions of a higher level:

1. Move ﬁlm from bank A to bank B

2. Move ﬁlm from microscope to bank A

3. Move ﬁlm from bank B to microscope

10 K. Borer, J. Damet, M. Hess, I. Kreslo, U. Moser, K. Pretzl, N. Savvinov, H.-U. Sch¨utz, T. W¨alchli, M. Weber.

The total time needed for the complex operation
of emulsion ﬁlm exchange is shown in Figure 12.
The operations shown in the ﬁgure are:

Stage->Exchange position Moving the micro-
scope object table into the predeﬁned posi-
tion, where it is accessible to the manipula-
tor arm.

Emulsion->Box : Moving the

emulsion ﬁlm
from the microscope object table to the
scanned bank box.

Move separator sheet : Moving the plastic
separator sheet from the source bank box
to the scanned bank box.

Stage homing : Optional operation of ﬁnding
the reference position for the microscope
object table.

Emulsion->Stage : Moving the emulsion ﬁlm
from the source bank box to the microscope
object table.

Stage->Initial position : Moving the mi-
croscope object table back to scanning po-
sition.

Air removal : Time needed to evacuate the air
from between the emulsion ﬁlm and the
glass surface of the microscope object table.

FM scan : Searching and measuring positions of
the ﬁducial marks to establish the reference
coordinate system.

Area/Prediction scan : Main track scan oper-

ations.

High placement accuracy reduces the duration
of the ﬁducial marks scan down to 11.0 s so that
the full operation cycle time is about 40 s per
emulsion ﬁlm.

7. Safety issues

The automatic plate manipulator belongs to a
pick-and-place robot family and is characterized
by the limited and well deﬁned space occupied
by all moving parts that are potentially harm-
ful. The force that the manipulator motors apply

to the moving parts is limited to provide safety
in case the manipulator would meet an obstacle.
This upper limit is chosen to be 1 kg to make it
safe for human operators arms accidentally put
in the way of the manipulator.

The motion of the manipulator is preceeded by
sound and blinking light warning signals, so that
the operator has about 4 seconds to react and
clear the manipulator space.

Electrical safety is characterized by standard
requirements to equipment powered by 220V AC
with a current consumption below 10A and oper-
ating at a relative humidity below 70%.

8. Conclusions

Present experiments in the ﬁeld of neutrino
physics, such as the OPERA neutrino oscillation
experiment, require high tracking accuracy and
large detector mass at the same time. The re-
cent developments in the emulsion ﬁlm produc-
tion allowed to satisfy these requirements. The
newly designed automatic emulsion scanning sys-
tems are able to perform the emulsion scanning at
an outstanding speed of 20 cm2 per hour. How-
ever the ﬁlm feeding speed has become a bottle-
neck.

A novel automatic computer controlled emul-
sion manipulator for modern automatic high-
speed scanning stations has been developed for
the special purposes of the OPERA experiment.
In this paper we have shown, that the process
of feeding emulsion ﬁlms to the scanning micro-
scope has been successfully automatized, allowing
to process a large number of emulsion ﬁlms with-
out human intervention.

The performace required by the projected
scanning load of OPERA has been successfully
achieved: emulsion placement accuracy is well
within 100 µm peak-to-peak, the emulsion re-
placing time is about 30 seconds. Five manip-
ulators have been installed and currently oper-
ate at the European scanning laboratories of the
OPERA collaboration and provide 24 hours a day
unmanned scanning process with a very low fail-
ure rate.

A novel automatic ﬁlm changer for high-speed analysis of nuclear emulsions.

11

9. Acknowledgments

We acknowledge the members of the OPERA
collaboration for suggestions and discussions. We
gratefully acknowledge the technical staﬀ of the
Laboratory for High Energy Physics of the Uni-
versity of Bern,
in particular S. Lehman, H.
Ruetsch, F. Nydegger and J.-C. Roulin for the
invaluable support in constructing the manipu-
lator. We thank L. Martinez for the IT support
during the development, and S. Gamper, who has
made his diploma work on this subject. We also
would like to thank A. Ereditato for cooperation
in the work on the paper. We express our thank-
fulness to the Swiss National Foundation for the
ﬁnancial support.

REFERENCES

1. An appearance experiment to search for
νµ − ντ oscillations in the CNGS beam,
by OPERA CollaborationCERN/SPSC 2000-
028, SPSC/P318, LNGS P25/2000.
2. E. Eskut et al., NIM A401 (1997) 7.
3. K. Kodama et al., Phys. Lett. B504 (2001)

218.

Nagoya.

4. S. Aoki et al., NIM B51 (1990) 466.
5. T. Nakano et al., Ph.D. Thesis, University of

6. N. Armenise et al., High-speed particle track-
ing in nuclear emulsion by last generation au-
tomatic microscopes, NIM A 551 (2005) 261-
270.

7. N. Armenise et al., Hardware performance of
a scanning system for high speed analysis of
nuclear emulsions, NIMA-D-06-00166.

