MINERνA: a dedicated neutrino scattering experiment at NuMI
K. S. McFarlanda, on behalf of the MINERνA collaboration

aUniversity of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627 USA

MINERνA is a dedicated neutrino cross-section experiment planned for the near detector hall of the NuMI

neutrino beam at Fermilab. I summarize the detector design and physics capabilities of the experiment.

6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
0
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
8
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

MINERνA is a dedicated neutrino cross-section
experiment planned for the NuMI beamline at
Fermilab [1]. The advent of high rate neutrino
beamlines designed for studies of long-baseline
neutrino oscillation at the atmospheric δm2, such
NuMI, CNGS and J-PARC ν, opens up new po-
tential for high rate neutrino cross-section mea-
surements. Among those beamlines, NuMI pro-
vides the optimal combination of enabling factors
– a well understood and tunable neutrino ﬂux,
a spacious near detector hall (Figure 1), and of
course high ﬂux. The rate of neutrino charged-
current interactions in three diﬀerent NuMI beam
conﬁgurations in the MINERνA location is shown
in Figure 2. As can be seen, a one ton target will
be able to observe of order 105 events/eV in a
run of a few years duration over a broad range of
energies. Planned future upgrades to the beam-
line power will enhance this capability to observe
neutrino interactions at high statistics in a low
mass detector.

To exploit the opportunity provided by the
beamline, the MINERνA collaboration is prepar-
ing to build a low-mass fully active detector in-
terspersed with passive nuclear targets to study
exclusive and inclusive neutrino interactions on a
variety of nuclei at 1–20 GeV neutrino energies.
Figure 3 shows the detector in a schematic view.
Final states of interest will include muons, low
momentum recoil protons, charged and neutral
pions and electrons.

The ﬁducial volume in which most events are
analyzed is the inner “Active Target” which is
made almost entirely of scintillator strips. This
low-density active target allows for separation of
ﬁnal state particles before they create hadronic or

Figure 1. An isometric engineering model of the
MINERνA detector as it is to be installed in the
NuMI hall.

electromagnetic showers and enables the identiﬁ-
cation of individual particles through the proper-
ties of their tracks in the segmented scintillator.
The strips are assembled into hexagonal planes
with distinct orientations of strips oﬀset by 60◦
which allow reconstruction of three-dimensional
tracks.

However, the active target does not fully con-
tain forward and sideways going particles due to
its low density and low Z, so the MINERνA de-
sign surrounds it with sampling detectors.
In
these sampling detectors, scintillator strips are in-
termixed with absorbers. For example, the side
and downstream (DS) electromagnetic calorime-
ters (ECALs) have 2 mm thick lead absorbers in
front of each plane of scintillator. Surrounding

1

2

Figure 2. The rate of charged-current interactions
per ton of material per GeV in 2.5 × 1020 protons
on target, a nominal year of NuMI running.

Figure 3. A schematic side view of the MINERνA
detector with sub-detectors labeled. Neutrinos
enter from the left in this ﬁgure and the MINOS
near detector, which serves as the MINERνA
muon momentum analyzer, is to the right in this
ﬁgure.

Figure 4. Coordinate resolution from charge shar-
ing in adjacent strips for tracks of muons from
quasi-elastic scattering.

Figure 5. A typical event containing a π0 in the
ﬁnal state, νµ → µ−pπ0. The photons from the
π0 → γγ decay are observed as broad tracks in
the detector, well separated from the point of in-
teraction in the scintillator.

the ECALs are the hadronic calorimeter (HCAL)
and outer detector (OD) which intersperse scin-
tillator with steel absorber. Upstream of the de-
tector is a veto of steel and scintillator panels
to shield MINERνA from or identify the pres-
ence of incoming particles produced in the ma-
terial upstream of the detector. Downstream of
MINERνA is the existing MINOS near detector,
which will measure the energy of muons which
do not exit through the OD. Finally the nuclear
target region has planes active scintillator inter-
spersed with passive absorbers in order to study
interactions on nuclei other than carbon.

With the low mass design allowed by the high
intensity NuMI beam, MINERνA’s response to
single particles for exclusive ﬁnal state identi-
ﬁcation is more similar to a bubble chamber

3

compared with expected curves for π±, K ± and
protons.

With the surrounding ECALs for energy con-
tainment, MINERνA’s π0 reconstruction capa-
bilities are excellent. This is essential, since ﬁ-
nal states with π0’s are a major source of back-
ground for νe appearance oscillation experiments.
As shown in Figures 5 and 6, MINERνA’s low
density and high granularity make it an ex-
cellent photon tracker, able to accurately re-
construct the vertex and kinematics even for a
coherently-produced π0 with no accompanying
charged tracks. Kinematic reconstruction allows
coherent and resonant π0 production to be dis-
tinguished.

MINERνA Detector Technology

The active element of the inner scintillator de-
tector consists of extruded polystyrene scintilla-
tor strips of triangular cross-section with a 17 mm
height and a 33 mm base. The polystyrene is
mixed with 1% PPO and 0.01% POPOP in a
continuous in-line extrusion process, and an ac-
companying co-extruder places a ∼ 0.2 mm re-
ﬂective layer of TiO2 loaded polystyrene on the
outside of the strips.
In the center of the tri-
angle, the extruder also leaves a ∼ 2 mm di-
ameter hole in which is placed a 1.2 mm Ku-
raray multi-clad S-35 ﬁber doped at 175 ppm
of Y-11 waveshifter. In the MINERνA detector,
the wavelength shifting (WLS) ﬁbers are approx-
imately 3 m long, and are read out on one end
while the other end is mirrored by vacuum de-
position of Al to obtain 80% reﬂectivity. The
ﬁber is potted into the hole with an optical epoxy
which increases the light yield by a factor of 1.5.
The WLS ﬁbers are bundled into groups of eight
and terminated in a DDK MCP-8A ﬁber connec-
tor. Clear ﬁber cables with an average length
of 1.5 m take the light from the WLS ﬁbers to
Hamamatsu R7600U-00-64 MAPMTs with pho-
tocathodes selected for high quantum eﬃciency
for green light. The MAPMTs are enclosed in a
dark box mounted onto the structure of the outer
connector. The clear ﬁber cables are connected
via an identical DDK connector to a clear ﬁber
bundle which terminates at the the MAPMT in

Figure 6. Energy and angular resolution for re-
constructed π0s from produced in coherent scat-
tering from a carbon nucleus. As can be seen
in the ﬁgure at right, the generated and recon-
structed angular distribution in forward-peaked
coherent production are nearly identical.

than to previous high-rate neutrino detectors.
MINERνA’s performance has been studied ex-
tensively in a hit-level simulation, including the
photo-statistical eﬀects of light collection, a re-
alistic Kalman ﬁlter reconstruction package for
track and vertex ﬁtting, and particle identiﬁca-
tion. The fully-active region of the detector has
excellent performance for tracking and identiﬁ-
cation of single particles in the ﬁnal state, in-
cluding low-energy recoil protons from low-Q2
νn → µ−p reactions. Charge sharing between
adjacent triangular strips allows excellent spa-
tial resolution. For µ− from quasi-elastic inter-
actions, the expected hit resolution per detector
plane is ∼ 3 mm as shown in Figure 4. Fitted
tracks from such muons have typical impact pa-
rameter and angular resolution of ∼ 2 mm and
< 9 mrad. Using the (typically short) recon-
structed proton track and the muon track from
quasi-elastic events, RMS vertex uncertainties of
9 mm and 12 mm are measured in the coordi-
nates transverse and parallel to the beam direc-
tion, respectively. Measured energy loss (dE/dx)
is an excellent tool for particle identiﬁcation in
MINERνA. For tracks which stop in the inner
detector, the charge deposited near the end of
the track (corrected for sample length) can be

4

Figure 7. The light collection chain in the scintil-
lator strips of the MINERνA detector.

a ﬁber placement “cookie” that is aligned to the
pixel pattern of the MAPMTs. The light collec-
tion chain is shown schematically in Figure 7.

For front-end digitization of the MAPMT sig-
nals, a design based on the D0 TRiP ASIC [2]
has been developed and tested. MAPMTs are
connected by short ribbon cables to the front-
end boards on each PMT dark box to minimize
input capacitance to the TRiP ampliﬁers. The
front-end boards include a Cockroft-Walton high-
voltage supply for the tube. Both the pulse-
height and time (used for identiﬁcation of strange
particles and muon decays) of each hit are digi-
tized. Digitized signals are collected by custom
VME readout controllers through LVDS chains
of twelve front-end boards and transferred to
the data acquisition computer over a PCI-VME
bridge. Slow control messages are also exchanged
with the front-end boards over the LVDS readout
chains.

This entire chain of light collection, electronics
and readout has been tested in a “vertical slice
test” (VST) array consisting of three layers of of
scintillator strips in small planes. Based on the
results from this test, the light yield is projected
to be 4.6–5.4 photoelectrons/MeV of deposited
energy in the strip, depending on where in the
along the strip the particle passes.

Prototypes of most other detector components
have been produced and tested individually. The
detector will be assembled in planar modules.
The OD portion of each module consists of a
hexagonal-shaped steel frame with slots of scin-
tillator, and it provides the structural support for
Inside each frame is one or two
the detector.
planes of scintillator. The side ECAL is con-
structed simply by placing lead absorber around

the outside of each scintillator plane, and ECAL
and HCAL modules have scintillator planes in-
terspersed with thin lead or thick steel absorbers
covering the full face of the scintillator. The
inner detector scintillator is glued into planes
and wrapped with opaque material. The glued
WLS ﬁbers are supported by semi-ﬂexible routing
guides which bring the ﬁber through the gaps of
the OD frame. Clear ﬁber cables are constructed
with ﬁber which is undoped but otherwise iden-
tical to the WLS ﬁber. These ﬁbers are encased
in PVC tubes that are potted into the connector
with a dark pigmented polyurethane.

Physics Goals of MINERνA

The physics of neutrino cross-sections is an ex-
citing subject which explores physics in the ax-
ial current similar to that being probed at high
precision in the vector current at high inten-
sity electron scattering machines. The physics
goals of MINERνA include measurements of the
A-dependence of quasi-elastic (νn → µ−p) and
deep inelastic scattering, measurement of the ax-
ial form factor of the nucleon at high Q2, tests of
quark-hadron duality in the axial current, mea-
surements of coherent single-pion production in
the Coulomb ﬁeld of a target nucleus, neutrino
production of strange particles, and measurement
of a wide variety of exclusive low-multiplicity neu-
trino reactions across a broad range of energies.
For reasons of space, I highlight only two of these
measurements here.

The best measurements today of the charged-
current quasi-elastic cross-section are have statis-
tical and systematic errors each in the range of
10–20%. A full simulated analysis of the quasi-
elastic channel in MINERνA has been carried
out [3]. The eﬃciency and purity of the ﬁnal sam-
ple are Q2 dependent with an average eﬃciency of
74% and purity of 77%. The expected results are
shown in Figure 8. MINERνA will measure the
cross-section on carbon up to Eν of 20 GeV with
statistical errors ranging from ≤ 1% at low Eν
up to 7%.. The expected beam systematic uncer-
tainty is 4–6% because of precision measurements
of hadron production (the largest uncertainty in
predicting neutrino ﬂux) by the MIPP experi-

5

Figure 9. An illustration of selection variables
used to isolated charged-current coherent pion
production from nuclei in MINERνA.

Figure 8. At top is the simulated cross-section
measurement for MINERνA in a 4-year run (sta-
tistical errors only). At bottom are the projected
axial form-factor results for MINERνA for two
FA/dipole=Gp
diﬀerent assumptions:
E/dipole
from cross-section and FA/dipole=Gp
E/dipole
from polarization. Also shown are measurements
from the deuterium bubble chamber experiments
Baker et al. [6], Kitagaki et al. [7] and Miller et
al. [8].

ment [4]. In addition, the MINERνA nuclear tar-
gets will allow comparison of quasi-elastic scatter-
ing cross-sections from carbon, iron and lead tar-
gets. Turning to high Q2, the large Q2 behavior
of Gp
E has turned out to be an evolving and sur-
prising story in recent years [5]. Figure 8 shows
the extraction of the axial-vector form factor from
the quasi-elastic dσ/dQ2 measured in MINERνA
over a 4-year run. Since MINERνA can measure
the axial nucleon form-factor at high Q2 with pre-
cision comparable to vector form-factor measure-
ments at JLab, combining them with present and

Figure 10. The expected uncertainties on cross-
sections from charged-current coherent scattering
as a function of energy.

future Jeﬀerson Lab data will permit precision
extraction of all form factors needed to improve
and test models of the nucleon.

Both charged and neutral-current coherent
pion production in the Coulomb ﬁeld of the nu-

6

cleus result in a single forward-going pion with
little energy transfer to the target nucleus. The
neutral current reaction, with a forward-going π0,
can mimic an electron in coarse or sampling de-
tectors, and can therefore provide background to
νe appearance in oscillation experiments. Ex-
isting cross-section measurements for this reac-
tion are only accurate to 35%, at best, and only
available for a limited number of target nuclei
at few to ten GeV in energy [9].
In addition,
recent data from K2K SciBar detector suggests
some surprising behavior of the cross-section at
low energy [10]. MINERνA, with its high statis-
tics and variety of nuclear targets, will greatly
improve our experimental understanding of co-
herent processes. A complete simulated analysis
of the CC coherent production channel has been
carried out [11]. The kinematic cuts employed
reduce the background by three orders of magni-
tude while reducing the signal by only a factor of
three. MINERνA will be able to precisely mea-
sure the cross-section as a function of energy, as
shown in Figure 10, and will also compare coher-
ent scattering cross-sections on various nuclei for
the ﬁrst time.

These measurements and others planned for
MINERνA are also important for future neutrino
oscillation experiments planned with beams of en-
ergies 1–few GeV. In this region at the transition
between elastic and inelastic scattering, neutrino
cross-sections are diﬃcult to predict theoretically
and are poorly measured [12]. Results from the
MINERνA experiment will signiﬁcantly reduce
errors from unknown neutrino cross-sections in
the MINOS, T2K and NOνA experiments.

Conclusions

MINERνA is currently poised to begin con-
struction. The ﬁrst active target module, con-
sisting of an outer detector frame ﬁled with two
planes of scintillator strips will be produced by
the end of 2006, and we expect to produce a group
of between 10 and 20 prototype modules for track-
ing and assembly tests is 2007. Construction of
the full set of over 100 modules will begin in late
2007, and we plan to have the full detector in-
stalled and operating in the NuMI beam in 2009.

We look forward to presenting our results in fu-
ture NuINT meetings.

Acknowledgments

I thank Makoto Sakuda and Okayama Univer-
sity for graciously hosting this workshop. The
author’s contributions to MINERνA are sup-
ported by the Department of Energy under
Award Number DE-FG02-91ER40685.

REFERENCES

1. D. Drakoulakos et al.

“Proposal

[Minerva Collab-
oration],
to perform a high-
statistics neutrino scattering experiment us-
ing a ﬁne-grained detector in the NuMI
beam,” arXiv:hep-ex/0405002.

2. P. Rubinov, FNAL-TM-2226. P. Rubinov,
FNAL-TM-2227. P. Rubinov, FNAL-TM-
2228.

3. MINERνA Collaboration, op. cit., pgs. 33 -

48, pgs. 182 - 187.
4. Y. Fisyak et al.

[The MIPP Collabora-
tion], “P-907: Proposal to Measure Particle
Production in the Meson Area Using Main
Injector Primary and Secondary Beams”,
http://ppd.fnal.gov/experiments/e907/e907.htm

5. J. Arrington and I. Sick, Phys. Rev. C 70,

6. N. J. Baker et al., Phys. Rev. D23, 2499

7. T. Kitagaki et al., Phys. Rev. D26, 436

28302 (2004).

(1981).

(1983).

8. K.L. Miller et al., Phys. Rev. D26 (1982) 537.
9. G. P. Zeller, arXiv:hep-ex/0312061.
10. M. Hasegawa et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,

11. MINERνA Collaboration, op. cit., pgs. 63 -

252301 (2005).

70, pgs. 189 - 191.

12. D. A. Harris et al. [MINERvA Collaboration],
“Neutrino scattering uncertainties and their
role in long baseline oscillation experiments,”
arXiv:hep-ex/0410005.

