E-mail: j.e.mcmillan@sheffield.ac.uk

J E McMillan 1 and C J Martoﬀ 2
1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sheﬃeld, Sheﬃeld, South
Yorkshire, S3 7RH, Great Britain
2 Department of Physics, Barton Hall, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA
19122-6082, USA

6 The measurement of scintillation emission spectra
0
by a coincident photon counting technique
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
9
1
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract.
In the evaluation of novel scintillators, it is important to ensure that the
spectrum of the light emitted by the scintillator is well matched to the response of the
photomultiplier. In attempting to measure this spectrum using radioactive sources,
it is found that so few photons are emitted per scintillation event that conventional
spectroscopic techniques cannot easily be used. A simple photon counting technique
is presented, using two photomultipliers operated in coincidence, the one viewing the
scintillator directly, while the other views it through a monochromator. This system
allows the spectrum to be measured without using specially cooled photomultipliers,
intense radioactive sources or particle beams.

Keywords: scintillation photomultipliers spectroscopy beta-particles pulsed-light

Submitted to: Meas. Sci. Technol.

PACS numbers: 29.40.Mc, 07.60.Rd

The measurement of scintillation emission spectra

2

1. Introduction

One of the most important parameters of any novel scintillator is the spectral response
of the light produced. For the scintillator to be experimentally useful, this response
must match the responses of readily available photomultiplier photocathodes or other
photodetectors.

In the case of organic scintillators, the ultra-violet induced ﬂuorescence spectrum
is frequently measured, as this is considered to be identical to the scintillation spectrum
[1, 2, 3] since both emissions are due to the same electronic transitions. However,
it remains diﬃcult to study the ultra-violet induced spectrum accurately where the
absorption and emission bands of the ﬂuorescing molecules overlap. Further, the spectra
emitted by organic solutions can be considerably diﬀerent from the the spectra obtained
by direct UV-excitation of the pure solutes [3].

For inorganic scintillators, the absorption bands are generally of such short
wavelengths that generating a suitable excitation spectrum becomes problematic and
transmission of this through more than a few millimetres of material impossible [4].
Additionally, in many inorganic crystals, the emission spectra produced are known to
depend markedly on the exciting particles [5].

These considerations suggest that it would be preferable to excite the scintillator
directly with radiation, rather than to rely on the ultra-violet induced spectrum.
In
the case of organic scintillators, since α-particles will only penetrate the surface layers
and because there are problems with absorption of γ-rays in small samples, previous
measurements have mainly been done using β-particles [6, 1, 2]. However, with the β-
particle energies emitted by available radioactive sources and typical organic scintillator
eﬃciencies (one photon for 100eV energy deposited [7]), very little light is produced per
event. This light must be fed through a monochromator and then passed to a broad
band photon detector in order to derive the spectrum.

The scintillation photons are emitted isotropically and the angular acceptance of
monochromators is inevitably low, consequently only a tiny fraction of the photons
produced will reach the detector. There is also the trade-oﬀ that if the monochromator
is set for higher resolution, then the throughput is unavoidably reduced and the signal-
to-noise ratio is degraded. Attempts have been made to avoid the problems encountered
with β-sources by using electrons from accelerators [8, 9]. While these were successful,
the equipment required is unlikely to be generally available. More recent work to
characterize a range of inorganic compounds has made use of a bench-top pulsed X-
ray system [10].

The measurement of scintillation emission spectra is essentially a signal-to-noise
ratio problem. The signal (here, the number of photons per event) can be increased
by depositing more energy in the scintillator. Clearly there is a limit to the energy
obtainable from β-particles from radioactive sources, while the use of accelerators to
produce higher energy electrons unnecessarily complicates the measurement. Increasing
the rate of events and integrating over many events is a workable option but this involves

The measurement of scintillation emission spectra

3

working with excessively radioactive sources and, while this may have been an option
in the past, is no longer acceptable.

Since it is clearly diﬃcult to increase the signal, the next obvious approach is to
attempt to reduce the noise. The principle source of noise is that of single-electron noise
in the recording photomultiplier. Cooling the photomultiplier reduces this, but since
not all the noise is of thermal origin, this approach can only be partially successful. The
present method uses two photomultipliers and a coincidence technique to suppress the
noise, whatever its physical origin.

2. Previous Measurements

Before describing the coincidence method in detail, it is worth reviewing the previous
measurements and comparing their capabilities and achievements.

Ott et al. [6] used a photographic technique to integrate the faint scintillation light
from organic liquid samples over a long period of time. A 3.7GBq 137Cs source providing
β-particles of 0.51 and 1.17MeV was used. The resolution appears to have been less
than 5nm although this is not speciﬁed directly. Clear inconsistencies between the
ﬂuorescence and scintillation spectra were observed.

Van Sciver [5] examined the spectral emission of sodium iodide crystals, excited by
either a 60Co γ-ray source or a 242Cm α-particle source. The light was passed through
a monochromator onto a photomultiplier cooled with dry ice and the DC output of this
was fed via an ampliﬁer to a pen recorder. No speciﬁcation of the spectral resolution
of the system is given but responses are presented which suggest that the resolution is
5nm.

Birks [1] compared the scintillation and ﬂuorescence spectra of organic solutions.
A grating spectrometer was coupled to a photomultiplier, the DC output of which was
coupled to a chart recorder to chart the spectrum. β-particles of 1.71MeV were provided
by a 52MBq 32P source. To overcome the low intensity of the light emission, the input
and output ports of the spectrometer were widened, giving a resolution of 8nm for the
better scintillators and 16nm for the poorer materials.

Langenscheidt [2] further studied organic solutions, providing a comparison of
spectra obtained by UV excitation with those obtained from α, β and γ−radiation.
The output of the spectrometer was coupled to a photomultiplier cooled to −80◦C,
the DC output of which was displayed on a chart recorder. Three radioactive sources
were used, a 37MBq 241Am source providing 5MeV α-particles, a 19MBq 247Pm source
providing 225keV β-particles and a 74GBq 192Ir source providing 0.2–1.36MeV γ-rays.
In the case of the β source, the particle energy was so low that the range in the liquid
was only ∼ 0.1mm. The resolution appears to have been around 5nm although, again,
this is not directly speciﬁed.

Horrocks [11, 8] used intense pulses of 3MeV electrons derived from a Van de
Graaﬀ generator. These were typically 3ns long and with beam currents of 400mA.
The test samples were organic liquid samples, ﬂame sealed in quartz ampoules so that

The measurement of scintillation emission spectra

4

they could be held in a vacuum line for exposure to the beam. The light produced was
passed through a monochromator and onto a photomultiplier, individual pulses being
recorded. A resolution of 0.7nm was attained. Problems were encountered both with
short term quenching and with long term damage of the scintillator as a result of the
intense radiation ﬂux.

Pronko et al. [9] developed a system in which intense pulses of 20keV electrons,
produced by a simple electron gun, were used to excite plastic scintillator samples held
in a vacuum line. The light was fed through a spectrometer and onto a photomultiplier.
The signal-to-noise ratio was improved by use of a lock-in ampliﬁer which modulated
the electron beam. The resolution was 3nm but problems were encountered because the
electron beam current was so high that deterioration of the light output of materials
was observed.

Moses et al. [10] designed a facility for the bulk evaluation of novel inorganic
scintillators using a pulsed X-ray tube. Each 100ps long pulse produced, on average,
40 X-ray quanta per steradian with a mean energy of 18.5keV. The X-rays excited
crystal or powdered inorganic samples and the light from these was monitored
by a photomultiplier. By placing a monochromator between the sample and the
photomultiplier, the emission spectrum of the scintillator could be determined. A
resolution of 12nm was achieved. The system was limited by the low level of light.

Kirov et al. [12, 13] examined the spectral emission of water-equivalent plastic and
liquid scintillator solutions. A 1.7GBq 90Sr/90Y source was used, providing β-particles
of 2.8MeV. The light from the scintillator was fed through a monochromator and onto
a photomultiplier. The output from this was integrated over a few tens of seconds and
an identical time interval dark background signal was subtracted. The monochromator
resolution was measured as 0.8nm though the step size used in actual measurements was
2.5nm. Both the monochromator and the data acquisition were computer controlled
allowing the automatic measurement of spectra.

3. Coincident Photon Counting

In the coincident photon counting technique, two photomultipliers are used to increase
the signal-to-noise ratio of the measurement. The arrangement is shown schematically
in ﬁgure 1. One of the photomultipliers, denoted the “total-event” tube, views the
scintillator sample directly, while the other, denoted the “monochromated” tube records
only photons that have passed through the monochromator. The signal from the
total-event photomultiplier is passed to a discriminator set to trigger at a typical β-
particle ﬂash, while the output from the monochromated photomultiplier is passed to
a discriminator set to detect single photons. The coincidence of the two discriminator
outputs is taken and the rate of coincidences is measured in real time.
In this way,
photons recorded by the monochromated tube are only counted if they are in coincidence
with a scintillation ﬂash recorded by the total-event photomultiplier. This eﬀectively
suppresses the single-photon noise of the monochromated photomultiplier.

The measurement of scintillation emission spectra

5

monochromator

scintillator sample

"total-event" 
photomultiplier

"monochromated"
photomultiplier

ratemeter

Figure 1. The experimental setup

The system was designed to study both liquid and plastic scintillator samples.
Liquid samples were contained in 10 × 10 × 55mm disposable acrylic cuvettes while
plastic samples were machined to similar dimensions. The samples were arranged so
that β-particles entered the scintillator from below through the base. The β-particles
had an end-point energy of 2.27MeV and were obtained from a 3.7MBq 90Sr source. This
source was held in a brass collimator consisting of a 50mm long 20mm diameter cylinder
with a central cavity. A 1mm diameter axial hole was drilled into this cavity in order to
provide a well-deﬁned β-particle beam with negligible exposure in other directions. The
sample was arranged so that the volume of scintillator immediately above the base was
aligned with the input slit of the monochromator. The base of the acrylic cuvettes was

Figure 2. Plan view of the arrangement of the sample and PTFE reﬂectors

1mm thick, so some absorption of β-particles in the wall could be expected. However, at
2.27MeV, the range in material of density 1.0 is about 10mm so the attenuation eﬀect
is negligible. Tests with cuvettes containing only water or pure mineral oil indicated
there was no problem with scintillation in the walls of the cuvette. Before liquids were
measured they were sparged with solvent-saturated nitrogen to remove dissolved oxygen.
The monochromator was an Applied Photophysics High Radiance Monochromator,
selected purely on the grounds of availability. Coupled to the output port of the
monochromator was an Electron Tubes 9829QA quartz windowed photomultiplier,
chosen to ensure that the spectral response of the measuring system extended into

b
The measurement of scintillation emission spectra

6

the ultraviolet.

A system of diﬀuse reﬂectors fabricated from PTFE (polytetraﬂuoroethylene)
ensured that, while as much light as possible entered the input port of the
monochromator, some of the light was directed to a second photomultiplier, the “total-
event” photomultiplier, here an Electron Tubes 9954KA. This arrangement can be seen
in plan view in ﬁgure 2. For clarity, the radioactive source and its collimator are not
shown; they are immediately below the sample cuvette.

The anode signals of the photomultipliers were both fed to discriminators. The
“total-event” tube had an Ortec 584 with the discriminator set to about 100 photo-
electrons while the “monochromated” tube had a Mechtronics 511 photon discriminator
set at about 0.3 times the single photon level. The outputs of the discriminators were
set to about 50ns width and fed to a LeCroy 466 coincidence unit. The coincidence
output was simply counted over 100 second periods with a Racal 9902 counter timer
and this rate gave a measure of the intensity of the scintillation light at the wavelength
selected by the monochromator.

With the resolution of the monochromator set at 5nm, and typical organic
scintillators observed at peak wavelength, the rate of coincidences was a few tens per
second. This meant that statistically signiﬁcant results could be obtained with count
periods of 100s per 5nm wavelength bin. A complete spectrum from 360nm to 540nm
would take a little over an hour to complete. The system described here was manually
controlled but it would be simple to automate the measurement by motor driving the
monochromator. It was also possible to improve the resolution at the expense of longer
counting times.

In order to determine the relative spectral response of the recording system, tests
were performed using light from a quartz-halogen lamp and a mercury vapour lamp.
The light from these was attenuated with a series of pinholes and fed through the
monochromator and onto the quartz window of the photomultiplier. For these tests, the
single-photon count rate was determined directly without a coincidence requirement. By
varying the monochromator over the range of interest and comparing the single-photon
rate with the known spectral emission of the sources, a set of correction curves for
the instrumental response of the monochromator and quartz window photomultiplier
were obtained.
individual emission lines
could be discerned, and this provided a check on the wavelength calibration of the
monochromator. One series of the correction measurements was performed with
a sample wall from one of the cuvettes inserted between the light source and the
monochromator to ensure that the corrections included wall losses.

In the case of the mercury vapour lamp,

With the photomultiplier used and with the organic scintillators being studied,
the correction factors were minor.
If the technique were used for materials emitting
further into the ultraviolet or into the green, where the response of the photomultiplier
is reduced, the accuracy with which the corrections were known would begin to dominate
the measurements.

Since it was clear at an early stage that the coincident photon counting technique

The measurement of scintillation emission spectra

7

provided excellent signal-to-noise ratio, no eﬀort was made to cool the photomultipliers.
Indeed, it is not obvious that any improvement to the measurements would be made by
such cooling.

4. Results

To show typical results from the system, spectra from two liquid scintillator samples,
XLS169A and XLS169C produced by Zinsser Analytic (UK) Ltd., are presented in
ﬁgure 3. Both materials are ternary scintillators using POPOP and bis-MSB. XLS169A

XLS169A

XLS169C

2000

1500

1000

500

s
d
n
o
c
e
s
 

0
0
1

 
r
e
p

 
t
n
u
o
c

0

350

400

450

wavelength / nm

500

550

Figure 3. Typical liquid scintillator spectra

is based on diisopropylnapthalene, whereas XLS169C is a mineral oil and naphthalene
mixture. It can be seen that while the two spectra are similar on the long wavelength
side, the XLS169C cuts oﬀ more sharply on the short wavelength side, presumably
because the mineral oil solvent has lower transparency in the near ultraviolet.

It is worth noting that the integral of each curve gives the total amount of light
emitted over all wavelengths and hence provides a comparative measure of eﬃciency
for the scintillator sample.
In the work of Kirov et al. [12], the corrections needed
for accurate calculation of the number of photons per unit wavelength are considered
and a detailed error analysis for estimating the scintillator eﬃciency from spectral
measurements is given.

5. Conclusions

The coincident photon counting technique is demonstrated as a simple method of
determining scintillator spectral response. It requires only low cost equipment typically
available in laboratories where scintillators are studied. The apparatus described uses

The measurement of scintillation emission spectra

8

a relatively low activity β-particle source and organic scintillator samples, but the
technique could easily be extended to use α or γ sources and modiﬁed for inorganic
or even cryogenic scintillators.

In the case of ternary organic scintillators, employing a solute and a wavelength
shifter, care must be taken that the light paths through scintillator are longer than the
extinction length of the wavelength shifter. If this is not the case, unshifted photons
will escape the volume and the measured spectrum will be inaccurate. For a typical
commercial plastic scintillator, Bicron BC400/NE-102, this has been measured [14]
as 120µm. With the geometry described above and materials with realistic levels of
wavelength shifter, no problems were encountered.

In the case of inorganic scintillators with long decay times and more than one decay
component, it might be possible to examine changes in spectral output as a function of
time by using a short coincidence gate and specifying a time delay from the total-event
discriminator.

The system could further be extended to examine the emission spectra of
wavelength shifter materials by using a radioactive source to excite a scintillator which
is arranged to illuminate one of the large faces of a rectangular slab of polished acrylic.
The wavelength shifter can either be doped into the acrylic or be deposited as a ﬁlm on
the large face. If light from the slab is coupled through one of the small edges into the
monochromator, it will be uncontaminated by the original scintillation light spectrum.
The coincident photon counting technique described may also be applied to the
measurement of the spectra of any other pulsed light emission such as Cherenkov light,
plasma or spark discharges.

This work was developed as part of a Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council
PIPSS scheme. We would like to thank the staﬀ of Zinsser Analytic (UK) for samples
and assistance with this work.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] J.B. Birks et al. A comparison of the scintillation and photoﬂuorescence spectra of organic

solutions. Brit. J. Appl. Phys., 15:399–404, 1964.

[2] E. Langenscheidt. Luminescence spectra of liquid organic scintillators. Nucl. Instr. and Meth.,

91:237–245, 1971.

London, 1971.

123:1071, 1956.

[3] I. Berlman. Handbook of ﬂuorescence spectra of aromatic molecules. Academic Press, NY and

[4] J.B. Birks. The theory and practice of scintillation counting. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1964.
[5] W. Van Sciver. Alkali halide scintillators. IRE Trans. Nucl. Sci., NS-3:39–50, 1956.
[6] D.G. Ott et al. Apparent inconsistencies in ﬂuorescence and scintillation spectra. Science,

[7] D. Clark. Intrinsic scintillation eﬃciency of plastic scintillator for 60Co gamma excitation. Nucl.

Instr. and Meth., 117:295–303, 1974.

The measurement of scintillation emission spectra

9

[8] D.L. Horrocks. Solute-solute transfer in solution excited with nanosecond pulses of 3MeV electrons.

Nucl. Instr. and Meth., 128:573–574, 1975.

[9] J.G. Pronko et al. Emission spectra characteristics and selective ﬁltering studies of organic

scintillators. Nucl. Instr. and Meth., 163:227–235, 1979.

[10] W.W. Moses et al. Scintillator characterization using the LBL pulsed X-ray facility. Rad. Meas.,

24(4):337–341, 1995.

[11] D.L. Horrocks. High resolution scintillation spectra obtained with nanosecond pulses of 3MeV

electrons. Photochemistry and Photobiology, 15:239–244, 1972.

[12] A.S. Kirov et al. Towards two dimensional brachytherapy dosimetry using plastic scintillator: New

highly eﬃcient water equivalent plastic scintillator. Med.Phys, 26:1515–1523, 1999.

[13] A.S. Kirov et al. New water equivalent liquid scintillation solutions for 3D dosimetry. Med.Phys,

27:1156–1164, 2000.

[14] A. Quaranta et al. Scintillation mechanism and eﬃciency of ternary scintillator thin ﬁlms. IEEE

Trans. Nucl. Sci., NS-49(5):2610–2615, 2002.

