6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
0
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

29th International Cosmic Ray Conference Pune (2005) 00, 101–106

The EEE Project

R. Antolini, R. Baldini Ferroli, M. Caporaloni, A. Chiavassa, L. Cifarelli, F. Cindolo,
E. Coccia, S. De Pasquale, M. Garbini, C. Gustavino, D. Hatzifotiadou, G. Imponente,
H. Menghetti, G. Piragino, G. Sartorelli, M. Selvi, C. Williams, A. Zichichi
Museo Storico della Fisica, Centro Studi e Ricerche “E. Fermi”, Roma, Italy
Universit`a di Bologna and INFN, Bologna, Italy
Universit`a di Torino and INFN, Torino,Italy
Universit`a di Salerno and INFN, Salerno, Italy
Universit`a di Catania and INFN, Catania, Italy
INFN-LNGS, Assergi (Aq), Italy
INFN-LNF, Frascati, Italy
Presenter: G. Sartorelli (gabriella.sartorelli@bo.infn.it), uki-imponente-G-abs1-he15-oral

The new experiment “Extreme Energy Events” (EEE) to detect extensive air showers through muon detection is
starting in Italy. The use of particle detectors based on Multigap Resistive Plate Chambers (MRPC) will allow
to determine with a very high accuracy the direction of the axis of cosmic ray showers initiated by primaries
of ultra-high energy, together with a high temporal resolution. The installation of many of such ’telescopes’
in numerous High Schools scattered all over the Italian territory will also allow to investigate coincidences
between multiple primaries producing distant showers. Here we present the experimental apparatus and its
tasks.

1.

Introduction

Since the ﬁrst evidence of the existence of the Cosmic Rays (CRs), dating back to Victor Hess in 1912, an
increasing interest grew, for the phenomenon of particles coming from the Space as well as for the detection
techniques devoted to measure the secondaries produced in the interaction with the upper atmosphere and
arriving down to the ground. The higher the energy of an incoming cosmic ray, the larger the area to be
covered in order to measure the induced Extensive Air Shower (EAS) generated so far. Given the peculiarities
of the CR ﬂux, the interest to take many data with various kind of detectors widely distributed, aims to conﬁrm
(or not) the indications of primaries violating the so-called GZK cut-off (see for example [1] for a review, and
references therein). A uniﬁed framework for explaining the spectrum behavior at energies above 1015 eV is
still missing, in particular for what regards the details of the slope changes as well as for the existence of a CRs
energy upper limit, or not.
The EEE Project is designed for being a very large array of particle detectors scattered over the whole Italian
territory and located inside High Schools buildings and INFN Sections and Laboratories. This set up has the
peculiar characteristic of having, once in operation, a double grid pace: a small one (given by the average
separation of Schools within the same city), order of hundreds meters, aimed to measure a single shower; a
larger one, order of tens or hundreds kilometers, in order to search for correlations between two (or more)
primaries. The detectors array inside the same city is sensible to EAS with an energy threshold ∼ 1018 eV.
Using the data coming from different cities it would be possible to search for the existence of a “shower
of primaries” formed outside the Earth’s atmosphere by means of different mechanisms, from astrophysical
[3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] to exotic ones (for review [2]).
The review presented in [10] gives a new estimate of the multiple primaries rate provided some years ago in
[4], keeping in mind the design and the perspectives of the present experiment.

2

A. Zichichi et al.

2. Detector design

The basic idea of the detector is that it has to be able to reconstruct the directions of the incoming muons
produced by the interaction of a primary with an air nucleus. The muons mainly proceed directly to the ground
without interacting, hence the detection of many of them allows a very accurate measure of the primary’s di-
rection. The detector used in this project is a telescope consisting of three Multigap Resistive Plate Chamber

Figure 1. (left) Scheme of the three MRPC detectors constituting the single telescope and (right) prototype of the MRPC
chamber and inner layers.

(MRPC) spaced of 1 m, one over the other as in as in Figure 1 (left). This kind of detector is robust, allows to
track the secondary muons of an EAS with an angular resolution less than 0.5o (see Figure 2 (left)), thanks to
a space resolution of the track impact point of the order of the centimeter, and time resolutoin of the order of
hundred of picoseconds.
The basic design of the MRPC consists of six gas gaps of 350 µm to enhance streamer-free operation inside
two resistive plates of glass sheets coated with a resistive paint. Two vetronite panels insulate the readout cop-
per strips from the anode and the cathode. The signal initiated by a charged particle transversing the detector
is formed on such strips and proceed to both ends: the time difference of the signals arriving at the two strip
ends gives the coordinate along the copper line. A honeycomb support and aluminum boxes complete the
mechanics. The two coordinates of the impact point of a muon are then measured in each chamber.
The gas ﬁlling mixture consists of 93% C2F4H2 and 7% SF6: the ﬁrst tests were performed with gas ﬂuxing.
Inside the Schools the chambers will operate with no gas ﬂuxing due to security reasons. The apparatus will
be tested to determine the gas reﬁlling duty cycle needed to mantain its very high efﬁciency (close to 100%)
for many weeks or months.

3. Performance of the telescope and reconstruction of axis direction

In each MRPC chamber of the telescope both the two impact coordinates and the crossing time of a muon are
measured. From the position of the three impact points (one per plane) it is possible to reconstruct the direction
of the crossing muon.
Taking into account the design of the MRPC telescope we performed Monte Carlo simulations in order to eval-
uate the detector geometrical acceptance. A sample of 107 muons, with incoming direction uniformly sampled

The EEE Project

3

on the upper hemisphere surrounding the detector, has been generated. The resulting overall geometrical ac-
ceptance, whose details are shown in Figure 2 (right), is 0.34 m2sr. The telescope acceptance can, of course,

Figure 2. (right) Geometrical acceptance of the telescope in bins of Φ and cos(θ). The total acceptance is 0.34 m2sr and
(left) difference between the generated and the reconstructed muon direction zenith angle.

be varied changing the distance between the MRPC planes so that for example, reducing the distance between
the three planes, it is possible to reconstruct muons at larger zenith angles.
Another simulation has been performed in order to evaluate the expected muon rate in one telescope, due to the
cosmic muons steady ﬂux. The inputs to the simulation are the known ﬂux and angular distribution of cosmic
muons at ground. With this procedure we ﬁnd that the expected muon rate per telescope is equal to 36 Hz.
That result has been conﬁrmed with a full Monte Carlo simulation of the primary ﬂux, the shower production
and propagation down to the sea level and the muon detection in the telescope.
We also studied the telescope capability to reconstruct the shower axis direction. Using the position and arrival
time of the shower front on the detectors at ground (at least three non aligned detectors are needed) 70% of the
reconstructed shower axes have an angular uncertainty smaller than 14o (Figure 3 (left)).
Thanks to the telescope excellent tracking capabilities it is possible to reconstruct the shower axis direction
using the reconstructed muons direction. As shown in Figure 3 (right) 70% of the reconstructed shower axes
have an angular uncertainty smaller than 2o. The accuracy increases with the number of muons hitting the
detectors even if this method can provide informations on shower axis direction even when less than three
telescopes are hit (which is otherwise impossible using arrival times).

4. Project plan

The EEE Project will last at least 10 years and has to cover the whole Italian territory as much as possible, in
order to obtain a grid over more than 300.000 km2. The actual plan is designed to follow the natural distribu-
tion of candidate Schools, characterized by a closer spacing within each city of order of hundreds meters and a
larger one between one city and the other, of order hundreds of kilometers. Where a INFN Section is present,
an additional telescope will be installed also there.
The ﬁnancing institutions in Italy are “Museo Storico della Fisica and Centro Studi e Ricerche Enrico Fermi”
in Rome, the MIUR - Ministero dell’Istruzione Universit`a e Ricerca and INFN - Istituto Nazionale di Fisica

4

A. Zichichi et al.

Figure 3. Angular resolution of the reconstruction of the shower axis direction (left) taking into account the arrival time
information and (right) the recosntructed muons. The shaded areas shows that 70% of the events are reconstructed with an
angular uncertainty smaller than 14

o (left) and 2

o (right).

Nucleare.
The present status of the apparatus consists of the full construction and testing of advanced prototypes of 21
MRPC performed in the CERN facilities. These ﬁrst telescopes will be installed in seven piloting Schools by
the end of the year 2005, while the construction of more detectors is ongoing and fastly proceeding.

References

[1] M.Nagano and A.A. Watson, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 689 (2000)
[2] P. Bhattacharjee and G.Sigl, Phys. Rep. 327, 110 (2000)
[3] D.J.Fegan, B. McBreen and C.O’sullivan, Phys.Rev.Lett 51, 2341 (1983)
[4] G.A. Medina-Tanco and A.A. Watson, Astropart. Phys. 10, 157 (1999)
[5] B. McBreen and C.J. Lambert, Phys. Rev. D 24, 2536 (1981)
[6] J.L.Puget, F.W. Stecker and J.H.Bredekamp, Astrophys. J. 205, 638 (1976)
[7] M.A. Malkan and F.W. Stecker, Astrophys. J. 496, 13 (1998)
[8] N.M. Gerasimova and G.T. Zatsepin, Sov Phys JETP 11, 899 (1960)
[9] F.W. Stecker and M.H. Salamon, Astrophys. Journ. 512, 521-526 (1999)

[10] G. Imponente and G. Sartorelli, these Proceedings.

