6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
4
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An Optimal Lookup Table Construction for
Charge Division with respect to Eﬃciency
Flatness.

February 2, 2008

P. Van Esch 1
F. Millier
Institut Laue Langevin
6, rue Jules Horowitz
BP 156
F-38042 Grenoble
France

Abstract

Static lookup tables as often used in the position calculation electronics
in position sensitive detectors suﬀer from the well known problem that
the propagation of digitization errors in the division leads to unequal
eﬃciencies for the diﬀerent output channels. In this paper we present a
solution to the construction of such a lookup table which is optimal in
the sense that the least possible eﬃciency errors are committed in the
class of monotone lookup tables. The obtained resolution is comparable
to what is obtained using the standard implementation of the ﬁxed point
division. After a theoretical explanation, we present some experimental
results conﬁrming our claim.

1 Introduction

Resistive charge division is a well-known technique for determining the position
of the impact of an ionizing particle along a resistive electrode read out by
charge ampliﬁers on both sides. If X is the charge measured at side A and Y
is the charge at side B, then the position can ideally be calculated from the
dimensionless number:

(1)

1Corresponding author

P =

X
X + Y

1

Optimal Lookup Table in Charge Division

2

Several electronic techniques exist to calculate the relative position P from the
electronic signals X and Y. Although analog treatment has been used in the past
with success, the progress in ADC converters and digital circuitry promotes an
all-digital solution. Moreover, the existence of large EPROM memories invites
the use of an extremely simple design, which is often used in correspondence
with position sensitive detectors: a lookup table which associates which each
couple (X, Y ) the position P . In practice, we’ve build a circuit with two 11-bit
inputs for X and Y and one 8-bit output for P .

2 Digitization Problem

Although the task of ﬁlling in the lookup table may seem simple (use the dig-
itized values of X and Y, and calculate P, rounded to 8-bit accuracy) it leads
to an unequal eﬃciency of each of the 256 channels due to digitization eﬀects.
Perfectly uniform irradiation would then lead to unequal intensities observed in
the diﬀerent channels. In the rest of this paper, we will refer to this assignment
as the ’standard position calculation’. The quantization eﬀect and the reasons
why they are sometimes a problem are well-described in [1]. In this paper we set
out to ﬁnd the best possible lookup table which reduces this eﬀect maximally,
without compromising the resolution.

The eﬀect can be explained as follows: a true value X will be represented by
its digitized counterpart Xd and a true value Y will be represented by Yd. So
a digital couple (Xd, Yd) represents a square in the (X, Y ) plane with center of
gravity (Xd + 1/2, Yd + 1/2). The standard way of assigning this point (and so
all couples in the square we’re considering) to a position bin is by calculating:

and after digitization:

P ′ =

Xd + 1/2
Xd + Yd + 1

Pd = [

Xd + 1/2
Xd + Yd + 1

2Nout]

(2)

(3)

Here, Nout is the number of bits in the output (for 256 position channels, it is
equal to 8). The problem arises because this assignment maps the whole square
of (X, Y ) values to the value Pd as determined by the exact position of its center,
and the distribution of these center points is not uniform over the 256 position
channels. The probability for a point (X, Y ) to be solicited depends on (X + Y )
through the pulse height spectrum of the incident radiation.

We make one fundamental hypothesis: we assume that the pulse height
spectrum of the captured radiation is independent of position. So we’re actually
considering an event distribution which factorizes in the variables E and P:

dσ = spec(E)image(P )dP dE

(4)

We know spec(E) (the pulse height spectrum, assumed independent of the po-
sition), and we want to ﬁnd out image(P ) from σ(E, P ). However, technically,

Optimal Lookup Table in Charge Division

we’re working in the variables X and Y, so we have:

dσ = ρ(X, Y )dXdY

So our task is to extract image(P ) from ρ(X, Y ). Working directly in the dig-
itized variables (but analytically continuing them...), we have the following co-
ordinate transformation:

3

(5)

(6)

E = X + Y + 1
X + 1/2
X + Y + 1

P =

The Jacobean of the transformation ∂(P, E)/∂(X, Y ) = 1/(X + Y + 1) = 1/E,
so we obtain:

image(P )

ρ(X, Y ) =

spec(E)
E
This suggests that points which are geometrically uniformly distributed in the
X, Y plane (as our digitized (Xd, Yd) couples are) have a weight equal to spec(E)/E
in the image. It would hence be logical that each bin of the image (each digi-
tized slice of the variable P) contains as much as possible an equal total weight
of spec(E)/E over each of the points (Xd, Yd) assigned to the bin in the lookup
table. Of course there is the constraint that the P’-value of each couple should
still be close to the nominal P-value of the chosen bin (otherwise the resolution
of our image will suﬀer seriously). We propose a method which satisﬁes both
requirements.

(7)

3 Proposed method

There are already several successful techniques that are proposed to tackle this
problem: [2] proposes to assign the (X,Y) point partly to diﬀerent P-bins ; [3]
extends the eﬀective word length over which the division is worked out.
[4]
partly uses a lookup table to invert (X+Y) and uses a processor to calculate
the ﬁnal position. However, all these techniques change the basic electronic
architecture and do not use a simple lookup table. [5] and [6] have written about
half-analog methods, using logarithmic ampliﬁers. [6] has moreover proposed a
more classical method of correcting the image oﬀ line with eﬃciency correction
coeﬃcients which can be calculated from the pulse height distribution. He points
out that this gives rise to increased statistical errors. [1] does give an improved
way of calculating a lookup table, but the method is sub-optimal, although
probably suﬃcient for many applications.

We set out to ﬁnd a mathematically optimal solution of constructing a lookup
table. An optimal solution can eventually be used as a benchmark to compare
to other techniques.

We ﬁrst create a list L of all possible pairs (Xd, Yd) of which there are, in
our case, 222 = 4194304. We deﬁne a function xy, that maps the set of integers
1..222

onto the set of couples

2 in lexical order:

0..211

1

{

}

{
−
xy(i) = (Xd, Yd)

}

(8)

Optimal Lookup Table in Charge Division

4

(9)

(12)

(13)

Next, ordering the couples according to their P’ value given in equation 2 comes
down to the deﬁnition of a permutation p of 222 elements, deﬁned as follows:

P ′(xy(p(i)))

P ′(xy(p(j)))

≤

i

j

⇔

≤

The list L′ of the pairs xy(p(i)) when i is running from 1 to 222 is the list of
position-ordered couples. We assign a (non normalized) weight to each element
in this list in the following way:

wi = spec(Xd + Yd + 1)/(Xd + Yd + 1)

(10)

with

(Xd, Yd) = xy(p(i))
(11)
Taking the normalized, cumulative sum in the order of the list L′, we ﬁnally
obtain:

The new mapping is now deﬁned as:

ri =

i
j=1 wj
222
j=1 wj

P

P

xy(j)

[256rp−1(j)]

7→

Here we used the inverse permutation p−1, to obtain a ﬁnal mapping in lexical
order, which is necessary to practically program the EPROM memory. In this
way, each of the bins has very close to the same summed weight of points in
it. We also respect the order of the value P ′ so that a couple with a higher
P ′ value can never be assigned to a lower bin than a couple with a lower P ′
value. Within the family of all possible lookup tables which respect the order of
P ′, the proposed method gives us the optimal solution concerning the ﬂatness of
the eﬃciency, by construction. Indeed, the construction here proposed makes
the eﬃciencies (the sum of the weights) equal, up to one single eﬀect, that is: in
the order of P ′, one has to decide whether a last point will still be attributed to
the lower bin (and in that case, the extra weight of this single point might give
us a total sum slightly above 1/2N ), or we might decide to attribute it to the
next bin so that the lower bin has a total sum slightly under 1/2N . Any lookup
table construction respecting the order of P ′ will have to make this decision and
hence at least this error, but in our case, it is the only error. Moreover, apart
from this decision on these pivotal points, the proposed lookup table is unique.
Hence any other lookup table will give worse eﬃciency errors. Although quite
computing intensive, resolving for the permutation of 4 million pairs of numbers
is now within reach of a modern personal computer and can be accomplished in
a matter of minutes.

Given that we have now the optimal solution concerning eﬃciency ﬂatness,
we will have to investigate what happened to the position resolution. It turns
out that the error in position thus committed is not much larger than the normal
quantization error of the standard method (which is optimal with respect to the
position resolution). This is understandable, because in the limit of very high

(14)

(15)

(16)

Optimal Lookup Table in Charge Division

5

binning in X and Y (for the same resolution in P), that is, in the continuum limit,
the diﬀerence between the standard method and our newly proposed technique
vanishes. Indeed, if we work in the real variables (X,Y), limited to the square
[0, 1]2, let us deﬁne digitized variables:

Xd =

; Yd =

; ǫ =

Y
ǫ (cid:21)

(cid:20)

1
2N

X
ǫ (cid:21)

(cid:20)

with N the very wide word length of the converters. The accumulated non
normalized weight in output channel n (one of the 256), using our new deﬁnition
of weight, but using the standard assignment, can be approximated very well
by an integral:

wi

Xi∈n

≃ Z0<E<Emax Zn−1<256P <n

spec(E)/E

dX
ǫ

dY
ǫ

wi

≃

1
256ǫ2 Z

Xi∈n

spec(E)dE

We now see that the standard assignment already makes the weights accumu-
lated in each position bin equal, so we would obtain exactly the same assignment
using our new technique (because the lookup table doing this is unique), what-
ever pulse height spectrum is used. It also means that if we can estimate the loss
in resolution (which will turn out to be insigniﬁcant) in a low-bit word example,
this will give us an upper limit on the resolution loss. We will study a Monte
Carlo example to have an idea of what happens.

4 Monte Carlo simulation.

In order to illustrate the problem and its proposed solution, we simulate the
behavior in the case of a low-bit example: we suppose that the incoming signals
X and Y are digitized on 6 bits, and that we calculate the position on 6 bits (64
positions). We take as a spectrum an inverted Raleigh distribution, leading to
the probability density function:

spec(E) = 0.00781(63

E)e−0.0039(63−E)

2

(17)

−
The precise choice of this distribution doesn’t really matter, it just grossly
looks like a true thermal neutron spectrum (using He-3 as a converter gas and
in the proportional region) and is mathematically well deﬁned. The proposed
”spectrum” is displayed in ﬁgure 1. We simulated 106 points with a uniform
position distribution and an energy distribution drawn from the above spectrum.
Introducing the digitization according to a 6 bit scale for X and Y, we observe,
using the standard position calculation, a severe digitization inﬂuence (with
spikes of the order of 25 %) on the uniformity of the response of the system, as
displayed in ﬁgure 2, full line.

Optimal Lookup Table in Charge Division

6

density

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

10

20

30

40

50

60

pulse height
channel

Figure 1: Artiﬁcial distribution that will serve as ’pulse height spectrum’

Using the newly proposed technique, we obtain the distribution of the cal-
culated position in ﬁgure 2, dashed line. The uniformity is clearly superior in
the this case. The price to pay is a very small decrease in resolution. Let us
investigate how severe it is. The quantization error in the case of the classical
calculation is of course close to a uniform distribution with a standard devi-
ation of 1/√12 = 0.28867. Using the Monte Carlo data, we ﬁnd a standard
deviation of 0.292. The standard deviation of the error using the new mapping
is measured to be 0.298 when using a uniform weight over all couples (X,Y).
The two distributions of the position errors are shown in ﬁgure 3. We hence
observe a relative loss in resolution of no more than about 2%. Essentially, the
resolutions can be said to be equivalent, because this tiny decrease in resolution
shouldn’t aﬀect the spatial resolution of the overall system, which shouldn’t be
determined by the number of output bins, but by physical processes and noise
limiting the intrinsic resolution of the detector.

If we quantify the non-uniformity by calculating the standard deviation of
the bin contents (using our sample of 1000000 events) we ﬁnd the residual
standard deviation before quantization is 133.3 counts (per cell) where we expect
125. Using the standard way of calculating positions, we have a non-uniformity
of 1686.7 counts, and this is reduced to 388.5 counts using the newly proposed
technique.

However, in order for this to hold it is important that the true spectrum in
the data matches closely the spectrum used in the design of the lookup table.
If we shrink the spectrum of the data by 5% (applying a factor 0.95 to the orig-
inal spectrum used to construct the table), the good uniformity of the position
histogram is partly gone. The standard technique gives us a non-uniformity
of 1902.3 counts while the new technique obtains 794.2 counts. A shrinking of
10% leads to a standard non-uniformity of 2236.3, while the proposed technique
obtains 1424.0 counts. Although still better, this indicates the need to match
closely the spectrum used in the composition of the table to the actual spec-

Optimal Lookup Table in Charge Division

7

counts

20000

18000

16000

14000

standard

new

10

20

30

40

50

60

channel

Figure 2: Result of the standard and new assignment of events to position
channels.

standard

new

number of events

250

200

150

100

50

-1

-0.5

0.5

position
error

1

Figure 3: Distribution of position errors for the standard technique and the new
technique.

Optimal Lookup Table in Charge Division

8

normalized
intensity

0.002

0.0015

0.001

0.0005

2000V

1950V

500

1000

1500

2000

channel
number

Figure 4: Normalized Pulse height spectrum of the detector at 2000V and at
1950 V.

trum that will be used in order to take the full advantage of the method. For
proportional counters used in thermal neutron detection, this is a reasonable
requirement as the spectrum is very stable (and also rather broad). On the
other hand, given the very small word lengths in this example, this simulation
is a particularly severe test for our method and in practice the sensitivity to a
change in spectrum is smaller, as will be shown in the next part.

5 Experimental veriﬁcation

Using an Am-Be thermal neutron source, a 40 cm long position-sensitive He-3
neutron detector available from Reuter-Stokes of the type RS-P4-0814-2, and
two 3V/pC ampliﬁers with an overall gaussian shaping time of 1.4 microseconds,
we bias the detector at 2000V. This uses almost the full dynamics available (2048
channels for 5 V) without saturation as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.

In order to have very high statistics in a reasonable amount of time, we put
the source very close to the detector; we will have no uniform illumination, but
the smooth bell form image will indicate local ﬂuctuations in counting eﬃciency
also clearly. Using the standard algorithm and the new technique, we obtain
diﬀerent images as displayed in ﬁgure 5 with the dash-dotted and the full curve,
respectively.

The digitization glitches are clearly visible in the ﬁrst one and buried in
the statistical noise in the second.
(Note that the position of the source is
slightly diﬀerent, as it was a manual positioning in between experiments). Let
us now look at the sensitivity of the spectrum: we change the voltage from
2000 V to 1950 V and use the same lookup table (constructed for use with
the 2000 V spectrum). Notice that the applied spectrum (see ﬁgure 4, dotted
curve) now has changed by almost 30%. When looking at the resulting image in

Optimal Lookup Table in Charge Division

9

counts

50000

40000

30000

20000

10000

new 2000V

new 1950V

standard

50

100

150

200

250

position
channel

Figure 5: Images obtained with the standard method and with the new method
using the spectrum at 2000 V. The full curve shows the new image at 2000V,
and the dashed curve shows the new image at 1950 V. The dash-dotted curve
gives us the image using the standard method (the number of counts has been
divided by 20 for this last image in order to ﬁt on the ﬁgure). Because of the
diﬀerent manual positioning of the neutron source, the standard and new images
do not coincide perfectly.

ﬁgure 5 (dotted curve), we notice that a small digitization error appears around
channel 128, but it is still much smaller than if we would have used the standard
algorithm.

We have hence experimentally illustrated that the glitches in eﬃciency dis-
appear when applying our new technique. We’ve also demonstrated a certain
robustness against diﬀerences between the pulse height spectrum used to con-
struct the lookup table, and the pulse height spectrum of the detector using the
lookup table.

References

[1] H. Geesmann et al. Nucl. Instr. Meth. A307 (1991) 413

[2] Takahashi et al. Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 373 (1996) 119

[3] Koike et al. Nucl. Instr. Meth. A272 (1988) 840

[4] Berliner et al. Nucl. Instr. Meth. 184 (1981) 477

[5] C. Mori et al. Nucl. Instr. Meth. 299 (1990) 128

[6] A. Uritani et al. Nucl. Instr. Meth. 353 (1994) 246

