6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Data Acquisition in the EUDET Project

J. Mnicha and M. Wingb
a Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Notkestr. 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany
b Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT,
UK

Abstract. The goal of the EUDET project is the development and construction of infrastructure
to permit detector R&D for the International Linear Collider (ILC) with larger scale prototypes. It
encompasses major detector components: the vertex detector, the tracker and the calorimeters. We
describe here the status and plans of the project with emphasis on issues related to data acquisition
for future test beam experiments.

PACS Nos 2.0

1. Introduction

EUDET [1] is a project supported by the European Union in the Sixth Framework Pro-
gramme structuring the European Research Area [2]. The project is an Integrated In-
frastructure Initiative (I3) which aims to create a coordinated European effort towards re-
search and development for ILC detectors. The emphasis of the project is the creation
and improvement of infrastructures to enable R&D on detector technologies with larger
prototypes. After establishing several new technologies to match the required ILC detec-
tor performances, the construction of and experimentation with larger scale prototypes to
demonstrate the feasibility of these detector concepts is the next important step towards
the design of an ILC detector. Such larger detectors generally require cooperation between
several institutes and EUDET is intended to provide a framework for European and also
Global collaboration.

The project comprises 31 European partner institutes from 12 different countries work-
ing in the ﬁeld of High Energy Physics. In addition, 23 associated institutes will contribute
to and exploit the EUDET research infrastructures. The project started in January 2006
and will run for four years providing additional funding of 7 MEuros from the European
Union. In addition signiﬁcant resources are committed by the participating institutes.

EUDET contributes to the development of larger prototypes of all detector compo-
nents for which major R&D efforts are ongoing: vertex and tracking detectors as well
as calorimeters. The project is organised in three Joint Research Activities: test beam in-
frastructure, infrastructure for tracking detectors and infrastructure for calorimeters, which
are subdivided into several tasks addressing different detector types and technologies. The
project is complemented by networking activities, the tasks of which include support for
information exchange and common analysis tools as well as a transnational access scheme
through which the use of the DESY test beam and, at a later stage, the exploitation of the
infrastructures by European research groups is subsidised.

1

J. Mnich and M. Wing

With the increasing size and complexity of detector prototypes data acquisition issues
become more and more important. For some of the EUDET infrastructures the develop-
ment of a DAQ system is part of the project and ﬁrst conceptual ideas have been developed.
Even though it is certainly to early to design the ﬁnal DAQ system it is instrumental to ex-
change ideas, homogenise concepts across sub-detector boundaries and thus prepare the
ground for an integrated concept for the ILC detector. In EUDET a coherent DAQ ap-
proach is discussed for the large prototypes involved to facilitate combined test beam ex-
periments. Even though it was not part of the original project, discussions have started to
evaluate the feasibility in light of the very different demands of the detectors. It should also
be noted that efforts on coherent DAQ schemes are very welcome to advance the concept
of the Global Detector Network [3].

2. The Joint Research Activities

2.1 Test Beam Infrastructure

This activity aims at improving the current test beam installation with a large bore mag-
net of up to about 1 Tesla and a low mass coil. The magnet, called PCMAG, is provided
by KEK, one of the associated institutes. In addition a high resolution beam telescope
made of pixel detectors using Monolithic Active Pixel Sensors (MAPS) is under develop-
ment [4]. Initially both devices will be constructed and used at the DESY test beam facility
but they are transportable, as all EUDET infrastructures, and could be used later at other
laboratories.

Figure 1. Design of the DAQ system for the high resolution pixel telescope.

An important part of this project is the development of a DAQ system for the pixel
telescope. Fig. 1 shows a ﬁrst design of it. This task includes the design of front-end

2

Data Acquisition in the EUDET Project

electronics and data reduction boards. It will be complemented by a special trigger logic
unit. Some parts of the design, like the connection to the readout computers, are not yet
decided. A ﬁrst demonstrator set-up of the telescope is scheduled to become operational
by mid 2007 and the full telescope by the end of 2008.

2.2 Infrastructure for Tracking Detectors

Both options for the ILC central tracking detector, a high resolution TPC and a large low-
mass tracker consisting of silicon strip detectors, are addressed in this activity. The TPC
activity centres around the development and construction of a large ﬁeld cage, to be used
inside PCMAG to test various options of micro pattern gas detectors which are under study
for the gas ampliﬁcation at the end-plates. For the silicon tracking option studies will
concentrate on the design of a large and light mechanical structure, the cooling aspects as
well as on front-end electronics development.

Together with the TPC ﬁeld cage a general purpose readout system to be used with
different end-plate technologies will be provided. The design of this readout is based on
existing technologies, namely the ALTRO chip developed for the ALICE experiment [5],
which can provide the required high number of channels at low cost. It has also the po-
tential to be further developed and tailored to the requirements of the ILC TPC using new
high integration technologies as they become available. The TPC readout system will be
complemented by an adequate DAQ system. This infrastructure is schedule to be ready for
ﬁrst test beam measurements beginning of 2008.

2.3 Infrastructure for Calorimeters

This part of EUDET comprises the construction of a fully equipped module of the electro-
magnetic calorimeter, a versatile stack for testing technologies for the hadron calorimeter
as well as calibration and sensor test devices for the forward calorimeter. The development
of front-end electronics and a DAQ system for the calorimeters also belong to the project.

Figure 2. Off-detector receiver design for calorimeters.

A conceptual design of the a DAQ system to be used with the electromagnetic and
hadron calorimeters exists. It is ﬂexible and can be adapted to different options of the
readout electronics. Commercial products are used to ensure the system is inexpensive,
scalable and maintainable. Fig. 2 shows the concept of the off-detector receiver card.

3

J. Mnich and M. Wing

These cards will be mounted directly on PCI buses of the DAQ computers. This concept
is expected to provide a high-speed generic DAQ card available in 2009 for test beam
experiments.

3. Conclusions

Within the EUDET project, infrastructures for coming ILC detector R&D with larger pro-
totypes will be developed and constructed in the next years. DAQ systems for the calorime-
ters, vertex and tracking detectors are part of the project, which will permit detailed test
beam experiments in a few years. Efforts have started to investigate if the concepts for
these DAQ systems can be homogenised despite the partially diverging requirements on
the R&D issues to be addressed by the different detectors. Obviously, any modiﬁcation
and enlargement of the DAQ systems planned has to be accommodated within the time
frame and the resources of EUDET. The advantages and possible beneﬁts are, however,
numerous ranging from combined test beam experiments to the valuable experience to be
gained for the ILC detector.

This work is supported by the Commission of the European Communities under the 6th
Framework Programme ’Structuring the European Research Area’, contract number RII3-
026126.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] More information about the project can be found at the URL http://www.eudet.org
[2] More information on the framework programmes of the European Union can be found at the

[3] J. Mnich, Introduction to the Global Detector Network, Proceedings of LCWS05, Stanford,

URL http:/cordis.europa.eu/

March 2005.

[4] T. Haas, ”A Pixel Telescope for Detector R&D for an International Linear Collider”, Proc. Conf.

Vertex 2005, Chujenzi Lake Japan, to be publ. Nucl. Inst. A

[5] L. Musa et al., “Front End Electronics for the ALICE-TPC Detector”, Proc. of the 4th Workshop
on Electronics for LHC Experiments, Rome, Sept. 21-25, 1998; R. Esteve-Bosch et al., ”The
ALTRO Chip : A 16-channel A/D Converter and Digital Processor for Gas Detectors”, Open
Access article - Published in: IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 50 (2003) 2460-69.

4

