6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Energy Linearity and Resolution of the
ATLAS Electromagnetic Barrel Calorimeter
in an Electron Test-Beam

M. Aharrouche a, J. Colas a, L. Di Ciaccio a, M. El Kacimi a,2,
O. Gaumer a, M. Gouan`ere a, D. Goujdami a,2, R. Lafaye a,
S. Laplace a, C. Le Maner a, L. Neukermans a, P. Perrodo a,
L. Poggioli a, D. Prieur a, H. Przysiezniak a, G. Sauvage a,
F. Tarrade a, I. Wingerter-Seez a, R. Zitoun a, F. Lanni b,
H. Ma b, S. Rajagopalan b, S. Rescia b, H. Takai b,
A. Belymam c, D. Benchekroun c, M. Hakimi c, A. Hoummada c,
E. Barberio d,1, Y.S. Gao d, L. Lu d, R. Stroynowski d,
M. Aleksa e, J. Beck Hansen e,3, T. Carli e,4, I. Efthymiopoulos e,
P. Fassnacht e, F. Follin e, F. Gianotti e, L. Hervas e, W. Lampl e,
J. Collot f, J.Y. Hostachy f, F. Ledroit-Guillon f, P. Martin f,
F. Ohlsson-Malek f, S. Saboumazrag f, M. Leltchouk g,
J.A. Parsons g, M. Seman g, S. Simion g, D. Banﬁ h
L. Carminati h, D. Cavalli h, G. Costa h, M. Delmastro h,
M. Fanti h, L. Mandelli h, M. Mazzanti h, G. F. Tartarelli h,
C. Bourdarios i, L. Fayard i, D. Fournier i, G. Graziani i,
S. Hassani i, L. Iconomidou-Fayard i, M. Kado i, M. Lechowski i,
M. Lelas i, G. Parrour i, P. Puzo i, D. Rousseau i, R. Sacco i,5,
L. Serin i, G. Unal i, D. Zerwas i, A. Camard j, D. Lacour j,
B. Laforge j, I. Nikolic-Audit j, Ph. Schwemling j, H. Ghazlane k,
R. Cherkaoui El Moursli ℓ, A. Idrissi Fakhr-Eddine ℓ,
M. Boonekamp m, N. Kerschen m, B. Mansouli´e m, P. Meyer m,
J. Schwindling m, B. Lund-Jensen n, Y. Tayalati n

aLaboratoire de Physique de Particules (LAPP), IN2P3-CNRS,
F-74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France.
bBrookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), Upton, NY 11973-5000, USA.
cFacult´e des Sciences A¨ın Chock, Casablanca, Morocco.
dSouthern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas 75275-0175, USA.
eEuropean Laboratory for Particle Physics (CERN), CH-1211 Geneva 23,

2 February 2008

Switzerland.
f Laboratoire de Physique Subatomique et de Cosmologie, Universit´e Joseph
Fourier, IN2P3-CNRS, F-38026 Grenoble, France.
gNevis Laboratories, Columbia University, Irvington, NY 10533, USA.
hDipartimento di Fisica dell’Universit`a di Milano and INFN, I-20133 Milano,
Italy.
iLaboratoire de l’Acc´el´erateur Lin´eaire, Universit´e de Paris-Sud, IN2P3-CNRS,
F-91898 Orsay Cedex, France.
jUniversit´es Paris VI et VII, Laboratoire de Physique Nucl´eaire et de Hautes
Energies, F-75252 Paris, France.
kFacult´e des Sciences and Centre National de l’ ´Energie des Sciences et des
Techniques Nucl´eaires, Rabat, Morocco.
ℓUniversit´e Mohamed V, Facult´e des Sciences, Rabat, Morocco.
mCEA, DAPNIA/Service de Physique des Particules, CE-Saclay,
F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France.
nRoyal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.

Abstract

A module of the ATLAS electromagnetic barrel liquid argon calorimeter was ex-
posed to the CERN electron test-beam at the H8 beam line upgraded for precision
momentum measurement. The available energies of the electron beam ranged from
10 to 245 GeV. The electron beam impinged at one point corresponding to a pseudo-
rapidity of η = 0.687 and an azimuthal angle of φ = 0.28 in the ATLAS coordinate
system. A detailed study of several eﬀects biasing the electron energy measurement
allowed an energy reconstruction procedure to be developed that ensures a good lin-
earity and a good resolution. Use is made of detailed Monte Carlo simulations based
on GEANT4 which describe the longitudinal and transverse shower proﬁles as well
as the energy distributions. For electron energies between 15 GeV and 180 GeV the
deviation of the measured incident electron energy over the beam energy is within
0.1%. The systematic uncertainty of the measurement is about 0.1% at low energies
√E
and negligible at high energies. The energy resolution is found to be about 10%
·
for the sampling term and about 0.2% for the local constant term.

Key words: Calorimeters, particle physics

1 Now at university of Melbourne, Australia.
2 Visitor from LPHEA, FSSM-Marrakech (Morroco).
3 Now at Niels Bohr Institute, Copenhagen.
4 E-mail: Tancredi.Carli@cern.ch.
5 Now at Queen Mary, University of London.

2

Introduction

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC), currently under construction at CERN,
will collide protons on protons with a beam energy of 7 TeV, extending the
available centre-of-mass energy by about an order of magnitude over that of
existing colliders. Together with its high collision rate, corresponding to an
−1/year, these energies allow for
expected integrated luminosity of 10
−
production of particles with high masses or high transverse momenta or other
processes with low production cross-sections. The LHC will search for eﬀects
of new interactions at very short distances and for new particles beyond the
Standard Model of particle physics (SM). The large particle production rates
at LHC are not only a challenge to our theoretical understanding of proton
proton collisions at such high energies, but also for the detectors.

100 fb

An excellent knowledge of the electron or photon energy is needed for precision
measurements of, for example couplings within and beyond the SM, or to
resolve possible narrow resonances of new particles over a large background.
A good energy resolution and a good linearity need to be achieved for energies
ranging from a few GeV up to a few TeV.

A prominent example is the possible discovery of the Higgs boson which in the
SM provides an explanation how the elementary particles acquire mass. If the
Higgs boson mass is below 130 GeV, the decay H
γγ is the most promising
discovery channel. If the Higgs mass is larger and, in particular if it is at least
twice the mass of the Z 0-boson 2 MZ ∼
180 GeV, the Higgs boson can be
e+e−e+e− decay channel. Even in this case
discovered in the H
→
the energy of one of the electrons can be as low as about 10 GeV. The possible
observation of the Higgs boson requires therefore excellent measurements of
electrons and photons from low to high energies.

Z 0Z 0

→

→

→

→

Z 0X

The absolute energy measurement can be calibrated on reference reactions as
e+e−X, exploiting the precise knowledge of the mass of the
pp
Z 0-boson. However, a good energy resolution and a good linearity can only
be achieved, if the detector, the physics processes in the detector, and eﬀects
of the read-out electronics are well understood. In particular, knowledge of
the detector linearity determines how precisely an energy measurement at one
particular energy can be transfered to any energy. For instance, to measure
the mass of the W ±-boson with a precision of 15 MeV a linearity of about
10−4 is required in an energy interval which is given by the diﬀerence of the
transverse energy spectrum of an electron from the W ±-boson decay and that
of the Z 0-boson [1].

The electromagnetic (EM) barrel liquid argon (LAr) calorimeter is the main
detector to measure the electron energy in the central part of the ATLAS

3

detector. It is a sampling calorimeter with accordion shaped lead absorbers
and LAr as active medium.

In August 2002 a production module of the ATLAS LAr EM barrel calorimeter
was exposed to an electron beam in the energy range of 10 to 245 GeV at the
CERN H8 beam line, which was upgraded with a system to precisely measure
the beam energy. These data are used to assess the linearity of the electron
energy measurement and the energy resolution. A calibration scheme is devel-
oped which ensures simultaneously a good linearity and a good resolution.

In the past the linearity of the ATLAS EM calorimeter has been studied with
a calorimeter prototype [2]. For electron energies between 20 - 300 GeV a
linearity within 1% has been measured.

In section 1 the system to measure the linearity of the beam energy is pre-
sented and its accuracy is discussed. Section 2 describes the ATLAS EM bar-
rel calorimeter, the H8 test-beam set-up, the data samples, and the event
selection. The Monte Carlo simulation is out-lined in section 3. Section 4
summarises the calibration of the electronic signal, converting the measured
current to a visible energy, i.e., the energy deposited in the active medium.
Section 5 discusses general eﬀects related to the physics of EM showers that
need to be taken into account to precisely reconstruct the electron energy.
Section 6 presents the calibration procedure to precisely reconstruct the total
electron energy. Comparison of the visible energies and the total reconstructed
energy in the data and in the Monte Carlo simulation are shown in section 7.
The possible pion contamination in the electron beam is discussed in sec-
tion 8. The results of the energy measurement together with their systematic
uncertainties are presented in section 9.

1 Precise Determination of the Relative Electron Beam Energy

1.1 The H8 Beam-line

The H8 beam line is sketched in Fig. 1. The electron momentum deﬁnition is
based on the second momentum analysis using two triplets of bending magnets
B3 and B4, between collimator C3 acting as a source, and collimator C9 acting
as a momentum slit, while the upstream part was set at 180 GeV. A thin
sheet of lead was introduced upstream of C3 to increase the electron yield.
The magnets were set in direct current (DC) mode and the induced current
was read-out with a Direct Current Current Transformer (DCCT).

To control the induced current in the spectrometer with a single precision

4

DCCT, only the B3 magnets, connected in series, were used. This limited
the maximum momentum to 180 GeV for a current of about 1200 A. The B4
magnets were degaussed, following a bipolar loop and kept unpowered. The
m.
remaining bending power
Each bending magnet has an eﬀective length of 5.2 m and a ﬁeld of 1.42 T/kA
(linear part).

Bdl was zero with an uncertainty of

1.5 mT

±

R

·

To eliminate any uncertainty coming from the geometry of the spectrometer,
the jaw positions of both C3 and C9 were kept ﬁxed during the entire data
taking period. A slit of 8 mm was chosen for C3 as a compromise between the
beam intensity and the momentum spread. The slit of C9 was kept at 8 mm.
0.15 % at all energies. With the geom-
The induced momentum spread was
±
etry of the spectrometer ﬁxed (its total deviation is 41 mrad) the momentum
Bdl of the
of selected electrons is directly proportional to the bending power
B3 triplet. A correction of half the energy lost by synchrotron radiation in the
spectrometer was applied to particles at the detector, downstream of C9.

R

The eﬀect of the earth’s ﬁeld along the beam line was also evaluated. Taking
into account the focusing eﬀect of the quadrupoles with the beam transport
program TURTLE[20], the net eﬀect found was a shift of +4 MeV for negative
particles.

Target

B1 B2

B2

B1

B1 B2

T4

C6

C3

B3 B4

B4

B3

B3 B4

C9

Fig. 1. Sketch of the H8 beam line showing the momentum deﬁnition elements. The
magnets labeled B4 were degaussed during the data taking period.

1.2 Control of the Beam Energy Linearity

Two main sources of uncertainties on the power of the bending magnets had
to be controlled:

(1) The value of the current in the magnet string:

The precision supply and the DCCT read-out ensured a relative precision
and reproducibility of 1

10−4 [3,4,5,6].

·

5

(2) The calibration and reproducibility of the hysteresis curve:

At the maximum current of 1200 A, the integral bending power is about
2% below the linear extrapolation from low currents (see Fig. 2). This
needed to be calibrated and the non-linearity controlled to about one
percent.

A reference magnet (MBN25) was calibrated using a precision power supply
and the DCCT, and a two wire loop to measure its bending power. The mag-
netic ﬁeld at the centre was also measured with a relative precision better
10−5 using a set of NMR probes [3,4] Results are shown in Fig. 2.
than 1
The measurements can be ﬁtted with a polynomial function. The residuals
are smaller than 10−4.

·

To transport this calibration to the B3 triplet, calibration curves measured
during the time of production of about 100 MBN magnets were used to com-
pare the reference magnet and the magnets of the B3 triplet. While all magnets
10−4 [7,8], a
had been trimmed during production to be identical within
10−4 at the highest current) between the reference
small diﬀerence (at most 3
magnet and the B3 triplet had to be corrected.

2
±

·

·

To ensure reproducibility of the ﬁeld for a given current, the same unipolar
setting loop was always used, both in the bench test and during setting up
with the beam. With this procedure, the uncertainty on the bending power is
1 mT

m at all energies.

·

In order to have a further cross-check of the actual ﬁeld in the B3 triplet during
electron data taking, one of the magnets of the triplet was instrumented with
two sets of Hall probes, to be read-out during each burst. They were positioned
at 1.0 m and 1.5 m inside the magnet, within a few mm from the vacuum pipe.
The Hall probes data include Hall voltages for three orthogonal directions, and
10−4/oC for the magnetic ﬁeld
the temperature. A correction of about
as measured with the Hall probes was applied. By running the Hall probes
positioned in the reference magnet at the same location as in the B3 magnets,
a cross calibration with respect to the current in the DCCT, the magnetic
ﬁeld at centre, and the bending power was obtained.

3
−

·

A critical test of the cross calibration of the two ﬁeld measurements in B3
is a comparison of the magnetic ﬁeld at the magnet centre calculated from
the DCCT current and from the Hall probe signals. Fig. 3 shows an excellent
agreement up to 400 A and a small systematic inhomogeneity (0.15%) at
the maximum current. This diﬀerence is attributed to a slight diﬀerence of
the ﬁeld at the Hall probe location, which is not taken into account by the
comparative calibration. A linear interpolation of the diﬀerences leaves an
10−4 which indicates the level of uncertainty on the
average dispersion of 2
linearity induced by taking one measurement or the other.

·

6

1.3 Results and Uncertainties

For the ﬁnal comparison of the beam energy with the electron energy recon-
structed in the calorimeter, the bending power calculated from the DCCT
current was used. For each run the DCCT currents read-out at each burst
were averaged. The currents were stable within 0.01 A.

The resultant beam energy determinations are summarised in Tab. 1. The syn-
chrotron radiation correction includes small additional losses in the correction
magnets (B5 and B6) downstream of C9.

Since this work does not aim at a precise absolute calibration 6 , the electron
beam energy was arbitrarily normalised at 100 GeV. The maximum induced
uncertainty on the synchrotron radiation loss is 15 MeV at 180 GeV. The
magnet correction corresponds to the diﬀerence between MBN25 and the three
magnets of the B3 string.

m
The largest uncertainty is associated to the remnant ﬁeld in B3 (
randomly on each energy point). The resulting uncertainty on the linearity
measurement estimated with a simple Monte Carlo simulation where a per-
fect linearity is assumed and the beam momenta ﬂuctuate according to their
10−4. A further systematic uncertainty of 11 MeV due to
uncertainties is 3
the remnant ﬁelds in the B4 magnets must be added. This last uncertainty is
common to all data points.

1 mT

±

·

·

2 Test-Beam Set-up and Event Selection

2.1 Test-Beam Set-up

The H8 test-beam set-up is shown in Fig. 4. The EM barrel calorimeter is
located in a cryostat ﬁlled with liquid argon (LAr). The cryostat consists of
an inner and an outer aluminum wall with thicknesses of 4.1 cm and 3.9 cm,
respectively. The two walls are separated by a vacuum gap. Between the cryo-
stat and the calorimeter module a foam block (ROHACELL) is installed to
exclude LAr in front of the calorimeter.

The cryostat is mounted on a table that allows rotation of the calorimeter in
the two directions orthogonal to the beam axis. The two directions are chosen
to be the η and φ directions with respect to a reference frame with cylindrical
coordinates having its origin in the virtual proton-proton interaction point

6 The absolute beam energy is known to about 1%.

7

t
i
f
_
r
a
e
n

i
l
/
l

d
B

 
t
n

I

1

0.99

0.98

0.97

0.96

0.95

0.94

b)

10

)

m
T
(
 
l

 

d
B

 
t
n

I

8

6

4

2

0

a)

)
T
m

 

(
 
)
l
l
a
H
(
0
B
−
 
)
T
C
C
D
(
0
B

2

0

−2

−4

0

500

1000

0

500

1000

current (A)

current (A)

Fig. 2. a) Calibration measurements of the magnetic ﬁeld integrated over the beam
path as a function of the induced current. The adjusted parameterisation is super-
imposed as line. b) Deviation from linearity, i.e., measured ﬁeld values divided by
a linear parameterisation obtained from the points below I < 500 A as a function
of the induced current.

200

400

600

800

1000

current (A)

Fig. 3. Diﬀerence between the values of the magnetic ﬁeld at the magnet centre,
predicted by the calibration obtained from the current measurements and the mag-
netic ﬁeld measurements with the Hall probe as a function of the current. The error
bars represent the root mean square of the distribution.

in ATLAS (see Fig. 4). In this coordinate system the z-axis is deﬁned along
the beam axis. The φ and θ angles are the azimuthal and polar angles. The
pseudo-rapidity is deﬁned by η =

log tan θ/2.

In front of the cryostat four multi-wire proportional chambers (BC1, BC2,
BC3, BC4) measured the position of the beam particles. Three scintillator

−

8

events

nom. E

current

Bdl magnet

syn. rad. corr.

E

[ GeV ]

[A]

corr.

[ GeV ]

[ GeV ]

R
[T

m]

·
1.3664

62.315

0.99975

93.133

2.0379

0.99975

124.363

2.7184

0.99975

155.513

3.3980

0.99975

186.689

4.0789

0.99975

217.900

4.7607

0.99975

248.973

5.4397

0.99975

280.075

6.1201

0.99975

373.484

8.1596

0.99975

435.705

9.5187

0.99975

497.673

10.8715

0.99976

559.524

12.2208

0.99976

621.128

13.5634

0.99976

744.113

16.2383

0.99980

926.708

20.1866

0.99995

1115.230

24.1095

1.00011

6703

2727

6463

6746

8403

7842

8791

8314

9465

9507

9829

9973

10.

15.

20.

25.

30.

35.

40.

45.

50.

60.

70.

80.

90.

22685

9585

9367

4960

100.

120.

150.

180.

18366

311.270

6.8005

0.99975

0.0000

0.0000

0.0001

0.0003

0.0006

0.0012

0.0020

0.0032

0.0049

0.0102

0.0189

0.0322

0.0515

0.0781

0.1605

0.3806

0.7698

10.092

0.013

15.041

0.009

20.061

0.010

25.074

0.011

30.098

0.012

35.128

0.013

40.137

0.014

45.148

0.014

50.174

0.017

60.197

0.020

70.216

0.022

80.184

0.025

90.120

0.028

±

±

±

±

±

±

±

±

±

±

±

±

±

100.000

0.033

119.658

0.037

148.594

0.046

177.182

0.056

±

±

±

±

Table 1
Summary of the used data sets. Number of the selected electron events, nominal
beam energy, induced current in the magnetic ﬁeld, magnet bending power, cor-
rections for magnets and synchrotron radiation and the measured beam energy.
The overall beam momentum scale is normalised to 100 GeV. At E = 245 GeV no
precision energy measurement is possible with the used magnet set-up.

counters (S1,S3,S4) located in between the wire chambers were used as event
trigger. The last two (S3 and S4) each with a size of 4x4 cm were used to
deﬁne the beam acceptance and to reject events with more than one charged
track. Since in the test-beam particles hit the calorimeter at random times
with respect to the 40 MHz clock used by the front-end electronics, the time
between a trigger and the next clock cycle was measured with a Time Digital
Converter (TDC) with a 50 ps/TDC-count sensitivity.

Behind the calorimeter and after about 13X0 of material (including cryostat
and a 5 cm lead plate) a scintillator was installed to reject pions (pion counter).

9

Another scintillator was installed after an iron block of 5 interaction lengths
to reject muons. For most of the runs both scintillators have been used on-line
to reject muons and pions.

S1

S3

S4

BC1

BC2

BC3

BC4

Virtual ATLAS IP

c

r

y

o

s
t
a
t

r
e
t
n
u
o
c
 
n
o
i
P

r
e
t
n
u
o
c
 
n
o
u
M

η = 0,6

~10 X   lead
 0 

5 λ  iron
I

Fig. 4. Schematic top view of the test-beam set-up.

2.2 The ATLAS Electromagnetic Barrel Calorimeter

The details of the ATLAS LAr barrel calorimeter are described elsewhere [2,9].
A module is made out of accordion shaped lead absorbers glued between two
0.2 mm thick stainless steel sheets placed into a cryostat containing LAr. The
read-out electrodes are interleaved between two absorbers. At η = 0.687, the
lead of the absorbers have a thickness of 1.53 mm and the gap size is about
2.1 mm on each side of the electrode.

The module is longitudinally segmented into three compartments, each having
a diﬀerent transverse segmentation. At η = 0.687, the front, middle and back
compartments have thicknesses of 4.6 X0, 17.6X0 and 5.0X0, respectively. The
front compartment is ﬁnely segmented in η strips with a granularity of 0.025/8
η-units, but has only four segments in φ with a granularity of 2π/64. The
middle compartment has a segmentation of 0.025 in η and 2π/256 in φ. The
back compartment has in φ the same granularity as the middle compartment,
but is twice as coarse in η (0.05).

A thin presampler detector (PS) is mounted in front of the accordion mod-
ule. The PS consists of two straight sectors with cathode and anode elec-
trodes glued between plates made of a ﬁbreglass epoxy composite (FR4). The
13 mm long electrodes are oriented at a small angle with respect to the line
where a particle from the test-beam or from the nominal interaction point
in ATLAS is expected to impinge on the calorimeter. The gap between the
electrodes is 1.93 mm. The presampler is segmented with a ﬁne granularity in
η of about 0.025. It has four segments in φ with a granularity of 2π/64.

Between the PS and the ﬁrst compartment (depending on φ) read-out cables
and electronics like the summing- and mother-boards are installed.

In total a full module, including the PS, has 3424 read-out cells.

10

2.3 Data Samples and Event Selection

Runs at 18 diﬀerent energies between 10 GeV and 245 GeV were recorded
with a ATLAS LAr barrel calorimeter module beginning of August 2002 within
three days. Approximately every 12 hours calibration runs were taken. Some of
the runs were repeated with the same beam energy at diﬀerent times during
the data taking period. No systematic eﬀect was found. The temperature
variation of the LAr was within 7 mK over the total 2002 running period,
which corresponds to a maximum variation of the calorimeter response of

10−5.

7
±

·

The electron beam impinged on the module at an angle corresponding to a
virtual angle in the ATLAS experiment 7 of η = 0.687 and φ = 0.282.

The following selection requirements have been applied to select a pure sample
of single electrons:

•
•

•

•

the pion counter had to be compatible with no signal.
the S3 scintillator counter signal had to be compatible with that from one
minimum ionising particle.
cuts on the TDC signals of the chambers were imposed to remove double hits
and to ensure a good track reconstruction. In addition, the beam chamber
information was used to deﬁne a square of 3x3 cm2 around the mean beam
position (evaluated for each analysed run) deﬁning the beam acceptance.
the φ and η positions reconstructed by the shower barycentre must be within
0.4 cell units vertical to the cell centre in φ. and within 0.4 (0.2) cell units
left (right) from the cell centre.

The number of the selected electron events for each energy point can be found
in Tab. 1. The run at E = 245 GeV is left out from the table, since no precision
measurement of the electron beam energy was possible with the used magnet
set-up. For lower energies the statistics was limited by the rate of electrons in
the beam.

3 Monte Carlo Simulation

The simulation of the beam-line and of the calorimeter module was performed
using the GEANT4 Monte Carlo simulation package [10]. The detailed shower
development follows all particles with an interaction range larger than 20 µm.
Besides purely electromagnetic processes, also hadron interactions, such as

7 In the ATLAS cell numbering scheme this corresponds to the centre of the middle
compartment cell ηi = 27 (out of 54) and φi = 11 (out of 16).

11

those induced by photon nucleon interactions 8 , were simulated. In addition
to the energy deposited in each calorimeter cell, the induced current was cal-
culated taking into account the distortion of the electric ﬁeld in the accordion
structure. Normalisation factors equalising the response in the regions of uni-
form electrical ﬁeld were applied to ensure the correct inter-calibration of the
accordion layers.

One major challenge in the simulation is the correct description of the passive
material in front of the detector and between the PS and the ﬁrst accordion
compartment. The details of the material description as implemented in the
Monte Carlo simulation are shown in Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b. The beam instru-
mentation before the cryostat corresponds to 0.2X0. The two aluminum walls
of the cryostat, the argon excluder (Foam) and the LAr in front of the PS
have in total a thickness of about 1.5X0.

The amount of LAr between the PS and the inner cryostat wall is not well
known, since the exact position of the argon excluder in front of the calorime-
ter was not precisely measured. An estimate of 2 cm has been obtained by
simulating diﬀerent conﬁgurations and by requiring that the ratio of the vis-
ible energy in the simulation and in the data does not depend on the beam
energy for each calorimeter layer. From this study, a systematic uncertainty
of

0.5 cm is estimated.

±

The electronic read-out chain and the signal reconstruction are only partly
simulated. The current to energy conversion takes into account the convolution
of the signal with the shaper response and its integration time. Thus, the
response at the peak of the signal is simulated. A cross-talk correction derived
from calibration runs (see section 4.3) is applied to simulate the eﬀects on the
shape of the energy distribution in the ﬁrst compartment. The total energy in
the ﬁrst layer is not modiﬁed.

The electronic noise has been extracted from randomly triggered events where
the signals have been reconstructed in the same way as in physics events (see
section 4). This noise has been added incoherently to the energy of each cell.
In the medium gain the noise is slightly larger due to the contribution of the
second stage noise of the electronics. The noise has been measured in special
runs, where randomly triggered events are recorded with ﬁxed electronic gains
(see section 4.1). The ﬁnal noise has then been calculated as the root mean
square of one of the two samples chosen according to the probability that a
given cell is in high or medium gain.

An event sample was simulated for each energy point in Table. 1. At low (high)
energy the simulated event samples were about 20 (2) times larger than the

8 Here, and for the simulations of pions the QGSP physics list is used for the
simulations of hadron interactions.

12

corresponding data samples.

4 Electronic Calibration

The ionisation signal from the calorimeter is brought via cables in the LAr out
of the cryostat to the front end crates (FEC). These crates, directly located
on the cryostat, house both the Front End Boards (FEB) and the calibration
boards.

On the FEB, the signal is ﬁrst ampliﬁed by a current sensitive preampliﬁer.
In order to accommodate the large dynamic range and to optimise the total
noise (electronics and pile-up), the signal is shaped with a CR-RC2 archi-
tecture (bipolar shape) and split in three linear scales with a typical ratio
1 : 9.2 : 92, called low, medium and high gain. For a given channel these three
signals are sampled at the 40 MHz clock frequency and stored in an analog
pipeline (Switched Capacitor Array) until the trigger decision. After a trig-
ger, a predeﬁned number of samples (N) is digitised by a 12 bit ADC. This
digitisation is done either on each gain or on the most suited gain according
to a hardware gain selection based on the amplitude of a ﬁxed sample in the
medium gain.

The response dispersion of the electronics read-out is about 2%. To account for
such an eﬀect and for the diﬀerent detector capacitances of each calorimeter
cell, the calibration board provides to all channels an exponential signal that
mimics the calorimeter ionisation signal. This voltage signal is made by fast
switching of a precise DC current ﬂowing into an inductor and is brought to the
motherboard on the calorimeter via a 50 Ω cable terminated at both ends. The
amplitude uniformity dispersion is better than 0.2%. One calibration signal is
distributed through precise resistors to 8 (32) calorimeter cells for the middle
(front and back) compartment whose location is chosen such that cross-talk
can be studied.

Details on the calibration of the electronics can be found in Ref. [11]. Here
we summarise those aspects which are relevant for the linearity of the energy
measurement.

The cell energy is reconstructed from the measured cell signal using:

Evis

cell =

1
fI/E

Fgain X

sample=1,N

OFsample,gain (Ssample −

Pgain),

(1)

where Ssample is the signal measured in ADC counts in N time slices, Pgain is
the pedestal for each gain (see section 4.1) and OFsample,gain are the optimal

13

ﬁltering (OF) coeﬃcients derived from the shape of the physics pulse and the
noise (see section 4.2). The function Fgain converts for each gain ADC counts
to currents in µA (see section 4.3). The factor fI/E takes into account the
conversion from the measured current to the energy (see section 4.4).

4.1 Pedestal Subtraction

In order to determine the signal levels where no energy is deposited in the
detector, special runs with random triggers and no beam were taken (”pedestal
runs”). The stability of the pedestal values was checked using runs taken in
regular intervals throughout the data taking period. A run-by-run instability
was observed in particular for the PS which has a non-negligible eﬀect on
the reconstructed energy. No instability has been observed within a run. To
minimize the eﬀects of such instabilities each electron run was corrected using
pedestal values measured with random triggers within the same run. This
ensured that for each physics run the correct pedestals are calculated and
possible biases of about 20 MeV are corrected.

4.2 Determination of the Signal Amplitude

The peak amplitude A (and the signal time) is extracted from the N = 5 signal
samples (Ssample) using a digital ﬁltering technique [12]. The peak amplitude
is expanded in a linear weighted sum of coeﬃcients (OF) and the pedestal
subtracted signal in each sample (see eq. 1).

The coeﬃcients are calculated using the expected shape of the physics signal,
its derivative and the noise autocorrelation function. The noise contribution is
minimised respecting constraints on the signal amplitude and its time jitter.
The noise autocorrelation function is determined from randomly triggered
events.

The shape of the physics signal can be predicted using a formula with four
free parameters that can be extracted from a ﬁt to the measured physics pulse
shape [13]. For each cell, the OF coeﬃcients are then calculated [14]. Over the
full module, the shapes of the measured and predicted physics pulse agree to
within 2% and the residuals of the pulse shape at the peak position are within
0.5% in the ﬁrst and 1% in the second compartment. For the cells involved
in the electron energy measured at the beam position studied in this analysis,
10−3 in the ﬁrst compartment and by at
the residuals deviate by at most 7
most 2.5

10−3 in the second compartment.

·

·

Due to the ﬁne segmentation of the ﬁrst calorimeter compartment there is

14

unavoidably a capacitive coupling between the read-out cells (strips). This
cross-talk aﬀects the signal reconstruction during the calibration procedure
as well as the physics pulse shapes. The cross-talk (see section 4.3) has been
taken into account in the determination of the OF coeﬃcients.

4.3 Calibration of the Read-out Electronics

The relation between the current in a LAr cell (µA) and the signal measured
with the read-out electronics (in ADC counts) is determined by injecting with
the calibration system a well known current. Calibration runs have been taken
in regular intervals (about every 12 hours) for each cell. In these calibra-
tion runs currents with linearly rising amplitudes (in DAC units) are injected
(”ramp runs”).

For each cell and for each injected current, the amplitude is reconstructed from
the measured signal (after subtracting a parasitic injected current) adjusting
the pulse shape derived from special calibration runs (“delay runs”), where a
signal with a ﬁxed amplitude and a variable time for the pulse is injected.

Each reconstructed amplitude rises almost linearly with the input signal. To
correct for small non-linearities the dependence of the reconstructed amplitude
on the input signal is ﬁtted with a fourth order polynomial. This ﬁt is used to
reconstruct the visible energy in a LAr cell (Fgain in eq. 1).

As an example, in Fig. 6 the results of the ramp run analysis is shown for
the cell that had on average the largest energy fraction during the data taking
period. The relation between the injected current in µA and the reconstructed
amplitude in GeV is shown. For a given DAC value on the calibration board a
current is injected and the resulting signal is measured in ADC counts. To facil-
itate the interpretation 9 the data are already transformed into in GeV units.

The data obtained in medium gain are shown as open circles. Data in high
gain are shown as closed circles. At low energies, where the signal can be
reconstructed in both gains good agreement is found. In the region where
the gains are switched the diﬀerence between the high gain and the medium
gain is only a few MeV. The deviation from linearity of the electronics for
a cell signal is 1
2%. The line shows the result of a ﬁt of a fourth order
polynomial P4(ADC). The bottom part of the ﬁgure shows the residuals, i.e.,
the diﬀerence between the reconstructed and the input signals in MeV. For
the medium (high) gain the signal is reconstructed with an accuracy of 40
(10) MeV.

−

9 To convert ADC counts to GeV fADC/GeV = 0.1082 (0.0117) has been used for
medium (high) gain.

15

During the calibration of the electronics the cells are pulsed with a pattern
where between two pulsed cells three cells are not pulsed. Since the calibration
constants are derived from the known injected current and the measured signal
for the pulsed cells, they are overestimated if the eﬀect of cross-talk is not taken
into account. In the ﬁrst compartment, where the capacitive coupling between
the cells is large, a cross-talk correction is derived for each cell using delay
runs. It is obtained by adding the signal measured in the two closest passive
neighbours of pulsed cell and the average of the next-to-closest neighbour. The
correction factors do not strongly vary for diﬀerent electronic gains and they
are moreover stable for all pulse values.

4.4 The Current to Energy Conversion Factor

The conversion from the measured current (µA) to the visible energy ( MeV)
is done using a factor fI/E, which is assumed to be independent of the beam
energy. There is one common factor for the three accordion compartments and
one factor for the presampler. Both factors are diﬃcult to calculate from ﬁrst
principles. The diﬃculties arise from the complex structure of the electric ﬁeld
and from the modelling of physical eﬀects like recombination of electrons in
the LAr.

In this analysis they are determined from a comparison of the visible energies
in the data and in the Monte Carlo simulation, where the complex accordion
geometry and in particular the electrical ﬁeld are simulated in detail. In this
way also the dependence of the simulated signal on the range cut, below which
a particle is not tracked any further and deposits all its energy, is absorbed.
Since the current to energy conversion drops out in the linearity analysis, its
exact value is not critical.

t)

The fI/E factor can be roughly estimated using a simpliﬁed model, where
a detector cell is seen as a capacitor with constant electrical ﬁeld: fI/E =
e/(w
15 nA/MeV, where e is the elementary charge, w is the ionisa-
tion potential of LAr and t is the drift time. The comparison of the data to
the Monte Carlo simulation gives in the accordion calorimeter fI/E = 16.0
nA/MeV.

≈

∗

The calibration signal amplitude is attenuated due to the skin eﬀect in the
cables. The diﬀerent lengths used in each compartment result in a small bias
and the front signal has to be corrected by a factor 1.007. Diﬀerences from
the slightly diﬀerent electrical ﬁelds in the ﬁrst and the second compartment
(due to the diﬀerent bending of the accordion folds) are estimated to be of the
order of 0.3% (using calculations of the electric ﬁeld). The cross-talk eﬀect in
the ﬁrst compartment (see section 4.3) is corrected cell-by-cell. The result of

16

this correction is that on average the measured total signal is lowered by a
factor 0.93. For all these eﬀects, an uncertainty of
0.5% is assigned for the
relative normalisation of the ﬁrst and the second compartment.

±

In addition, a correction for cross-talk between the second and the third com-
partment is also needed. This is due to the read-out lines of the second com-
partment passing through the third one. Empirically it has been found that
0.55% of the energy deposited in the second compartment (E2) is measured
in the third compartment (E3). Therefore, 0.55% of E2 is subtracted from E3
and added to E2. The overall energy is not changed by this correction. How-
ever, to compare the energy fraction deposited in the individual layers and the
mean shower depth in data and Monte Carlo simulations it has to be taken
into account.

In the PS the current to energy conversion factor is also estimated to be about
fI/E = 16 nA/MeV. Two eﬀects must be taken into account that reduce this
factor: First, one cell with coherent noise had to be excluded from the analysis.
For the impact point studied here this leads to a reduction of 0.95 of the total
PS signal (according to the Monte Carlo simulation). Second, the eﬀective
length of the PS is reduced to 11 mm due to the vanishing electric ﬁeld at
the edges, the factor is fI/E = 16
0.95 = 12.9 nA/MeV. This is
in agreement with the number found from the comparison of data to Monte
Carlo.

(11/13)

·

·

5 Calibration of Electromagnetic Showers

5.1 Calibration Constants for Sampling Calorimeters

In a sampling calorimeter the total deposited EM energy (Etot) can be esti-
mated from the energy deposited in the active medium (Eact) by dividing by
the sampling fraction f e

samp:

Etot =

Eact, with f e

samp =

1

f e
samp

Eact
Eact + Epas ,

(2)

where Epas is the energy deposited in the passive material.

For a minimum ionising particle the sampling fraction is a ﬁxed number which
can be calculated from the known energy deposits in the active and passive
materials due to ionisation. Since the energy loss of electrons is diﬀerent from
that of muons, the sampling fraction for electron is lower.

In Fig. 7a is shown the shape of the deposited energy distribution of an

17

EM shower along the shower axis (l) for electrons with E = 10 GeV, E =
100 GeV and E = 500 GeV, and for muons with E = 10 GeV. The accordion
calorimeter starts at 1500 mm. The sampling structure of the calorimeter ends
at about 1960 mm. The energy depositions before and after the calorimeter
are not shown.

The muon loses only a small part of its energy in the calorimeter. The dips
approximately every 40 mm are due to the lead traversed by the muon going
through the accordion (zig-zag) folds.

While the energy deposited by muons is approximately constant, for EM show-
ers the deposited energy rises quickly to a maximum and then is slowly attenu-
ated. As the energy of the impinging particle increases, the shower penetrates
deeper into the calorimeter. In most events the shower is contained inside the
calorimeter and only a very small fraction of the energy leaks out. At the end
of the shower more and more particles at low energy are produced.

Particles produced in the EM shower interact diﬀerently with the detector at
the beginning and at the end of the shower development. At the end of the
shower a large number of low-energetic photons are produced, which have a
higher probablity to produce low energy electrons (via e.g. the photo-electric
eﬀect and Compton scattering) in the lead absorber than in the Lar. Since the
range of these electrons is typically smaller than the lead absorber thickness,
the energy deposit in the absorber increases relative to the energy deposit in
the active material towards the end of the shower and the sampling fraction
decreases [6,15,16,17,18,19]. This is illustrated in Fig. 7b, where the sampling
fraction along the shower axis is shown for the same particles as in Fig. 7a.
While the sampling fraction is constant for muons, for electrons the sam-
pling fraction decreases towards the end of the shower. For an electron with
E = 10 GeV the sampling fraction drops by 20%. This behaviour depends
on the electron energy. However, when the sampling fraction is calculated
as a function of the relative distance from the shower maximum, it shows a
universal behaviour, i.e., it does not depend on the electron energy [6] (see
Fig. 7c).

When looking at a ﬁxed point of the calorimeter, the sampling fraction can
be diﬀerent event-by-event due to longitudinal shower ﬂuctuations. If, how-
ever, the response of the calorimeter is equal in all regions, the sampling
fraction is the same when integrated over the whole shower depth. Therefore
the calorimeter is linear. Nevertheless, a non-linearity is introduced, if only a
part of the shower is contained in the calorimeter or if the longitudinal com-
partments are not equally calibrated, i.e., if they react diﬀerently to minimum
ionising particles. In most practical applications, the shower starts already
upstream of the calorimeter and a fraction of its energy is also deposited be-
hind the calorimeter. This introduces an intrinsic non-linearity of the energy

18

response due to longitudinal shower ﬂuctuations, which must be corrected.

5.2 Correction for Upstream Energy Losses using Presampler Detectors

The principle of a presampler detector is that the energy deposited in a thin
active medium is proportional to the energy lost in the passive medium in
front of the calorimeter. The diﬀerence with respect to a sampling calorimeter
is that the passive material, the “absorber”, is very thick, typically about 1
2
X0, and that there is only one layer of passive and active material. Therefore,
the calibration scheme is diﬀerent from the one of sampling calorimeters where
a shower passing a radiation length is sampled many times.

−

If an electron passes through the passive material in front of the presampler,
it continuously loses energy by ionisation. The total deposited energy in the
passive material is approximately constant and can be calculated assuming
the energy is lost by a minimally ionising particle. However, the electron also
emits photons by Bremsstrahlung. Depending on their energy they either react
through Compton scattering or photo-electric eﬀect (in this case their energy
is mainly deposited in the dead material by low energy electrons) or they do
not interact until they create an electron positron (e+e−) pair. The pair can be
produced in the passive material, in the active medium of the presampler or in
the sampling calorimeter. In the latter case, their energy is simply measured in
the calorimeter and nothing has to be done in addition. The energy deposited
by each particle of the e+e− pair is therefore in many cases smaller than
the energy deposited by the beam electron passing through the full passive
material. In the case where the pair is created in the presampler itself, the
energy measured in the presampler is even largely uncorrelated to the energy
deposited in the passive material.

In any case the electrons produced by pair-production will traverse none or
part of the passive material. If one e+e−-pair is created in the passive material,
three electrons ionise the active medium. Two of them have only traversed a
small part of the passive material. The correct calibration constant is there-
fore smaller than the one calculated from the inverse sampling fraction of a
minimum ionising particles.

The total energy deposited in the active and in the passive material in and
before the presampler Etot
0

can be reconstructed from:

Etot

0 = wP S Eact

0 =

Eact

0 = a + b Eact
0

(3)

a + b Eact
Eact
0

0

where Eact

0

is the energy deposited in the active medium of the presampler. The

19

calibration coeﬃcient a represents the average energy lost by ionisation by the
beam electron. Its energy dependence might be caused by low energy photons
produced by Bremsstrahlung that are absorbed in the dead material and by
photon nucleon interactions. The ampliﬁcation factor b takes into account that
the e+e−-pairs produced in the passive material or in the active medium have
only traversed part or none of the material in front of or in the PS.

The calibration factors depend on the details of the experimental set-up and
have to be extracted from a Monte Carlo simulation.

6 Electron Energy Reconstruction

6.1 Reconstruction of the Electron Cluster Energy

When an electron penetrates the ATLAS calorimeter a compact EM shower
is developed, which deposits most of the energy near the shower axis. To
reconstruct the electron energy, the energies deposited in a ﬁxed number of
calorimeter cells are added together. No noise cut is applied. This collection
of cells is called “cluster”. Since the radial EM shower energy proﬁle depends
merely on the electron energy, the signal loss from cells outside the cluster can
be easily corrected.

The electron cluster is constructed from the second accordion compartment,
where all cells within a square of 3x3 cells around the cell with the high-
est energy are merged. For the other accordion compartments all cells which
intersect the geometrical projection of this square are included. In the ﬁrst
accordion compartment, which has high granularity in the η-direction, 8 cells
from each side of the cell with the maximum energy in this compartment are
added to the cluster. For the impact point analysed here, two cells in φ are
included. Thus, a cluster includes 17x2 cells in the ﬁrst, 3x3 cells in the second
and 2x3 in the third compartment. while in the PS 3x2 cells are used to deﬁne
the visible energy.

To reconstruct the electron energy deposited in the accordion calorimeter the
visible energy measured within the electron cluster deﬁned above is multiplied
by a calibration factor:

Erec

acc = X
i=1,3

Erec

i =

1
d(E) fsamp

Evis
i

,

X
i=1,3

(4)

i

where Evis
is the visible energy in the ith compartment and fsamp = 0.18 is
the sampling fraction taken for an electron with an energy of 100 GeV (see
eq. 2).

20

The factor d is depends on the initial electron energy (see Fig. 8c). Its variation
is mainly (about 0.6%) due to the decrease of the sampling fraction towards
the end of the shower, and due to the fact that the shower has already started
before entering the accordion calorimeter as discussed in section 5.1. In ad-
dition, the factor d corrects for a drop of the total energy of about 10% due
to the reduced charge collection near the accordion folds and for energy lost
laterally (typically 4% of the total electron energy). The fraction of energy
outside the electron cluster varies by about 0.3% with energy. The current to
energy conversion leads to a decrease of the reconstructed energy by 0.5% at
high energies. Since these eﬀects are correlated, they do not factorise and are
therefore absorbed into one factor.

6.2 Correction for Upstream Energy Losses

Following the correction procedure for energy losses in the upstream material,
described in section 5.2, the total energy deposited in and before the PS is
reconstructed by:

Erec
is the visible energy in the PS cluster.

0 = a + b Evis
0 ,

where Evis

0

(5)

The calibration parameters a and b are obtained from the Monte Carlo sim-
ulation. As an example, the correlation between the visible energy deposited
in the PS and the true energy deposited upstream and in the PS is shown
in Fig. 9a and Fig. 9b for electrons with E = 10 and E = 180 GeV. The
calibration parameters a and b are determined by a linear ﬁt.

The oﬀset a rises linearly with the beam energy (see Fig. 8a) and can be
easily parameterised. The slope b rises logarithmically (see Fig. 8b)). The
value of b corresponds to about 60% of the inverse sampling fraction of a
minimally ionising particle completely passing through the full active and
passive medium.

6.3 Correction for Energy Losses between the Presampler and the Accordion

The region between the PS and the ﬁrst accordion compartment contains
support structures, electronics and cables. The amount of passive material
depends on the impact point in η and φ.

At this point, a muon with an energy of 10 GeV deposits 0.6% of its energy in
the passive material in front of the calorimeter and about 0.15% in the passive
material between the PS and the ﬁrst accordion compartment. However, elec-
trons deposit a larger fraction of their energy in the material between the PS

21

and the ﬁrst accordion compartment. An electron with 10 GeV deposits on
average 3.6% of its energy in the passive material in front of the calorimeter
and 4.1% in the passive material between the PS and the ﬁrst accordion com-
partment. The fact that more energy is deposited behind the PS than before
gets more pronounced towards higher energies. An electron with 180 GeV de-
posits 0.45% of its energy in the passive material in front of the calorimeter
and 0.85% in the passive material between the PS and the ﬁrst accordion
compartment.

The energies deposited before and just after the PS are linked via the dy-
namical behaviour of the EM shower development. According to the Monte
Carlo simulation, a good correlation to the energy deposited between the PS
and the ﬁrst accordion compartment can be obtained from an observable com-
bining the energy in the PS and the energy measured in the ﬁrst accordion
compartment, namely:

Erec

P S/Strip = c (Evis
0

Evis
1 )

0.5

.

·

(6)

The value of the exponent in eq. 6 has been found empirically. The calibration
coeﬃcient c is obtained from the Monte Carlo simulation. The result of the
simulation is shown in Fig. 8d) as a function of the beam energy.

0

1 )0.5 and the true energy
As an example, the correlation between (Evis
Evis
deposited between the PS and the ﬁrst compartment is shown in Fig. 9c and
Fig. 9d for electrons with E = 10 and E = 180 GeV. The calibration pa-
rameter c is obtained as the slope of a linear ﬁt. While this assumption is
justiﬁed for low energies, at high energies deviations from a linear correlation
are observed. The exponent in eq. 6 seems to be slightly energy dependent.
Since, however, the dead material correction is less important at high energies,
within the present accuracy this eﬀect can be neglected.

·

6.4 Correction for Downstream Energy Losses

In the region analysed in this study, i.e. η = 0.687, the electron passes materials
with a total thickness of about 30 X0. Therefore the energy fraction leaking
out behind the calorimeter is small.

The amount of energy leaking out of the back of the calorimeter can be de-
termined from the Monte Carlo simulation. On average, about 0.35% of the
initial electron energy with E = 10 GeV is deposited behind the calorimeter,
increasing linearly to 0.45% for E = 245 GeV. Thus, the longitudinal energy
leakage introduces a non-linearity of about 0.1% in this energy range.

22

This eﬀect is corrected on average for each energy point.

6.5 Correction for the Impact Position within a Cell

Due to the complex structure of the accordion folds, the energy response
changes as a function of the φ position of the impinging particle within a
cell. The main reasons are the varying amount of passive absorber material
and changes in the electric ﬁelds. In the η-direction, a drop of the measured
energy is observed, if the electron does not impinge on the cell centre. This
eﬀect is due to an incomplete containment of the electron in the cluster 10 .
These eﬀects have been already reported in Ref. [11].

The electron φ impact position within a cell is reconstructed from the energy
weighted barycentre of the second layer. The bias due to the ﬁnite calorimeter
cell size is corrected using the average diﬀerence of the position measurements
provided by the calorimeter and by the beam chamber measured as a function
of calorimeter position measurement (“S-shape”). The corrected Φ impact
position normalised to middle cell units is called Φcorr
calo .

The meassured dependence of the mean energy on Φcorr
calo is shown in Fig. 10
for an electron beam energy of E = 100 GeV. The peak-to-peak modulation
for diﬀerent impact positions is about 1.5%. The modulation is parameterised
with a function with eight free parameters having a sinusoidal term correcting
for the accordion structure and a parabola term correcting cluster containment
eﬀects. The form of the adjustment is shown in Fig. 10 as line.

The correction is obtained from the data run with an electron beam energy
of 100 GeV, where the largest data sample was available, and is applied to all
other energies.

6.6 Corrections for Bremsstrahlung Photons lost in the Beam-line

Photons produced by Bremsstrahlung of the beam electron in the passive ma-
terial before the last trimming magnets, 40 to 170 m upstream of the detector,
cannot reach the calorimeter. Therefore a correction has to be applied to the
electron energy measured by the calorimeter.

The amount of material in this region associated with the NA45 experiment
is not well known and has to be estimated. In the beam-line, there is about

10 Since the beam for this data sample was mostly covering the central part of the
cell, this eﬀect is small and does not require a correction in this analysis.

23

0.03 X0 of air, and about 0.01 X0 of material from the beam pipe windows. In
the Monte Carlo simulation this “far” material is modelled by a thin spherical
shell of Aluminium 11 . Since the energy lost by Bremsstrahlung leads to a tail
on the low energy side of the reconstructed energy distribution, the amount of
material can be estimated by comparing the tails of the reconstructed energy
distribution in Monte Carlo simulations with diﬀerent amounts of material
and in the data at various beam energies. An aluminium thickness of 0.04
0.01 X0 has been estimated in this manner.

±

The particles produced by Bremsstrahlung in the ”far material” are not tracked
any further in the simulation, but their total energy is recorded. The correc-
tion can then be estimated by looking at the reconstructed energy with and
without the lost energy added to the measured calorimeter energy.

If the photon energy is relatively large, the electron energy can be considerably
lower than the original beam electron. Since the beam optics 12 is optimised
for electrons with the nominal beam energy, there is a certain probability
that the electron will not reach the scintillator S3 and S4 deﬁning the beam
spot. This eﬀect has been evaluated using a simulation of the beam-line based
on the TURTLE program[20]. At a beam energy of 10 GeV, for an electron
having lost 1%, 5% or 10% of its energy, only for 98%, 77% and 50% of the
events the electron arrives in the calorimeter. For a beam energy of 50 GeV,
the corresponding probabilities are 100%, 86% and 56%. This correction is
applied to the Monte Carlo simulation as an event weight for each measured
distribution.

The correction due to Bremsstrahlung is shown in Fig. 11. For an electron
energy of E = 10 GeV the peak of the reconstructed energy distribution is
shifted by 0.25%, at E = 50 GeV by 0.15%, and at E = 180 GeV by 0.09%.
The non-linearity induced by Bremsstrahlung in the “far” material is therefore
about 0.2% before correction.

6.7 The Final Electron Calibration Scheme

The ﬁnal electron calibration scheme is a sum of the individual corrections
described above:

11 The material is simulated as a sphere to ensure the same amount of material
for each η direction. In the real experiment the beam-line stays constant and the
calorimeter is rotated. In the Monte Carlo simulation the direction of the beam is
changed.
12 In this region there are no bending magnets, but there are correction dipoles and
quadrupoles.

24

Erec = 


a(E) + b(E) Evis

0 + c(E) (Evis
0

Evis

1 )0.5 +

·

1
d(E) fsamp



Evis
i

X
i=1,3

fcell impact(∆Φ)

(1 + fleakage(E)),

·

·


(7)

i

where Evis
is the visible cluster energy deposited in the ith (i = 0, 3) calorime-
ter compartment, fsamp = 0.18 is the sampling fraction for an electron with
E = 100 GeV and the functions f correct (event-by-event) for the eﬀect of
longitudinal leakage (fleakage) (see section 6.4) and of the cell impact position
(fcell impact) (see section 6.5). The mean reconstructed energy is in addition
corrected for upstream Bremsstrahlung losses (fbrems) (see section 6.6).

Since the calibration parameters slightly depend on the energy to be measured,
an iterative procedure is needed to reconstruct the electron energy.

7 Comparison of Data and Monte Carlo Simulations

Since the calibration scheme described above is based on the Monte Carlo
simulation, it is important to verify that the Monte Carlo simulation repro-
duces the total energy distribution, the energies measured in each layer and
the lateral development of the EM shower.

The mean reconstructed energy in the PS and in the ﬁrst and second com-
partment of the accordion is described by the Monte Carlo simulation for all
energies within
2%. In addition, also the shape of the energy distributions
within each compartment are well described. As an example, the shapes of
the visible energy fraction distributions are shown in Fig. 12 for E = 10 and
E = 100 GeV.

±

The distribution of the reconstructed total energy distribution is shown in
Fig. 13 for electron beam energies of 10, 50, 100 and 180 GeV. The beam
energy in the Monte Carlo simulation is scaled to the one in the data. The
Monte Carlo simulation gives a good description of the data.

The shape of the energy distribution in the η-direction measured in the ﬁrst
compartment is shown in Fig. 14 for electron beam energies of E = 10, 50,
100 and E = 180 GeV. The η-position is calculated with respect to the shower
barycentre in the ﬁrst compartment and expressed in units of read-out cells.
Due to the compactness of an EM shower the radial extension depends only
slightly on the beam energy. The distribution is found to be asymmetric (see
also in Ref. [21]). At low electron beam energies, the Monte Carlo simulation
gives an excellent description of the data. In particular, the asymmetry is well
reproduced. At high energies the data distribution is slightly broader than
predicted by in the Monte Carlo simulation.

25

In conclusion, the Monte Carlo simulation predictions are in good agreement
with the shower development measured for the data.

8 Determination of the Pion Contamination using Monte Carlo

Simulation

The instrumentation of the H8 beam-line used in the present analysis did
not allow for a direct measurement of the pion contamination in the electron
beam. Only the signal of the scintillator behind the calorimeter can be used
to reject pions. The inﬂuence of a possible pion contamination has therefore
to be estimated by comparing the electron and pion energy shapes predicted
by the Monte Carlo simulation to the one measured in the data.

Since the LAr calorimeter has a thickness of about one interaction length,
most pions deposit only a fraction of their incident energy. However, a small
fraction of them can deposit most of their energy in the LAr calorimeter. For
instance, at E = 10 GeV about 3% of the pions deposit more than 8 GeV in
the LAr calorimeter. Since these pions can inﬂuence the measurements of the
electron energy, their fraction has to be determined.

Pions which deposit a lot of energy in the LAr calorimeter interact on average
later in the LAr calorimeter than do electrons. Compared to electrons of the
same beam energy they deposit therefore less energy in the ﬁrst compartment
and more in the second and third ones. The ratio Evis
3 ) is shown
in Fig. 15a for E = 10 GeV and Fig. 15b for E = 50 GeV for data and an
appropriate mixture of electrons and pions. The Monte Carlo simulation is able
to describe the data. The fraction of pions in the electron beam is determined
for each energy and varies from 2% at 10 GeV to 22% at 180 GeV. The eﬀect
on the electron energy measurement will be discussed in section 9.2.

2 + Evis

1 /(Evis

9 Linearity and Resolution Results

9.1 Linearity Results

The mean energy is obtained by ﬁtting a Gaussian to the reconstructed energy
distribution within two standard deviations for the low energy side and three
standard deviations for the high energy side 13 . To determine the uncertainty

13 This is the maximal possible ﬁt range where the χ2 per degree of freedom is one.

26

due to the chosen ﬁt range, results are also considered where the range of the
low energy side is restricted to 1.5 and extended to 2.5 standard deviations.

The mean reconstructed energy divided by the beam energy is shown in
Fig. 16. The error bars indicate the statistical uncertainty as obtained by the
ﬁt procedure. Since the absolute calibration of the beam energy is not pre-
cisely known, all points are normalised to the value measured at E = 100 GeV.
The inner band represents the uncorrelated uncertainty on the knowledge of
the beam energy, while the outer band shows in addition the correlated un-
certainty added in quadrature (see section 1). For energies E > 10 GeV, all
0.1%. The point E = 10 GeV is lower by 0.7%
measured points are within
with respect to the other measurements.

±

9.2 Systematic Uncertainties on the Linearity Results

The systematic uncertainties induced by various eﬀects on the reconstructed
electron energy are shown in Fig. 17. In order to evaluate the size of some
of the systematic uncertainties, dedicated Monte Carlo simulations have been
produced to calculate new sets of calibration parameters. These samples were
typically smaller than the default one.

The uncertainty on the current to energy conversion factor (see section 4.4)
of the PS has been studied using the χ2-distribution of the visible energy
distribution for data and Monte Carlo simulations for all energy points. The
uncertainty is estimated by the scatter for diﬀerent energies. The same proce-
dure has been repeated by studying the dependence of the mean reconstructed
energy on the PS energy in the data and in the Monte Carlo simulations. A
consistent result has been found. Since the relative contribution for the PS is
larger at low energies, the systematic uncertainty rises towards low energies
(see Fig. 17a). While the systematic uncertainty is negligible at E = 180 GeV,
it reaches about 0.1% at E = 10 GeV.

The uncertainty due to the relative normalisation diﬀerence between the ﬁrst
and the second compartments (see section 4.4) is shown in Fig. 17b. This eﬀect
biases the energy measurement by up to about 0.1%, mostly at low energies.

The systematic uncertainty arising from the incomplete knowledge of the
amount of LAr between the PS and the LAr excluder in front of it (see sec-
tion 3) is shown in Fig. 17c. It introduces an uncertainty of about 0.05%.
Again, low energies are most aﬀected.

Fig. 17d shows the eﬀect of adding ad hoc 0.02 X0 additional material between
the PS and the ﬁrst compartment. The relative variation of the reconstructed
beam electron energy is slowly decreasing from low to high energies The eﬀect

27

amounts to about 0.1% at low energies. At E = 10 GeV even 0.2% is found.

As explained in section 4, according to the amplitude of a predeﬁned sample
in the medium gain, a selection of the gain to be digitised is done. In the test-
beam electrons arrive at any time with respect to the 25 ns clock used by the
data acquisition system. When this sample is not at the peak of the signal, it
happens around the threshold that the cell is digitised in the high gain while
it should have been done in the medium gain. The fraction of such events
depends on the trigger phase with respect to the 40 MHz clock. Moreover, in
the calibration procedure no continuity of the reconstructed amplitude near
the overlap region of high and medium gain has been imposed. A combination
of these two eﬀects can induce a change of the reconstructed energy especially
in the electron range from 40 to 80 GeV. This eﬀect was studied by selecting
events sampled near the peak (10 < ttdc < 20 ns) and outside this time window
(ttdc < 10 ns or ttdc > 20 ns). In ATLAS a timing adjustment will be performed
such that the maximum sample is near the maximum of the signal, which
corresponds to 15 ns in the testbeam data taken in asynchronous mode. As
shown in Fig. 17e, the largest eﬀect is about

0.1% at 60 GeV.

±

The uncertainty introduced by restricting or extending the ﬁt range of the
Gaussian to the reconstructed energy distribution (see section 9.1) is shown
in Fig. 17f. At low energies the uncertainty reaches 0.1%, above E > 60 GeV it
is negligible.

The bias introduced by the uncertainty of the ”far” material and correspond-
ingly of the Bremsstrahlung correction (see section 6.6) is shown in Fig. 17g.
The resulting uncertainty is about 0.05% (up to 0.1% at two energies).

To test the inﬂuence of an incomplete description of the low energy tail later-
ally to the shower axis, the whole analysis is repeated using a 5x5 instead of
a 3x3 cluster. The change with respect to the standard analysis is shown in
Fig. 17h). The uncertainty is about 0.1%.

Fig. 17i) shows the eﬀect of using diﬀerent range cuts in the Monte Carlo
simulation. The default value of 20µm is decreased to 10µm and increased
to 100µm. Although visible energy and sampling fraction signiﬁcantly change
in the Monte Carlo simulation, the linearity remains constant within about
0.05% (0.1% in exceptional cases).

In the default Monte Carlo the small deformation of the calorimeter cells in the
gravitational ﬁeld of the earth is modeled (”sagging”). This eﬀect introduces
at most a change of 0.05%.

In an electromagnetic shower hadronic interactions of mainly photons with nu-
cleons can lead to deposited energy that can not be measured in the calorime-
ter (nuclear excitation etc.) or can produce particles that escape detection

28

(neutron, neutrinos etc.). According to the Monte Carlo simulation on aver-
age about 0.4% of the energy can not be measured in the calorimeter. How-
ever, the energy dependence of this eﬀect is small. While at high energies the
relative variation of a Monte Carlo simulation with photon nucleon interac-
tions switched oﬀ to the default case is constant, at low energies it is about
0.995

0.999. This is shown in Fig. 17j).

−

The correction for the modulation of the reconstructed energy on the φ-impact
position within a cell (needed to improve the energy resolution) does not
change the mean reconstructed energy within 0.05%.

To estimate how the reconstructed electron energy is biased by a possible
pion contamination, the fraction of pions with a large energy deposit in the
LAr is determined from the Monte Carlo simulation (see section 8) and the
shift of the reconstructed mean electron energy in the Monte Carlo simulation
is calculated. The shift is negligible at all energies.

1 /(Evis

In addition, data events with Evis
3 ) > 0.1 can be selected. Such
a cut does not shift the reconstructed energy in the Monte Carlo simulation
of electrons and does not change much the expected pion energy distribution.
The reconstructed energy in the restricted data sample, where about half of
the pions are expected to be removed, does not change.

2 + Evis

To ensure a precise measurement of the electron energy, the energy depen-
dence of the calibration parameters has to be taken into account. Since the
initial electron energy is not known a-priori, an iterative procedure has to be
applied. Starting from the measurement in the accordion calorimeter and us-
ing an average calibration parameter for the accordion calorimeter (parameter
d in eq. 7), the energy is reconstructed. With this ﬁrst energy estimate, the
calibration corrections are evaluated. This procedure is evaluated until the re-
constructed energy does not change signiﬁcantly. Already after two iterations
an accuracy of better than 10−5 is achieved.

9.3 Interpretation of the Linearity Results

To quantify the non-linearity of the measured data points for E > 10 GeV,
a ﬁrst order polynomial is ﬁtted. The resulting slope (a1) is compatible with
zero. When the analysis is repeated for each systematic uncertainty, slopes in
10−6 GeV−1 are obtained. All systematic uncertainties
the range a1 =
10−6 GeV−1. Based on
combined in quadrature give an uncertainty of
purely statistical uncertainties, the χ2 per degree of freedoms for a linear ﬁts
to the data points is χ2/ndf = 2.7. This, together with the fact that the pull
distribution is not Gaussian (RMS is about 1.5), indicates that the measured
data points are not fully compatible with a straight line and that systematic

9
±

5
±

·

·

29

uncertainties aﬀect the linearity.

In practical applications like the measurement of the W ±-boson mass, the shift
of the measured (transverse) energy spectrum with respect to a reference reac-
tion like that from the Z 0-boson needs to be understood. Since the transverse
energy distribution is roughly peaked at half of the boson mass and slowly
decreases towards lower transverse energies, one is interested in the control of
the linearity within a few GeV. To estimate the size of local non-linearities for
each energy measurement the local slope is calculated from the measurement
which have a beam energy diﬀerence smaller than 20 GeV. The result for the
default measurement and for the systematic variations added in quadrature 14
at each energy point (where the slope can be calculated) is shown in Fig. 18.
In the region relevant for the measurement of the W ±-mass the local slope
10−5 GeV−1. This translates roughly to an
is known to a level of about
uncertainty of 15 MeV on the W ±-mass.

4
±

·

9.4 The Resolution Results

The energy resolution is obtained from the standard deviation of the Gaussian
ﬁt described in section 9.1. The relative resolution as a function of the electron
beam energy is shown as closed circles in Fig. 19.

Since the noise depends on the electronic gain of the cells, the noise is sub-
tracted for each energy point to obtain the intrinsic resolution of the calorime-
ter. The noise is evaluated as described in section 3. The noise is about
250 MeV and slightly increases towards higher energies. The noise contribu-
tion to the resolution is shown in Fig. 19 as open squares. The data where the
noise contribution and in addition the beam spread has been subtracted are
shown in Fig. 19 as open circles. A function of the following form is ﬁtted:

σE
E

=

a
√E ⊕

b, with a = 10.1

0.1%

√ GeV and b = 0.17

0.04%.(8)

±

·

±

⊕

The symbol
indicates that the two terms are added in quadrature. The
quoted errors are only statistical. The ﬁt function is overlayed to the data
points and gives a good description of the energy dependence in the data. The
result is compatible with previous test-beam results taken in this η region [11].

14 Here, we only consider the systematics which are not related to the uncertainty
of the test-beam geometry, i.e., normalisation of the presampler, the strips and the
middle, the timing, the ﬁt range, the lateral extension of the shower and using the
diﬀerent Monte Carlo simulations to extract the calibration constants.

30

Conclusions

Electron energy measurements with a module of the ATLAS electromagnetic
barrel LAr calorimeter have been studied in the range from 10 to 245 GeV im-
pinging at η = 0.687 at the CERN H8 test-beam upgraded for precision mo-
mentum measurement. The beam energy has been monitored in the range
10−4 for the uncorrelated uncer-
10 < E < 180 GeV with an accuracy of 3
tainty and an uncertainty of 11 MeV common to all energy points.

·

A calibration scheme has been developed for electrons that provides a good
linearity and a good resolution at the same time. The mean reconstructed
energy, the energy distributions, as well as the longitudinal and lateral energy
proﬁles, are well described by the Monte Carlo simulation. Based on this sim-
ulation the data have been corrected for various eﬀects involving the intrinsic
non-linearities due to the varying sampling fraction, energy losses due to up-
stream and downstream interactions, energy depositions outside the electron
cluster, and losses due to Bremsstrahlung at the beginning of the beam line.

180 GeV, the reconstructed energy response is
In the energy range 15
0.1%. The point at E = 10 GeV is about 0.7% lower than the
linear within
other beam energies. At E = 245 GeV no precise beam energy measurement
was available.

±

≤

≤

E

The systematic uncertainties due to the limited knowledge of the test-beam or
detector set-up or due to reconstruction eﬀects is generally larger at low en-
0.1%), but negligible at high energies. The non-linearity
ergies (up to about
observed in the energy range of 40 GeV and higher matches, if extendable to
the whole calorimeter, the requirements for the W ±-mass measurement aiming
for a precision of 15 MeV.

±

The sampling term of the energy resolution is found to be 10%
local constant term is 0.17%.

·

√ GeV , the

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank D. Cornuet, J. Dutour from the CERN AT/ME depart-
ment and Y. Gaillard and J.P. Brunet from the CERN AB/PO department
for valuable help on setting up the beam. We thank our NIKHEF ATLAS
colleagues A. Linde for kindly supplying the Hall probes used for the precise
beam energy determination and H. Boterenbrood for help with the read-out.
We are indebted to our technicians and engineers for their contribution to the
construction and running of the calorimeter modules and the electronics. We

31

would like to thank the accelerator division for the good working conditions in
the H8 beam-line. Those of us from non-member states wish to thank CERN
for its hospitality.

References

[1] ATLAS Collab., ”Technical Design Report, Detector and Physics Performance”,

CERN/LHCC/99-15 (May 1999).

[2] ATLAS LAr Calorimeter Collab., ”Technical Design Report”, CERN/LHCC

96-41 (December 1996).

[3]

I. Efthymiopoulos, ”Evaluation of the bending power of the MBN spectrometer
magnets of H8”, CERN SL/EA/IE internal note, Geneva (Switzerland) (March
2002).

[4] A. Gustavson, ”Magnetic ﬁeld measurements of the MBN magnets”, private

communication (September 2002).

[5] S. Hassani, These Universite Paris-Sud, LAL-02-89, Paris (France) (Sept. 2002).

[6] G. Graziani, ”Linearity of the response to test beam electrons for the EM barrel
module P13”, ATLAS internal note, ATL-COM-LARG-2004-001 (January
2004).

[7] A. Asner, J. Vlogaert, ”Technical note on the MBN magnets”, CERN LAB-

II/EA/note74-3, Geneva (Switzerland) (1974).

[8] J. Loas, ”Mesure des premiers MBN”, CERN-SPS/EMA/note 77-7, Geneva

(Switzerland) (1977).

[9] B. Aubert et al., Construction, assembly and test of the Atlas electromagnetic

barrel calorimeter, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 558 (2006) 388.

[10] J. Agostinelli et al., Geant4: A simulation toolkit, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 506

(2003) 250.

[11] B. Aubert et al., Performance of the Atlas electromagnetic calorimeter barrel

module 0, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A500 (2003) 202.

[12] W. E. Cleland, E. G. Stern, Signal processing considered for liquid ionization
calorimeter in a high rate enviroment, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 338 (1994) 467.

[13] L. Neukermans, P. Perrodo, R. Zitoun, Understanding of

the Atlas
electromagnetic barrel pulse shape and the absolute e.m. calibration, ATLAS
internal note, ATL-LARG-2001-008 (February 2001)

[14] D. Prieur, ”Etalonnage du calorim`etre ´electromagn´etique du d´etecteur Atlas.
Reconstruction des ´ev´enements avec des photons non pointants dans le cadre
d’un mod`ele supersym´etrique GMSB”, These Universit´e Annecy, LAPP-T-
2005-03, Annecy (France) (April 2005).

32

[15] K. Pinkau, Phys. Rev. 139 (1965) 1548.

[16] H. Beck, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. 91 (1971) 525.

[17] C. J. Crannell et al., Experimental determination of the transition eﬀect in

electromagnetic cascade showers, Phys. Rev. 182 (1969) 1435.

[18] W. Flauger et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 241 (1985) 72.

[19] J. del Peso, E. Ros, Monte carlo investigation of the transition eﬀect, Nucl.

Instrum. Meth. A295 (1990) 330.

[20] D.C. Carey, K.L. Brown, Ch. Iselin, ”Decay TURTLE (Trace Unlimited
Rays Through Lumped Elements) A computer program for simulating
charged particle beam transport systems, including decay calculations”, SLAC
Report No.246, Standford (USA) 1982, CERN 74-2, February 1974 Geneva
(Switzerland), and NAL-64 December 1971.

[21] J. Colas et al., Position resolution and particle identiﬁcation with the Atlas em

calorimeter, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A550 (2005) 96.

33

0

 
]

X

[
 

s
s
e
n
k
c
h
T

i

-110

-210

-310

a)

0

 
]

X

[
 
s
s
e
n
k
c
i
h
T

1

-110

-210

-310

b)

Layer 1

Layer 2

Layer 3

1

Cryostat Cryostat

r
A

 

Foam

1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900

shower axis [mm]

0
1
G

 

s
c
i
n
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

 

r
A

 

r
A

 

s
c
i
n
o
r
t
c
e
E

l

 

r
A

 

r
A

 

r
A

 

s
e
l
b
a
C

 

s
c
i
n
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

 

4
R
F

 

r
A

 

r
A

 

4
R
F

 

r
A

 

r
A

 

r
A

 

e
d
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

 

e
d
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

 

e
d
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

 

r
A

 

r
A

 

e
d
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

 

4
R
F

 

r
A

 

4
R
F

 

1400

1420

1440

1460

1480

1500

shower axis [mm]

Fig. 5. a) Amount of material in the beam line starting just before the cryostat
along the axis of a particle penetrating at η = 0.687. b) Detailed view of the material
in the presampler and before the ﬁrst compartment.

34

1000

]

 

A
µ
[
 
I

900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

60

40

20

0

-20

-40

-60
0

]

V
e
M

[
 
l

a
u
d
s
e
r

i

a)

1 x1+a0a

 + a

2 x2

 + a

3 x3

 + a

4 x4

High Gain
Med. Gain

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

5

10

15

20

25

35
cell signal [GeV]

30

cell signal [GeV]

b)

Fig. 6. Relation of the measured cell signal in GeV and the current (µA) injected
by the calibration system for high and medium gain. Superimposed is the result of
a ﬁt to a fourth order polynomial. In the bottom the residual, the diﬀerence of the
injected current and the ﬁt, is shown as a function of the measured signal. In a) the
results for the medium gain and in b) the results for the high gain are shown. In
addition, in b) the low signals of the medium gain are superimposed.

100

]

 

A
µ
[
 
I

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
0

]

V
e
M

[
 
l

a
u
d
s
e
r

i

35

elE
elE
elE

beam

beam

beam

= 10 GeV
= 100 GeV
= 500 GeV

muon

0
1500

1600

1700

1800

1900

 shower depth l [mm]

1500

1600

1700

1800

1900

 shower depth l [mm]

 
]

m
m
/
1
[
 
l

/

d
E
d

 

t
o
t
E
/
1

0.006

0.005

0.004

0.003

0.002

0.001

a)

b)

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f
 
g
n

i
l

p
m
a
s

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f
 
g
n

i
l

p
m
a
s

c)

0.28

0.26

0.24

0.22

0.2

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.28

0.26

0.24

0.22

0.2

0.18

0.16

0.14

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5
 (l-l

4

4.5
)

-l

start

)/(l

start

max

Fig. 7. a) Shape of the energy deposited along the shower axis. b) Sampling fraction
along the shower axis. c) Sampling fraction rescaled to the shower maximum. Shown
are Monte Carlo simulations for electrons with beam energies of 10, 100 GeV and
500 GeV and muons with 10 GeV. In c) lstart is deﬁned as the beginning of the
calorimeter and lmax is the maximum of the shower.

36

]

V
e
G

[
 
a
 
t
e
s
f
f

O

0.3

0.28

0.26

0.24

0.22

0.2

0.18

0.16

0.14
0

a)

0.86

0.855

0.85

0.845

 

 

d
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
r
o
c
 
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f
 
g
n

i
l

p
m
a
s

0.84
0

c)

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200

0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200

beamE

 [GeV]

b)

beamE

 [GeV]

At E= 100 GeV: 
= 0.181 

f

samp

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200

beamE

 [GeV]

beamE

 [GeV]

Fig. 8. Calibration parameters extracted from the Monte Carlo simulation as a func-
tion of the beam energy. The calibration parameters are deﬁned in eq. 7. The lines
illustrate a parameterisation of the energy dependence of the calibration coeﬃcients.

 

b
 
e
p
o
S

l

12.4

12.2

12

11.8

11.6

11.4

11.2

11

c
 
e
p
o
S

l

3

2.8

2.6

2.4

2.2

2

1.8
0

d)

37

beamE

=  10 GeV

beamE

= 180 GeV

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08
visE
0

0.1
 [GeV]

0.05

0.1

0.15
 [GeV]

visE
0

beamE

=  10 GeV

beamE

= 180 GeV

]

V
e
G

[
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
m
a
e
r
t
s
p
u

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

a)

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

]

V
e
G

[
 

/

s
p
i
r
t
s
S
P
n
e
e
w
t
e
b

 

 
 

y
g
r
e
n
e

c)

0
0

0.05

0.1

0.15
vis
(E
0

0.2
0.5)1
vis

0.25
 [GeV]

0.3

  E

0.2

0.4

0.6

vis

0.8
 E

1
0.5)1

vis

1.2
 [GeV]

(E
0

Fig. 9. Mean energy lost before and in the PS as a function of the visible energy in
the PS for electrons of 10 (a) and 180 GeV (b). Mean energy lost after the PS and
1 )0.5
before the ﬁrst accordion compartment as a function of the estimator (Evis
for electrons of 10 (c) and 180 GeV (d). The dashed lines indicate the linear ap-
proximation in the range, where the calibration parameters have been extracted.

Evis

0

·

2.5

1.5

3

2

1

]

V
e
G

[
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
m
a
e
r
t
s
p
u

0.5

0
0

b)

]

V
e
G

[
 

/

 

s
p
i
r
t
s
S
P
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
y
g
r
e
n
e

 

3.5

2.5

1.5

3

2

1

0.5

0
0

d)

38

E= 100 GeV

)
0
=
o
l
a
c

r
r
o
c

Φ
d
(

c
e
r
E

/
)
r
r
o
c

o
l
a
c

Φ
d
(

c
e
r
E

1.015

1.01

1.005

1

0.995

0.99

0.985

−0.4−0.3−0.2 −0.1 −0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4

Φd

corr
calo

 [middle cell units]

Fig. 10. Correction for the mean energy as a function of the φ impact position within
a cell obtained from a data run with electrons at E = 100 GeV. Overlayed as line
is a parameterisation.

39

n
o
i
t
c
e
r
r
o
c
 
g
n
u
h
a
r
t
s
s
m
e
r
B

l

1.004

1.0035

1.003

1.0025

1.002

1.0015

1.001

1.0005

40

1
0

100

200
beamE

300

 [GeV]

Fig. 11. Correction for the eﬀect of Bremsstrahlung in the “far” material as a
function of the electron beam energy. The solid line indicates the correction for the
standard beam-line set-up. The band gives the uncertainty due to variation of the
“far” material.

0

0.02

0.04
0E

/(Evis

0.06
2+Evis

0.08
3+Evis

0.1
)vis

1

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
)vis
/(Evis

2+Evis

3+Evis

1E

1

a)

c)

0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
3+Evis
2E

2+Evis

/(Evis

1
)vis

1

d)

-210

-0.02

0
3E

/(Evis

0.02
2+Evis

1

3+Evis

0.04
)vis

Fig. 12. Visible energy fraction distribution for electrons with E = 10 GeV and
E = 100 GeV in the PS (a) and the ﬁrst (b), second (c) and third (d) compartment
of the accordion calorimeter. Shown are data (circles) and a Monte Carlo simulation
(line). The band indicates the uncertainty in the Monte Carlo simulation due to the
“far” material and the material in front of the PS.

Data E
Data E

beam

beam

=  10 GeV
= 100 GeV

MC

210

10

1

0

1

)
)

s
i
v
3
E
+
s
i
v
2
E
+
s
i
v
E

(
/

s
i

/

v
E
(
d
n
d
N
/
1

 

-110

-210

10

)
)

s
i
v
3
E
+
s
i
v
2
E
+
s
i
v
E

(
/

/

s
i
v
E
(
d
n
d
N
/
1

 

1

1

2

-110

-210

10

)
)

s
i
v
3
E
+
s
i
v
2
E
+
s
i
v
E

(
/

s
i

/

v
E
(
d
n
d
N
/
1

 

1

1

1

-110

-210
0

b)

210

10

1

3

1

)
)

s
i
v
3
E
+
s
i
v
2
E
+
s
i
v
E

(
/

/

s
i
v
E
(
d
n
d
N
/
1

 

-110

41

beamE

=  10 GeV

1

1

beamE

=  50 GeV

8

9

10

42

44

46

48

11
recE

12
 [GeV]

-310

40

b)

50
recE

54
52
 [GeV]

1

beamE

= 100 GeV

1

beamE

= 180 GeV

Data
MC

]

V
e
G
1
[
 

/

/

c
e
r
E
d
n
d
N
/
1

 

-110

-210

-310

]

V
e
G
/
1
[
 

/

c
e
r
E
d
n
d
N
/
1

 

-110

-210

a)

c)

-310

90

92

94

96

98

100 102 104
recE

 [GeV]

-310

160

d)

165

170

175

180
 [GeV]

recE

Fig. 13. Shape of the reconstructed energy distribution for electrons with (a)
E = 10, (b) 50, (c) 100 and (d) 180 GeV. Shown are data and a Monte Carlo
simulation. The band indicates the uncertainty in the Monte Carlo simulation due
to the “far” material and the material in front of the PS.

]

V
e
G
1
[
 

/

/

c
e
r
E
d
n
d
N
/
1

 

-110

-210

]

V
e
G
/
1
[
 

/

c
e
r
E
d
n
d
N
/
1

 

-110

-210

42

1

beamE

= 10 GeV

Data
MC

1

beamE

= 50 GeV

Data
MC

-310

-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0

4

8 10
6
2
η
 [strip-units]

-310

b)

-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0

4

8 10
6
2
η
 [strip-units]

a)

1

beamE

= 100 GeV

1

beamE

= 180 GeV

Data
MC

Data
MC

]
s
t
i
n
u
-
p
i
r
t
s
[
 
η
d
E
d

/

 

E
/
1

-110

1

-210

]
s
t
i
n
u
-
p
i
r
t
s
[
 
η
d
E
d

/

 

E
/
1

-110

1

-210

-310

-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0

-310

-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0

4

8 10
6
2
η
 [strip-units]

d)

c)

4

8 10
6
2
η
 [strip-units]

Fig. 14. Shape of the energy distribution as a function of the η-direction in the
ﬁrst calorimeter compartment for beam energies of (a) E = 10 GeV, (b) 60 GeV,
(c) 100 GeVand (d) 180 GeV. Shown are data (closed symbols) and a Monte Carlo
simulation (lines). To illustrate the energy dependence the data with an beam en-
ergy of E = 10 GeV are superimposed in d) to the data with E = 180 GeV. The
systematic uncertainty in the Monte Carlo simulation due to the “far” material and
the material in front of the PS is shown, but is not visible.

]
s
t
i
n
u
-
p
i
r
t
s
[
 
η
d
E
d

/

-110

 

1
E
/
1

-210

]
s
t
i
n
u
-
p
i
r
t
s
[
 
η
d
E
d

/

-110

 

1
E
/
1

-210

43

-310
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

Data
MC e 
 πMC 
MC e + 

 π

1.8

2
1.6
) 3+E
/(E1E
2

Data
MC e 
 πMC 
MC e + 

 π

2

1

)
)

3
E
+

E

(
/

/

E
(
d
n
d
N
/
1

 

10

1

-110

-210

a)

2

1

)
)

3
E
+

E

(
/

/

E
(
d
n
d
N
1

/

 

10

1

-110

-210

-310
0

b)

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.9

1
0.8
) 3+E
/(E1E
2

Fig. 15. Shape of the ratio of the ﬁrst (E1) over the sum of the second (E2) and
of the third (E3) calorimeter compartment. Shown are data (closed circles) with
E = 10 GeV (a) and E = 50 GeV (b) and Monte Carlo simulations for electrons
(dashed), pions (dotted) and an appropriate mixture of electrons and pions (solid).

44

Data
beam energy uncertainty uncorrelated
beam energy uncertainty correlated

 1.0‰± 

m
a
e
b
E
/
c
e
r
E

1.006

1.004

1.002

1

0.998

0.996

0.994

0.992

0.99
0

50

100

150

200
 [GeV]

beamE

Fig. 16. Ratio of the reconstructed electron energy to the beam energy as a
function of the beam energy. All points are normalised to the value measured
at E = 100 GeV. The inner band illustrates the uncorrelated uncertainty of the
beam energy measurement; in the outer band the correlated uncertainty is added
in quadrature to the inner band.

45

1.0025
m
a
e
b

1.002

1.0015

c
e
r

1.001

1.0005

1

0.9995

0.999

0.9985

0.998

E

/

 

E
n
o
i
t
a
i
r
a
v
 
.
l
e
r

0.9975
0

a)

1.0025
m
a
e
b

1.002

E

/

1.0015

c
e
r

1.001

1.0005

1

0.9995

0.999

0.9985

0.998

0.9975
0

c)

 

E
n
o
i
t
a
i
r
a
v
 
.
l
e
r

1.0025
m
a
e
b

1.002

E

/

1.0015

c
e
r

1.001

1.0005

 

E
n
o
i
t
a

i
r
a
v

 
.
l

e
r

1

0.9995

0.999

0.9985

0.998

0.9975
0

e)

1.0025
m
a
e
b

1.002

E

/

1.0015

c
e
r

1.001

1.0005

1

0.9995

0.999

0.9985

0.998

0.9975
0

g)

 

E
n
o
i
t
a

i
r
a
v

 
.
l

e
r

1.0025
m
a
e
b

1.002

E

/

1.0015

c
e
r

1.001

 

E
n
o
i
t
a
i
r
a
v
 
.
l
e
r

1.0005

1

0.9995

0.999

0.9985

0.998

0.9975
0

i)

PS normalisation

Strip/Middle normalisation

 1.0‰± 

 1.0‰± 

20

40

60

80

100 120 140 160 180 200 220

20

40

60

80

100 120 140

beamE

 [GeV]

160 180 200 220
beamE

 [GeV]

LAr in front of PS

Strip/Middle material

 1.0‰± 

 1.0‰± 

20

40

60

80

100 120 140 160 180 200 220

20

40

60

80

100 120 140

beamE

 [GeV]

160 180 200 220
beamE

 [GeV]

timing

Fit range

 1.0‰± 

 1.0‰± 

20

40

60

80

100 120 140 160 180 200 220

20

40

60

80

100 120 140

beamE

 [GeV]

160 180 200 220
beamE

 [GeV]

Bremsstrahlung correction

lateral cluster size

 1.0‰± 

 1.0‰± 

20

40

60

80

100 120 140 160 180 200 220

20

40

60

80

100 120 140

beamE

 [GeV]

160 180 200 220
beamE

 [GeV]

Geant range cut dependence

γno 

 N interactions in Geant

 1.0‰± 

 1.0‰± 

E

/

 

E
n
o
i
t
a
i
r
a
v
 
.
l
e
r

1.0025
m
a
e
b

1.002

1.0015

c
e
r

1.001

1.0005

1

0.9995

0.999

0.9985

0.998

0.9975
0

b)

1.0025
m
a
e
b

1.002

E

/

1.0015

c
e
r

1.001

1.0005

1

0.9995

0.999

0.9985

0.998

0.9975
0

d)

 

E
n
o
i
t
a
i
r
a
v
 
.
l
e
r

1.0025
m
a
e
b

1.002

E

/

1.0015

c
e
r

1.001

1.0005

 

E
n
o
i
t
a

i
r
a
v

 
.
l

e
r

1

0.9995

0.999

0.9985

0.998

0.9975
0

f)

1.0025
m
a
e
b

1.002

E

/

1.0015

c
e
r

1.001

1.0005

1

0.9995

0.999

0.9985

0.998

0.9975
0

h)

 

E
n
o
i
t
a

i
r
a
v

 
.
l

e
r

1.0025
m
a
e
b

1.002

E

/

1.0015

c
e
r

1.001

1.0005

 

E
n
o
i
t
a
i
r
a
v
 
.
l
e
r

1

0.9995

0.999

0.9985

0.998

0.9975
0

j)

20

40

60

80

100 120 140 160 180 200 220

20

40

60

80

100 120 140

beamE

 [GeV]

160 180 200 220
beamE

 [GeV]

Fig. 17. Sensitivity to systematic eﬀects on the electron energy measurements: a) the
normalisation of the PS, b) the relative normalisation of the strips and the middle,
c) the amount of LAr in front of the PS, d) the amount of material between the PS
and the strips e) the event arrival time with respect to the data acquisition clock,
f) the range where the Gaussian ﬁt is performed, g) the Bremsstrahlung correction
(amount of ”far” material), h) the lateral shower description, i) the dependence on
the range cut used in the simulation j) the presence of photon nucleon reactions
46
in the simulation, Shown is the relative variation of the reconstructed to the beam
electron energy. All points are normalised to the value measured at E = 100 GeV.
The closed and open circles show the variations of the corresponding systematic

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

 
 

V
e
G
 
0
2
 
n
h
t
i

i

 

w
V
e
G

/
)

‰

(
 
e
p
o
l
s

-0.05
0

20

40

60

80

100

120
beamE

140
 [GeV]

Fig. 18. Slope calculated for the energy measurements within 20 GeV around a given
electron energy. The point represent the default result, while the band illustrates
the slopes obtained from the systematic variations.

47

Sampl.   Const. Term

[%/ 
10.1

]     [%]

(GeV)
0.1     0.17

±

±

0.04

Data
Data noise subtracted
Noise

 

0.05

/

E
0.045
E

σ

0.04

0.035

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0

100

200
beamE

 [GeV]

Fig. 19. Fractional energy resolution as a function of the beam energy. Shown are
the data before (closed circles) and after (open circle) the gain dependent noise
subtraction. Overlayed as a line is a parameterisation of the resolution based on eq. 8
obtained from a ﬁt. The open squares indicate the subtracted noise contribution.

48

