6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Capacity formulas in MWPC: some critical
reﬂexions.

P. Van Esch

February 2, 2008

Abstract

An approximate analytical expression for ”capacitance” of MWPC
conﬁgurations circulates in the literature since decades and is copied over
and over again. In this paper we will try to show that this formula cor-
responds to a physical quantity that is diﬀerent from what it is usually
thought to stand for.

1 Introduction

Simple as it may seem, the concept of capacitance is a many-faced item when
working in a setup with many electrodes such as it is the case in a MWPC, and
it is easy to get lost. We will ﬁrst analyze exactly what are the diﬀerent accepted
deﬁnitions of capacitance and how they are related to physical quantities that
aﬀect the functioning of the detector. Next we compare that to the established
formula we will analyze here. It is the expression for ”the capacitance per unit
length of each wire” in the case of a parallel wire grid, symmetrically placed
between two conducting planes:

C =

2πǫ0
s − ln 2πrs

s

πl

(1)

In this expression, s is the spacing of the wires in the grid, l is the distance
between the wire plane and each of the conducting planes and rs is the radius
of the wires. The formula is based upon an approximation which is excellent
when s is of the order of or smaller than l. This equation can be found in [2]
and in about all courses on gas detectors. It ﬁnds its origin in a formula in an
old paper by Erskine [3], where Erskine calculated the accumulated charge on a
wire plane between two planar conductors. The problem is that stated this way,
the formula seems to imply that the above quantity called C is, for instance,
the capacitance as seen by the input of an ampliﬁer that is connected to a single
wire. This is the capacitance that will then determine the noise current induced
by the equivalent voltage noise (series noise) of the ampliﬁer. We will show in
this paper that that is not true: C is not that quantity. But one can already

1

see that there is something disturbing about the given formula: namely the fact
that the capacitance per wire increases when, all other dimensions equal, the
wire spacing increases.
Is equation 1 wrong then ? The answer is no. The
formula does describe a quantity that can be called a capacitance, but it is not
the usual deﬁnition — and it is not what the ampliﬁer will see at its entrance.

2 Deﬁnitions of capacitance.

In order to understand the diﬀerent possible deﬁnitions of capacitance and the
confusion it can lead to, a short, elementary review is due. One cannot do
better than to return to Jackson [1] in order to have a clear deﬁnition of what
is ”capacitance”. There, on p. 43, it is clearly stated: ”For a system of n
conductors, each with potential Vi and total charge Qi in otherwise empty space,
the electrostatic potential energy can be expressed in terms of the potentials
alone and certain geometrical quantities called coeﬃcients of capacity.”, and
further:

Qi =

Cij Vj

n

X
j=1

We could even add to this that ”empty space” can be a conﬁned volume with
an enclosing conducting wall at ground potential. Next, Jackson writes: ”The
coeﬃcients Cii are called capacitances while the Cij , i 6= j are called the co-
eﬃcients of induction.” and ”The capacitance of a conductor is therefore the
total charge on the conductor when it is maintained at unit potential, all other
conductors being held at zero potential.”. Note that capacitance is normally
a positive quantity, while the coeﬃcient of induction is normally a negative
quantity. The coeﬃcient of induction C12 is the ”crosstalk” capacitance which
induces charges on conductor 1 when voltages (with respect to ground) appear
on conductor 2, all other conductors, including conductor 1, remaining at the
same potential (with respect to ground).

It is the capacitance, as deﬁned by Jackson, that is ”seen” by the input of
an ampliﬁer (and hence enters into the noise calculations), when all conductors
are connected to (low-impedance) charge ampliﬁers.

Jackson also deﬁnes: ”the capacitance of two conductors carrying equal
and opposite charges in the presence of other grounded conductors is deﬁned
as the ratio of the charge on one conductor to the potential diﬀerence between
them”. This can then easily be worked out to result in the following expression:

C1−2 =

C11C22 − C12C21
C11 + C22 + C12 + C21

which reduces, in the symmetrical case (C11 = C22, C12 = C21), to:

(2)

(3)

(4)

This is the capacitance that is measured by a ﬂoating capacitance meter between
conductors 1 and 2 (when all other conductors are put to ground potential).

C1−2 =

C11 − C12
2

2

Figure 1: Equivalent capacitor network.

Note that numerically, C1−2 is bigger than |C12|, because it includes also the
indirect capacitive coupling in series: node 1 - ground - node 2. For instance, if
there is no direct coupling (C12 = 0) we ﬁnd, indeed, that C1−2 = C11/2.

What is the relationship between these quantities and a network of ”equiv-
alent capacitors” linking all conductors (nodes) amongst them and to ground,
as shown in ﬁgure 1 ? Let us note by cij , i 6= j the equivalent capacitor linking
nodes i and j, and by cii the equivalent capacitor linking node i to ground.
We now have a passive linear network to which we can apply the well-known
method of node potentials [4] to write (with p the Laplace variable):

p

n
k=1 c1k

P
−pc21
...





−pc12
n
k=1 c2k
...

P

...
...
...





× 


v1
v2
...





= 


i1
i2
...





(5)

Bringing p to the other side, we obtain, on the right hand side, elements
of the form i1/p which, in the time domain, come down to integrating the
current over time, so i1/p can be replaced by the charge Q1 etc... and we
recognize the equivalences between the capacitance matrix of Jackson and the
elements of the node voltage conductance matrix above: cij = −Cij, i 6= j and
cii =

n
k=1 Cik = Cii −

Pi6=j |Cij |.

P

3 The meaning of Erskin’s formula

Equation 1 is based upon an expression Erskin derives in [3], when he calculates
an approximate expression for the charge Q on each wire when all wires are

3

brought to a potential V0. Formula 1 is then nothing else but the ratio of
C = Q/V0. Let us consider an arbitrary wire number 1 ; using equation 2, we
can then easily derive that C =
it is the
capacitor element from the wire to ground in the equivalent network. But note
that this is NOT the capacitance of the wire with respect to ground which is
C11.

n
k=1 C1k and this is equal to c11:
P

Unfortunately, the only way to measure, in a direct way, c11, is by connecting
all other wires to the output of a 1:1 buﬀer ampliﬁer which has a high impedance
and whose input is connected to wire number 1, using all other wires in an
active shielding conﬁguration. If we then measure, with a capacitance meter,
the capacitance of wire 1 w.r.t. ground, we will ﬁnd c11.
Indeed, the only
capacitor on which the charge can ﬂow is on c11: all c1k capacitors are, through
the servo mechanism of the buﬀer ampliﬁer, kept on the same potential on both
sides and do not take in any charge. This also explains the counterintuitive
behavior of equation 1, that when the wires get closer, C diminishes:
indeed,
there is more and more active shielding of the ground plane by the nearby wires,
and less and less direct coupling to the ground plane, so the closer the active
shielding wires come, the less capacity is measured.

However, it is now also clear that this ”capacitance” C is almost never the
physical quantity we need in an actual application (such as the load to the
entrance of an ampliﬁer). Only in the limit of large s, when c12 goes to 0, would
c11 become equal to C11, but there the approximation used is not valid anymore
!

If we connect the other wires to a high-impedance (voltage) ampliﬁer (essen-
tially leaving them ﬂoating) this comes down to having no possibility of having
a ﬂow of net charge on these wires when wire 1 is brought from 0 to 1 V. In
this case, it is as if these wires are absent, and the capacitance measured on
wire 1 will be the capacitance of a single wire (limit s → ∞), which is repre-
sented by the line w1 in ﬁgure 2. As such, we should have a capacitance which
is independent of s; again not the value given by C. In fact, it is impossible
without using active components to make the value of the capacitance as seen
by an ampliﬁer descend below the value of w1. Any passive load on the other
wires will increase the capacitance seen by the ampliﬁer, through c12, and not
decrease it, as does formula 1.

We can compare the result of an exact calculation of the capacitance C11 of
wires of 1 m length (in a semi-analytic way, in a very similar way as done by
Erskine [3]) of the middle wire of a set of 1, 3 or 7 wires (curves w1, w3 and w7)
with equation 1. We also include a calculation of the capacitance of a single
wire over a ground plane. We take the case of wires with a diameter of 20 µm, a
distance between the wire plane and each of the ground planes of 2mm and we
plot the quantities as a function of the wire spacing. We also show the values
of C1−2 and of c12 for comparison.

This is shown in ﬁgure 2 Clearly, although in a certain range, by coincidence,
the numerical values of both calculations are of the same magnitude (and of the
order of ǫ0), both curves have nothing to do with one another. The value needed
in most applications is not the one given by formula 1.

4

Figure 2: Capacitance of a single wire, calculated in diﬀerent ways: w1, w3 and
w7 stand respectively for the C11 calculation with 1, 3 or 7 wires. They are
compared the formula 1, and to the formula for the capacitance of a wire over a
single plane. c12, the induction coeﬃcient, and C1−2, the capacitance between
two adjacent wires, are also displayed.

4 Discussion

In this paper we reviewed the diﬀerent aspects of the concept of ”capacitance”
and used this to confront it to the calculation of a ”standard formula” for a
”capacitance” C, equation 1, well-known in the world of gas detectors. From this
comparison, it turns out that this quantity has a meaning, namely a capacitor
value in the equivalent circuit describing the capacitive interactions between the
wires and the ground plane c11, but that this is not the quantity it is usually
claimed it is supposed to be (namely the capacitance of a single wire C11).
The confusion between both quantities (which are shown to have numerically
diﬀerent behavior) can lead to wrong applications and wrong conclusions, for
instance, concerning the noise behavior of ampliﬁers connected to the wires of
a MWPC.

References

[1] J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 3rd edition, c(cid:13)1999 John David

Jackson, John Wiley and Sons.

[2] F. Sauli, Principles of Operation of Multiwire Proportional and Drift Cham-

bers, CERN 77-09, 1977.

[3] Erskine, Nucl. Instr. Meth. 105 (1972) 565

[4] Nahvi and Edminister, Schaum’s outlines of Electric Circuits

c(cid:13)2003

McGraw-Hill Companies

5

