6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
6
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
1
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Readout Electronics Tests and Integration of the ATLAS Semiconductor Tracker

Vasiliki A. Mitsouab for the ATLAS SCT Collaboration

a Instituto de F´isica Corpuscular (IFIC), CSIC – Universitat de Val`encia,
Ediﬁcio Institutos de Investigaci´on, P.O. Box 22085, E-46071 Valencia, Spain
b CERN, PH-ATT Department, CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland
vasiliki.mitsou@cern.ch

Abstract

The SemiConductor Tracker (SCT) together with the Pixel de-
tector and the Transition Radiation Tracker (TRT) form the cen-
tral tracking system of the ATLAS experiment at the LHC. It
consists of single-sided microstrip silicon sensors, which are
read out via binary ASICs based on the DMILL technology, and
the data are transmitted via radiation-hard optical ﬁbres. After
an overview of the SCT detector layout and readout system, the
ﬁnal-stage assembly of large-scale structures and the integration
with the TRT is presented. The focus is on the electrical perfor-
mance of the overall SCT detector system through the different
integration stages, including the detector control and data acqui-
sition system.

altogether, while a total of 1976 end-cap modules are mounted
on the disks. The whole SCT occupies a cylinder of 5.6 m in
length and 56 cm in radius with the innermost layer at a radius
of 27 cm.

The silicon modules [4, 5] consist of one or two pairs of
single-sided p-in-n microstrip sensors glued back-to-back at a
40-mrad stereo angle to provide two-dimensional track recon-
struction. The 285-µm thick sensors [6] have 768 AC-coupled
strips with an 80 µm pitch for the barrel and a 57 − 94 µm pitch
for the end-cap modules. Between the sensor pairs there is a
highly thermally conductive baseboard. Barrel modules follow
one common design, while for the forward ones four different
types exist according to their position in the detector.

I. INTRODUCTION

II. THE SCT READOUT SYSTEM

The ATLAS detector [1], one of the two general-purpose ex-
periments of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), has entered into
the ﬁnal stages of installation at CERN. The LHC, a proton-
proton collider with a 14-TeV centre-of-mass energy and a de-
sign luminosity of 1034 cm−2s−1, is expected to deliver the ﬁrst
proton beam by the end of 2007. The ATLAS central tracker (In-
ner Detector, ID) [2] combines the silicon detector technology
(pixels and micro-strips) in the innermost part with a straw drift
detector with transition radiation detection capabilities (Transi-
tion Radiation Tracker, TRT) in the outside, operating in a 2-T
superconducting solenoid.

Figure 1: Layout of the ATLAS Inner Detector: it comprises the Tran-
sition Radiation Detector, the Semiconductor Tracker and the Pixel sys-
tem from the outer to the inner radii, respectively.

The microstrip detector (Semiconductor Tracker, SCT), as
shown in Fig. 1, forms the middle layer of the ID between the
Pixel detector and the TRT. The SCT system [2, 3] comprises a
barrel made of four nested cylinders and two end-caps of nine
disks each. The barrel layers carry 2112 detector units (modules)

1Digital Optical Receiver Integrated Circuit.
2VCSEL (Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Laser) Driver Chip.

1

The readout of the module is based on 12 ABCD3TA ASICs
manufactured in the radiation-hard DMILL process mounted on
a copper/kapton hybrid [7]. The ABCD3TA chip [8] features a
128-channel analog front end consisting of ampliﬁers and com-
parators and a digital readout circuit operating at a frequency
of 40.08 MHz. This ASIC utilises the binary scheme where
the signals from the silicon detector are ampliﬁed, compared
to a threshold and only the result of the comparison enters the
input register and a 132-cell deep pipeline, awaiting a level-1
trigger accept signal. It implements a redundancy mechanism
that redirects the output and the control signals, so that a failing
chip can be bypassed. To reduce the channel-to-channel thresh-
old variation, in particular after irradiation, the ABCD3TA fea-
tures an individual threshold correction in each channel with a
4-bit digital-to-analog converter (TrimDAC) with four selectable
ranges. In addition, a calibration circuitry is implemented in the
chip providing an injection charge in the range 0.5 − 10 fC.
By injecting various known charges and performing threshold
scans, the analogue properties of each channel can be deter-
mined, such as the gain, the offset and the noise.

The clock and command signals as well as the data are trans-
mitted from and to the off-detector electronics through optical
links [9]. On the detector side, the DORIC1 and VDC2 are
utilised for receiving the optical clock and control signal (one
link) and for data transmission (two links), respectively. There-
fore, three optical ﬁbres are connected to each module, termi-
nated by an opto-package consisting of Si p-i-n diodes and VC-
SELs mounted on the Back-Of-Crate (BOC) card. The latter
serves as an interface between the optical signals and the off-
detector electronics in the Read-Out Driver (ROD). Each ROD

controls and monitors 48 SCT modules.

The LHC operating conditions demand challenging electri-
cal performance speciﬁcations for the SCT modules and the lim-
itations mainly concern acceptable noise occupancy level, track-
ing efﬁciency, timing and power consumption. These require-
ments reﬂect on the design of the readout system, as well as
on the quality assurance/control strategy followed throughout
the detector construction. To this respect, a series of electrical
tests were performed during the various stages of the detector as-
sembly; from module production [10], to macro-assembly [11],
at reception at CERN [12], and eventually after the ﬁnal inte-
gration with TRT. These repetitive tests are necessary to ensure
that the module/system performance does not change after each
stage, to ﬁnalise the corresponding data acquisition software,
and to learn how to recover potential errors/problems. The ﬁ-
nal stages of the SCT assembly and testing at CERN were car-
ried out in the ATLAS SR1 clean-room, equipped with a system
capable of characterising up to one million readout channels si-
multaneously. Electronics tests results such as electrical connec-
tions checks, noise and gain measurements, as well as temper-
ature and leakage current measurements were given particular
attention. The outcome of these electronics tests, essential also
for the validation of the grounding, shielding and cooling sys-
tem, are discussed in the following sections.

III. SCT ASSEMBLY AND INTEGRATION

After the module production, being distributed over sev-
eral sites in Australia, Europe, Japan and the USA, the macro-
assembly3 took place in three laboratories, in the UK and the
Netherlands. The four barrel layers were assembled at the Uni-
versity of Oxford employing two specially designed robots for
the mounting of modules onto cylindrical support structures.
A detail of a barrel layer showing the overlapping modules is
given in Fig. 2 (left). The on-detector services, being ﬁtted dur-
ing macro-assembly, include thin-wall Cu-Ni pipes and module
cooling blocks, which remove heat through an evaporative C3F8
cooling system. The modules are individually supplied with LV
and HV power through Al- or Cu-on-Kapton low mass tapes.

stable operation for a simultaneous readout of up to one million
channels in terms of thermal operation, data acquisition and de-
tector control. More than 99.7% of all barrel channels are fully
operational as evident from Table 1, where detailed informa-
tion for dead and noisy channels for each barrel is given. These
ﬁgures are in agreement with the ones obtained during module
production. The average module noise was stable at 4.5 × 10−5,
well below the design speciﬁcation of 5 × 10−4. Concerning
the detector bias, the leakage current drawn by the sensors at
∼ 15◦C was much lower than 1 µA at the nominal bias value of
150 V, i.e. within the speciﬁcations.

Table 1: Channel defects breakdown for the barrel SCT as measured
after macro-assembly, in Oxford and at CERN.

Barrel

Dead Noisy Other Total defects

Total nr.
channels

589 824

737 280

884 736
1 032 192

B3

B4

B5

B6

Total

3 244 032

357

245

770
2513

3885

460

242

492
1936

3130

666

354

556
1271

2847

1483 (0.25%)

841 (0.11%)

1818 (0.21%)
5720 (0.55%)

9862 (0.30%)

After completing the individual testing of the barrels at
CERN SR1 room, the four layers were eventually integrated
into one barrel. This operation, completed within a period of
three months, was carried out step-by-step with one layer being
inserted into the structure each time from the largest down to
the smallest one. During this operation, the SCT services of the
inner layer were transferred onto a horizontal service support
structure, whereas the ones of the outer layer were unfolded ra-
dially at the ends.

The two end-caps, on the other hand, were brought to-
gether at the University of Liverpool (End-Cap C, EC-C) and
at NIKHEF (End-Cap A, EC-A). The modules were manually
mounted onto disks, fully characterised in a test-box and ﬁnally
the disks were installed inside carbon ﬁbre cylinders. A photo-
graph of the fully assembled EC-C as seen from inside is shown
in Fig. 2 (right); all disks are clearly visible. Both end-caps have
been transferred to CERN —ﬁrst EC-C and then EC-A— and
they have passed successfully the reception tests, which include
visual inspection, disk alignment measurements, examination of
the cooling circuits and comprehensive electronics tests. The
EC-A was tested while cooled down to the nominal temperature
of −7◦C in contrast to EC-C which was tested warm. The mea-
sured ENC5 noise for each module of EC-A is shown in Fig. 3.
These values are comparable to the ones measured during mod-
ule assembly [10] and after macro-assembly at NIKHEF. The
fraction of dead channels was also found to be at the same level
as previously measured and around 0.2%.

Many of the activities performed on the SCT large structures
was devoted to connection and manipulation of services, i.e. the
connection of the evaporative cooling plants, the ﬁnal power
supplies and readout electronics. A prototype of the ﬁnal Data
Acquisition (DAQ) system, consisted of RODs and BOCs, and

Figure 2: Left: detail from a barrel outer surface; silicon sensors and
hybrids are visible. Right: beam’s eye view of end-cap C.

The electrical performance of whole barrels was duly tested
in Oxford for barrels 3, 4 and 64 and at CERN for barrels 3
and 5. All digital and analog functions were examined by fol-
lowing standard measuring procedures [10]. The tests showed

3Mounting of modules onto disks (end-cap) or cylinders (barrel) and installation of the respective services.
4The four SCT barrels are numbered from 3 to 6 starting from the innermost one, i.e. B3–B6, whereas B0–B2 denote the pixel layers.
5Equivalent Noise Charge deﬁned as the input charge giving signal equal to effective output noise (expressed in electrons).

2

the Detector Control System (DCS) was engaged. The DCS pro-
vides high and low voltage for the sensors and ABCD3TA chips,
voltage for the DORIC and VDC ASICs and monitors the tem-
perature on the modules. Besides monitoring and controlling
various parameters of these power supplies, the DCS includes
a hard-wired interlock system which automatically switches off
the power supply to certain groups of modules in the event of an
over-temperature. In addition, the DCS monitors humidity and
temperature sensors mounted on the outlets of each cooling loop
and records the corresponding data.

TTCs. Three scintillator counters were also installed (see Fig. 5,
left) to provide an external trigger from cosmic rays to both de-
tector systems. A typical cosmic-ray track is shown on the right-
hand side of Fig. 5 as reconstructed by a combined SCT & TRT
tracking algorithm. The measurement results that follow were
obtained with this cosmic setup.

Figure 4: Insertion of barrel SCT into barrel TRT; the OTE is visible
surrounding the barrel SCT, as well as the services on the ISSS (fore-
ground).

Figure 3: ENC noise per module for all disks of end-cap A as mea-
sured at CERN. The modulation observed in the plot is due to the dif-
ferent noise levels of the four types of end-cap modules [5]; ∼ 1450 −
1550 e− for the outer and long middle modules and ∼ 900 − 1100 e−
for the inner and short middle ones.

Each of the three SCT blocks, the barrel and the end-caps,
are enfolded in cylindrical structures, the Outer and the Inner
Thermal Enclosures (OTE and ITE, respectively). These foam-
based layers, covered by aluminised Kapton (OTE) or carbon-
ﬁbre-reinforced-plastic (ITE), provide gas tightness,6 thermal
isolation and Faraday shielding. The gas envelopes are comple-
mented by ﬂat panels ﬁtted on the ends. A quite large fraction
of testing time was given to gas tightness measurements, iden-
tiﬁcation and sealing of leaks. After several iterations, the leak
rate was reduced to an acceptable level for the barrel and EC-C
(EC-A OTE has not been ﬁtted yet).

IV. BARREL SCT-TRT INTEGRATION

The integration and commissioning of the barrel SCT with
the respective TRT [14] is almost complete. It started in Febru-
ary 2006 with the insertion of one detector into the other, shown
in Fig. 4, using a rail system and a cantilever stand. During this
operation, the SCT services were transferred onto the Insertion
Service Support Structure (ISSS), ﬁxed onto the SCT cradle ex-
tensions. The TRT, installed in the inner detector trolley, was
ﬁnally slid over the SCT.

A series of combined tests followed the integration of the
barrel ID, covering a wide spectrum of operational and de-
tector performance related aspects [15]. During these tests in
SR1, one eighth of the TRT and one quarter of the SCT were
equipped with the complete readout chain, in a top-bottom lay-
out as shown in the left-hand side of Fig. 5. As far as the SCT
is concerned, 468 out of the 2112 modules were read out us-
ing 12 RODs and one TIM.7 In the TRT, on the other hand,
about 10 000 channels were examined with nine RODs and three

Figure 5: Left: Transverse schematic view of the setup for the cosmic
run. The actually read out parts are highlighted (half of the bottom
TRT section was not read out). Three scintillator counters were used
for trigger. Right: reconstructed cosmic track in the SCT and the TRT.

A typical electrical testing sequence begins by establishing
communication between the modules and the off-detector elec-
tronics system and by optimising the optical links settings. Af-
ter the digital tests, i.e. checking the redundancy links, the chip
by-pass functionality and the pipeline circuit, the analogue mea-
surements follow. These include measurements of the gain, the
offset and the noise for each channel and evaluation of the mod-
ule noise occupancy. The noise is measured by performing a
threshold scan in the absence of charge injection. The slope of
the logarithm of the occupancy versus the square of the thresh-
old is approximately proportional to the ENC noise. Further-
more, the noise occupancy at the 1-fC threshold level is ob-
tained, with the exact 1-fC point for each channel already been
deﬁned by the trimming. Several distinct conﬁgurations were
tried in order to assess the potential dependence of the noise on
those.

The noise stability was monitored throughout the measure-
ments and only a slight increase was observed for single bar-
rels in comparison with the macro-assembly values, as well as
between the whole barrel and the individual barrel layers. No
pick-up noise was detected in the presence of external heaters

6The SCT will be operated in a N2 environment at −7◦C, whereas the TRT will be embedded in CO2 at a temperature of ∼ 20◦C.
7TTC (Timing, Trigger & Control) Interface Module.

3

In Fig. 7, a comparison between the ENC noise recorded
when the SCT only is read out (left panel) and when the TRT
is also operated simultaneously (right panel). The ENC noise in
both cases remains the same and equal to ∼ 1750 e−, thus no
electrical pick-up noise is induced between the two detectors.
A similar result is acquired when a different data compression
logic8 than the previously applied test mode (XXX, excluding
000) is selected; for the level mode (X1X), the ENC noise is
1611 electrons for the SCT only and 1610 electrons for SCT &
TRT together. Similar conclusions are drawn for the TRT in the
absence/presence of the SCT readout.

Figure 7: Noise occupancy as a function of the threshold for SCT only
(left panel) and for SCT and TRT simultaneous readout (right panel)
when the test mode (XXX, excluding 000) is selected for the data
compression. The points represent measurements taken with threshold
scans and the curves are analytically (through a complementary error
function) derived from the ENC value indicated.

As far as common-mode noise is concerned, no evidence of
such was found. There was no increase in noise occupancy ob-
served when using synchronous triggers. No correlations have
been observed neither between noise hits within chips, nor be-
tween hits on different modules.

The ID barrel was transported from SR1 building and in-
stalled in the ATLAS detector in August 2006. After being
lowered into the ATLAS cavern with only a few millimeters of
clearance, the detector was successfully inserted in the liquid
argon calorimeter cryostat (see Fig. 8). The ﬁnal stage of the
barrel ID commissioning is under way, involving the connection
of cables and services, the veriﬁcation of full connectivity to the
power supplies, readout and DAQ systems, and the on-detector
functionality checks of all detector modules for SCT and TRT.
This intervention will be carried out by implementing the ﬁnal
grounding and shielding scheme for all ∼ 2000 SCT modules
and the complete TRT. It should validate the detector for au-
tonomous operation for ten years without further access.

on the SCT thermal enclosure. After applying temperature cor-
rections, the ENC noise was found to be ∼ 40 − 50 e− higher
for the barrel than after macro-assembly.

For the noise occupancy measurements,

the TrimDAC
thresholds for each channel were initially set to the value ob-
tained during module production, leading however to a wide
threshold variation. To remedy this problem the so-called new
Response Curve (RC) conﬁguration was introduced, which in-
cluded a ∼ 10% wafer-by-wafer correction to account for vari-
ations in the ABCD3TA calibration capacitor. The latter conﬁg-
uration is compared with the old trim target uncorrected one in
Fig. 6 with respect to the measured noise occupancy. With the
new conﬁguration, the noise occupancy values are clearly less
scattered, returning an r.m.s. value of 3.7 × 10−5, whereas the
old one gives an r.m.s. of 5.5 × 10−5. The observed decrease
in the mean value with the RC threshold, on the other hand, is
due to the long period of detector bias preceding these measure-
ments, rather than the threshold conﬁguration. This behaviour
had previously been observed in single barrel tests and is evident
in calibration as well as physics-mode runs. The RC conﬁgura-
tion was used throughout the cosmic run.

Figure 6: Average noise occupancy for each chip for the cosmic test
setup and for two different threshold conﬁgurations: the‘old trim tar-
get’ (blue), rendering a mean (r.m.s.) value of 6.8×10−5 (5.5×10−5),
and the ‘new RC’ (green), returning 5.1 × 10−5 (3.7 × 10−5), respec-
tively. The measurements with RC conﬁguration were taken after a few
days with detector bias.

The effect of high trigger frequency was studied by varying
the pulser rate in physics mode. For a trigger rate ranging from
5 Hz up to 50 kHz, no evidence of increase in noise occupancy
was found.

The grounding scheme may be a potential factor contributing
to noise level. Therefore the effect of a change in the grounding
was studied, by measuring the noise occupancy with the power
supply DC shorting cards in and out when noth SCT and TRT
are triggered from a pulser at 50 Hz. No signiﬁcant change in the
noise occupancy was observed, however the grounding scheme
in SR1 is not the ﬁnal one, which will not be available before
the detector is installed in its ﬁnal position.

Noise can be evaluated by two methods: online with cal-
ibration scans and triggers provided by the ROD and TIM and
ofﬂine with physics mode runs triggered by a pulser by applying
the ofﬂine analysis. With either approach practically the same
results were obtained in terms of noise occupancy.

Figure 8: The barrel ID installed in its ﬁnal position inside the electro-
magnetic calorimeter cryostat bore.

8In view of the foreseen 1% strip occupancy on any event, data compression is employed, in order to reduce the number of bits of data read out of the chip for
each event. This logic examines the three bits of data, representing three beam crossings centred on the level-1 trigger time, making up the hit pattern for each
channel. The state ‘X’ denotes any bit value; 0 or 1.

4

V. END-CAP SCT-TRT INTEGRATION

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The integration of the forward parts of the ID started in
September 2006 with the insertion of the SCT EC-C into the
TRT EC-C, shown in Fig. 9. Before this operation, the func-
tionality of an octant of the EC-C was successfully tested inside
the thermal enclosures. The readout and power cables are cur-
rently being connected in preparation for the two-month long
combined tests in the SR1 clean-room. During those, one quad-
rant of the SCT, i.e. 247 modules, will be read out together with
an adjacent sector of the TRT corresponding to 1/16 of the total
end-cap (7680 straws/channels).

The progress reported in this paper represents work per-
formed across the ATLAS SCT collaboration. I would like to
thank all my colleagues whose work is presented here and, in
particular, Pepe Bernabeu for his useful comments and sugges-
tions.

REFERENCES

[1] ATLAS Collaboration, ATLAS Technical Proposal,

CERN/LHCC/94-43 (1994);
http://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/

[2] ATLAS Collaboration,
Design Report vol.
CERN/LHCC/97-17 (1997).

Inner Detector Technical
I & II, CERN/LHCC/97-16 &

[3] For a recent review see: Z. Dolezal [ATLAS SCT Collab-

oration], Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 150 (2006) 128.

[4] A. Abdesselam et al. [ATLAS SCT Collaboration], “The
barrel modules of the ATLAS semiconductor tracker,”
Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A in press [ATL-INDET-PUB-2006-
005] (2006);

[5] A. Abdesselam et al. [ATLAS SCT Collaboration], “AT-
LAS SCT end-cap module production,” submitted to Nucl.
Instrum. Meth. A [ATL-INDET-PUB-2006-007] (2006).

[6] D. Robinson et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 485 (2002) 84.

[7] Y. Unno, Proc. 11th Workshop on Electronics for LHC and
Future Experiments (LECC 2005), Heidelberg, Germany,
12–16 September 2005 (2005), pp. 11–15.

[8] F. Campabadal et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 552 (2005)

292.

[9] A. Abdesselam et al., “The Optical Services and Accom-
panying Electrical Connections for the ATLAS SemiCon-
ductor Tracker,” to be submitted to Nuclear Instruments
and Methods A.

[10] V. A. Mitsou [ATLAS SCT Collaboration], IEEE Trans.
Nucl. Sci. 53 (2006) 729 [arXiv:physics/0606263].

[11] G. Viehhauser [ATLAS SCT Collaboration], Conference
Record of the 2004 IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium,
Rome, Italy, 16–22 October 2004 (2004), pp. 1188–1191.

[12] B. Mikulec [ATLAS SCT Collaboration], Conference
Record of the 2005 IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium,
El Conquistador Resort, Puerto Rico, 23–29 October 2005
(2005), pp. 1480–1484.

[13] H. Sandaker [ATLAS SCT Collaboration], Nucl. Instrum.

Meth. A 541 (2005) 96.

[14] For a review see: T. Akesson et al. [ATLAS TRT Collabo-

ration], Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 522 (2004) 131.

[15] M. J. Costa [ATLAS SCT Collaboration], “Cosmics and
Final ATLAS ID-SCT Tests,” contributed to 2006 IEEE
Nuclear Science Symposium (NSS), San Diego, Califor-
nia, 29 October – 4 November 2006.

Figure 9: Insertion of the SCT EC-C into the TRT EC-C.

The ID EC-A, on the other hand, is going to follow more or
less the same integration and installation steps as EC-C. How-
ever, this process is expected to proceed faster taking advantage
of the experience gained during the EC-C integration. The ID
EC-A is expected to be integrated by November. Both end-caps
are scheduled to be ready for installation in the ATLAS cavern
by January – February 2007.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

ATLAS SCT is progressing well towards integration with
the other parts of the ID, installation in ATLAS and commis-
sioning. Repeated tests in various stages have demonstrated op-
erational stability and good electrical performance. The fraction
of dead channels has been kept below 0.2%. Particular attention
was given to the electronics tests such as electrical connections
checks, noise and gain measurements, as well as temperature
and leakage current measurements. The outcome of these tests
validated the grounding, shielding and cooling system. As far as
noise is concerned, no remarkable change with respect to mea-
surements during module production and macro-assembly has
been observed and no pick-up noise has been detected while
TRT is read out. Combined tests with cosmic rays allowed to
gain experience with the overall operational and running condi-
tions (DAQ, DCS, monitoring, etc). The barrel ID (SCT & TRT)
has been successfully installed in the ATLAS cavern inside the
electromagnetic calorimeter cryostat and the SCT end-caps inte-
gration with the TRT has already started and is well under way.
The innermost layer of the ID, the Pixel detector, will be in-
stalled independently in 2007.

5

