6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
6
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fast Photon Detection for Particle
Identiﬁcation with COMPASS RICH-1

P.Abbonk, M.Alekseevl, H.Angereri, M.Apolloniom, R.Birsam, P.Bordalog,
F.Bradamantem, A.Bressanm, L.Bussol, M.Chiossol, P.Cilibertim, M.L.Colantonia,
S.Costal, S.Dalla Torrem, T.Dafnik, E.Delagnesk, H.Deschampsk, V.Diazm,
N.Dibiasel, V.Duicm, W.Eyrichd, D.Fasol, A.Ferrerol, M.Fingerj , M.Finger Jrj,
H.Fischere, S.Gerassimovi, M.Giorgim, B.Gobbom, R.Hagemanne, D.von Harrachh,
F.H.Heinsiuse, S.Horikawac, R.Joostenb, B.Ketzeri, K.K¨onigsmanne,
V.N.Kolosovc, ⋆ , I.Konorovi, D.Kramerf , F.Kunnek, A.Lehmannd, S.Levoratom,
A.Maggioral, A.Magnonk, A.Manni, A.Martinm, G.Menonm, A.Muttere, O.N¨ahleb,
F.Nerlinge, ⋆⋆ , D.Neyretk, P.Paganom, S.Panebiancok, D.Panzieria, S.Pauli,
G.Pesarom, J. Polakf , P.Rebourgeardk, F.Robinetk, E.Roccom, P.Schiavonm,
C.Schille, W.Schr¨oderd, L.Silvag, M.Sluneckaj , F.Sozzim, L.Steigerj , M.Sulcf ,
M.Svecf , F.Tessarottom, A.Teufeld, H.Wollnye
(a) INFN, Sezione di Torino and University of East Piemonte, Alessandria, Italy
(b) Universit¨at Bonn, Helmholtz-Institut f¨ur Strahlen- und Kernphysik, Bonn,
Germany
(c) CERN, European Organization for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland
(d) Universit¨at Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Physikalisches Institut, Erlangen, Germany
(e) Universit¨at Freiburg, Physikalisches Institut, Freiburg, Germany
(f ) Technical University of Liberec, Liberec, Czech Republic
(g) LIP, Lisbon, Portugal
(h) Universit¨at Mainz, Institut f¨ur Kernphysik, Mainz, Germany
(i) Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Physik Department, Garching, Germany
(j) Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic and JINR, Dubna, Russia
(k) CEA Saclay, DSM/DAPNIA, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
(l) INFN, Sezione di Torino and University of Torino, Torino, Italy
(m) INFN, Sezione di Trieste and University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy

Abstract

Particle identiﬁcation at high rates is an important challenge for many current and
future high-energy physics experiments. The upgrade of the COMPASS RICH-1
detector requires a new technique for Cherenkov photon detection at count rates of
several 106 per channel in the central detector region, and a read-out system allow-
ing for trigger rates of up to 100 kHz. To cope with these requirements, the photon
detectors in the central region have been replaced with the detection system de-
scribed in this paper. In the peripheral regions, the existing multi-wire proportional
chambers with CsI photocathode are now read out via a new system employing
APV pre-ampliﬁers and ﬂash ADC chips. The new detection system consists of
multi-anode photomultiplier tubes (MAPMT) and fast read-out electronics based
on the MAD4 discriminator and the F1-TDC chip. The RICH-1 is in operation in
its upgraded version for the 2006 CERN SPS run. We present the photon detection
design, constructive aspects and the ﬁrst Cherenkov light in the detector.

⋆ On leave from IHEP Protvino, Russia.
⋆⋆Corresponding author, E-mail address: frank.nerling@cern.ch (F. Nerling).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

22. September 2006

Fig. 1. Scheme of fused sil-
ica telescope system con-
nected to each MAPMT.

Fig. 2. First quarter of the new detection system com-
prising 144 MAPMT, fully eqipped with FE electron-
ics. The FE cards are water-cooled by single waterline
copper plates, as indicated by the three DREISAM
boards in the front.

Key words: COMPASS, RICH, multi-anode PMT, particle identiﬁcation
PACS: 29.40.Ka, 42.79.Pw, 85.60.Gz

1 Introduction & motivation of the project

The ﬁxed target experiment COMPASS [1] at CERN SPS is a two stage spec-
trometer dedicated to the investigation of perturbative and non-perturbative
QCD. The comprehensive research programe comprises both physics with a
muon and hadron beams, including the study of the nucleon spin structure
and charm spectroscopy. Identiﬁcation of hadronic particles is required, and
performed by RICH-1 in the multi-decade GeV/c range [2]. For this pur-
pose, a large size gas radiator RICH has been in operation in COMPASS
since 2001. Multi-wire proportional chambers (MWPC) with CsI photocath-
odes have been used for the single photon detection, whereas the read-out was
based on the Gassiplex front-end (FE) chip [3]. Now, the central quarter of
the 5.3 m2 photon detection area has been ﬁtted with a new detection system
based on MAPMT [4] and is discussed in this paper. The outer regions stay
unchanged, and are read out by a new system [5] characterised by negligible
dead-time and better time resolution. Details on the COMPASS data acqui-
sition system may be found in [6].
The memory time of about 3 µs of the detection system and the dominant
background due to uncorrelated muon beam particles in the central detector
region had remarkably reduced the detector performance, especially for par-
ticles at the very forward direction. Furthermore, the planned increase of the
beam intensity from 40 to 100 MHz, and trigger rates from 20 kHz in the past
to 100 kHz, made upgrading the COMPASS RICH-1 mandatory in terms of a
faster photon detection system.

2

Fig. 3. Cherenkov yield as a function
of wavelength - the diﬀerent sensitivities
for CsI and MAPMT are indicated.

2 Realisation of the project

Fig. 4. Simulated Cherenkov emission
angle θCh versus particle momenta - the
PID capabilities extended by the detec-
tor upgrade are marked.

The new detector part consists of 576 MAPMT (Hamamatsu R7600-03-M16)
with 16 channels per PMT, each coupled to an individual fused silica tele-
scope, see Fig. 1. The purpose of the optics is to focus the Cherenkov photons
on the sensitive cathodes to gain a factor of approximately 7 in sensitive sur-
face. Moreover, the telescope has been designed to minimise image distortions,
provide an angular acceptance of ±9.5o, and perform a spot size of ∼ 1 mm
(r.m.s). The read-out is performed by 4 sensitive MAD4 chips [7] on 2 FE cards
per MAPMT, and high-resolution F1 TDC [8]. One so-called DREISAM card
housing 8 F1-TDC reads 4 MAPMT. Both electronic cards are water-cooled
via copper water line plates. One panel of MAPMT fully equipped with FE
electronics is shown in Fig. 2. The MAD4 chip features a small noise level
(5-7 fC compared to mean signals of 500 fC) and has a rate capability up to
∼ 1 MHz per channel. The new FE chip version CMAD, that will be available
for the 2007 run, will operate up to rates of 5 MHz per channel. The F1-TDC
operate stably for input rates up to 10 MHz per channel at 100 kHz trigger
rates, and the time resolution of 120 ps further ensures the background level
from uncorrelated physics events to be negligible.

3 Expected performance & ﬁrst light in the upgraded detector

The performance achieved in the past can be summarised as follows [2]: Pho-
tons per particle at saturation Nph/ring = 14 (mean value), single photon and
global resolution on the reconstructed Cherenkov angle θCh at saturation of
σph = 1.2 mrad and σring = 0.6 mrad respectively, resulting in particle identi-
ﬁcation (PID) eﬃciency better than 95% for θCh > 30 mrad, and 2σ pion-to-
kaon separation at 43 GeV/c.
One beneﬁt of using MAPMT is the extension in the wavelength range and
the resultant increase of detected Cherenkov photons as illustrated in Fig. 3.
We expect an increase in the number of detected photons per ring by approx-
imately a factor of 3 to Nph/ring ≈ 40 (β ∼ 1). Due to the improved time

3

Fig. 5. Accumulated detector hitmap
imaging the halo of beam particles.

Fig. 6. Single physics event with multi-
ple hadron rings (blue-red = 20 ns).

resolution of a few ns, we further expect a gain in the time resolution of single
ring reconstruction to σring ≈ 0.4 mrad at β ∼ 1 . The improved Nph/ring leads
to an extended PID capability towards θCh < 30 mrad and lower particle mo-
menta, whereas the better σring extends PID to higher particle momenta, cf.
Fig. 4. The eﬀective space resolution of the system is about 5 mm, which leads
to σph ≈ 2.4 mrad. Finally, we expect 2σ pion-to-kaon separation at 50 GeV/c
and eﬃcient PID for small angles θCh > 20 mrad.
In Fig. 5, the two dimensional hitmap of the 96 × 96 channels or pixels are
shown for one of the ﬁrst COMPASS 2006 SPS physics runs. One clearly recog-
nises the halo of the beam particles in the centre. First single event hadron
rings detected with the COMPASS RICH MAPMT are shown in Fig. 6 (20 ns
time cut applied).

4 Conclusions
For the upgrade of the COMPASS RICH-1, a fast photon detection system
based on MAPMT was designed and implemented on the time scale of one
and a half years, and thus was ready for the COMPASS 2006 data taking. The
PID capabality will be extended to both - high particle momenta and near
the threshold. First signals in the detector indicate the new system is working
well, improving future COMPASS physics results.

5 Acknowledgements
We acknowledge support from the CERN/PH groups PH/TA1, TA2, DT2,
TS/SU, and support by the BMBF (Germany) and the European Community-
research Infrastructure Activity under the FP6 programme (Hadron Physics,
RII3-CT-2004-506078).

References
[1] The COMPASS Collaboration, Proposal, CERN/SPSLC/96-14, SP-SLC/P 297

March 1. (1996), CERN/SPSLC/96-30, SPSLC/P 297 May 20, (1996).

[2] E. Albrecht et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 553, 215-219 (2005).

4

[3] C. Santiard et al., Proc. 6th Pisa Meeting on Advanced Detectors, La Biodola,

Italy, May 1994, Phys. Rev. C52, 2072 (1995).

[4] M. Alekseev et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth., A 553, 53 (2005).

[5] D. Neyret et al., 4th Intern. Conf. on New Developments in Photondetection,

Beaune, France (2005).

[6] L. Schmitt et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 51, 439 (2004).

[7] F. Gonnella and M. Pegoraro, CERN-LHCC-2001-034, 204-8 (2001).

[8] H. Fischer et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 49, 443 (2002).

5

