PRAMANA
— journal of
physics

c(cid:13) Indian Academy of Sciences

pp. 1–3

The Layout of the photon collider at the ILC ∗

V. I. Telnov †
Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia

Abstract. One of the interaction regions at the linear colliders should be compatible both with
e+e− and γγ,γe modes of operation. In this paper, the differences in requirements and possible
design solutions are discussed.

The photon collider (γγ, γe) is being considered as an “option” in the International
Linear Collider (ILC) project [1–3], while e+e− collisions are “baseline”. In reality, this
means that at the beginning of its operation, the ILC will run in the e+e− mode, and then
one of the the interaction regions (IPs) and the detector will be upgraded for operation
in the γγ, γe mode. The photon collider has many speciﬁc features that strongly inﬂu-
ence the baseline ILC conﬁguration and the parameters of practically all of its subsystems.
They should be included into the baseline design from the very beginning—otherwise, the
upgrade will be very costly or even impossible at all.
:

Here, we discuss only the requirements related to the ILC layout; they are the following
• For the removal of disrupted beams, the crab-crossing angle at one of the interaction

regions should be about 25 mrad [2,3];

• The very wide disrupted beams should be transported to the beam dumps with ac-
ceptable losses. The beam dump should be able to withstand absorption of a very
narrow photon beam after Compton scattering.

Both of these requirements are mandatory for the photon collider. They do not contradict
the e+e− mode of operation, which can run at the same IP without any modiﬁcation to the
IP (only the forward part of the detector has to be modiﬁed). However, such conditions are
not optimum for e+e−.

For e+e− collisions, two IPs are currently being considered, one with a small crossing
angle, of 2 mrad, and the other with a large crossing angle, 14 or 20 mrad. While this
In
paper was in preparation, the beam-delivery group suggested 14 mrad at both IPs.
γγ collisions, the outgoing beams are strongly disrupted, and for their removal a larger
crossing angle is needed. The minimum crossing angle is the sum of the disruption angle
and the angular size of the ﬁnal quad. Detailed considerations show that the minimum
crossing angle required for γγ collisions is about 25 mrad [2,3].

∗LCWS06, Bangalore, India, March 2006
†e-mail: telnov@inp.nsk.su

1

6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
8
2
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

There are also differences in the requirements for the extraction lines and beam dumps
due to the very different beam properties. In the e+e− case, after collision the beams re-
main quite monochromatic and there is a possibility to measure their properties (the energy
spectrum and polarization). Such an extraction line should be quite long and equipped with
many magnetic elements and diagnostics.

At the photon collider, the situation is different:
• The disrupted beams at a photon collider consist of an equal mixture of electrons

and photons (and some admixture of positrons);

• Low-energy particles in the disrupted beams have a large angular spread and need

exit pipes of a large diameter.

• Following the Compton scattering, the photon beam is very narrow, with a power of

about 10 MW. It cannot be dumped directly at a solid or liquid material.

There exists an idea of a beam dump for the photon collider, as well as some simula-
tions [4,3]. In short, it is a long tube, the ﬁrst 100 m of which is vacuum, followed by
a 150 m long gas converter ended by the water beam dump. The diameter of the tube at
the beam dump is about 1.5 m. In addition, there are fast sweeping magnet for electrons.
Due to a large beam width no detailed diagnostics is possible, may be only beam proﬁle
measurements.

At present, the ILC beam delivery group has the following suggestion [5]. The extraction
lines and the beam dump for e+e− and γγ are very different. Their replacements (transition
to γγ and back after the energy upgrade) will be problematic due to induced radioactivity.
It therefore makes sense to have different crossing angles and separate extraction lines and
beam dumps for e+e− and γγ. For the transition from e+e− to γγ, one has to move
the detector and about 700 m of the upstream beam line, Fig.1. The displacement of the
detector is equal to 1.8 m and 4.2 m for the increase of the crab-crossing angle from 20
to 25 mrad and from 14 to 25 mrad, respectively. The photon collider needs an additional
250 m of tunnels for the beam dump. This is quite a lot of work.

14mr => 25mr

Figure 1. The upgrade path from e+e− to γγ (14 mrad to 25 mrad)

My ﬁrst reaction to the above suggestion was quite negative: too expensive, needs a lot
of extra work, and is time-consuming. An alternative suggestion may be the following:
the same crossing angle, the same beam dump and no detector displacement. What are

2

the disadvantages? In this case, the designs of the extraction line and the beam dump are
dictated by γγ, so no precision diagnostic in the extraction line for e+e− is possible. But
is it really necessary? Indeed, without such a special extraction line we can measure the
energy and polarization before collisions, many characteristics during the beam collision
(the acollinearity angles, distributions of the secondary e+e− pairs, the beam deﬂection
angles); we can measure the angular distributions and the charged and neutral contents in
the disrupted beams. All this allows the reconstruction of the dynamics of beam collisions,
with a proper corrections in the simulation. For example, the depolarization during the
collision is rather small, knowledge of beam sizes with a 10–20% accuracy is sufﬁcient
for introducing theoretical corrections. Direct measurement of the polarization after the
collision does not exclude the necessity of such a correction, it is just one additional cross
check, but there are many other cross checks besides the polarization. In addition, the
requirement for the instrumented extraction line for e+e− restricts the accessible set of
beam parameters and correspondingly the luminosity. One cannot use it for the case of
large beamstrahlung losses. It will not work, for example, in the CLIC environment or at
the photon collider. In other words, such diagnostic of outgoing beams is useful but not
absolutely necessary at linear colliders.

Although the alternative suggestion looks possible and can save money, labor and time,
it inﬂuences the e+e− plans too much. The diagnostics of the outgoing beams will be less
precise and it can affect the quality of some physics results. Attempts to reach a consensus
would create a tension between e+e− and γγ communities.

So, in the end I agree with 14 mrad crossing angles at both IPs at the start of the ILC. The
upgrade to 25 mrad adds only a fraction of the cost and engineering work, but decouples
e+e− and γγ, which is very important. The moving of the detector (perhaps only 3 or so
times ever) is not a problem. Hopefully, the shift of the upstream beamlines (700 m) is
not a big problem as well, especially if beamline elements are installed on long movable
platforms. The upgrade to 25 mrad should be included to the ILC baseline design.

References

[1] B. Badelek et. al., Intern. Journ. Mod. Phys. A 30 (2004) 5097-5186, hep-ex/0108012.
[2] V.

I. Telnov, Proc. of 2005 Intern. Linear Collider Physics and Detector Workshop
and 2nd ILC Accelerator Workshop, Snowmass, Colorado, 14-27 Aug 2005, ECONF
C0508141:PLEN0020,2005; physics/0512048.

[3] V. I. Telnov, Acta Physica Polonica B, 37 (2006) 1049; physics/0604108.
[4] L. I. Shekhtman and V. I. Telnov, Proc. of Intern. Conf. on Linear Colliders (LCWS04), Paris,

France, 19-24 Apr 2004, v2, p.537, eds: H. Videau, J-C.Brient; physics/0411253.

[5] A. Seryi, MDI overview, talk at the LCWS06, 9-13 March 2006, Bangalore, India, these pro-

ceedings.

3

