6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
4
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
2
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fluctuation studies and energy reconstruction in a
segmented calorimeter

Sara Bergenius Gavler∗, Per Carlson∗ and Jan Conrad∗

∗School of Engineering Sciences
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden
Email: conrad@particle.kth.se

Abstract— In order to better understand energy estimation
of electromagnetic showers in segmented calorimeters, detailed
Geant4 simulation studies of electromagnetic showers in the en-
ergy range 1–100 GeV in CsI have been performed. When sampled
in layers of 1.99 cm thickness, corresponding to 1.08 radiation
lengths, the energy ﬂuctuations in the samples show distributions
that vary signiﬁcantly with depth. The energy distributions are
similar for incident electrons and photons and were found to
change systematically along the shower, varying little with the
initial energy.
Three probability distributions have been ﬁtted to the data:
negative binomial, log-normal and Gaussian distributions, none of
which gives a good ﬁt over the full shower length. The obtained
parameterizations might be useful in the use of the maximum
likelihood method for estimating the energy.
Two methods for estimating the energy have also been studied. One
method is based on ﬁtting individual longitudinal shower proﬁles
with a Γ-function, the other one corrects the measured energy for
leakage by utilizing the energy deposited in the last layer. Our
simulations indicate that the last-layer correction method applied
to photons and electrons of 1 and 10 GeV gives about a factor of
2 improvement in the energy resolution.

I. INTRODUCTION

In a segmented calorimeter, where the energy deposition
is sampled in layers along the shower, the ﬂuctuations in a
layer at a given depth arise from ﬂuctuations in starting point
and development of the shower. Already in 1937 Bhabha and
Heitler [1], in their work on electromagnetic cascades, studied
ﬂuctuations and proposed that these follow a Poisson distri-
bution. Furry [2] used a multiplicative model for the shower
development and arrived at a wider distribution, often called
the Furry distribution. Mitra [3] used the negative binomial or
P´olya distribution to describe air showers, with the Poisson and
Furry distributions as limiting cases. The P´olya distribution is
mentioned in conjunction with cosmic rays for the ﬁrst time in
1943 [4]. It has been used e.g. to describe photomultiplier elec-
tron statistics [5] and in particle physics to describe hadronic
inelastic non-diffractive multiplicity distributions of produced
particles [6], [7]. Fluctuations in electromagnetic cascades have
been considered as an application of Markov processes [8] and
analytic solutions have been found [9].

Only few experimental or simulation based studies of ﬂuc-
tuations at a given depth can be found in the literature. Longo
and Sestili [10] have used simulations to study ﬂuctuations
in the last radiation length of lead glass of different lengths

for photons with energies up to 1 GeV. They used the P´olya
distribution for comparison.

Gaisser [11], in discussing cosmic air showers, points out that
these ﬂuctuations are smallest near shower maximum and that
they approximately follow a log-normal distribution, reﬂecting
the multiplicative nature of the shower development. In a recent
paper, Souza et al. [12] studied the ﬂuctuations of maximum
number of particles in air showers in order to estimate how
well the shower size at maximum depth can determine the
shower energy. General properties of calorimeter ﬂuctuations
are reported e.g. by Amaldi [13]. In this contribution we report
on a simulation study of ﬂuctuations as function of depth in
a segmented CsI calorimeter. We also use these simulations to
compare different methods for energy reconstruction especially
for non-contained electro-magnetic showers.

II. SIMULATIONS

In the simulation studies the calorimeter consisted of CsI
(radiation length 1.85 cm) crystal bars arranged in layers per-
pendicular to the incident particles. The layout, shown in ﬁg. 1,
resembles a GLAST electromagnetic calorimeter tower [16],
which is built up by 8 orthogonally oriented layers of 12
CsI(Tl) crystal bars of size 32.60×2.67×1.99 cm3, giving a
total thickness of about 8.6 radiation lengths for perpendicular
incidence. In order to study the basic ﬂuctuation phenomena,
the simulated calorimeter does not contain any supporting
material or gaps, the layers were not placed orthogonal, and
in total 20 layers were implemented. Each layer consisted of 6
crystals. Furthermore, in the simulations the energy deposited
in the crystals was taken as the measured energy, i.e. no readout
system has been applied.

The simulations were performed using Geant4 (v7.0p01), a
Monte Carlo particle transport toolkit which is well supported
and used by several experiments. Only standard electromagnetic
processes were considered, all photo-nuclear interactions have
been neglected. Ajimura et al. [17] have measured the photo-
nuclear interactions to contribute to less than 2 × 10−7 in CsI
for energies above 1 GeV. Electromagnetic processes are well
simulated by Geant4 in the energy range relevant here, for a
validation see e.g. [18]. Geant4 uses the particle range to set the
energy cut-off below which secondary particles are no longer
tracked and the energy is simply dumped at that location. We
used a range cut of 1 mm, corresponding to an energy cut-off

incident
angle θ

t

Fig. 1

THE SEGMENTED CSI CALORIMETER USED IN THE SIMULATIONS. A

CALORIMETER LAYER CONSISTS OF 6 CRYSTAL BARS AND THE LAYER
NUMBER INCREASES WITH x. THE INCIDENT PARTICLE ENTERS THE

CALORIMETER FROM LEFT

of 38 keV, 692 keV and 658 keV for respectively photons,
electrons and positrons in CsI. Simulations were performed
with incident electrons and photons in the energy range 1–
100 GeV with a minimum of 100000 events in each simulation.
Most studies were done with perpendicular input, but the case
with non-perpendicular input having a incident angle of 30◦
was also examined.

III. FLUCTUATION STUDIES

A. Longitudinal proﬁles

Fig. 2 shows the mean longitudinal proﬁles for showers
induced by electrons and photons having initial energies of
1 GeV, 10 GeV and 100 GeV. The showers induced by photons
reach their maxima later than those induced by electrons. This
is due to the differences in electron and photon interaction
mechanisms. An electron starts losing energy immediately as
it enters the calorimeter media, while photons may travel a
distance before interacting. See further the work of Wigmans
and Zeyrek [19] for a study on differences between photon-
and electron-induced showers. The proﬁles are well ﬁtted with
the Gamma distribution:

dE
dt

= E0b

(bt)a−1e−bt
Γ(a)

(1)

where t is the depth in radiation lengths, a an energy-dependent
parameter and b a Z-dependent parameter varying slowly with
energy. E0 is the initial energy of the particle, Γ is the Gamma
function.

We see that the shower maxima for initial energies of 1 GeV,
10 GeV and 100 GeV occur at layer 4, 6 and 8 (4.3, 6.5 and
8.6 radiation lengths) for electrons and at layer 5, 7 and 9 (5.4,
7.5 and 9.7 radiation lengths) for photons.

B. Sample ﬂuctuations

The ﬂuctuations in energy deposition in each layer were
studied both for showers induced by electrons and photons of
initial energy of 1 GeV, 10 GeV and 100 GeV. In each case
100000 incident particles (electrons or photons) were simulated.
Figs. 3 shows how the ﬂuctuations change from layer to layer in
the ﬁrst 15 layers (16 radiation lengths) for a particle energy of

Fig. 2

MEAN ENERGY DEPOSITION IN THE CALORIMETER LAYERS, HERE SHOWN

FOR BOTH ELECTRONS (SOLID LINE) AND PHOTONS (DASHED LINE)
HAVING INITIAL ENERGIES OF 1 GEV, 10 GEV AND 100 GEV. THE

DISTRIBUTIONS HAVE BEEN FITTED WITH A GAMMA FUNCTION (EQN. 1).

10 GeV.The energy ﬂuctuations in layer 16–20 have the same
exponential-like shape as layer 15, only shifted towards lower
energy as the depth increases. All of the 10 GeV electrons
have deposited energy in the ﬁrst layer (1.1 radiation lengths)
whereas about 5% of the 10 GeV photons have not interacted
at this depth.

The shape of the energy ﬂuctuations changes systematically
with depth for the three different energies. Both electron- and
photon-induced showers show ﬂuctuations with a high-energy
tail at small depths, which is reduced as the depth increases and
the distribution becomes more symmetric and Gaussian-like.
Moving deeper into the calorimeter, a low-energy tail develops.
Eventually the ﬂuctuations become more symmetric again and
ﬁnally a high-energy tail emerges. The non-asymmetry of the
energy distributions can be readily understood from ﬂuctuations
in the shower developments. Indeed, in the ﬁrst few radiation
lengths early shower developments can give rise to large total
energy deposits giving a high-energy tail. At the location of
the mean maximum energy deposition, ﬂuctuations to higher
energies are less frequent than those to lower energies, giving
distributions with a slight low-energy tail. The most symmetric
Gaussian-like distributions occur just before and after the
maximum energy deposition where there are both high- and
low-energy contributions from early respectively late initiated
showers. These tendencies become more pronounced with
increasing energy as the longitudinal shower proﬁle becomes
more stretched out.

The energy ﬂuctuations in each layer were ﬁtted with
negative binomial, log-normal and Gaussian distributions for
incident electrons and photons of energy 1 GeV, 10 GeV and
100 GeV. The ﬁts were performed over a range in energy
corresponding to 1% of the peak value of the distribution. As

Fig. 3

FLUCTUATIONS OF ENERGY DEPOSITION IN THE CSI CALORIMETER

LAYERS FOR SHOWERS INDUCED BY 1 GEV ELECTRONS AND PHOTONS.
THE HISTOGRAMS SHOW THE NUMBER OF EVENTS DEPOSITING IN AN

ENERGY INTERVAL CORRESPONDING TO THE BIN SIZE (HERE 4 MEV).

EACH LAYER OF CSI IS 1.99 CM (1.08 RADIATION LENGTHS).

expected from the variations as function of depth, quality of ﬁts
varies considerably and in most cases there are deviations from
the ﬁtted form in the tails of the distributions. An important
conclusion from the ﬁts is that for each layer one – but not the
same – distribution gives the best ﬁt. With 100000 simulated
events only a few layers give a fully acceptable ﬁt as judged
by the χ2.

As an example we show in ﬁg. 4 the 10 GeV electron and
photon energy distributions in layers 5, 8 and 12 (5.4, 8.6 and
12.8 radiation lengths). These three layers are before, close to
and after the shower maximum. The ﬁtting range covers 97.1,
99.5 and 98.9% (88.8, 97.8 and 98.4%) of the 100000 events
in the simulation for electrons (photons).

The low-energy tails in layers 5 and 8 are not well ﬁtted. The
high-energy tails are quite well described by the log-normal
or negative binomial distributions. Fig. 5 shows as function
of layer number the reduced χ2 of the ﬁts, giving a relative
evaluation of how well the three distributions ﬁt the energy
ﬂuctuations. The systematic change of the ﬂuctuations with
depth can be seen. We include in ﬁg. 5 the reduced χ2 for
layers 16–20 although the number of events there is small. For
1 GeV incident electrons and photons, the Gaussian distribution
gives the best ﬁt in the ﬁrst 5 layers which is expected since
the the mean shower maximum occurs in layer 4. At larger
depths the energy ﬂuctuations are best ﬁtted with the negative
binomial. Note that the energy ﬂuctuations become close to
exponential at layer 14 and beyond, giving a large uncertainty
in the ﬁtted parameters. For 10 GeV the Gaussian distribution
gives the best ﬁt a few layers before and after the mean shower
maximum, as expected. When the high-energy tail emerges, the
best ﬁt is given by the negative binomial, and as it becomes

Fig. 4
FITTING THE ENERGY FLUCTUATIONS FOR INCIDENT ELECTRONS AND

PHOTONS HAVING AN INITIAL ENERGY OF 10 GEV WITH NEGATIVE

BINOMIAL (SOLID LINE), LOG-NORMAL (DASHED LINE) AND GAUSSIAN
(DOTTED LINE) DISTRIBUTIONS. THE HISTOGRAMS SHOW THE NUMBER OF

EVENTS DEPOSITING IN AN ENERGY INTERVAL CORRESPONDING TO THE

BIN SIZE (HERE 25 MEV). THE FITTING RANGE COVERS 97.1, 99.5 AND

98.9% (88.8, 97.8 AND 98.4%) OF THE DISTRIBUTION FOR ELECTRONS

(PHOTONS).

more prominent, the log-normal. For 100 GeV the Gaussian
again gives the best ﬁt before and after the location of the
shower maximum, and when the high-energy tail emerges the
log-normal distribution gives the best ﬁt. The negative binomial
gives quite a good ﬁt up to layer 4, but after that it completely
fails. There are no larger differences in the χ2 between electron-
and photon-induced showers since the width changes but not
the shape of the ﬂuctuations.

In this way parameterizations of the deposited energy dis-
tributions can be obtained as function of energy and incident
angle. More detailed results of this simulation study are pre-
sented in [20].

IV. COMPARISON OF ENERGY RECONSTRUCTION METHODS

A. The method of last layer correction.

The simplest method to estimate the energy in a segmented
calorimeter is to sum up the energies deposited in each segment.
This estimate is only accurate if the energies of the incident
particles are small as compared to the average energy lost of
the particles in the calorimeter. In the usual case, corrections
have to be applied for the energy lost. In this context it is worth
noting that the energy lost due to leakage is correlated with the
energy deposited in the last layer (see ﬁgure 6). A corrected
energy can thus be calculated from:

Ecor = Etot + kElast

(2)

where Ecor is the energy estimated corrected for leakage,
Etot is the total energy deposited in the calorimeter and Elast

Fig. 5

THE REDUCED χ2

OF THE NEGATIVE BINOMIAL (SOLID LINE),

LOG-NORMAL (DASHED LINE) AND THE GAUSSIAN (DOTTED LINE) FIT FOR
1 GEV, 10 GEV AND 100 GEV ELECTRONS AND PHOTONS. THE LINES

HAVE BEEN DRAWN TO GUIDE THE EYE. THE ARROWS MARK THE MEAN

SHOWER MAXIMUM.

is the energy deposited in the last layer. The parameter k
is to be determined from Monte-Carlo simulations or from
measurements under controlled conditions (beam test).

B. Fitting of individual proﬁles with the Γ- distribution.

Another method to estimate energy is to ﬁt individual show-
ers with the Γ - distribution (see eqn. 1). Considering a mono-
energetic beam of particles in which all shower maxima are
contained within the calorimeter, ﬁtting individual showers will
result in Gaussian distributions of a,b and E0, centered on
their true values. However, as can bee seen in ﬁgure 7, if the
shower maximum is not contained within the calorimeter the
ﬁt fails badly. Thus, if the energy of the incident particles is
high enough such that a signiﬁcant fraction of showers have
maxima outside the calorimeter volume, the distribution of E0
will have signiﬁcant high energy tails. Figure 8 shows in the
upper panel the distribution of E0 for a ∼9 X0 calorimeter
as compared to one which is ∼ 22 X0 in depth. For this
ﬁgure a 10 GeV electron beam was assumed. In the shallower
calorimeter about 1 % of the electrons are estimated to have
an energy above 20 GeV. For the deeper calorimeter the
situation improves signﬁcantly: the fraction of electrons where
the estimated energy is above 11 GeV is only 0.1 %.

One possible method to account for the high energy tails
in the estimation, is to perform a constrained ﬁt, where the
parameters a,b and E0 are constrained to ranges determined
by Monte Carlo simulations or from data obtained under
controlled conditions (beam test).

In table I we compare the two reconstruction methods presented
above with respect to their mean estimated energy and resolu-
tion for 1 GeV and 10 GeV photons and electrons. The last

Fig. 6
AN EXAMPLE FOR THE CORRELATION BETWEEN ENERGY DEPOSITED IN

THE LAST LAYER AND THE ENERGY LOST DUE TO LEACKAGE. THE LOWER

PANEL IS A THREE DIMENSIONAL PRESENTATION OF THE UPPER PANEL.

Fig. 7
TWO EXAMPLES OF INDIVIDUAL LONGITUDINAL SHOWER PROFILES FIT
WITH THE Γ-FUNCTION. IN THIS CASE, 10 GEV PHOTONS HAVE BEEN
SIMULATED AT NORMAL INCIDENCE. THE UPPER PANEL SHOWS A

LONGITUDINAL PROFILE WITH ITS MAXIMUM OUTSIDE THE SENSITIVE

CALORIMETER VOLUME. THE ENERGY ESTIMATE OBTAINED IN THIS CASE
IS 692 GEV. THE LOWER PANEL SHOWS AN EXAMPLE OF A PROFILE WHERE

THE SHOWER MAXIMUM IS CONTAINED. THE ESTIMATED ENERGY IN THIS

CASE IS 9.4 GEV.

COMPARSION OF THE TWO ENERGY ESTIMATION METHODS

TABLE I

Particle

Energy

type

[GeV]

Energy dep.
σE
E

Etot

[GeV]

[%]

[GeV]

e−

γ
e−

γ

1

1

10

10

0.83

0.81

6.4

6.2

6.7

8.9

10.8

13.3

Proﬁle ﬁt

Last lay.

E0

0.83

0.79

8.6

8.2

σE
E

[%]

10.7

12.1

13.0

14.8

E0

[GeV]

1.0

1.0

10.1

10.1

σE
E

[%]

5.1

6.6

7.6

9.1

the simplest case, if all observations are uncorrelated, the multi-
dimensional likelihood function will reduce to a multiplication
of one-dimensional likelihood functions.
In practice, this method is complicated by several factors: ﬁrstly
there will be an additional parameter and observation (the
angle of the incoming photon) and secondly we know that the
assumption that the observables are uncorrelated is not correct.
Still, one possibility is to test the method under the assumption
that correlations can be neglected and see how well it works.
In case, correlations can not be neglected the only technically
feasible solution (considering limited computing resources) is
the application of learning machines, such as artiﬁcial neural
networks.

V. CONCLUSION

Distributions of energy depositions in an segmented CsI
calorimeter have been studied using GEANT4 simulations.
Three probability distributions have been ﬁtted to the data:
negative binomial, log-normal and Gaussian distributions, none
of which gives a good ﬁt over the full shower length. However,
negative binomial and log normal distributions give best ﬁts if
the shower has a pronounced high energy tail.
The performed simulations have also been used to compare
two different methods of energy reconstructions. The simplest
method is to to add up the energies deposited in each layer of
the calorimeter. This method works well for calorimeters whose
size is enough such that leakage can be neglected. For ﬁnite
size calorimeters, a correction for the leakage can be introduced
noting that the energy lost due to leakage is correlated with the
energy deposited in the last layer.
Another possible method is to use a ﬁt of the Γ function
to individual longitudinal shower proﬁles. This method works
well, if the calorimeter is large enough so that only a non-
signiﬁcant fraction of the showers have their maximum outside
the calorimeters sensitive volume. Otherwise, the ﬁt overes-
timates the energy. Our simulation studies indicate that for
1 Gev and 10 GeV photons and electrons the method of last
layer correction gives an improvement in resolution of about
50 % when compared to the ﬁtting method. The improvement
is larger for the 1 GeV case.
Finally, we give a short discussion on how the parameterizations
of the layer-wise energy depositions presented in this note could
be used to improve maximum likelihood estimation methods.

Fig. 8

DISTRIBUTIONS OF THE PARAMETERS OBTAINED FROM A FIT OF THE
Γ-DISTRIBUTION (SEE EQN. 1) TO INDVIDUAL LONGITUDINAL SHOWER
PROFILES. THE UPPER PANEL SHOWS THE CASE OF AN 8 LAYER

CALORIMETER, THE LOWER PANEL THE CASE OF A 20 LAYER
CALORIMETER. ALSO SHOWN IS THE CORRELATION BETWEEN THE a AND

THE b PARAMETER.

layer correction gives a between 40 % and 50 % better energy
resolution for both particle types. The improvement is larger
for the lower energy.

C. Some remarks on Maximum Likelihood methods

Using Monte Carlo simulations, in principle, it could be

possible to construct the likelihood function:

L(E0|~x)

(3)

where E0 denotes the reconstructed energy and ~x a vector
containing all the observations in the calorimeter. In particular,
these observations could be the energy deposited in each layer.
The parameterizations found in the previous sections could then
be used to construct likelihood functions, since they represent
probability density functions P (Elayx |Etrue), i.e. the probabil-
ity of observing an energy Elayx given the true energy Etrue. In

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank the K A Wallenberg foun-
dation and the Swedish Space Board for ﬁnancial support.
Computing resources made available by a grant from the G¨oran
Gustafsson Foundation are also acknowledged. J.C. acknowl-
edges support from Vetenskapsr˚adet, grant nr: 40219601.

REFERENCES

[1] Bhabha H J and Heitler W 1937 Proc. R. Soc. London A 159 432
[2] Furry W H 1937 Phys. Rev. 52 569
[3] Mitra A N 1957 Nucl. Phys. 3 262
[4] Arley N 1943 On the theory of stochastic processes and their application
to the theory of cosmic radiation, Thesis, Copenhagen University

[5] Prescott J R 1966 Nucl. Instrum. Methods 39 173
[6] Giovannini A et al. 1974 Nuovo Cimento A 24 421
[7] Alner G J et al. 1985 Phys. Lett. B 160 193
[8] Bharucha–Reid A T 1960 Elements of the Theory of Markov Processes

and Their Applications, McGraw-Hill, New York
[9] Messel H and Potts R B 1952 Phys. Rev. 87 759
[10] Longo E & Sestili I 1975 Nucl. Instrum. Methods 128 283
[11] Gaisser T 1990 Cosmic Rays and Particle Physics, Cambridge univ. press
[12] de Souza V et al. 2005 (Preprint astro-ph/0511677)
[13] Amaldi U 1981 Phys. Scr. 23 409
[14] Agostinelli S et al. 2003 Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 506 250
[15] Michelson P E 1996 Proc. SPIE Int. Soc. Opt. Eng. 2806 31
[16] Johnson W N et al. 1997 IEEE Nucl. Sci. Symp. 1 27
[17] Ajimura S et al. 2005 Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A A552 263
[18] Amako K et al. 2005 IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 52 910
[19] Wigmans R and Zeyrek M T 2002 Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A

485 385

[20] Bergenius Gavler S 2006 Counting Calories – Studies of Energy Loss in
a Segmented Calorimeter, PhD thesis, Royal Institute of Technology

