6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
8
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Study of Monolithic CMOS Pixel Sensors
Back-thinning and their Application for a
Pixel Beam Telescope

Marco Battaglia a,b Devis Contarato b Piero Giubilato b,c
Leo Greiner b Lindsay Glesener a Benjamin Hooberman a

aDepartment of Physics, University of California at Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
bLawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
cIstituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Padova, Italy

Abstract

This paper reports results on a detailed study of charge collection and signal-to-
noise performance of CMOS monolithic pixel sensors before and after back-thinning
and their application in a pixel beam telescope for the ALS 1.5 GeV e− beam test
facility.

Key words:

ILC, Monolithic Pixel Sensors

1 Introduction

The Vertex Tracker for the International Linear Collider (ILC) has require-
ments that largely surpass those of the detectors at LEP, SLC and LHC. Not
only does the single point resolution need to be improved to just a few mi-
crons, but the material budget should not exceed ∼0.1% X0 per layer. This is
mainly motivated by the need to eﬃciently identify all of the secondary parti-
cles in hadronic jets initiated by a heavy quark in order to distinguish c from b
jets and also to determine the vertex charge. This translates to a requirement
for Si pixel chips that do not exceed 50 µm in thickness. CMOS monolithic
active pixel sensors are ionising radiation detectors featuring a ﬁeld-free, un-
depleted sensitive volume. Because charge generation is conﬁned primarily to
a thin epitaxial layer of just 10-20 µm, it is possible to remove most of the
bulk silicon using a back-thinning process without signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the
signal charge collected. This makes CMOS detectors an appealing candidate
for meeting the ILC physics requirements in terms of material budget. There

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

24 July 2013

has been some successful experience in back-thinning full wafers of CMOS
pixel structures, but questions on the eﬀect of back-thinning on charge collec-
tion arise (1; 2). In this study we address the issues of back-thinning individual
diced chips, characterise the sensor performance before and after thinning to
assess possible changes in signal charge collection and apply them in a beam
telescope for use at a 1.5 GeV e− beam test facility.

2 Back-thinning Studies

The Mimosa 5 chip (3; 4), developed at IPHC in Strasbourg, France, has been
selected for this study. This chip, fabricated using the 0.6 µm AMS process,
features a large active area of 1.7×1.7 cm2 and more than 1 M pixels. The
epitaxial layer is 14 µm thick and the pixel pitch 17 µm. The wafer thickness
is 450 µm. The detector is sub-divided into four independent sectors. For
testing, the chip has been mounted on a mezzanine card which is installed on
the readout board.

Data acquisition and on-line analysis is performed by a LabView program,
while the oﬄine data analysis is performed by a dedicated C++ program. The
chip characterisation procedure consists of three steps. The chip is mounted
on the mezzanine card using a removable glue. First its charge-to-voltage con-
version gain is measured using a 55Fe source, then charge generation at various
depths is probed using collimated lasers of various wavelengths and ﬁnally the
response to minimum ionising particles is studied on the 1.5 GeV e− beam of
the LBNL Advanced Light Source (ALS). The chip is then removed by de-
taching the wire bonds and placing the chip and mezzanine card into a heated
solvent bath and sent for back-thinning. After back-thinning, the chip is visu-
ally inspected, permanently attached to the mezzanine card with ﬁlm adhesive
and re-bonded. The same characterisation procedure is repeated and the com-
parison of results allows us to determine the change in chip performance due
to the back-thinning procedure.

The detector gain is determined using the 5.9 keV X-rays emitted by a 55Fe
source. Charge generated by X-rays which convert in the shallow depletion
region near the pixel diode is fully collected, resulting in a pulse height peak
corresponding to the full X-ray energy, or 1640 electrons. This provides the
ADC count calibration in electrons. Typical values for the Mimosa 5 chip in
our setup are in the range of 6 to 8 electrons per ADC count. The collection
of charge generated at diﬀerent depths in the Si thickness is studied using the
fact that the penetration depth of IR photons in silicon is strongly dependent
on their wavelength. We use an 850 nm laser to probe charge generation re-
stricted primarily to the epitaxial layer and a 1060 nm which generates charge
throughout the full wafer thickness. The setup consists of a laser diode pig-

2

Table 1
Summary of the results on back-thinned chip tests, given as average percentage
changes of signal pulse heights after and before back-thinning, quote uncertainties
are the rms values of the results for the diﬀerent sectors.

Thickness

Noise

55Fe

850 nm

1060 nm 1.5 GeV e−

(µm)

50

39

(+3±7)% (-7±8)% (-16±6)% (-16±10)%
(+8±13)% (+2±2)% (-10±6)% (+130±42)%

(-9±7)%
(+2±4)%

tailed to a 6 µm-core optical ﬁbre. The ﬁbre is terminated on an aspheric
lens doublet which provides a collimated beam with a nearly Gaussian pro-
ﬁle. Data is analysed by selecting a ﬁxed 25×25 pixel matrix centred around
the signal maximum and integrating the charge collected in the matrix over
several hundred events. The detector response to minimum ionising particles
is determined using the 1.5 GeV e− beam extracted from the booster ring
of the ALS. The readout cycle consists of a reset followed by the readout of
three subsequent frames of a 510×512 pixel sector. The readout sequence is
synchronised with the 1 Hz booster extraction cycle so that the beam spill
hits the detector just before the second frame. The empty frames are used to
update pedestal and noise values. Correlated double sampling is performed on
line.

Back-thinning is performed by Aptek Industries (5) using a proprietary hot
wax formula for mounting wafers and die to stainless steel grinding plates. The
use of wax as an adhesive oﬀers greater ﬂexibility for handling thinner parts as
well as eliminating the eﬀects of ESD damage. The back-thinning is performed
by a wet grind process with a rust inhibitor for cooling the chips and keeping
the grind wheel free of debris which could cause damage when thinning below
100 µm. The process allows accurate thickness measurements in-situ. After
the grinding a polish process is performed which minimises the stress from
the backside of the device and allows to achieve thicknesses below 50 µm.
Yields are dependent on various factors related to the quality of the silicon,
including where in the ingot the wafers are taken from. Front-side processing
factors such as oxides or polyamides as well as doping of a wafer can cause
stress in the silicon lattice and may result in failure in the silicon at ultra thin
speciﬁcations. Four chips have been characterised and back-thinned as part
of this study. Three have been thinned down to 50 µm while a fourth sensor
has been thinned to 39 µm. At this thickness, chipping of the sensor edges
was observed and the process was stopped. Inspection under a microscope
revealed that the edges of the chip have been damaged, but only outside the
guard ring area, thus not aﬀecting the electrical functionalities of the device.
Results reported here are based on the analysis of all four sectors of one chip
thinned to 50 µm and of the chip thinned to 39 µm.

3

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

Before Thinning

After Thinning

m

 
5
 
/
 
s
l
a
u
d
i
s
e
R

250

200

150

100

50

0

0
0

500

1000

1500

2000

3000

2500
Cluster Pulse Height (Electrons)

3500

4500

4000

5000

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

0.1

Y Hit - Y Extrapolation (mm)

Fig. 1. Backthinning test (left): 1.5 GeV e− cluster pulse height, before (solid)
and after (dotted line) backthinning. Beam telescope performance (right): residuals
between pixel hits on the ﬁrst layer and closest extrapolated track position for data
collected in a single run on the ALS 1.5 GeV e− beam. The ﬁtted gaussian curve
has a width of 9.5 µm.

Results are summarised in Table 1 in terms of the relative change of the
response before and after back-thinning. Values for the 55Fe data refer to the
centroid of the 5.9 keV peak, those for the laser measurements refer to the
mean value of the pulse height distribution while those for the 1.5 GeV e−
beam refer to the most probable value of a Landau function ﬁtted to the
reconstructed cluster pulse height distribution.

The results of these tests show no signiﬁcant degradation in the amount of
collected charge after back-thinning to 39 µm and 50 µm. 55Fe data shows
that the gain is not signiﬁcantly aﬀected. Instead laser data indicate that the
collected charge varied, after processing, by an amount from -16% to +130%
with the larger variations observed for longer wavelength. The laser output
was monitored using a Si photo-detector and found to be stable to better
than 10%. The signal increase could then be explained as a change of the
optical properties at the backplane after the thinning process. This eﬀect will
be further investigated, but it does not aﬀect the sensor response to a mini-
mum ionising particle. The change observed for the lower wavelength, which
is absorbed within the epitaxial layer, is consistent with the measurement un-
certainty, due to the stability of the laser source. The ALS data conﬁrm that
neither the charge collection nor the signal-over-noise ratio of the detectors
for energetic charged particles are aﬀected by the back-thinning process down
to thicknesses below 50 µm.

3 The CMOS Thin Pixel Pilot Telescope

The batch of thinned Mimosa 5 chips has been used to build a CMOS Thinned
Pixel Pilot Telescope (TPPT) installed on the 1.5 GeV e− ALS BTS facility at
LBNL. The ongoing LBNL R&D program on monolithic pixel sensors requires

4

m
beam tests of sensor prototypes, which are routinely performed at the ALS.
But the relatively low energy of the beam extracted from the ALS booster
would make it diﬃcult to track particles with enough accuracy to study single
point resolution and eﬃciency of the detector under test, using conventional
Si detectors. The TPPT provides a solution to this problem, oﬀering at the
same time an interesting prototype CMOS pixel tracker for detailed track-
ing performance studies towards the ILC Vertex Tracker. This is the ﬁrst Si
beam telescope made of thinned CMOS sensors and consists of three planes
of thin pixel sensors (layers 1 to 3), each spaced by 17 mm. One additional
Mimosa 5 chip (layer 4) is added 17 mm downstream of the last layer. This
detector can be replaced by other detectors under test (DUT) with their in-
dependent readout electronics and placed as close as 5 mm from the latest
telescope plane. One sector of each chip, corresponding to a 510×512 pixel ar-
ray, is readout through a custom FPGA-driven acquisition board. Four 14 bits,
40 MSample/s ADCs simultaneously read the four sensors, while an array of
digital buﬀers drive all the required clocks and synchronisation signals. The
FPGA has been programmed to generate the clocks pattern and collect the
sampled data from the ADCs. A 32 bits wide bus connects the FPGA to a
digital acquisition board installed on a control PC. Data is processed on-line
by a LabView-based program, which performs correlated double sampling and
pedestal subtraction, noise computation and cluster identiﬁcation. To reduce
the amount of data written to disk only the addresses and pulse heights of the
pixels in a ﬁxed matrix around the centre of a cluster candidate are recorded.
The data is converted in the lcio format for oﬄine analysis using a set of
dedicated processors developed for the Marlin framework (6). The telescope
is operated in an optical enclosure mounted on an optical rail and aligned
on the BTF beam line. The temperature is kept constant during operation
at 27◦ by forced airﬂow. The measured average signal-over-noise for clusters
associated to particle tracks is 14.4.

Detailed simulation of the TPPT has been carried out, using the Geant-4
package (7) to generate the particle points of impact and energy deposits on
the sensitive planes. These have been stored in lcio format and used as input
to a CMOS pixel simulation program implemented in Marlin (8). The simu-
lation has been validated on beam test data collected with the Mimosa 5 chip
on the 1.5 GeV ALS beam and on the 6 GeV e− DESY beam (9). Noise val-
ues have been matched to those measured for the detectors in the telescope.
The simulated response has been passed to the same cluster reconstruction
program used for real data and reconstructed hits used to ﬁt straight particle
tracks, after pattern recognition. The telescope performance has been charac-
terised by the residuals between the extrapolation of a track reconstructed on
layers 2, 3 and 4 back to the ﬁrst layer. Results from simulation have been
used for optimising the TPPT geometry. By placing the DUT 5 mm away
from the last telescope layer, an extrapolation resolution better than 4 µm
can be achieved.

5

Data have been collected at the BTF with diﬀerent beam intensities ranging
from 0.5 particles mm−2 up to about 5 particles mm−2. After data taking, the
beam telescope geometry has been surveyed using an optical metrology ma-
chine. The results of this survey have been used as starting point of the align-
ment procedure, performed on a sample of approximately 20000 well-isolated
particle tracks with four correlated hits. After alignment, track candidates
have been deﬁned by matching hits in the second and fourth layer. Each track
candidate has been extrapolated to the third, intermediate layer, where the
closest hit has been added if its residual was less than 50 µm. The track can-
didate ambiguities have been solved based on the number of associated hits
and on the diﬀerence between the track slope and the expected beam slope,
determined from the settings of the beam-line ﬁnal dipoles. Tracks have then
been re-ﬁtted using a modiﬁed least-square, to account for kinks due to multi-
ple scattering on the measuring planes (10), and extrapolated to the ﬁrst layer
where the residual to the closest reconstructed hit has been computed. Since
the beam contains a fraction of lower momentum particles, which increases
while moving away from the beam axis, only the central region of the beam
was used and an additional cut was imposed on the residual on the second
coordinate. A preliminary result for the residual gives 9.5 µm for all accepted
tracks, which becomes 9.1 µm when restricting to three-hit tracks. This should
be compared to 6.8 µm obtained from the simulation, which assumes perfect
geometry.

Acknowledgements

We thank Marc Winter and Frank Gaede for discussion and Robert Foglia,
of Aptek Industries, for assistance with the back-thinning process. This work
was supported by the Director, Oﬃce of Science, of the U.S. Department
of Energy under Contract No.DE-AC02-05CH11231 and used resources of
the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing Center, supported un-
der Contract No.DE-AC03-76SF00098. We are indebted to the staﬀ of the
LBNL Advanced Light Source for their help and the excellent performance of
the machine.

References

[1] S. Kleinfelder et al., Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. A 565 (2006), 132.
[2] W. Dulinski et al., Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. A 546 (2005), 274.
[3] Yu. Gornushkin et al., Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. A A 513 (2003), 291.
[4] G. Deptuch, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. , A 543 (2005) 537.
[5] Aptek Industries, San Jose, CA 95111, USA.
[6] F. Gaede, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 559 (2006) 177.
[7] S. Agostinelli et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 506 (2003), 250.
[8] M. Battaglia, to appear on Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A (2006).
[9] D. Contarato et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 565 (2006), 119.
[10] G. Lutz, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 273 (1988) 349.

6

