6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
4
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fast photon detection for the COMPASS RICH detector

P.Abbona, M.Alekseevb, H.Angererc, M.Apolloniod, R.Birsad, P.Bordaloe, F.Bradamanted, A.Bressand,
L.Bussob, M.Chiossob, P.Cilibertid, M.L.Colantonif, S.Costab, S.Dalla Torred, T.Dafnia, E.Delagnesa,
H.Deschampsa, V.Diazd, N.Dibiaseb, V.Duicd, W.Eyrichg, D.Fasob, A.Ferrerob, M.Fingerh, M.Finger
Jrh, H.Fischeri, S.Gerassimovc, M.Giorgid, B.Gobbod, R.Hagemanni, D.von Harrachj, F.H.Heinsiusi,
R.Joostenk, B.Ketzerc, K.K¨onigsmanni, V.N.Kolosovl ∗, I.Konorovc, D.Kramerm, F.Kunnea,
A.Lehmanng, S.Levoratod, A.Maggiorab, A.Magnona, A.Mannc, A.Martind, G.Menond, A.Mutteri,
O.N¨ahlek, F.Nerlingi, D.Neyreta, P.Paganod, S.Panebiancoa, D.Panzierif, S.Paulc, G.Pesarod, J.
Polakm, P.Rebourgearda, F.Robineta, E.Roccod, P.Schiavond, C.Schilli †, W.Schr¨oderg, L.Silvae,
M.Sluneckah, F.Sozzid, L.Steigerh, M.Sulcm, M.Svecm, F.Tessarottod, A.Teufelg, H.Wollnyi

aCEA Saclay, DSM/DAPNIA, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
bINFN, Sezione di Torino and University of Torino, Torino, Italy
cTechnische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Physik Department, Garching, Germany
dINFN, Sezione di Trieste and University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy
eLIP, Lisbon, Portugal
f INFN, Sezione di Torino and University of East Piemonte, Alessandria, Italy
gUniversit¨at Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Physikalisches Institut, Erlangen, Germany
hCharles University, Prague, Czech Republic and JINR, Dubna, Russia
iUniversit¨at Freiburg, Physikalisches Institut, Freiburg, Germany
jUniversit¨at Mainz, Institut f¨ur Kernphysik, Mainz, Germany
kUniversit¨at Bonn, Helmholtz-Institut f¨ur Strahlen- und Kernphysik, Bonn, Germany
lCERN, European Organization for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland
mTechnical University of Liberec, Liberec, Czech Republic

Particle identiﬁcation at high rates is a central aspect of many present and future experiments in high-energy
particle physics. The COMPASS experiment at the SPS accelerator at CERN uses a large scale Ring Imaging
CHerenkov detector (RICH) to identify pions, kaons and protons in a wide momentum range. For the data taking
in 2006, the COMPASS RICH has been upgraded in the central photon detection area (25% of the surface) with
a new technology to detect Cherenkov photons at very high count rates of several 106s−1 per channel and a new
dead-time free read-out system, which allows trigger rates up to 100 kHz. The Cherenkov photons are detected
by an array of 576 visible and ultra-violet sensitive multi-anode photomultipliers with 16 channels each. Lens
telescopes of fused silica lenses have been designed and built to focus the Cherenkov photons onto the individual
photomultipliers. The read-out electronics of the PMTs is based on the MAD4 ampliﬁer-discriminator chip and
the dead-time free high resolution F1-TDC. The 120 ps time resolution of the digital card guarantees negligible
background from uncorrelated physical events. In the outer part of the detector, where the particle rates are lower,
the present multi-wire proportional chambers (MWPC) with Cesium Iodide photo-cathodes have been upgraded
with a new read-out electronic system based on the APV preampliﬁer and shaper ASIC with analog pipeline and
sampling ADCs. The project was fully designed and implemented in the period November 2004 until May 2006.
The upgraded detector showed an excellent performance during the 2006 data taking: the number of detected
Cherenkov photons per ring was increased from 14 to above 60 at saturation. The time resolution was improved
from about 3 microseconds to about one nanosecond which allows an excellent suppression of the background
photons from uncorrelated events.

Keywords: COMPASS, RICH, particle identiﬁca-

∗On leave from IHEP Protvino, Russia.
†Corresponding author, mail: Christian.Schill@cern.ch

tion, multi-anode photomultiplier tubes.
PACS: 20.40.Ka, 42.79.Pw, 85.60.Gz

1

2

1. Introduction

The COMPASS experiment [1] at the CERN
SPS investigates key issues in hadron physics
by scattering high-energy polarized muons and
hadrons oﬀ polarized and unpolarized solid state
targets. The produced particles are detected in a
large size two-stage forward spectrometer which
covers a wide kinematic range (10−5 < xBj < 0.5,
10−3 < Q2 < 100 (GeV/c)2). One of the key
features of the COMPASS spectrometer is an ex-
cellent particle identiﬁcation which allows to se-
parate scattered electrons, muons, pions, kaons
and protons. It is performed by electromagnetic
and hadron calorimeters, muon walls and a large
scale Ring Imaging Cherenkov detector (RICH)
[2]. The RICH detector uses C4F10 as radia-
tor gas inside a 5 × 6 m2 wide and 3 meter
deep vessel. The produced Cherenkov photons
are reﬂected by a 20 m2 mirror wall onto a set
of photon-detectors: up to 2004 multi-wire pro-
portional chambers (MWPC) with Cesium Iodide
photo-cathodes, covering a total active surface of
about 5.5 m2 and including in total about 80.000
read-out channels.

2. Motivation of the upgrade

The read-out system of the COMPASS RICH
photon detectors in use till 2004 consisted of Gas-
siplex front-end chips [3] connected to the MW-
PCs, which have an integration time of about
3 microseconds. In the experimental environment
of the COMPASS setup there is a large ﬂux of
Cherenkov photons especially in the centre of the
detector, since the CERN muon beam is accom-
panied by 10% to 20% of halo muons which pass
through the detector and create Cherenkov rings.
At high beam intensities of 0.4 to 1.0×108 muons
per second, these halo rings create a considerable
background of overlapping rings in the centre of
the detector, which reduces the particle identiﬁca-
tion eﬃciency and purity, especially for particles
in the very forward direction.

A fast detection system for Cherenkov pho-
tons is needed to distinguish by time information
the photons originating from scattered particles
in the physics events from the background from

Figure 1. Lower half of the COMPASS RICH
photon detector before installation. The central
part (marked by the white line) of the MWPCs
has been replaced by lens telescopes, MAPMTs
and fast read-out electronics consisting of MAD4
discriminators and F1 TDC.

uncorrelated halo muons. The upgrade of the
COMPASS RICH detector consists of two parts.
In the central part of the detector (25% of the
sensitive area) where the photon ﬂux is largest
the MWPCs with Cesium Iodide photo-cathodes
have been replaced by multi-anode photomulti-
pliers [4] and a fast read-out system based on the
MAD4 [5] discriminator front-end chip and the
dead-time free F1 TDC [6] (see Fig. 1). In the
outer part, the existing MWPC chambers have
been equipped with a faster read-out based on
the APV preampliﬁer with sampling ADCs [7].
In addition, the upgraded detector allows a high
rate operation at increased trigger rates from 20
up to 100 kHz and small dead-time [8].

3. The upgrade of the central region

The central region upgrade is performed by re-
placing the central part of the MWPC photon
detector set by an array of 576 UV-sensitive 16
channel multi-anode PMTs H7600-03-M16 from
Hamamatsu [4]. The sensitive wavelength range
of these photomultipliers extends from 200 nm
up to 700 nm compared to the eﬀective sensi-
tive range of the Cesium-Iodide photo-cathodes
of 160 nm to 200 nm. Therefore the number of

3

Figure 2. Optical arrangement of the MAPMT
and the fused silica lens telescope.

detected photons per ring is expected to be about
4 times larger. In addition, the ring resolution is
improved by the larger number of detected pho-
tons from 0.6 to 0.3 mrad. This will increase the
upper limit of the kinematic region of the 2σ pion
from kaon separation from 44 to above 50 GeV/c
hadron momentum.

The Cherenkov photons are focused onto the
PMTs by 576 individual lens telescopes from UV-
transparent fused silica lenses (see Fig. 2). The
telescopes have been customly designed from one
spherical and one aspherical lens and oﬀer a large
angular acceptance for the photons of ±9.5o and a
minimum image distortion. The image reduction
is of a factor of about 7 in area; the PMT pixels
are of 4.5 × 4.5 mm2, the eﬀective pixel size of
the new detector is 12 × 12 mm2. All PMTs have
been shielded by soft iron boxes to protect them
from the residual 200 Gauss ﬁeld of the 1 Tesla
open spectrometer magnet few meters away.

The PMTs are read out by frontend electronics
mounted directly on the detector, which consists
of the MAD4 preampliﬁer and discriminator and
the F1 TDC chip. The MAD4 chip [5] has a low
noise level of 5 − 7 fC compared to the average
PMT signal of about 500 fC. It is able to handle
signals up to 1 MHz rate. In 2007, the MAD4 will
be replaced by C-MAD chips, which have a rate
capability up to 5 MHz. The digital part of the
read-out consists of the dead-time free F1 TDC [6]
mounted on the DREISAM3 frontend card. It has

3Digital REad-out Integrating and SAMpling card.

Figure 3. Single physics event in the RICH de-
tector, central region, after applying a time cut
of 5 ns around the physics trigger. One can see
Cherenkov rings of several hadrons.

a time resolution of better than 120 ps and can
handle input rates up to 10 MHz at trigger rates
of up to 100 kHz. The data from one frontend
card with 64 read-out channels are transferred via
optical links to the COMPASS read-out system
[8]. All read-out electronics is mounted in a very
compact setup directly on the detector.

4. Detector performance after the upgrade

In the COMPASS beam-time 2006, all data
have been taken with the upgraded RICH detec-
tor (see Figs. 3, 4 and 5). The detector shows ex-
cellent performance: the number of photons per
ring has increased from 14 before the upgrade to
above 60 at saturation (β ≈ 1). The increased
statistics in the number of photons has improved
the ring resolution to 0.3 mrad from 0.6 mrad
before. While the increased number of photons
has improved the particle identiﬁcation capabil-
ity at lower momenta, the better ring resolution
extends the particle identiﬁcation towards higher
momenta. The time resolution for single photons
(see Fig. 4) is about 1 ns, which allows an al-
most complete rejection of the background from
uncorrelated halo muon Cherenkov signals.

4

Figure 4. Time distribution of the Cherenkov
photons relative to the physics trigger. One can
see an excellent time resolution of about 1 ns.

Figure 5. RICH-reconstructed kaon mass-peak
before (2004 data) and after (preliminary 2006
data) the RICH upgrade.

5. Conclusions

A fast photon detection system with multi-
anode photomultipliers and fast read-out elec-
tronics based on the MAD4 discriminator and
the F1 TDC has been designed and constructed
to upgrade the Ring Imaging Cerenkov (RICH)
detector of the COMPASS experiment. The up-
graded detector was ready for the beam-time in
2006 and ﬁrst data show an excellent performance
of the new photon detection system. The time re-
solution of about 1 ns allows an almost complete
rejection of the background Cherenkov photons
from uncorrelated muon halo events, which im-
proves eﬃciency and purity (see Fig. 5) of the
particle identiﬁcation especially in the very for-
ward direction. The increased number of detected
photons extends the particle identiﬁcation per-
formance of the COMPASS RICH both towards
lower Cherenkov angles and at high particle mo-
menta above 50 GeV/c.

Acknowledgments

port by the BMBF (Germany) and the European
Community-research Infrastructure Activity un-
der the FP6 program (Hadron Physics, RII3-CT-
2004-506078).

REFERENCES

1. The COMPASS Collaboration, Proposal,
CERN/SPSLC 96-14 and 96-30, 297 (1996).
2. E. Albrecht et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 553,

215-219 (2005).

3. C. Santiard et al., Proc. 6th Pisa Meeting on
Advanced Detectors, La Biodola, Italy, May
1994, Phys. Rev. C52, 2072 (1995).

4. P. Abbon et al., Fast photon detection for
in
COMPASS RICH-1, accepted for publ.
Nucl. Inst. Meth. A.

5. F. Gonnella and M. Pegoraro, CERN-LHCC-

2001-034, 204-8 (2001).

6. H. Fischer et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 461,

507-510 (2001).

7. D. Neyret et al., 4th Intern. Conf. on New
Developments in Photondetection, Beaune,
France (2005).

8. L. Schmitt et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 51,

We acknowledge support from the CERN/PH
groups PH/TA1, TA2, DT2, TS/SU, and sup-

439 (2004).

