6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A triple-GEM telescope for the TOTEM experiment
S. Lamia, G. Latinoba∗, E. Oliveriba, L. Ropelewskic, N. Turiniba

aPisa INFN, Largo B. Pontecorvo, 3 - 56127 Pisa, Italy

bPhysics Department, Siena University, Via Roma, 56 - 53100 Siena, Italy

cCERN, EP Division, 1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland

The TOTEM experiment at LHC has chosen the triple Gas Electron Multiplier (GEM) technology for its T2
telescope which will provide charged track reconstruction in the rapidity range 5.3<|η|<6.5 and a fully inclusive
trigger for diﬀractive events. GEMs are gas-ﬁlled detectors that have the advantageous decoupling of the charge
ampliﬁcation structure from the charge collection and readout structure. Furthermore, they combine good spatial
resolution with very high rate capability and a good resistance to radiation. Results from a detailed T2 GEM
simulation and from laboratory tests on a ﬁnal design detector performed at CERN are presented.

1. INTRODUCTION

The TOTEM [1] experiment at the LHC col-
lider will measure the total pp cross section with
a precision of about 1÷2 %, the elastic pp cross
section over a wide range in -t, up to 10 GeV2,
and will study diﬀractive dissociation processes.
Relying on the “luminosity independent method”
the evaluation of the total cross section with such
a small error will require simultaneous measure-
ments of the pp elastic scattering cross section
dσ/dt down to −t ∼ 10−3 GeV2 (to be extrapo-
lated to t = 0) as well as of the pp inelastic interac-
tion rate with a good rapidity coverage up to the
very forward region. Roman Pots (RP) stations
at 147 m and at 220 m on both sides from the
Interaction Point (IP), equipped with “edgeless
planar silicon” detectors, will provide the former
measurement. The latter will be achieved by two
inelastic telescopes, T1 and T2, placed in the for-
ward region of the CMS experiment on both sides
of the IP. T1, using “Cathode Strip Chambers”,
will cover the rapidity range 3.1<|η|<4.7 while
T2, based on “Triple-GEM” technology, will ex-
tend charged track reconstruction to the rapid-
ity range 5.3<|η|<6.5. These detectors will also
allow common CMS/TOTEM diﬀractive studies

∗Corresponding author. Phone: +39-050-2214439. E-
mail address: giuseppe.latino@pi.infn.it

with an unprecedented coverage in rapidity. The
T2 telescope will be placed 13.56 m away from
IP and the GEMs employed will have an almost
semicircular shape, with an inner radius match-
ing the beam pipe. Each arm of T2 will have a
set of 20 triple-GEM detectors combined into 10
aligned semi-planes mounted on each side of the
vacuum pipe (Figure 1).

Figure 1. One arm of TOTEM T2 Telescope.

2. GEM TECHNOLOGY

The CERN developed GEM technology [2] has
already been successfully adopted in other ex-
periments such as COMPASS and LHCb and

1

2

has been considered for the design of TOTEM
very forward T2 telescopes thanks to its charac-
teristics:
large active areas, good position and
timing resolution, excellent rate capability and
radiation hardness. Furthermore, GEM detec-
tors are also characterized by the advantageous
decoupling of the charge ampliﬁcation structure
from the charge collection and readout structure
which allows an easy implementation of the de-
sign for a given apparatus. The T2 GEMs use
the same baseline design as the one adopted in
COMPASS [3]: each GEM foil consists of thin
copper clad polymer foil of 50 µm, with copper
layers of 5 µm on both sides, chemically perfo-
rated with a large number of holes of 70 µm in
diameter. A potential diﬀerence around 500 V
applied between the two copper electrodes gen-
erates an electric ﬁeld of about 100 kV/cm in the
holes which therefore can act as multiplication
channels (gains of order 10 ÷ 102) for electrons
created in a gas (Ar/CO2 (70/30 %) for T2) by an
ionizing particle. The triple-GEM structure, re-
alized by separating three foils by thin (2÷3 mm)
insulator spacers, is adopted in order to reduce
sparking probabilities while reaching high total
gas gains, of order 104 ÷ 105, in safe conditions.
The read-out boards will have two separate layers
with diﬀerent patterns: one with 256x2 concen-
tric circular strips, 80 µm wide and with a pitch of
400 µm, allowing track radial reconstruction with
σR down to 70 µm, and the other with a matrix of
24x65 pads of 2x2 to 7x7 mm2 in size from inner
to outer circle, providing level-1 trigger informa-
tion as well as track azimuthal reconstruction.

3. T2 TRIPLE-GEM SIMULATION

A detailed simulation of T2 triple-GEM detec-
tor has been developed starting from the existing
implementation for the GEMs used at LHCb [4].
The general framework is relying on several pack-
ages allowing a complete and detailed “step by
step” simulation, for a given gas mixture and de-
tector geometry, for the several underlying pro-
cesses: starting from the primary ionization up
to the spatial and timing properties of the col-
lected signals. The main framework is imple-
mented in Garﬁeld; the electric ﬁeld mapping is

simulated with Maxwell; the electron/ion drift ve-
locity and diﬀusion coeﬃcients are evaluated with
Magboltz; Townsend and attachment coeﬃcients
are simulated by Imonte; the energy loss by a
given ionizing particle in gas and the cluster pro-
duction process are evaluated by Heed. As an
example, Figure 2 reports the simulation for the
“weighting ﬁeld” ~EW
K (x) (deﬁned by putting at
1 V the given readout electrode while keeping all
the others at 0 V) for a pad electrode. Signal in-
duction is then derived via the Ramo theorem:
Ik = −q~v(x) × ~EW

K (x).

Figure 2. Simulation of the weighting ﬁeld for a
T2 GEM pad electrode.

From the reconstruction of the full process
chain leading to signal collection, with proper
lateral electron cluster diﬀusion
modeling of
through each GEM foil, the expected signal for
a MIP particle has been derived for both strips
and pads for typical values of the electric ﬁeld in
the drift and induction zones between GEM foils
(Ed/t ∼ 3kV/cm). Timing properties, such as
a typical signal time delay(duration) of ∼ 60(50)
ns, have been found consistent with preliminary
test beam studies on prototypes. Furthermore,
the study of signals as a function of distance from
electron cluster centroid, when combined with ex-
pected signal processing by the readout electron-
ics, has shown a typical strip cluster size of 2÷3
channels (1÷2 for pads), which is consistent with
COMPASS test beam results [3]. Ongoing test
beam activities, performed with ﬁnal production
detectors read by ﬁnal design electronics (digital
readout via VFAT chip), are expected to allow an
improved test and tuning of current simulation.

4. TEST ACTIVITIES AT CERN

Two ﬁnal full size detectors, whose components
were provided by CERN, have been assembled by
an italian private company [5], and then tested
at CERN Gas Detector Development Laboratory
with a Cu X-Ray source (Kα/β = 8/8.9 KeV).
These activities involved studies on: general func-
tionality, absolute gain, strip/pad charge shar-
ing, energy resolution, time stability and response
uniformity. In particular, the analysis of signals
simultaneously collected from 8 strip/pad elec-
trodes allowed to check the most important de-
tector parameters. Figure 3 shows the total ef-
2 for both strip and pad readout
fective gain GT
channels as a function of the applied HV: an ex-
pected gain of 8÷10×103 for a typical HV value
of -4 kV is observed.

Absolute GAIN Calibration
2nd Chamber Assembled at G&A

104

Strips Gain 2nd
Pads Gain 2nd

I

N
A
G
 
e
t
u
o
s
b
A

l

1000

Strips

Pads

y = 1.8996e-7 * e^(-0.0060998x)   R= 0.99964 

y = 8.7311e-8 * e^(-0.0062633x)   R= 0.99985 

-3500

-3600

-3700

-3900

-4000

-4100

-3800

H.V.

Figure 3. Strip/Pad gain as a function of the
applied high voltage.

The study of strip/pad cluster charge sharing
showed the expected correlation between the two
clusters (Figure 4). A slightly higher charge col-
lected by strips (about 10÷15%), considering the
typical higher strip cluster size, is consistent with
the design for an optimal setup of the common
readout chip.

The evaluation of energy resolution represents
another important detector test as it is related to
the quality and uniformity of GEM foils. In fact,
a not uniform gain over the irradiated zone will

2 This parameter can be derived according to equation
GT = Itot/(e · n · f ), from total readout current (Itot)
and X-Ray interaction rate (f ) measurements, knowing
the average number of electrons produced by an interact-
ing X-Ray (n).

3

Strip/Pad cluster charge sharing.
Figure 4.
The reduced correlation at higher current val-
ues (around the 8 KeV peak) is attributed to not
complete alignment of X-Ray beam to the instru-
mented readout channels.

results in an anomalous broadening of the peak in
the response spectrum. An energy resolution of
∼ 20%, in terms of FWHM for the leading 8 KeV
peak, was found to be well in agreement with the
expected design performance of the detector.

Furthermore, time stability of signal has been
tested with continuous detector irradiation over
more than one hour and response uniformity
checked by randomly moving the X-Ray source
over the detector surface.

In conclusion detector performances well
within expectations have been observed. A more
extensive test on ten production detectors will be
performed at the incoming test beam activities.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are particularly grateful to A. Cardini and
D. Pinci of LHCb Collaboration for very precious
initial input on triple-GEM simulation.

REFERENCES

1. “TOTEM Technical Design Report”, CERN-
LHCC-2004-002; addendum CERN-LHCC-
2004-020 (2004).

2. F. Sauli, Nucl. Inst. & Meth A386 (1997) 531.
3. C. Altunbas et al., Nucl. Inst. & Meth A490

4. W. Bonivento et al., IEEE Trans.Nucl.Sci.49

(2002) 177.

(2002) 1638.

5. G&A Engineering, Carsoli (Aquila) - Italy,

www.gaengineering.com.

