6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
0
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ACORDE a Cosmic Ray Detector for ALICE

A. Fern´andez1, S. Kartal2

∗, C. Pagliarone3

†

1 Benem´erita Universidad Aut´onoma de Puebla (BUAP), Puebla, Mexico
2 Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey
3 Universit´a di Cassino & INFN Pisa, Italy

Abstract

ACORDE, the ALICE COsmic Ray DEtector is one of the ALICE detectors,
presently under construction.
It consists of an array of plastic scintillator counters
placed on the three upper faces of the ALICE magnet. This array will act as Level 0
cosmic ray trigger and, together with other ALICE sub-detectors, will provide precise
information on cosmic rays with primary energies around 1015−17 eV. In this paper we
will describe the ACORDE detector, trigger design and electronics.

1

Introduction

Because of their extremely low ﬂux, the observation of cosmic ray particles,
with energies around and beyond the knee region, of the cosmic ray spec-
trum (see Fig. 1), is possible only using indirect methods. Ground based
arrays, so-called extensive air shower arrays, located on the Earth surface or
underground, detect particle showers created by the interaction of primary
cosmic rays with the atmosphere. The large collecting surface of such ar-
rays may allow the detection of events with extremely high energies and very
high multiplicity. One of the main problem of an extensive air shower array
experiment, comes from the diﬃculty in reconstructing the energy and the
mass of the primary cosmic particle crossing the atmosphere. As matter of
fact a detailed understanding of the interaction mechanism and and shower
development and evolution in the atmosphere is needed in order to achieve
this scientiﬁc goal. On the other hand new phenomena, in very forward high-
energy hadronic interactions, such as coherent pion production, disoriented
chiral condensate states (DCC) or heavy ﬂavor production, may signiﬁcantly

∗Corresponding author. E-mail: sehban.kartal@cern.ch
†Corresponding author. E-mail: pagliarone@fnal.gov

1

Figure 1: Cosmic ray particle spectrum for charged primaries. The knee and the ankle are visible near
1015 and 1018.5 eV/nucleus [1], respectively.

aﬀect the hadronic cascade and then the structure of the cosmic ray events at
ground level. Such an eﬀects may be responsible, for example, of the discrep-
ancies found among diﬀerent experiments, about the shower particle composi-
tion. Particle production, both at large energies and in the forward direction,
can be estimated only using models based on the extrapolation of accelerator
data. The interpretation of cosmic ray data, in particular the identiﬁcation
of primary cosmic rays, rely crucially on such a model. Presently, there are
no accelerator data for particle production at very small forward regions as
well as in the energy region around the cosmic ray knee. In the past years,
many interaction models such as VENUS, QGSJET, DPMJET, SIBYLL and
others have been extensively developed and used by the cosmic-ray commu-
nity [2]. As these models are based on proton-antiproton, electron-positron
and heavy-ion collisions data, at the present, the maximum energy available
from the accelerator experiments comes from the Tevatron collider that has
√s = 1.96 TeV. LHC experiments may then contribute to clarify and con-
strain such a models signiﬁcantly bringing the center-of-mass energy up to
1017
√s = 14 TeV which corresponds approximately to a proton of E
eV interacting with an other proton in the upper atmosphere. This energy
value lies above the knee of the energy spectrum of cosmic rays, see Fig. 1.
ALICE and the other LHC detectors will allow to extend the study of the A-
dependence in AA interactions to higher energies. Particularly important will
be in particular to study nitrogen-nitrogen interactions, since nitrogen and
oxygen are the most abundant nuclei in the atmosphere and since nitrogen
nuclei are also present in high-energy cosmic rays (E
At CERN, the use of large underground high-energy physics experiments, for

1015eV).

≃

≥

2

Figure 2: a) Angular distribution (zenithal vs azimuthal angle) of atmospheric µ reaching the ALICE hall.
b) φ vs Energy loss for atmospheric µ reaching the ALICE cavern. c) µ-Energy loss vs (initial) zenith angle.

comic ray studies, has been suggested by several groups [3]. In particular, the
L3 experiment established a cosmic ray experimental program the so called
L3+Cosmics. The principal aim was to measure, precisely, the inclusive
cosmic ray (µ) spectrum in the energy range 20
2000 GeV [4], which is
relevant for neutrino oscillations.

−

2 The ACORDE Detector

÷

1017 eV [6].

ALICE is an experiment mainly designed to study the products of nucleus-
nucleus collisions at CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) [5]. The under-
ground location of the ALICE detector, with 30 m of overburden composed
of subalpine molasse, is an ideal place for muon based underground exper-
iments (see Fig. 2). Using this facilities, we plan to observe muon bundles
generated by cosmic ray primary particles with energies around the knee
region 1015
ACORDE, ALICE COsmic Ray DEtector, is an array of scintillator modules
that will act as cosmic ray trigger for ALICE calibration, as a multiple muon
trigger and it will be used to detect, in combination with other tracking
apparatus, atmospheric muons and multi-muons events. Taking into account
the ﬁne granularity of the ALICE Timing Projection Chamber (TPC) and
the fast response of the ACORDE array it will be possible to measure several
properties of cosmic ray events with high density muon tracks, the so-called
muon bundles. A more detailed discussion on the ACORDE physics goals
can be found in the ALICE Physics Performance Review, Chapter 6 [5].

3

ALIC

View of CRT (ACORDE)

21/10/ 3

Figure 3: a) The ALICE Cosmic Ray Detector; the scintillator array is on top of the ALICE magnet. b)
View of the ALICE cavern.

2.1 The scintillator array

ACORDE is an array of plastic scintillator modules (60 at the present) placed
on the top sides of the central ALICE magnet, as shown in Fig. 3. More mod-
ules, to achieve a better angular coverage and acceptance, will be added later.
20 cm2
Each module, consists of two plastic scintillator paddles with 188
eﬀective area, arranged in a doublet conﬁguration (see Fig. 4). Each doublet
consists of two superimposed scintillator counters, with their corresponding
photomultipliers active faces, looking back to back. A coincidence signal,
in a time window of 40 ns, from the two scintillator paddles gives, for each
module, the trigger hit. A PCI BUS electronics card have been developed in
order to measure plateau and eﬃciency of the module counters [7].

×

2.2 The Cosmic Ray Trigger

The cosmic ray trigger system (CRT) will provide a fast level-zero trigger
signal to the central trigger processor, when atmospheric muons impinge upon
the ALICE detector. The signal will be useful for calibration, alignment and
performance studies of other ALICE tracking detectors: the Time Projection
Chamber (TPC), the Transition Radiation Detector (TRD) and the Inner
Tracking System (ITS). A typical rate, for single atmospheric muons crossing
the ALICE cavern, will be less than 1 Hz/m2. The expected rate for multi-
muon events will be around or less than 0.04 Hz/m2. Atmospheric muons
will need an energy of at least 17 GeV to reach the ALICE hall, while the
upper energy limit for reconstructed muons in the TPC will be less than 2

4

(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

26 cm

19.5cm

Scintillator

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

50 cm

10cm

Upper view

Side view

293 cm

190 cm

Front side of the module

Figure 4: a) Schematic view of an ACORDE module; the scintillator modules consist of two superimposed
scintillator counters. b) An ACORDE module in the the BUAP test facility.

TeV, depending on the ALICE magnetic ﬁeld intensity (up to 0.5 T).

2.3 Electronics design and construction

We have designed and implemented the necessary electronics in order to do
the following tasks:

1. Perform the clock synchronization with the LHC clock;

2. Produce single and multi-muon trigger signals for the Central Trigger

Processor (CTP);

3. Prodce a wake-up signal for the ALICE-TRD;

4. Communicate with the DAQ through a DAQ Source Interface Unit;

5. Online monitoring of the scintillator counter performances.

The ACORDE Electronics is then made of several diﬀerent parts essentially
the follow: i) 60 Front End Electronics cards (FEE), one for each ACORDE
module; ii) the ACORDE OR card to generate the TRD wake up signal (this
card receive the 60 coincidence LVDs signals coming from the FEE cards);
iii) a Main Card, which contains the electronics to receive the 120 LVDS
signals coming from 120 scintillators (this card will produce the single and
the multi-coincidence trigger signals and will provide the connectivity to the
ALICE trigger and DAQ systems, see Fig. 5.a).
Between the electronics cards the FEE performs the following task: take the
signal from each of the two PMT contained in an ACORDE module and
submits it to a leading edge discriminator. The discriminators convert the

5

Figure 5: a) General scheme of the ACORDE electronics. b) FEE card block diagram.

negative low signal coming from each PMT to a CMOS digital signal. These
signals have a time duration of about 10-20ns. In order to produce a wider
signal (100ns) the FEE electronics includes a mono-stable circuit. The mono-
stable outputs are used to produce the coincidence (AND) between the two
plastic scintillators. Also, the FEE electronics translate these three signals
into LVDS signals to eliminate noise problems during the transmission to the
other cards. Summarizing, the FEE will be able to provide the coincidence
signal of one ACORDE module and two signals coming from the scintillators,
these three signals will be pulses of 100ns. The coincidence signals are then
transmitted to the ACORDE ”OR” card and the PMT signals are tranfered
to the ACORDE main card (see Figure 5.b). The ACORDE OR card is used
to produce a TRD wake-up signal using the coincidence signals coming from
the 60 FEE cards. Those signals are then translated from LVDS to CMOS
levels. Afterwards, it will be used an OR gate of 60 inputs to generate the
wake-up signal. The trigger signal is then translated from CMOS to LVDS in
order to be sent to the TRD detector. There is also a 40MHz cryptal oscillator
to produce the wake-up signals (25ns LVDS pulse). The ACORDE OR card
will be located on top of the magnet as shown in Fig. 6.a. The ACORDE
main card uses 1 Bus card to interconnect 6 LVDS to CMOS translator cards
with the ACORDE main card. One LVDS to CMOS translator card is able to
receive 20 diﬀerential signals coming from 20 FEE cards. In order to receive
the 120 diﬀerential signals we use six translator cards. The Bus card supply
the power to the 6 translator cards and the ACORDE main card. The last
card receives 120 CMOS signals through the bus card. These signals are
supplied to an ALTERA EP20K100QC240-1 FPGA. This FPGA chip same

6

Figure 6: a) Location of the ACORDE OR card, on top of the ALICE magnet. b) Block diagram of the
ACORDE main electronics card.

as the one used in the TPC electronics; tests done previously have shown that
this device is radiation tolerant. The function of the FPGA chip is to store
the hit information and produce the single muon and the multi-coincidence
trigger in synchronization with the LHC clock signal. The main card has a
second ALTERA EP20K100QC240-1 FPGA chip, this device is connected
with the TTCrq and SIU card to provide the LHC clock recovery, the trigger
message decoder, the data header generator and the ACORDE-SIU interface.
The single moun L0 trigger signal is generated by combinational logic (AND
and OR gates). The ACORDE card latches the tracking data in a memory
when the detector produces a L0 trigger signal. The SIU daughter card allows
the communication with the DAQ system to be able to send the data header
and the tracking information through the Detector Data Link (DDL). The
ACORDE card sends the Data header and the tracking data to the DAQ
system after receiving a L2 accepted trigger message, see Fig. 6.b. The FEE
cards has been tested showing a very good performance, the leading edge
discriminator has a rise and fall time of 2ns and the mono-stable circuit
produces a 100ns pulse.
In order to calibrate the ALICE-TPC detector using cosmic rays, we have
developed a diﬀerent version of the ACORDE electronics. This version only
receives 40 diﬀerential signals coming from 20 modules. Ten modules will
be located on top and the other ten will located underneath. The sys-
tem will use an ACORDE card with one bus card to connect two LVDS
to CMOS translator cards to 1 main card. This card will only use one AL-
TERA EP20K100QC240-1 FPGA chip. We will not have connection to the

7

Trigger and DAQ ALICE systems. This electronics will provide a trigger
signal (LVDS). The user will be able to set an arbitrary OR combination
of the top modules in AND with an arbitrary OR combination of the bot-
tom modules through a PC. The communication between the PC and the
ACORDE electronics card is provided through the parallel port of the PC.
An ACORDE-PC interface card with a micro-controller has been developed
to receive the data from the PC to show the setting combination with a group
of 20 LED indicator. In this way the user can verify if the system have the
correct conﬁguration.

3 The ACORDE Control System

The main tasks of any Detector Control System (DCS) is the monitoring and
control of the electrical and physical parameters necessary to operate the
sub-detector. In general, these task include the high voltage (HV) and low
voltage (LV) power supplies, the front-end electronics (FEE) conﬁguration
parameters, alarm handling, parameter archiving and all other services such
as gas, cooling, etc. In our case we need to monitor and control only the HV
and LV power supplies. The electronics parameters such as multi-coincidence
number, trigger rates and others will be managed by the central DAQ system.
A general view of our DCS is shown in Fig. 7.a. We plan to use the SY1527
and the EASY [8] (Embedded Assembly SYstem) power supply systems from
CAEN as the HV and LV supplies respectively. The latter is a radiation-
and hig-magnetic-ﬁeld tolerant power supply system to be installed in the
cavern racks to supply the LV for ACORDE. The SY1527 crate can hold
up to 16 boards. Ten of its slots will be ﬁlled with 12-channel HV boards
(A1733N) to feed the 120 PMT’s. We will also install the EASY Branch
Controller (A1676A) board that can control up to 6 EASY crates. We will
need two full EASY 3000 crates each with ﬁve 12-channel 2–8 V boards
(A3009) for the discriminators. The remaining four channels for the Acorde
Electronics Card and the shoebox producing the TRD wake up signal will
be hosted by a third EASY 3000 crate with an additional A3009 board. The
intrinsic grouping of the scintillators into modules (each with a couple of
scintillators and PMT’s) and the fact that the FEE cards will be mounted
on the modules, makes it natural to select a detector-oriented hierarchy for
our DCS as shown in Fig. 7.b. This hierarchy will allow us to independently
control a single module in a simple way which can be useful for purposes
of isolating, testing or calibrating it. There will be a total of 183 Control

8

m
o
o
r
 
l

o
r
t

n
o
C

ACORDE

PVSSII

User interface

PVSSII
OPC
client

Database

Ethernet

PVSSII

OPC client

CAEN OPC Server

Ethernet

1

CAEN
SY1527

HV

120

LV

120

Pwr and ctrl

3

3

CAEN
EASY

LV

4

C
o
u
n

t
i

n
g

 
r
o
o
m

C
a
v
e
r
n

ACORDE
DCS

CU

DU

M60

HV60

LV60

M0

LV0

LVS 0.1

LVS 0.2

LVS 0.3

LVS 0.4

HVS 60.1

HVS 60.2

LVS 60.1

LVS 60.2

Detector

FEE

Electronics Card
Wake−up shoebox

High Voltage

FEE

Mario I. Martinez

+5 V
TRD wake−up shoebox

−5 V

+3.3 V
Acorde Electronics Card

+5 V

PMT 60−L

PMT 60−R

+5 V

−5 V

FEE Card

Figure 7: a) Overview drawing of the ACORDE detector control system. b) Finite state machine hierarchy
of the HV and LV of ACORDE.
Units (CU) in the DCS; the parent ACORDE DCS with 61 module CU’s (M0
through M60). M1 to M60 will control each one of the modules respectively,
including its associated FEE card. Module 0 will take care of the LV supply
to the Electronics and TRD shoe-box cards. As mentioned before the only
electronics parameter to be controlled is the multi-coincidence number; i. e.
the minimum number of modules hit in order to produce a multi-muon event
trigger. This threshold will be programmed through the DAQ system. The
DCS however should be able to monitor and control it (via the DAQ system).
As described on the ALICE TDR 010 [9] the online systems interface to each
other through the Experiment Control System (ECS); so the DCS will access
the multi-coincidence number by communicating with the ECS. The DCS is
also in charge of managing the calibration procedure of our detector. This
procedure will consist in monitoring the individual counts on each one of
the scintillators in a given time interval; so that we can realize if any of the
corresponding eﬃciencies has dropped to an unacceptable value.

4 Summary

We have implemented a dedicated cosmic ray trigger for ALICE which in
conjunction with other ALICE detectors provides a powerful tool for the
study of muon bundles properties. At the present, we have 20 ACORDE
modules already installed and the related electronics working. The ALICE-
TPC above ground commissioning is proceeding based on ACORDE trigger
using 10 modules placed on the top and 10 underneath the ALICE TPC
(see [10]).

9

5 Acknowledgments

We are grateful to the High Energy Physics Latinamerican-European NET-
WORK (HELEN) and CONACyT(M´exico) for continuous support. We es-
pecially thank Laszlo Jenkovszky for his kind hospitality.

References

[1] M. Takeda, et. al. (AGASA Collaboration),Energy determination in the

Akeno Giant Air Shower Array experiment astro-ph/0209422.

[2] J. Ranft, Cosmic Ray particle production, Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl.,

71, 228, 1999.

[3] A. C. et al., The UA1 detector as possible cosmic ray device, Proc.
17th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf., Paris, 10, 401, 1981; C. Taylor et al.,
CosmoLep, an underground cosmic ray muon experiment in the LEP
ring, CERN/LEP C 99-5, LEPC/P9, 1999; C. Taylor et al., Cos-
moLep, an underground cosmic ray muon experiment in the LEP ring,
CERN/LEPC 99-5, LEPC/P9, 1999;

[4] O. Adriani, et. al. (L3 + C Collaboration), NIMA, 488, (200 2) pp.

209-225.

[5] ALICE Physics Performance Report,

ALICE Collaboration,

http://alice.web.cern.ch/Alice/ppr/.

[6] A. Fern´andez et al.,Czechoslovak J. Phys., 55 (2005) B801 - B807.

[7] E. H. Bellamy et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 343, 484 (1994); E. H. Bel-

lamy et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 339, 468 (1994).

[8] CAEN S.p.A. – Costruzioni Apparecchiature Elettroniche Nucleari,

http://www.caen.it/nuclear/easy info.html

[9] ALICE Technical Design Report of the Trigger Data Acquisition High-
Level Trigger and Control System, CERN-LHCC-2003-062, 7 january
2004, chap. 16, 20.

[10] C.Pagliarone et al., arXiv:physics/0606051 to be published on Nucl. In-

strum. Meth.

10

