6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
0
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The PHENIX Muon Trigger Upgrade

John Lajoie for the PHENIX Collaboration

Iowa State University, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Ames, Iowa 50021

Abstract. The PHENIX muon trigger upgrade adds Level-1 trigger detectors to existing forward
muon spectrometers and will enhance the ability of the experiment to pursue a rich program of spin
physics in polarized proton collisions at √s = 500 GeV . The additional muon trigger detectors
and Level-1 trigger electronics will allow the experiment to select high momentum muons from
the decay of W -bosons and reject both beam-associated and low-momentum collision background,
enabling the study of quark and antiquark polarization in the proton. The muon trigger upgrade will
add momentum and timing information to the present muon Level-1 trigger, which only makes use
of tracking in the PHENIX muon identiﬁer (MuID) panels. Signals from three new resistive plate
chambers (RPC’s) and re-instrumented planes in the existing muon tracking (MuTr) chambers will
provide momentum and timing information for the new Level-1 trigger. An RPC timing resolution
of

2ns will permit rejection of beam related backgrounds.

∼

Keywords: RHIC, PHENIX, polarized protons, W boson, spin
PACS: 13.88+e, 14.70.Fm, 12.15.-y

PHYSICS WITH POLARIZED W BOSONS

A central goal of high-energy physics is to understand the quark and gluon structure
of QCD bound states. The most fundamental of these bound states is the nucleon, and
current measurements indicate that only about 25% of the spin of this object is carried by
its quark content [1]. Contributions from gluons, orbital angular momentum, and the sea
quarks are poorly understood. Measurements of the single longitudinal spin asymmetry
AL in W -boson production in polarized proton collisions will make it possible to better
understand the contributions of the of the sea and valence quarks to the spin of the
proton.

THE PHENIX EXPERIMENT

The PHENIX experiment is one of two large experiments at the Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory. The experiment consists of two
central arms designed for measuring leptons, photons, and charged hadrons produced
at midrapidty as well as two muon arms at forward and backward rapidities. The muon
arms themselves consist of a set of tracking chambers (the Muon Tracker, or MuTr) in
an approximately radial magnetic ﬁeld followed by a Muon Identiﬁer (MuID) which
consists of layers of absorber interspersed with Iarocci tubes.

RHIC is an extremely versatile accelerator complex, capable of accelerating Au and
60% polarization [2]. The PHENIX
lighter nuclei as well as polarized protons with
experiment has an active spin physics program, including measurements of the spin
structure of the nucleon through D G, D q/q, D q/q and transversity measurements d q

∼

FIGURE 1. Diagram of a PHENIX muon arm, showing the existing magnet, MuTr and MuID detectors
as well as the location of the three RPC chambers to be installed.

[3]. While measurements of D G have already been reported [4] based on running at √s
= 200 GeV , measurements of the quark and antiquark distribution functions will be
made in future running at √s = 500 GeV using polarized W -bosons, identiﬁed through
their decay into high momentum muons. The PHENIX experiment has excellent data
acquisition (DAQ) and trigger capabilities, and is capable of a sustained Level-1 accept
rate of 5kHz with very low deadtime. This combination of a selective trigger and high
bandwidth allows the PHENIX experiment to take data for multiple physics signals in
parallel.

THE MUON TRIGGER UPGRADE

1
2s−
In future running at √s = 500 GeV it is expected that luminosities near 2
×
12MHz. This high event rate,
will be achieved, corresponding to an interaction rate of
coupled with the requirement that muon triggers consume no more than 2kHz of the
available DAQ bandwidth, will require an event rejection > 10000 at Level-1. While
PHENIX currently has an existing Level-1 muon trigger based only on the MuID, the
250-500 is inadequate. In addition, the rejection
achieved rejection at √s = 200 GeV of
for the MuID based trigger is highly sensitive to beam-related background processes in
the collider.

1032cm−

∼

∼

While there are many sources of low-momentum muons in proton-proton collisions
(mainly charm and beauty decays), above a transverse momentum of 20 GeV/c the
muon spectrum at √s = 500 GeV is dominated by decays of W bosons. In order to
achieve the desired event rejection momentum selectivity at Level-1 is required. The
PHENIX collaboration plans to add this momentum selectivity through a combination
of additional instrumentation in the existing PHENIX muon arms. First, three resistive
plate chamber (RPC) tracking chambers will be installed in the PHENIX muon arms,
as shown in Figure 1. All three RPC chambers will use strip readout, with the strips
organized as 360 segments in azimuthal angle around the beam axis, and between four
and six segments in polar angle theta. (Only two theta segments will be used in the

FIGURE 2. Schematic view of the signal split from the existing MuTr station 2 cathode plane.

trigger.) This portion of the upgrade is funded by a grant from the U.S. National Science
Foundation.

While RPC development and testing have been ongoing at test stands at the University
of Illinois, the University of Colorado, and Georgia State University, we plan to make
use of existing RPC designs from the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider.
By doing this we leverage the considerable man-years of research and development
experience obtained by the CMS collaboration and accelerate the schedule for deploying
the detectors in PHENIX.

In addition to the additional information from the RPC chambers, the PHENIX muon
trigger upgrade will also include the ability to make use of high-resolution tracking
from the existing MuTr stations by splitting the signal from the chambers and adding
an additional electronics chain to provide information to the Level-1 trigger (see Figure
2). Ongoing tests with a MuTr chamber at Kyoto University have demonstrated that this
split can be achieved with passive electronics in such a way that it does not signiﬁcantly
degrade the resolution of the MuTr cathode planes. This portion of the upgrade is funded
by the JSPS.

Momentum selectivity in the PHENIX muon trigger upgrade is achieved by matching
hits in the ﬁrst and second RPC stations and making a straight line projection into MuTr
station 2. Because of the radial magnetic ﬁeld in the PHENIX muon arms, tracks will be
bent along the measurement direction in azimuthal angle, so that the deviation of a hit
found in MuTr station 2 and the straight line projection is an indication of the momentum
of the track. A cut on all candidates such that the MuTr station 2 hit deviates from the
projection by less than three cathode strips is efﬁcient for momenta above 20 GeV/c and
has been demonstrated to achieve event rejection factors > 10000 in simulations using
the pythia [5] event generator. It should be noted that in addition to a candidate track in
the muon trigger upgrade, the existing MuID-based muon trigger is also required.

As was mentioned previously, at RHIC substantial beam-related collider backgrounds
degrade the performance of the existing MuID based trigger. Because the magnitude of
the background is unknown at √s = 500 GeV running at RHIC, it is essential that the
trigger be designed to be insensitive to such backgrounds. In order to achieve this, we
will take advantage of the good timing resolution of the RPC chambers, in particular
RPC 3, to make a timing cut on the RPC hits such that only hits consistent with tracks
originating from the vertex are considered in the trigger. This will eliminate hits (and
backgrounds) from particles that arrive coincident with the beam bunches in the collider.

FIGURE 3. The PHENIX muon trigger upgrade algorithm. Hits in RPC 1 and RPC 2 are used to project
into MuTr station 2 and matched to hit.

FIGURE 4. Expected sensitivity of the RHIC measurements using polarized W -bosons, assuming the
full goals of the RHIC √s = 500 GeV program. The theory curve and uncertainty band are from an AAC
analysis of existing data.

OUTLOOK

It is expected that the current RHIC polarized proton program at √s = 200 GeV will be
completed in 2009, with the √s = 500 GeV program beginning at this point and con-
tinuing through 2012. Luminosity is expected to improve througout the √s = 500 GeV
1 and beam polarization at
program, with a total expected integrated luminosity 950 pb−
70%. The PHENIX muon trigger upgrade will be in place for the start of high energy po-
larized proton running in 2009. Expected sensitivity for the polarized W -boson program
at RHIC for D q/q are shown in Figure 4.

1. B. Lampe, and E. Reya, "Spin Physics and Polarized Structure Functions", Phys. Rept. 332, 1-163,

REFERENCES

2000

2. M. Bai, these proceedings.
3. K. Barish, these proceedings.
4. K. Boyle, these proceedings.
5. T. Sjostrand et. al, Comput. Phys. Comm. 135, 238 (2001).

