7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
7
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Silicon sensors implemented on p-type
substrates for high radiation resistance
application

Marina Artuso

Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244, USA

Silicon based micropattern detectors are essential elements of modern high energy
physics experiments. Cost eﬀectiveness and high radiation resistance are two impor-
tant requirements for technologies to be used in inner tracking devices. Processes
based on p-type substrates have very strong appeal for these applications. Recent
results and prototype eﬀorts under way are reviewed.

Abstract

Key words:

1 Introduction

The CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is poised to start operation soon
and ramp up to a luminosity of 1034 cm−2s−1. To be able to cope with the high
levels of radiation expected in the inner tracking devices a new technology has
been developed: the so called “n-on-n” silicon micropattern detectors have
replaced the conventional “p-on-n” used for decades in Si microstrip devices.
In this approach, the charge signal collecting electrodes are implemented with
n+ implants on an n-type substrate, while the p+ implant extends through-
out the back plane of the device. One of the reasons underlying this choice
is the discovery of “type-inversion” (1). Radiation damage introduces electri-
cally active defects in the band gap that change several sensor properties , in
particular they alter the eﬀective doping concentration Nef f . The study of the
Nef f evolution lead to the discovery of the phenomenon of “charge inversion”,
naively deﬁned as a change in the Nef f sign (transformation into a “p-type”
equivalent substrate). This eﬀective doping concentration is described with
the equation

Nef f = Nef f (0)e−cΦ − βΦ,

(1)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

13 December 2013

where N(0) is the initial doping concentration, c and β are empirical param-
eters accounting for the donor removal and the acceptor-like defect addition
rates as a function of the radiation dose Φ. This is an eﬀective parametriza-
tion; studies have shown that a “double-junction” model (2; 3; 4), where the
main junction is at the n+-bulk interface, provides a better description of the
device properties after high radiation doses. After type inversion, “n-on-n” de-
vice achieve much better charge collection eﬃciency that conventional devices.
Thus Atlas (5), CMS (6), and LHCb(7) use this technology for their track-
ing subsystems exposed to the largest radiation doses. An upgrade of LHC
(sLHC) is planned to achieve a luminosity of the order of 1035 cm2s−1, a fac-
tor of 10 higher than the LHC design luminosity. A corresponding increase in
the expected radiation doses is a natural consequence. Thus new technologies
are being studied to be used in the hottest detector regions.

One of the drawbacks of the “n-on-n” technology is the high ﬁeld at the
backplane junction in the early stages of operation of the detectors, prior
to radiation damage. Because of this, “n-on-n” detectors are produced with
a double-sided technology: implants in the back side include complex guard
ring structures that have the goal of providing a controlled drop of the voltage
from the biasing implant to the edge of the device. Moreover, the high ﬁeld
region produces a quickest charge collection and thus it is desirable to have
it always close to the signal collection electrode. Although many devices have
been produced with the “n-on-n” technology, options that could overcome
these limitations have been sought. High resistivity, detector grade p-type
substrates provide a very promising solution to satisfy the radiation resistance
requirements in a very cost eﬀective manner.

2 p-type technology

One of the main technological challenges in the fabrication of “n-in-p” devices
is the achievement of a good inter-electrode isolation. This is because the pos-
itive charge in the SiO2 oxide induces an electron accumulation layer at the
oxide-Si interface that would electrically connect all the sensing elements if no
isolation mechanism were introduced. This is an old problem, addressed for the
ﬁrst time when double-sided Si microstrip devices were introduced (8), but it
is still challenging the ingenuity of device designers and foundries. The charge
density in the accumulation layer increases with the radiation dose, up to a
level known as the “oxide saturation charge”. Interstrip isolation must guar-
antee a high inter-electrode resistance throughout the sensor lifetime, without
adversely aﬀecting the electrical performance of the device. Three approaches
commonly used are known as p-stop, p-spray, and moderated p-spray. The
p-stop method is based on p-type implants surrounding the n+ collection elec-
trode. “n-in-p” sensors with p-stop interstrip isolation have been shown to fea-

2

ture higher radiation resistance than sensors of equal geometry implemented
with “n-in-n” technology (9). However p-stop implants require an additional
mask, and they suﬀer from pre-breakdown micro-discharges that deteriorate
the noise performance of the sensors implemented with this interstrip insula-
tion. A commonly used alternative is the “p-spray” technique, where a uniform
p-type blanket is implanted throughout the active surface of the device. The
n+ implants have suﬃcient dose to overcompensate this p-type layer in the
regions where charge collection electrodes are planned. Thus the additional
mask is no longer needed. On the other hand, in this case it is necessary
to ensure that early breakdowns do not occur, and that an acceptable inter-
electrode insulation is maintained throughout the detector lifetime. Thus a
careful tuning of the p+ implant is necessary. A hybrid solution that aims
at bridging the advantages of the two methods, the so-called “moderated p-
spray” is sometimes used. This solution requires an additional mask, but may
ease the conﬂicting constraints of avoiding early breakdowns and maintaining
high interstrip resistance at all the radiation levels. Note that due to the lower
hole mobility, the depletion voltage is three times higher for p-type substrates
than n-type substrates of a given resistivity.

The high energy physics community has decades of experience with detec-
tor grade n-type substrates, while the p-type option is relatively new. How-
ever, several groups are studying this technology. Both the CERN RD50
collaboration(10) and the INFN funded SMARTS collaboration (11) have de-
voted considerable resources towards a comprehensive study of the properties
of a variety of sensors implemented with this technology. Sensors have been
produced at research laboratories such as CNM-IMB (12), or ITC-IRST (13),
as well as at industrial foundries such as Micron (14), and Hamamatsu (15).
Thus a thorough understanding of the properties of these devices at diﬀerent
level of radiation is emerging.

3 Fabrication Details

Both diﬀusion oxygenated ﬂoat zone (DOFZ), and magnetic Czochralski (MCz)
Si wafers have been used, with a wide resistivity range and wafer thicknesses
typically between 200 µm and 300 µm. Diﬀerent isolation techniques have
been used. The vast majority of the eﬀorts has been concentrated on blan-
ket p-spray, but diﬀerent p-stop topologies, including ﬁeld plate modiﬁcations
(16), and moderated p-spray have been implemented.

Earlier wafers contained a large number of test structures, such as multi-guard
ring diodes, MOS capacitors, and gated diodes, and a smaller number of strip
or pixel detectors. Now the eﬀort is progressing towards implementation of
larger scale devices. For example, the RD50 collaboration has a set of devices

3

being manufactured at Micron on 6 inch wafers that include strip and pixel
detectors suitable for LHCb, ATLAS, and CMS upgrades. In addition, full
size VELO sensors on high resistivity p-type substrates have been produced,
that have been assembled into fully instrumented modules by the University
of Liverpool group.

4 Performance before and after irradiation

There is a vast array of studies on the performance before and after irradiation
of the detectors implemented on p-type substrates. Some examples illustrating
the achievements and challenges in this process will be discussed.

Blanket p-spray isolation with lower implant dose (17) has been shown to fail
to provide adequate interstrip resistance at a dose of about 50 MRad, which
is the total dose expected in the middle region of the future upgrade of the
Atlas detector at Super-LHC. A KEK group (18) reported similar ﬁndings for
lower dose p-spray and p-stop implants. This group is investigating alternative
isolation techniques to achieve the optimum interstrip resistance, including the
use of ﬁeld plates over the blocking implant.

Other operational aspects that need to be studied as a function of the radia-
tion dose are the current versus voltage characteristic and the charge collec-
tion eﬃciency. It has been argued eﬀectively (19) that the latter parameter
is a much better predictor of the longevity of any given detector technology
than the full depletion voltage Vf d extracted from a capacitance versus voltage
measurement. While Vf d may be not practically achievable because it would
induce thermal runaway in radiation damaged sensors, adequate charge col-
lection eﬃciency at lower voltages may be still be achieved. Figure 1 shows an
example of the charge collection eﬃciency obtained in a 1x1 cm2 280 µm thick
microstrip detector produced by CNM-IMB using masks designed at the Uni-
versity of Liverpool. The charge collection measurement has been performed
using a 106Ru source, that has an energy deposition comparable to a mini-
mum ionizing particles. Thus the study provides an absolute charge collection
eﬃciency. As the noise has been shown not to depend upon the irradiation
level, the signal to noise ratio scales with the charge signal, and, although it
is deteriorating as a function of the radiation dose, may still be acceptable at
the highest levels of radiation considered.

Other radiation studies have been reported (20; 21; 22). One of the most re-
cent is based on the measurements by a group at IFIC, Valencia, (23) of 4
microstrip detectors manufactured by CNM-IMB and irradiated with neutrons
at the TRIGA Mark II reactor in Ljubljana to diﬀerent ﬂuences ranging from
1014 to 1016 n/cm2. Figure 2 shows the current versus voltage characteristic

4

Fig. 1. Charge collection eﬃciency versus applied voltage, normalized to pre-irradia-
tion value, of “n-in-p” strip detectors. The detector irradiated at 3×1015 pcm−2 is a
standard p-type substrate, while the others are oxygen enriched. The measurements
(19) have been performed at a temperature of -20/25◦C.

Fig. 2. Current-Voltage characteristics of “n-in-p” microstrip detectors irradiated
with neutrons. The measurements(23) have been performed at a temperature of
-30◦C.

of irradiated sensors maintained at a temperature of -30◦ C; a non irradi-
ated sensor is included for reference. Earlier micro-discharges appear at lower
irradiation doses. This group investigated the charge collection properties by
measuring the charged signal induced by a pulsed infrared laser (1060 nm). At
the higher ﬂuences the charge collection eﬃciency does not reach the plateau
corresponding to full depletion, and microdischarges onset was observed.

First examples of the feasibility of these detectors in real scale devices have
been accomplished. For example, 6x6 cm2 silicon strip devices designed with
ATLAS strip detector geometry implemented with n+ strips implanted on

5

diﬀerent substrates have been constructed and tested (19). The LHCb-VELO
group has produced full scale sensors on 300 µm thickness high resistivity p-
type substrates: the depletion voltage is of the order of 100 V, while breakdown
is observed at a voltage exceeding 200 V. A fully instrumented VELO module
was tested in the laboratory both at the university of Liverpool and CERN,
and was used in a recent test beam run including 10 VELO modules. Another
large scale production of large microstrip and pixel modules on 6” wafers is
under way at Micron, with masks developed by the RD50 collaboration. The
VELO beam test data and laboratory and test beam characterization of the
RD50 devices, before and after irradiation, will further our understanding of
the operational and system properties of detectors built with this technology.

5 Conclusions

The examples shown in this paper give some snapshots of the vibrant R&D
eﬀort to optimize processes based on p-type substrates to implement micropat-
tern detectors. The ongoing research is making signiﬁcant strides towards the
development of a cost eﬀective technology suitable for the highest radiation
doses expected at sLHC.

6 Acknowledgement

I would like to thank the organizers for a very enjoyable and productive con-
ference in a beautiful setting. I would also like to acknowledge interesting
discussions and scientiﬁc input from G. Casse, and M. Lozano. This work was
supported by the United States National Science Foundation.

References

[1] R. Wunstorf et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A315 (1992) 149.
[2] G. Casse et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 426 (1999)140.
[3] Z. Li et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. NS-43 (1996) 1590.
[4] L.J. Beattie et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 418 (1998) 314.
[5] http://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/INNER DETECTOR/PIXELS/tdr.html
[6] The CMS Collaboration, Report CERN/LHCC 98-6 (1998).
[7] The LHCb Collaboration, Report CERN/LHCC 2001-0011 (2001).
[8] G. Batignani et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 310(1991) 160.
[9] M. Lozano et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 52 (2005) 1468.
[10] RD50; http://www.cern.ch/rd50.

6

[11] A. Macchiolo

et

al., Nucl.

Instr.

and Meth. A (2006),

doi:10.1016/j.nima.2006.10.244

[12] CNM-IMB, Campus Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona,

Spain.

[13] ITC-irst, Povo (Trento), Italy.
[14] Micron Semiconductor Ltd, Lancing Business Park, West Sussex, UK.
[15] Hamamatsu Photonics, Hamamatsu City, Japan.
[16] Y.Unno et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 383 (1996) 159.
[17] G. Pellegrini et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A566 (2006) 360.
[18] Y. Unno, talk given at 2nd Workshop on Avanced Silicon Radiation De-

tectors, Trento, Italy, (2006).

[19] G. Casse, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 566 (2006) 26.
[20] K. Hara et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A565 (2006) 538.
[21] G. Casse, P.P. Allport, and A. Watson, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A568

(2006) 46.

[22] G.

Segneri

et

al., Nucl.

Instr.

and Meth. A (2006),

doi:10.1016/j.nima.2006.10.262.

[23] M. Mi˜nano et al., submitted to Proceedings of RESMDD ’06, 6th In-
ternational Conference on Radiation Eﬀects on Semiconductor Materials,
detectors and Devices, Florence, Italy, (2006).

[24] G. Batignani et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 277 (1989) 147.

7

