7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
8
0
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Tracked pellets – a way to improve the
eﬃciency of charmonium studies

¨O. Nordhage a,∗, I. Lehmann a,1, J. Lith a, C.-J. Frid´en b, and
U. Wiedner a

aDepartment of Nuclear and Particle Physics, Uppsala University, Box 535,
SE-751 21 Uppsala, Sweden
bThe Svedberg Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 533, SE-751 21 Uppsala,
Sweden

Abstract

We investigate the possibility of tracking individual hydrogen micro-spheres from
an internal pellet target. Such a method aims to provide the primary vertex of a
reaction to within about 100 µm, without utilizing any detector response. Apart
from background considerations the knowledge of the reaction vertex may be essen-
tial for the reconstruction of many physics channels. This is in particular true for
the study of the Ψ(3770) decay into D-mesons planned at the PANDA detector at
the future FAIR facility. Here the reconstruction of displaced vertices is especially
diﬃcult since neutral particles are involved.

Studies with a pellet target at The Svedberg Laboratory, Uppsala, show the
technical feasibility of a tracking system utilizing fast CCD line-scan cameras. Sim-
ulations for the reaction ¯pp → Ψ(3770) → D+D− prove the large impact such a
system would have on the data taking and reconstruction at PANDA.

Key words:
Tracking, D-meson Decay Length

Internal Target, Pellet Target, Displaced Vertex Reconstruction,

PACS: 07.07.Hj, 07.60.-j, 13.20.Fc, 29.25.Pj, 29.40.Gx, 29.85.+c

∗ Corresponding author.

Email address: orjan.nordhage@tsl.uu.se ( ¨O. Nordhage).

1 Current address: Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, G12 8QQ, Scotland, UK.

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

24 July 2013

1 Introduction

Charmonium physics has been shown to be a powerful tool in the understand-
ing of the strong interaction and hadronic structure. Probes like antiprotons
are unprecedented due to the gluon-rich environment, which they assure. In
the PANDA experiment [1] at the future FAIR facility antiprotons in the
momentum range between 1.5 GeV/c and 15 GeV/c will interact with an in-
ternal target. Most of the measurements require a proton target and the use
frozen micro-spheres, “pellets”, of hydrogen with a typical size of 30 µm is
planned [2,3]. To create pellets hydrogen liquid is forced through a nozzle
and, under the inﬂuence of vibrations, the liquid jet breaks up into droplets.
These are then injected into vacuum during which freezing occurs and the
result is a stream of pellets (up to 104 pellets/sec) reaching the interaction
point.

Such pellets have the advantage of being discrete objects separated by a few
millimeters distance, and hence individually traceable. This, however, poses
technical challenges which, in a ﬁrst approach using a light-guide system and
preampliﬁers, were diﬃcult to overcome [4]. We propose the use of fast CCD
line-scan cameras which we believe is suﬃciently developed to be of use. As
typical experimental set-ups such as PANDA leave almost no space close to
the interaction point, arrays of cameras and lasers must be arranged above
and below the experiment. The position and time that the individually-traced
pellet passes the beam has then to be extrapolated from information gathered
up to 2 m away.

In the ﬁrst part of this document we show how the small amount of light
reﬂected from a pellet can be registered in a commercial 100 kHz CCD line-
scan camera. In the second part we investigate how such tracked pellets would
improve the fraction of D-meson decays that can be observed as displaced
vertices in PANDA.

2 Pellet Tracking

The novel idea is to realize a tracking system using reﬂected laser light from
the pellets seen by fast CCD line-scan cameras located above and below the
interaction point. Four cameras should be positioned in pairs, two above and
two below the interaction point, with 90◦ relative angle to each other. This
way two parallel planes are deﬁned, each providing the pellet-position in x
and z. The pellet path is extracted from the position information from each
plane and relative timing. A feature of the current pellet stream is a rather
big diﬀerence in velocities of the pellets. Thus a priori it cannot be excluded

2

Fig. 1. Pellet-Test Station equipped with a line-scan camera perpendicular to the
laser beam (horizontal right to left) and pellet stream (vertical). The photo-multi-
plier tube is equipped with a collimator and optics and serves as an independent
rate monitor. The system is installed 2.3 m below the place of pellet production (the
vacuum injection capillary).

that pellets may overtake each other between the two observation planes. The
consequent problem of assigning a unique number to each pellet can be solved
by having an additional camera at almost any place in the pellets’ path. Also
the system will naturally provide rates and distributions for the statistical
analysis.

A prototype was built at the Pellet-Test Station (PTS) at The Svedberg Lab-
oratory, Uppsala, Sweden. The PTS is an independent pellet target system
which is, to a large extent, a direct copy of the WASA pellet target sys-
tem [2,5]. The pellet generator located at the top of the system is apart from
minor improvements identical. The lower vacuum system is designed to per-
form vacuum and distribution studies in a conﬁguration resembling a typical
internal experiment. The prototype of the tracking system was attached to
windows of the lower vacuum system and consists of an AViiVA line-scan
camera with 512 pixels (each 14 × 14 µm2) and a laser placed perpendicularly
to it (see Figure 1). A laser of 35 mW with a width of 5 mm and height of
about 100 µm was used, covering the whole width of the distribution and re-
ducing the probability of having two pellets simultaneously inside the laser
light down to the percent-level. The line read-out speed and dead time of
the camera have been determined experimentally to by 90, 909 ± 1 Hz and
3.37 ± 0.02 %, respectively [6].

3

The test measurements showed the feasibility of detecting individual pellets
and determining their position with such a system. The light yield under 90◦
was suﬃcient to be detected in the pixels of the camera. Standard optics (fo-
cal length 50 mm and f=1.4) at a focal distance of 184 mm and magniﬁcation
of 0.38 were used. The distribution of pellets 2.3 m below their place of pro-
duction is shown in Figure 2 (left) for two diﬀerent cases. A circular skimmer
of 2.0 mm diameter is situated 1.07 m above the measurement plane and cuts
the tails of the distribution. A centered pellet stream (maximized count rate)
produces a symmetric distribution (solid line). A pellet stream moved to the
right results in smaller count rate and an asymmetric pellet distribution (dot-
ted line), while the boundaries (given by the ﬁxed skimmer) remain constant.
One pixel corresponds to 37 µm, thus the total pellet-stream width is calcu-
lated to be 3.8 mm which is in good agreement with the expected width of
3.7 mm from geometrical considerations.

Fig. 2. Left: Spatial distribution of the pellets for two diﬀerent run conditions where
the total widths of 102 pixels correspond to 3.8 mm. Right: Number of lines between
two subsequent pellets for the centered pellet stream. Each line corresponds to 11 µs.

The right side of Figure 2 shows the time distribution between two subsequent
pellets. Each line corresponds to 11.0 µs, during which the light in the pixels is
sampled. Two pellets are seen within a single line in 2.5% of the scans taken.
But in most cases this poses no problem for the tracking, as the pellets can
be distinguished due to separated positions. 6.2% of the pellets appear in the
subsequent line, while 50% are detected within less than 180 µs. These results
conﬁrm that the distribution of pellets is governed by the statistical selection
of pellets through the skimmer and the spread in velocities, rather than by
the frequency which is used to generate the original droplets (about 80 kHz).

The light intensity proﬁle recorded with the camera indicates that we could
be at the limit of the sensor’s sensitivity. The fact that the independently
measured rates in a carefully adjusted counter coincide, however, make a sig-
niﬁcant ineﬃciency unlikely. In our case more light reﬂected into the camera
would have helped to study the eﬀect. Another advantage of having superﬂu-
ous light would be that one could close the lens aperture to avoid smearing

4

due to a limited range of focus. A stronger laser arranged to angles closer to
180◦ with respect to the camera (i.e. shining almost into the camera) may help
in that respect, as observations indicate a large transparency of those pellets.

All bulky target equipment must be placed outside the detector at PANDA.
Therefore, the distance between the two above-mentioned camera planes will
be & 4 m and the time delay for a particular pellet position will be ∼ 0.1 s due
to the pellet travel time. A latency of this magnitude causes the information
to enter at a higher level in the trigger scheme, but can be eﬃciently used for
any oﬄine analysis.

The position resolution of the reconstructed vertex will depend on several
factors. The pixel size of 14 µm leads to a resolution of σpix = 37 µm in
the plane of the pellets. The largest uncertainty will be introduced by the
alignment of the cameras. This depends upon the construction and the cali-
bration procedures. It is assumed that such an absolute alignment could be
done within σalign = 50 µm. Both uncertainties are independent and are added
quadratically. For our approach we assume a symmetric arrangement with re-
spect to the beam line. Thus we calculate the x-coordinate at the interaction
point simply as the mean of the values for each plane (denoted by 1 and 2)
xip = (x1 + x2)/2. The same applies for the z-coordinate. As the uncertainties
are equal in both planes we obtain the overall uncertainty of the pellet-position
at the interaction point for the x and z-coordinate

σpellet
x, ip = σpellet

z, ip =

× 2 × (σ2

pix + σ2

align) = 44 µm.

2

1
2

s

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

The third coordinate along the direction of travel of the pellets (decreasing y)
is determined by the time resolution, which is equal to the active time of the
camera. The maximum error we would expect here is 11 µs which corresponds
to well below a millimeter of pellet travel since the typical speed is & 50 m/s.

3 Displaced Vertices

One of the physics goals of PANDA is charmonium spectroscopy. Charmonium
spectroscopy above the D ¯D-threshold has hardly been investigated because
D-mesons are hard to select in an experiment due to their short lifetime. In
PANDA we have several measures to identify D-mesons and one tool is to
directly recognize the displaced vertex caused by the decay. This assumes
that the charged particles reach the innermost tracking detectors. At PANDA
this is a micro-vertex detector (MVD) arranged in a barrel geometry of layers
with silicon pixels and silicon strips. Any charged particle will be detected
here and the resolution for the decay D± → K∓π±π± is estimated to be about

5

50 µm [7]. Such information could enter early into the trigger scheme and allow
the pre-selection of potential “hidden-charm candidates”.

A much more powerful tool to identify D-meson decays is the reconstruction
of their decay length, through knowledge of the primary reaction vertex. Often
this primary vertex cannot be reconstructed using the reaction products, as
they tend to either be too short-lived or neutral particles. Tracking individual
pellets, as proposed here, yields a completely independent determination of
this primary vertex. In conjunction with the charged particle tracking, such
a system would be used both for the physical analysis and for background
rejection.

We investigated the impact of such an approach by studying the benchmark
process

¯pp → Ψ(3770) → D+D−,

where the hidden-charmed Ψ is produced at rest in the center-of-mass system,
corresponding to an antiproton momentum of 6.59 GeV/c. In order to be able
to quantify the impact of the pellet-tracking method we compare two scenarios,
one with pellet tracking and one without.

Decays of charged particles are often accompanied by neutral particles in the
ﬁnal state (e.g. D+ → ¯K0π+, ¯K0π+π0, or ¯K0π+π+π−). Therefore the recon-
struction of the vertex is not possible from the observed charged decay prod-
ucts. To build an eﬃcient trigger on such decays one needs to identify a sig-
niﬁcant kink in the particle track. However, one problem in identifying kinks
from the D-mesons in the reaction above is the lifetime τ = 1040 fs [8] lead-
ing to an average travel length of only ≃ 0.5 mm. In addition, demanding an
exclusive detection of the D-decay particles would be rather a ineﬃcient con-
straint since the decay modes that contain at least one neutral particle add up
to a substantial fraction. Already foreseen is to reconstruct vertices from the
MVD response to be used in a ﬁrst-level trigger, to see whether two particles
have decayed within some narrow time window and if their decay points are
separated [9]. In such a case the knowledge of the primary vertex would be of
great help and therefore the discrete nature of pellets is an important advan-
tage when compared to a typical cluster-jet target with a continuous target
density and a much larger spatial extension. We will not look further on a
comparison between cluster targets and a pellet target, but rather compare
tracked pellets to untracked pellets.

To explore this, we introduce the convolution between the antiproton beam
and target as the “possible volume of primary interactions”, Vprim. For the an-
tiproton beam at the target location we can assume that the combined eﬀects
of (stochastic) cooling and heating due to target and intra-beam scattering
will result in a Gaussian distribution with rms widths σx and σy in the hori-
zontal and vertical direction, respectively. A single pellet can be assumed to

6

be spherical and of diameter 30 µm. If we randomly generate primary vertices
inside the pellet as many as 98% of the D-mesons will decay outside.

(a) Primary vertices (untracked pellets).

(b) Primary vertices (tracked pellets).

(c) D-decay vertices (untracked pellets).

(d) D-decay vertices (tracked pellets).

Fig. 3. In a) and b) 10,000 randomly generated primary vertices are shown for
untracked and tracked pellets, respectively. In c) and d) the corresponding distri-
butions of secondary vertices from the benchmark channel are plotted. The beam
comes in from -z and meets the center of the target at the origin. The vertical axis
shows the transverse distance to that point.

We will consider primary vertices Vprim based on an antiproton beam with
σx = σy = 1 mm and:

• a randomly spread distribution in the xz-plane within a circle 2 of diameter

2 mm, which is to correspond to untracked pellets, and

• a trace-tracked pellet for which the xz-position is determined to within a

diameter of 0.1 mm.

For convenience, we take the center of the region of primary interactions as
reference frame, i.e. (0,0,0), such that a direct comparison between the above-

2 The average density distribution is in fact almost a constant within the circular
area deﬁned by the skimmer. This can also be seen from the projection shown in
Figure 2 (left). For further details see Ref. [10].

7

mentioned cases is possible. In Figure 3 we see 10,000 randomly generated
vertices. Figures a) and b) show the primary ¯pp-vertices (corresponding also
to the Ψ-decay points) whereas c) and d) show the distributions of the D-meson
decay points. We observe that the separation of primary and secondary vertices
will be much more eﬃcient with pellet tracking, but still possible without.

To detect neutral D0-mesons which decay even faster than D± it will be of even
greater importance to know the primary vertex. Otherwise it will be diﬃcult
– if not impossible – to distinguish prompt reactions like ¯pp → π+K−K0
S from
those where the resonant decay D0 → π+K− is involved. It should also be
pointed out that the secondary vertices will be shifted in the longitudinal
direction as the beam momentum and therefore the Lorentz boost increases.
This will, of course, facilitate the vertex separation.

Vprim. Here zD and zmax

We deﬁne the longitudinal displacement of the secondary and primary vertex
d ≡ zD − zmax
Vprim are the z-coordinates of the D-meson
decay point and maximum value of the possible primary vertex, respectively.
The uncertainty of d will depend on the uncertainty of zD, thus the MVD
resolution, and the uncertainty of zmax
Vprim, which we assume to be 10%. In
Table 1 the percentage of D-mesons that one can identify by their decay (i.e.
having a displacement d > 0) is shown. We ﬁnd that the identiﬁcation can
be improved by a factor of 4 to 5 using tracked pellets in comparison to the
conventional approach.

Conﬁdence

D-mesons with d > 0 [%]

level

zmax
Vprim

= 1 mm zmax
Vprim

= 50 µm

(Untracked)

(Tracked)

1σ

2σ

3σ

20

16

13

83

76

69

Table 1
Fraction of D-mesons with a positive (thus distinguishable) displacement.

4 Conclusions

We have shown the feasibility of tracking individual pellets using laser light
reﬂected into a fast line-scan camera. In a test experiment the rates from a
conventional system and the expected transverse distribution of pellets could
be well reproduced. By using several cameras and lasers we propose a system
which could provide a three-dimensional vertex point at any experiment using
such a target. If used at the future PANDA experiment we expect to obtain a

8

resolution at the interaction point of the order . 100 µm in the two perpen-
dicular directions and ≤ 1 mm in the parallel direction, with respect to the
pellet stream.

A pellet-tracking system would in particular be advantageous in the study
of events with hidden charm, where the reconstruction of the D-meson de-
cay length is a prerequisite. It would also be used online to reduce the data
stored in a late stage of the data-acquisition system and for the rejection of
background.

We have demonstrated on the benchmark reaction ¯pp → Ψ(3770) → D+D−
that the eﬃciency of the reconstruction of D-meson decays can be increased
by a factor of ∼ 4 using a system that tracks pellets. This shows that such an
approach will substantially improve the data quality.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank all the staﬀ of The Svedberg Laboratory for their help
with all kind of odds and ends, especially Kjell Fransson, Gunnar Norman, and
the workshop personnel. We thank M. Murray and C. Shearer for revising the
document. The authors greatly acknowledge the G¨oran Gustafsson Foundation
for granting the application on pellet tracking. One of us ( ¨O.N.) also wishes
to thank GSI, Darmstadt, Germany, for the ﬁnancial support.

References

[1] PANDA Collaboration, Technical Progress Report (2005).

[2] B. Trostell, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. A 362 (1995) 41; C. Ekstr¨om

et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 371 (1996) 572.

[3] ¨O. Nordhage et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 546 (2005) 391.

[4] S. Goldberg and L. Gustafsson, TSL/ISV-Report 95-0122, Uppsala University

(1995); P. Wasylczyk, Internal note TSL, Uppsala University (1996).

[5] C. Ekstr¨om et al., Phys. Scripta T99 (2002) 169; J. Zabierowski et al., Phys.

Scripta T99 (2002) 159.

Uppsala University (2005).

[6] J. Lith, Master’s Thesis, Uppsala University (2006); M. Schult, Project Work,

[7] A. Sokolov, Ph.D. Thesis, Universit¨at Giessen (2005).

9

[8] S. Eidelman et al. (Particle Data Group), Phys. Lett. B 592, 1 (2004) and 2005

partial update for edition 2006 (URL: http://pdg.lbl.gov).

[9] W. K¨uhn, Personal communication (2006).

[10] ¨O. Nordhage et al., Conference Proceedings STORI’05, J¨ulich, Vol 30, (2005)

389.

10

This figure "fig1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0701088v1

