A hybrid method for calorimetry with subnanolitre samples using Schottky junctions

T. K. Hakala, J. J. Toppari, and P. T¨orm¨a
Nanoscience Center, Department of Physics, P.O.Box 35 (YN), FIN-40014 University of Jyv¨askyl¨a, Finland

A µm-scale calorimeter realized by using Schottky junctions as a thermometer is presented. Com-
bined with a hybrid experimental method, it enables simultaneous time-resolved measurements of
variations in both the energy and the heat capacity of subnanolitre samples.

nm) SiN-layer (see Fig. 1). The samples were fabricated
on a lightly boron doped (12 Ωcm) Si chip having a SiN
layer on both sides. By using photolithography and Reac-
tive Ion Etching (RIE), a square opening (1.2×1.2 mm2)
was etched on the SiN layer on one side. The opening
was then used as a mask for chemical KOH etching to
form a Si well. The etching was interrupted when there
was still about 5–10 µm of Si at the bottom of the well,
under which there was the SiN layer of the other side.
After that the well was covered with SiN using PECVD
deposition. This SiN layer was further e-beam patterned
and RIE etched by using PMMA as a mask, to leave
only a small SiN square at the center of the well bot-
tom. A second KOH etching was applied to form a sep-
arate Si island onto the SiN membrane. On the other
side of that SiN membrane, openings on the SiN for the
Schottky junctions to the Si island were done by e-beam
lithography and RIE. The chip was exposed to chemical
cleaning {procedure consisting of 2% HF (20s)/Piranha
(5min)/2% HF (20s)}13 prior to deposition of Ti, that
acted as a metal for Schottky junctions. Ti was deposited
by e-beam evaporator in UHV chamber. Ti layer was
then patterned and (RIE) etched to form a heating ele-
ment and the Schottky junctions onto the membrane.

7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
0
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

I.

INTRODUCTION

The present micromachining techniques allow the scal-
ing of the calorimeter dimensions down to micrometer
or even submicrometer scale, which results in high sen-
sitivity and rapid response times. For instance, ther-
mopiles fabricated on a thin SiN membrane have been
used to determine the catalase activity within a single
mouse hepatocyte.1 Recently, nanowatt sensitivity and
time constant of millisecond was achieved by optimiz-
ing such a structure.2 In general, membrane based mi-
crocalorimeters using dc-methods have lately been un-
der extensive study.3,4,5,6,7 Additionally, ac-calorimetry
methods8 have been developed for measurement of heat
capacity9,10 and thermal conductivity11 of increasingly
small samples.

In this paper we describe the ﬁrst µm-scale calorime-
ter realized by using Schottky junctions as a thermome-
ter. The ability to use present IC fabrication techniques
makes Schottky junctions a very attractive choice for
mass produced, low cost and high throughput calorime-
ters for a variety of applications. Moreover, we utilize a
novel measurement method which enables measurements
of energy changes to be performed simultaneously with
ac-calorimetry.12 Combined with a short time constant
(∼20 ms) of the device, it allows direct time-resolved
measurements of both the variations in the sample heat
capacity and the energy changes due to for example a
phase transition or other phenomena. The calorimeter
may be used in ambient conditions and with liquid sam-
ples allowing also real time monitoring, e.g., under a mi-
croscope, and the operation is near isothermal utilizing
only low heating rates, thus making it particularly suit-
able for biological applications. The performance and
reliability of the device and method were tested. We
used subnanolitre drops of DI-water as samples2,4 and
measured, simultaneously, the change of the heat capac-
ity and the latent heat related to the evaporation of the
drop.

II. EXPERIMENTS

FIG. 1: A schematic and a micrograph (close-up) of the fab-
ricated sample and the measurement principle.

A. Sample fabrication

B. Experimental methods

The fabricated calorimeter is composed of two Si/Ti
Schottky junctions as a thermometer and a Ti heating
element on a small Si island supported by a thin (600

It is well known that Schottky diodes can be used as
accurate thermometer at room temperature. The charge
transport through Schottky junctions with low semicon-

ductor doping concentration is dominated by thermionic
emission, which yields an exponential dependence be-
tween the current and the temperature given by Itot =
AJST [exp(qV /kBT ) − 1].14 Here V is the voltage across
the junction, A the area of the junction, q the electron
charge, kB the Boltzmann constant and T the absolute
temperature. The saturation current density JST is de-
ﬁned by JST ≡ A∗T 2 exp(−qφB/kBT ), where A∗ is the
eﬀective Richardson constant and φB the barrier height.
We consider temperature changes ∆T small enough so
that the dependence of the current on temperature, I(T ),
can be linearized, i.e. I(T ) ∝ (dI/dT )∆T . In the present
conﬁguration there are two Schottky junctions in series,
one being always forward biased and the other reverse bi-
ased. The zero bias resistance of the fabricated samples
with 35×45 µm2 Schottky contacts in ambient conditions
is 5-10 MΩ and the variation of resistance about 10 %/K.
At the equilibrium, the temperature of the Si island T
is governed by the net power Pin applied to it, and by
the heat conductance K [W/K] of the SiN membrane to
a heat bath formed by the Si chip at temperature T0. In
general, one can write

T = T0 + Pin/K,

(1)

if the variations in Pin are slower than time constant of
the calorimeter τ = (C + ∆C)/K. Here C + ∆C is the
total heat capacity of the Si island (C) and possible sam-
ple on it (∆C). An ac voltage V = V0 sin(ωt) applied
via the Ti-heater, i.e., the power PH = V 2
0 /R × sin2(ωt),
where R is the resistance of the heating element, pro-
duces by Joule heating a temperature ﬂuctuation of the
sample with a frequency 2ω. If ω ∼ τ −1, the equilibrium
result does not apply anymore and one obtains for the
temperature of the island

T = T0+

V 2
0
2RK"

1−

e−t/τ
1+(2ωτ )−2 −

cos(2ωt+ϕ)

1+(2ωτ )2 #

+

, (2)

PS
K

p

where ϕ = arctan(2ωτ ) and PS is the power produced
by the sample (e.g. due to a chemical or biological re-
action), or by some external source. Consequently, the
dc-biased Schottky junctions will carry a current, directly
proportional to T above, with one component having the
frequency of 2ω and another being the dc component pro-
portional to PS and the constant rms power fed in via the
heater, V 2

0 /2RK.

Our calorimeter function is based upon the combina-
tion of two calorimeter operation modes: the heat con-
duction mode, which measures PS/K via the dc compo-
nent, and the ac-calorimeter mode with an ac voltage of
frequency ω ∼ τ −1 applied to the heater (see Figs. 1 and
2). According to Eq. (2), the amplitude of the produced
2ω temperature component depends on the heat capacity
of the sample as

δT =

V 2
2R

1
K 2 + (2ω)2(C + ∆C)2

,

(3)

p

2

where the term ∆C describes the heat capacity of the
sample which can also slowly vary in time, e.g., due to
evaporation of a liquid sample drop. Thus, by simulta-
neous measurement of the dc and ac signals, one is able
to detect both the variation in temperature and the vari-
ation in heat capacity, respectively.

The simultaneous monitoring of the dc and ac signals
was performed by using a measurement setup shown in
Fig. 2. The dc-bias of the Schottky junctions was set to
60 mV and the sinusoidal signal for the heating element
had rms power of 37 µW and a frequency of 10 Hz corre-
sponding to the situation ω ∼ τ −1. The dc component of
the temperature sensitive current through the Schottky
junctions was measured directly using DL Instruments
low noise voltage preampliﬁer 1201 and to measure the 20
Hz ac component, Stanford Research SR830 digital lock-
in ampliﬁer was used. These both signals were recorded
by a computer with a sampling rate of 1 kHz. The ﬂuctu-
ating ac signal component was extracted from the mea-
sured dc signal by digital notch ﬁltering.

FIG. 2: A schematic of the measurement setup.

C. Sample delivery

The sample to be measured, i.e., drop of DI-water is
delivered to the Si island of the calorimeter constructed
onto the center of the SiN membrane (see Figs. 1 and 3)
using a very narrow pulled glass pipette. The injection
is carried out by having the pipette back end attached to
a pressure device (ASI MPPI-2 microinjector) which can
supply a short pressure pulse with adjustable pressure
and pulse time.
In principle, this device allows one to
precisely and reproducibly (from measurement to mea-
surement) control the amount of liquid injected. How-
ever, it is not possible to quantify the amount since the
total amount depends on the viscosity of the liquid, the
surface eﬀects between the liquid and the pipette, the
pipette dimensions, etc.

All the time during the sample delivery and the mea-
surement, the end of the pipette is at the very near prox-
imity of the Si island of the calorimeter. This is necessary
since, due to high surface tension of the water, the small
drops used in this experiment will not have suﬃcient

mass to detach from the tip of the pipette unless they
touch the Si island surface. During the pressure pulse,
the drop size increases until it touches the hydrophilic
surface of the Si island and spreads on. After the pulse,
the drop size starts to decrease due to evaporation of the
drop and also due to the reﬂux of the water back to the
injector as will be discussed later.

After the evaporation of the drop, a small amount of
water is left to thermally bridge the pipette and the Si
island (see Fig. 3). This is due to hydrophilicity of the
surface of the Si island and the surface tension of wa-
ter, and it creates an additional pathway for heat trans-
fer between the calorimeter and the environment. Since
the relative positioning of the tip of the pipette and the
calorimeter remains constant throughout the whole ex-
periment, it is expected that this additional pathway for
heat transfer will simply increase the total heat conduc-
tivity K in our simple model by a constant factor which
can be experimentally determined. Thus the total ther-
mal conductivity may be assumed to be constant over
the time span of the experiment.

Prior to measurement of the device parameters (see
next section), a drop of water was injected onto the Si is-
land surface which was then allowed to evaporate to form
the water bridge between the calorimeter and the pipette
as described above. This conﬁguration is now considered
to be the empty device, since after each injection the sys-
tem returns to this state. The pipette is kept on its place
during all the further experiments. Thus, the obtained
parameter values already include the eﬀect of the addi-
tional heat conductivity through the water, i.e., the eﬀect
of the pipette slightly touching the device. Importantly,
this eﬀect can be accurately measured, and it remains
constant through the whole measurement process, which
makes it controllable. However, for more practical use
of the device, other delivery systems, e.g., microﬂuidistic
channels, could be implemented.

D. Calibration

The dc signal (with 60 mV dc-bias) dependence on
the temperature was calibrated by using a Pt-100 ther-
mometer as a reference, resulting in a linear relation with
a slope of 9.5 × 10−10 A/K between the current and the
temperature near the operation temperature 23◦C. Ad-
ditionally, the relaxation method was used to determine
the thermal conductance, K, and heat capacity, C, of the
empty device (including the pipette for water, see above
and Fig. 3) without the sample: To obtain the thermal
conductance according to the Eq. (1), we measured the
dc current as a function of slowly increasing dc power (ap-
plied to the heating element), yielding 6.95 × 10−5 W/K.
The time constant of the calorimeter was determined by
measuring the dc signal response to the step pulse fed
into the heater, resulting in a time constant of 21 ms.
Finally, the calorimeter heat capacity was obtained as
the product of the time constant and the conductance

3

FIG. 3: (a) – (d) Cartoon of evaporation of a water drop after
injection. In the end, a small amount of water stays to bridge
the end of the pipette and the Si island of the calorimeter.
This conﬁguration, shown in (d), is considered as the ”empty
device”. The thermal conductivity K and the heat capacity C
are determined for this ”empty device”, thus accurately and
systematically including the eﬀect of the pipette.

which yielded a value of 1.53 × 10−6 J/K.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Measured signals for subnanolitre drops of
water

The validity of our measurement method was evaluated
by injecting several subnanolitre-scale drops of DI-water
with diﬀerent (undetermined) volumes onto the calorime-
ter, and by measuring the ac and dc responses as func-
tions of time as explained in section II B. In Fig. 4a) is
shown the dc and ac signals of the thermometer with sev-
eral injection times of the nanoinjector, ranging from 10
ms up to 60 ms (injection pressure being constant ∼ 0.5
Bar). During all the measurements, the pipette was in
thermal contact with the device as described above in
section II C.

The ﬁgure 4b) illustrates the function of the sensor in
detail for 60 ms injection time. From the ﬁgure one can
see the abrupt change in the two signals when the injec-
tion of drop takes place, i.e., at around 288.5 s. The dc
signal increases, indicating the temperature decrease due
to evaporation of the drop while the ac signal decreases
due to increase in heat capacity of the system. Between
the time 289–295.5 s the dc signal remains approximately
constant, which implies that the power consumption due
to evaporation (PS in Eq. (2)) and thus the surface area
of the drop, remains almost constant. This is due to hy-
drophilicity of the Si island surface, which causes a ﬂat
shape of the drop and the height of it to vanish almost
completely before the horizontal area starts to decrease

during evaporation (see Fig. 3). This also implies that the
volume of the evaporated part of the drop is decreasing
with approximately constant rate. During this timeframe
the ac signal is increasing which is due to continuous de-
crease in heat capacity, ∆C, of the system as the drop
evaporates, which is also shown as a dash-dotted (green)
curve in Fig. 4b). As the heat capacity is proportional
to volume, this is consistent with the conclusions made
from the dc signal.

In ﬁgure 4b) the dashed line shows the calculated
(along Eq. (3)) variation of ac signal amplitude as a func-
tion of time assuming a constant reducing rate of volume
after the injection. Also, a ﬁnite time for injection, dur-
ing which the drop is growing linearly, is assumed in cal-
culation. These assumptions can be clearly veriﬁed from
the curve showing ∆C as a function of time. Heat ca-
pacity of the drop, ∆C, as well as the heat capacity, C,
and conductance, K, of the calorimeter for the calcula-
tion are obtained from the measurement and calibration
data. The excellent agreement of the calculated curve
with the measured one further veriﬁes that the reducing
rate of the total heat capacity of the sample during the
evaporation is approximately constant in time, as the dc
signal already suggested for the evaporated part. Since
the total reduction of the heat capacity is due to evap-
oration and also due to the reﬂux of the injected water
back to the pipette, as will be further explained in next
section, this implies that also the reﬂux happens at a
constant rate.

FIG. 4: (a) The dc (blue) and ac (red) signals of the ther-
mometer for several consequent injections, the injection times
ranging from 10 ms up to 60 ms. (b) A closeup of both sig-
nals with 60 ms injection time. The dash-dotted (green) line
is the heat capacity of the drop, ∆C, obtained from the ac
signal as a function of time and the dashed line (black) shows
the theoretical signal calculated along Eq. (3) assuming linear
decrease in ∆C. The two arrows show the corresponding axes
for the curves.

4

B. Detection of nonidealities in sample delivery

In general, the heat capacity, ∆C of the sample can
be expressed in terms of speciﬁc heat c and mass m of
the sample as ∆C = cm. Furthermore, for samples that
evaporate, ∆C = cm = cE/ℓ, where E is the total energy
required for evaporation of a drop and ℓ is the latent
heat of evaporation. From the measured dc signal one
is able to obtain the energy E as the time integral of
the signal, and the variation of the heat capacity of the
system is related to the ac signal via Eq. (3). Such com-
plementary information allows to understand details of
the process and eliminate the eﬀect of measurement non-
idealities (which are of increasing importance when the
sample volume decreases), as will be shown in the fol-
lowing. Furthermore, for evaporating samples, it oﬀers a
test of consistency since the heat capacity can be deter-
mined in two ways: from the ac signal, and, in addition,
from the dc signal via the relation ∆C = cE/ℓ.

As the main non-ideality in the measurement, it was
observed that the non-ideal backpressure applied to the
nanoinjector produced a reﬂux of the injected drop back
into the pipette during evaporation (the backpressure is
used to compensate the capillary forces that result in a
reﬂux of the injected liquid back to the pipette). There-
fore the energy of evaporation E obtained by integrat-
ing the dc signal does not give, without a correction,
the initial heat capacity of the sample from ∆C = cE/ℓ.
The required correction was obtained by performing mea-
surements for drops of diﬀerent (unknown) volumes until
they were fully evaporated, and by 1) determining the
mass of the initial drop from the ac signal as the ratio
mC = ∆C/c of the maximum variation of heat capac-
ity ∆C and the speciﬁc heat of water c, 2) determining
the mass of the evaporated part of drop from the dc sig-
nal as the ratio mE = E/ℓ of the energy required for
evaporation E and the latent heat of water ℓ. The dif-
ference between the mass of the initial drop and that of
the evaporated part then gives the mass of the part that
was reﬂuxed to the injector.

A plotting of mC against mE for each drop, as shown
in Fig. 5, reveals that the mass mE obtained from evapo-
ration energy is systematically smaller than the mass mC
obtained from minimum of the ac signal. This result is
easy to understand by noting that since the pipette sucks
some of the liquid back during the evaporation, the mass
mE obtained from evaporation energy must be smaller
than the mass mC obtained from the initial heat capac-
ity of the drop (ac signal). Furthermore, since the reﬂux
is due to a constant pressure diﬀerence, it is supposed to
happen at approximately constant rate, which can also
be veriﬁed from the signals in Fig. 4 as explained in pre-
vious section III B. As shown by the Fig. 5, as much
as 72% of the initial mass is lost by the reﬂux in every
pipetting.

Such measurements can also be used to calibrate
the pipette for diﬀerent liquids, surfaces, etc., which
is often found to be a problem in nano- and subnano-

litre injections. Therefore, the hybrid method and
the device we use allow to accurately distinguish vari-
ous non-idealities of the measurement from the chem-
ical/physical/biological phenomena of interest. This is
certainly a strength, especially at nanoscale where non-
idealities in the measurements are diﬃcult to avoid.

5

used in this analysis are taken from the measured cali-
bration data. From the value given for c/ℓ by the ﬁtting
and using the known value for c or ℓ, we obtain the cor-
rect value for ℓ or c, respectively, with the accuracy of
about 7%. This accuracy characterizes the overall perfor-
mance of the device and method at this stage, and can be
improved by optimizing the sample fabrication and the
measurement setup. Note that for evaporating samples
where one of the parameters c, ℓ or volume is known, the
method can used for determining the two others.

The ac signal also allows high accuracy mass measure-
ments: the smallest measured change of heat capacity
(for 10 ms injection time) was approximately 10−7 J/K
which, for water, corresponds to 20 ng mass. This could
be extremely useful for example when measuring a re-
action heat of some chemical or biological reaction, since
one is able to simultaneously measure the amounts of the
reagents added and the energy produced or consumed by
the reaction.

FIG. 5: Relation between the initial mass of the drop mC and
the mass of the evaporated part mE. Circles correspond to
the measured data and line is a linear ﬁt to it.

C. Evaluation of the calorimeter

Finally, as a test of performance and consistency of our
method, we present in ﬁgure 6 the following analysis: We
performed measurements for diﬀerent sizes of the drops.
For each drop, the information given by the two signals,
ac and dc, is plotted as a point in a two dimensional graph
where one axis is the minimum of the normalized ac lock-
in signal (corresponds to the heat capacity of the initial
sample via Eq. (3)), and the other axis is the integrated
dc signal giving the evaporation energy E. The latter
yields the mass of the evaporated part of the drop mE
via the relation mE = E/ℓ. However, we cannot use the
mass mE as such since it excludes the part gone back to
the pipette by the reﬂux, and when considering e.g. the
minimum value of the ac signal, one has to use the mass
of the initial drop, which includes the part that later will
be gone back to the pipette by the reﬂux. From the
analysis presented above, we know the ratio between the
evaporated and the initial masses to be constant, ∼ 0.28.
Thereby we can use a corrected value of mass, i.e. m =
mC ≈ mE/0.28 = E/(0.28 ℓ) and thus corrected energy
EC ≡ E/0.28, which is plotted as x-axis in 6.

As a ﬁt to the theory and test of consistency, we
then take the measured values of E, use the relation
∆C = cm = (c/ℓ)EC (with c/ℓ as the only ﬁtting pa-
rameter), insert this value of ∆C in Eq. (3), and plot the
resulting curve in the ﬁgure. It corresponds excellently
to the measured data points. The values for C and K

FIG. 6: The measured minimum values of the normalized ac
signal and the measured total energy required for drop evap-
oration (with the reﬂux correction), together with the theo-
retical ﬁt obtained using the relation of evaporation energy
and heat capacity and Eq.(3).

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In summary, we have developed a microcalorimeter
capable of providing simultaneous quantitative time-
resolved information of the sample temperature, power
and total energy production/consumption as well as of
sample heat capacity and its variations. The small heat
capacity of the device which enables fast and sensitive
measurements carried out in room temperature, together
with the mass production potential of the Schottky junc-
tions, hold a promise for high throughput and cost eﬀec-
tive tool for biological and chemical applications.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Academy of Finland and EUROHORCs

(EURYI award, Academy project number 205470).

6

1 E. A. Johannessen, J. M. R. Weaver, P. H. Cobbold, and

J. M. Cooper, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 2029 (2002).

2 E. B. Chancellor, J. P. Wikswo, F. Baudenbacher, M. Radpar-

var, and D. Osterman, Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 2408 (2004).

3 D. W. Denlinger, E. N. Abarra, K. Allen, P. W. Rooney,
M. T. Messer, S. K. Watson, and F. Hellman, Rev. Sci. Instrum.
65, 946 (1994).

4 E. A. Olson, M. Y. Efremov, A. T. Kwan, S. Lai, V. Petrova,
F. Schiettekatte, J. T. Warren, M. Zhang, and L. H. Allen,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 77, 2671 (2000).

5 Y. Zhang and S. Tadigadapa, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 034101

(2005).

6 R. E. Cavicchi, G. E. Poirier, N. H. Tea, M. Afridi, D. Berning,
A. Hefner, J. Suehle, M. Gaitan, S. Semancik, and C. Mont-
gomery, Sensors & Actuators 97, 22 (2004).

7 F.E Torres, et al. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101, 9517 (2004).

8 P. F. Sullivan and G. Seidel, Phys. Rev. 173, 679 (1968).
9 J.-L. Garden, E. Chˆateau, and J. Chaussy, Appl. Phys. Lett.

84, 3597 (2004).

10 E. Chˆateau, J.-L. Garden, O. Bourgeois, and J. Chaussy,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 151913 (2005).

11 M. Zhang, M. Yu. Efremov, E. A. Olson, Z. S. Zhang, and

L. H. Allen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 3801 (2002).

12 Similar measurements, but for polymer samples and using ther-
mopiles, have been performed in S. Adamovsky and C. Schick,
Thermochim. Acta 415, 1 (2004).

13 T. Kuroda, Z. Lin, H. Iwakuro, and S. Sato, J. Vac. Sci. Tech-

nol. B 15, 232 (1997).

14 S. M. Sze, Physics of Semicondutor Devices (Wiley, New York,

1981).

