6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
0
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LNF-04/25 (P)
27 dicembre 2006

GAS ANALYSIS AND MONITORING SYSTEMS
FOR THE RPC DETECTOR OF CMS AT LHC
M.Abbresciaa, A.Colaleoa , R.Guidaa, G.Iasellia, R.Liuzzia, F.Loddoa, M.Maggia,
B.Marangellia, S.Natalia, S.Nuzzoa, G.Pugliesea, A.Ranieria, F.Romanoa, R.Trentaduea,
L.Benussib, M.Bertanib, M.A.Caponeroc, D.Colonnad, D.Donisic, F.L.Fabbrib, F.Fellid, M.Giardonib,
B.Ortenzib, M.Pallottab, A.Paolozzie, L.Passamontib, B.Ponziob, C.Puccie, G.Savianod,
G.Polesef,g, I.Segonig, N.Cavalloh, F.Fabozzih, P.Paoluccii, D.Piccoloi, C.Sciaccai,
G.Bellil, A.Grellil, M.Necchil, S.P.Rattil, C.Riccardil, P.Torrel, P.Vitulol

Abstract

The Resistive Plate Chambers (RPC) detector of the CMS experiment at the LHC proton collider (CERN,
Switzerland) will employ an online gas analysis and monitoring system of the freon-based gas mixture
used. We give an overview of the CMS RPC gas system, describe the project parameters and ﬁrst results on
gas-chromatograph analysis. Finally, we report on preliminary results for a set of monitor RPC.

Manuscript received on November 17, 2006.
Stefano Bianco is with the Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati dell’INFN, v.E.Fermi 40, 00044 Frascati
(Rome) Italy (telephone: +39-06-94032793, e-mail: stefano.bianco@lnf.infn.it).

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

i

l

Dipartimento Interateneo di Fisica and Sezione INFN, Bari, Italy;
Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati dell’INFN, Italy;
Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati dell’INFN and ENEA Frascati, Italy;
Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati dell’INFN and Facolta’ di Ingegneria Roma1, Italy
Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati dell’INFN and Scuola di Ingegneria aerospaziale Roma 1, Italy
CERN, Geneva, Switzerland;
Lappeenranta University of Technology, Finland;
Universita’ degli Studi della Basilicata and Sezione INFN, Napoli, Italy;
Dipartimento di Fisica and Sezione INFN, Napoli, Italy;
Dipartimento di Fisica Nucleare e Teorica and Sezione INFN, Pavia, Italy

1

INTRODUCTION

Resistive Plate Chambers (RPC) detectors are widely used in HEP experiments for muon detection and

triggering at high-energy, high-luminosity hadron colliders, in astroparticle physics experiments for the

detection of extended air showers, as well as in medical and imaging applications. While gain and efﬁciency

stability are always a must, in the case of RPC detectors in high-rate experiments which use freon-based

gas mixtures, utmost care has to be paid also for the possible presence of gas contaminants. The RPC

detector of experiment CMS at the LHC proton collider (CERN, Switzerland) will employ a gas analysis and

monitoring system for the online monitor of the freon-based gas mixture used. The gas monitoring system is

based on small RPC detectors whose working point (gain and efﬁciency) is continuously monitored online.

The gas monitoring system is designed to provide fast and accurate determination of any shift in working

point conditions. Quantitative gas chemical analysis is then performed online by a complete system which

includes gas-chromatography, pH sensors and contaminants (notably HF) detectors.

2 THE CMS EXPERIMENT AT LHC

The Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment [1] will search for the missing block of Nature - the

Higgs boson - and for new exotic elementary particles that are predicted by theory and by cosmological

observations. The CMS detector uses Resistive Plate Chambers (RPC) as muon detectors, coupled to Drift

Tubes in the barrel region, and to Cathode Strip Chambers in the endcaps. The RPC detector in CMS was

described elsewhere at this conference [2].

RPC counters [3] are fast, efﬁcient and economical charged particles detectors, well-suited for op-

eration in high magnetic ﬁeld. The elementary component is a gap, a gas volume enclosed between two

resistive plates. Resistive plates are made of bakelite, coated with lineseed oil for surface uniformity. Gas

mix used is 96.2% C2H2F4 / 3.5% Iso-C4H10 / 0.3% SF6, with a 45% relative humidity.

Signal pulses are picked up by readout strips. In CMS, RPC counters are operated in avalanche

mode to sustain high-rate operation, with the streamer suppressed by the addition of SF6 gas in the mixture.

3 THE CMS CLOSED LOOP GAS SYSTEM

Because of high costs and huge volumes of the freon-based gas mix used, CMS will use a recirculation

(Closed Loop) gas system developed by the CERN gas group [4]. The Closed Loop is a critical component

of RPC. CMS has accumulated experience on its use and performances during the test at the Gamma

Irradiation Facility at CERN in 2001 [5], and currently at the ISR where chambers are tested in CL prior

to installation. At the GIF facility we observed substancial production of HF, linearly correlated with the

signal current.

In the Closed Loop (CL) system, puriﬁers are the crucial componente. Puriﬁers were determined af-

ter tests at the GIF in order to minimize the unknown contaminants which showed as spurious peaks besides

the known gas mix components. Three ﬁlters were selected: 5A molecular sieve, Cu/Cu-Zn, Ni/Al2O3. A

2

small scale CL system is currently in use at the ISR test station, where RPC chambers are tested at CERN

prior to installation in the CMS detector. The system total ﬂux is 110 l/h, with a 10% fraction of fresh mix.

Our operational experience showed how the CL system works well as long as the puriﬁers are not saturated

(about 20 days). When puriﬁers are saturated, contaminants are not ﬁltered and currents in chambers start

increasing (Fig.1). Currents return to standard after puriﬁers regeneration. We do not observe any trace in

GC analysis of either impurities or pollutants.

A measurement campaign[6] on puriﬁers is in progress, using chemical, SEM/EDS (Scanning Elec-

tron Microscopy/Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy), XRD (x-ray Diffrattometry) analyses. We plan to char-

acterize the CL gas system in three phases: at ISR during chamber testing, at ISR at testing ﬁnished with

dedicated gaps and dedicated gas system, at the GIF in high-radiation environment. Many open questions

do exist: why only some 30-40% of chambers show current increase with saturated puriﬁers? Why often

only one gap out of two is affected? It is clear how full understanding of the CL system is crucial for a

reliable operation of CMS RPCs.

4 GAS QUALITY MONITORING SYSTEM

Gas quality in CMS RPC will be monitored by a dedicated system able to accomplish a full analysis of the

gas quality. The gas quality monitoring system will use speciﬁc electrodes for hydro-ﬂuoridric acid (HF)

detection, as well as SEM/EDS, XRD analyses for puriﬁers. The system will be ﬂexible and open, so as to

integrate other analysis devices such as GC (Gas Chromatography) and MS (Mass Spectrometry). In case

of anomalies detected, we shall have the possibilities of accessing the experimental cavern where manual

pickup points (one per half wheel) will be setup. Several results have been produced over the last few years

with subsystems planned to be used in the gas quality monitoring system. Production of HF was found in

chambers irradiated at the GIF[5], with the concentration of HF produced in the gap found proportional to

the signal charge. We recently performed new studies on irradiated RPCs. We opened small (50cm x 50cm)

chambers irradiated at the GIF and observed defects on the inner surfaces (Fig.2). We performed SEM-EDS

analyses on- and off-defect. The presence of Na in defects is conﬁrmed. The origin of Na is supposedly

the bakelite bulk, where NaOH is used as a catalyst in production. We performed XRD analysis of defects,

preliminary results [7] show a good match of diffrattogram with the lines characteristic of NaF (Fig.3).

5 GAS GAIN MONITORING SYSTEM

The gas gain monitoring system will monitor the RPC working point faster and more precisely than what

one could get by using the CMS RPC system, and provide a warning in case of shifts caused by the gas

mixture changes. The system is designed to monitor efﬁciency and charge continuously in one-hour cycles

with a 1The system (Fig.4) is composed of three subsystem of RPC single gaps, readout by 45cm x 45cm

3

pads in a cosmic ray telescope located in the SGX5 gas building. Each subsystem is ﬂushed with a different

gas. The Reference subsystem is ﬂushed with fresh open loop gas mixture. The MonitorOut subsystem is

ﬂushed with CL gas downstream of CMS RPCs. The MonitorIn subsystem is ﬂushed with CL gas upstream

of CMS RPCs. Each subsystem is composed of three gaps, whose high voltage is set to the standard working

point voltage at the efﬁciency knee, and to 200V above and below the knee respectively. Each cosmic ray

track therefore provides completely correlated pulses in the three subsystems, allowing one to study the

differential response of gaps and by disentangling any effect due to changes in the gas mixture. In case

a working point change is detected, an alarm condition is released and the gas quality monitoring system

described in Sec.IV will verify what the change of work point is due to.

Several readout options have been considered for the RPC single gaps composing each subsystem. A

double-pad readout was investigated, with each single pad read by both sides by 45cm x 45cm pads. An

5.1 Prototypes

exploded view is shown in Fig.5.

5.2 Preliminary Results

Single gap prototypes were exposed to cosmic ray tracks triggered by a scintillator counter hodoscope.

The negative and positive pads are sent to two input channels of a Tektronix TDS5600 digital sampling

oscilloscope. Event-by-event pulse charges are measured and stored via LabView custom applications. The

standard CMS RPC gas mixture is used, with 45% relative humidity to keep the bakelite resistivity.

Fig.6 shows the charge distributions of avalanches from cosmic rays for positive and negative pads,

at high voltages from 9.5kV to 10kV. Fitting the charge distributions with truncated Gaussians shows the

expected linear dependance of charge at the peak of distribution on the high voltage applied in case of

saturated avalanche (Fig.7).

Several ampliﬁcation schemes are being explored. Even a simple passive sum of positive and nega-

tive pads, and feeding to NIM LeCroy LRS612AM ampliﬁer improves the S/N ratio (Fig.8).

6 CONCLUSIONS

The CMS RPC group is performing a detailed and complete analysis campaign since early tests at the GIF

in 2001, to guarantee high-purity gas mixture for a reliable operation of the detector. A lot of work is being

spent into the full understanding of the chemistry of puriﬁers in CL gas system. A gas analysis system

has been designed, SEM-EDS analysis observes presence of Na in RPC gaps irradiated at GIF conﬁrming

previous results, while XRD analysis shows the presence of NaF. A gas gain monitoring system utilizing

small RPC gaps has been designed, prototypes have been tested and preliminary results show the expected

response to cosmic rays.

4

References

[1] MS Collaboration home page is /cms.cern.ch/.

[2] . Pugliese for the CMS RPC Collaboration, N24-3, this Conference.

[3] . Abbrescia et al., Nucl. Instr. And Meth. A533 (2994) 102-106; M.Abbrescia et al., Nucl. Instr. And

Meth. A515 (2993) 342-347.

[4] .Hahn, CERN Closed Loop Gas System: Operating Instructions (unpublished).

[5] .Abbrescia et al., HF production in CMS Resistive Plate Chambers, submitted to NIM, presented by

R.Guida at the RPC Conference, Seoul (Korea) 2005.

[6] .Abbrescia et al., Proposal for a systematic study of the CERN closed loop gas system used by the RPC

muon detectors in CMS, Frascati preprint LNF-06/26(IR).

[7] .Pucci, Master’s Degree Thesis, University of Rome La Sapienza 2006 (in Italian). Frascati preprint

LNF-06/31(Thesis).

5

Figure 1: Increase of currents in RPC chambers under test at the ISR in CL gas system when puriﬁers are
saturated. Currents start decreasing when chamber is set in Open Loop, and decrease further when chamber
is returned to CL with regenerated puriﬁers. Top inset show results of a best ﬁt of an exponenential curve
to data.

Figure 2: SEM image of a defect in a RPC chamber irradiated at the GIF under two magniﬁcations. The
defect is identiﬁed as NaF.

6

Figure 3: XRD spectrum of defects in a chamber irradiated at GIF. A very good match is observed for two
characteristic peaks of NaF.

Figure 4: Gas gain monitoring system conceptual layout.

7

Figure 5: Exploded view of a 50cm x 50cm single gap which composes a subsystem of the gas gain
monitoring system. Each single gap is read by two 45cm x 45cm pads on both sides, each one picking up
negative and positive pulses from the avalanche developing in the gas gap upon the crossing of a cosmic ray
track.

Figure 6: Charge distribution of single gap operated in avalanche regime and read by two 45cm x 45cm
pads. The high voltage is increased from 9.5kV to 10kV. Pedestal is subtracted.

8

Figure 7: Dependence of peak values of charge distributions from high voltage

Figure 8: Charge distribution from the double pad readout scheme. A transformer (inset) sums positive and
negative pads outputs. Transformer output is ﬁltered and sent to NIM LeCroy ampliﬁer. Pedestal is not
subtracted and shown in arbitrary vertical scale at about -4pC.

9

