7
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
0
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
8
0
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Multiwire Proportional Chamber for
Precision Studies of Neutron β Decay Angular
Correlations

T. M. Ito ∗,1 R. Carr, B. W. Filippone, J. W. Martin 2,
B. Plaster, G. Rybka 3, J. Yuan 4

W. K. Kellogg Radiation Laboratory, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA 91125

Abstract

A new multiwire proportional chamber was designed and constructed for precision
studies of neutron β decay angular correlations. Its design has several novel features,
including the use of low pressure neopentane as the MWPC gas and an entrance
window made of thin Mylar sheet reinforced with Kevlar ﬁbers. In the initial oﬀ-
line performance tests, the gas gain of neopentane and the position resolution were
studied.

Key words: Neutron β decay, multiwire proportional chamber, low energy
electron detection
PACS: 29.40.Cs, 23.20.En

1 Introduction

Precision studies of neutron β decay oﬀer an excellent means to test the foun-
dation of the Standard Model of electroweak interactions and to search for
what may lie beyond it. In particular, the angular correlation between the
neutron spin and the electron momentum (characterized by the coeﬃcient A)

∗ Corresponding author

Email address: ito@lanl.gov (T. M. Ito).

1 Present address: Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545
2 Present address: Department of Physics, The University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, R3B 2E9
3 Present address: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
4 Present address: Harvard University, Cambridge, MA

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

in polarized neutron β decay provides important input for testing the unitar-
ity of the CKM matrix [1]. Recent technological advancements, including the
realization of superthermal ultracold neutron sources [2,3], have made exper-
iments with a precession of δA/A ∼ 10−3 within reach. Consequently, it is
imperative to control possible systematic eﬀects at the 0.1% level.

A typical experimental arrangement for A coeﬃcient measurements involves
measuring the forward-backward asymmetry of electron emission with respect
to the neutron spin in polarized neutron β decay. Possible sources of systematic
eﬀects include polarization determination, background, and detector eﬀects
such as electron backscattering. With regard to the detector eﬀects, most of
the previous experiments used plastic scintillation counters as the detector for
the decay electron. However, due to the small end point energy of the electron
spectrum (E0 = 782 keV), a signiﬁcant fraction (∼ 10%) of electrons from
neutron β decay directed to one detector can backscatter from the surface of
the detector and are detected by the other detector. A non-negligible fraction
of the backscattered electrons leave undetectably small energy deposition in
the ﬁrst detector, hence introducing an error in the asymmetry determination.
These electrons are called missed backscattered electrons.

One way to reduce the fraction of the missed backscattered electrons, and
hence the eﬀect of such events, is to use a detector that is sensitive to smaller
energy deposition and can therefore have a lower energy threshold. In gen-
eral, gas proportional counters are sensitive to a smaller energy deposition
than plastic scintillation counters are. For a gas counter, an energy deposi-
tion of ∼ 100 eV is necessary to create one primary electron-ion pair, which
generates on average four secondary electron-ion pairs. With a moderate gas
gain of 104 and an ampliﬁer gain of 10 V/pC, one obtains an output pulse of
∼ 50 mV. Therefore, an energy deposition of 100 eV can be relatively easily
detected. On the other hand, for a plastic scintillation detector, an energy
deposition of 100 eV is necessary to create one photon inside the scintilla-
tor. If a typical value of 15% for the photocathode quantum eﬃciency of the
photomultiplier tube (PMT) and a rather generous value of 25% for the light
collection eﬃciency are assumed, we obtain a 2.5 keV energy deposition for a
single photoelectron event.

A detector system comprised of a thin low pressure multiwire proportional
chamber (MWPC) placed in front of a plastic scintillator serves as an ideal
β detector: the thin MWPC provides sensitivity to backscattered events with
small energy deposition while the plastic scintillator provides the total energy
information as well as the timing information, which is of vital importance in
analyzing a class of events in which both detectors record a hit as a result
of backscattering. In addition, the position information from the MWPC can
be used to apply a ﬁducial volume selection, which is of vital importance in
experiments that use ultracold neutrons (UCN). Also, by requiring a coinci-

2

dence between the MWPC and the scintillation counter for the event trigger,
the sensitivity to γ rays, one of the major background sources in previous ex-
periments, can be reduced because of the relatively low sensitivity of MWPCs
to γ rays.

The UCNA experiment [4], currently being commissioned at Los Alamos Na-
tional Laboratory, aims at a 0.2% measurement of the A coeﬃcient using
UCN, and uses such a combination as the β detector.

In this paper, we describe the design and construction of the MWPC devel-
oped for the UCNA experiment, and report the results from the initial oﬄine
performance tests. The design and construction of the plastic scintillation de-
tector, together with the performance of the MWPC as installed in the UCNA
spectrometer will be reported in a later publication [5].

2 Design and construction

2.1 General considerations and design overview

In the UCNA experiment, UCN are produced by the LANSCE solid deuterium
UCN source, sent through a polarizer/spin ﬂipper, and then introduced into
a decay volume. The wall of the decay volume is a 3 m-long diamond coated
quartz cylinder 10 cm in diameter. The decay volume is in the warm bore of
a superconducting solenoidal magnet (SCS), which provides a holding ﬁeld of
1 T. The decay electrons spiral along the magnetic ﬁeld lines towards one of
the detectors, and then enter the ﬁeld expansion region, where the magnetic
ﬁeld is reduced to 0.6 T. As an electron enters the ﬁeld expansion region,
the energy associated with the angular motion of the electron is transfered to
longitudinal motion in order to conserve angular momentum as the diameter
of the spiral increases due to the reduced ﬁeld. This reduces the incident angle
of the electron onto the detector surface (reverse of the magnetic mirror eﬀect)
and suppresses backscattering. The detectors are placed in a region where the
expanded ﬁeld is uniform. The schematic of the UCNA experiment is shown
in Fig. 1.

The function of the UCNA MWPC is two-fold: 1) to minimize the missed
backscattered events, and 2) to provide position information. The latter is
necessary because, unlike the previous A measurements that used a cold neu-
tron beam, in the UCNA experiment the UCN ﬁll the decay volume. Therefore
it is important to place a ﬁducial volume cut to reject events in which the β
decay occurred near the wall of the decay tube where it is likely for the electron
to hit the wall.

3

Superconducting solenoidal 
magnet (1.0 T)

Roughened surface

Detector housing

MWPC

Plastic scintillator

Vacuum

Decay volume

Polarizer/Spin flipper

Diamond-coated 
quartz tube

To UCN source

PMT

Light guide

Neutron
absorber

Fig. 1. Schematic of the UCNA Experiment.

A general consideration for minimizing missed backscattered events results in
the following requirements for the design of the MWPC, in particular for the
windows and the gas.

• The entrance and exit windows have to be thin.
• The gas has to be at low pressure, and has to consist of relatively heavy

molecules made of low Z (=atomic number) atoms.

The requirements for the windows is obvious as any event in which the electron
gets backscattered from the entrance window without getting into the gas
volume will become a missed backscattered event. The gas pressure has to
be low in order to make the entrance window thin, since it separates the
MWPC gas volume from the spectrometer vacuum. Also, in order to minimize
the backscattering, the gas should only contain atoms with low Z (=atomic
number), since the total backscattering fraction is larger for a larger Z [6]. At
the same time, in order to have a high enough detection eﬃciency, the MWPC
gas has to have a reasonable electron density. This calls for a gas that consists
of relatively heavy molecules made of light atoms.

Furthermore, there are two requirements for the UCNA MWPC design that
are speciﬁc to the UCNA experiment. These are requirements for the position
resolution and the actual geometrical size of the MWPC.

4

• The maximum diameter of the spiral of the electron trajectory in the ﬁeld
expansion region is 6.6 mm. In order to perform a ﬁducial volume selec-
tion with a minimum loss of statistics, a position resolution of ∼ 2 mm is
required.

• Because of the ﬁeld expansion factor of 0.6 (0.6 T/1.0 T), the 10 cm diameter
cross section of the decay volume maps to a circle with ∼ 14 cm diameter
in the ﬁeld expansion region. On the other hand, the diameter of the warm
bore the SCS magnet is 25.4 cm. Therefore, the UCNA MWPC has to have
an eﬀective area larger than 14 cm in diameter and has to ﬁt in the warm
bore with a diameter of 25.4 cm.

There is an additional consideration associated with the exit window. In the
UCNA experiment, the exit window separates the MWPC gas volume from the
volume in which the plastic scintillation detector is placed. The exit window
can be made thin by ﬁlling the volume in which the plastic scintillator is placed
with a gas that is of the same pressure as the MWPC gas.

Below, we will discuss each of these aspects of the design in more detail.

2.2 Mechanical construction

Figure 2 shows the cross section of the detector assembly, which in normal
operation is inserted into the vacuum inside the SCS warm bore. Figure 3
shows the cross section of the MWPC and Figs. 4 and 5 are photographs of
the MWPC. The chamber body and the chamber lid, both made of aluminum,
constitute the body of the MWPC itself and enclose the MWPC gas, which
is 100 torr neopentane (see section 2.3). The MWPC, the plastic scintillator,
the light guide system, and the photomultipliers are housed in the detector
housing. The detector housing consists of a about 25 in. long stainless steel
nipple with an outer diamter of 10.5 in., an aluminum cylinder with an outer
diameter of about 12 in., an end cap and a front cap made of aluminum.
The stainless steel nipple and the aluminum cylinder are connected via 12-in.
conﬂat ﬂanges. The aluminum cylinder is welded onto a 12-in. ﬂange made of
explosion bonded aluminum-stainless steel bi-metal.

The detector housing is ﬁlled with 100 torr nitrogen. This is to minimize the
pressure diﬀerence across the MWPC back window so that the back window
can be thin. The space enclosed by the aluminum cylinder, the front cap,
and the chamber lid houses the preampliﬁer for the MWPC readout and the
HV systems for the MWPC operation. The diﬃculties associated with oper-
ating the HV system in a 100 torr nitrogen environment will be discussed in
Section 2.5.

The chamber body, the chamber lid, the front cap are designed so that when

5

Detector housing
end cap

Detector housing
(stainless steel nipple)

Detector housing
(aluminum cylinder)

Detector housing
front cap

MWPC entrance
window

MWPC exit window

PMT

Light guide

Plastic scintillator

Chamber lid

Chamber body

Fig. 2. Cross section of the detector assembly inserted into the vacuum inside the
SCS warm bore.

the front cap is mounted on the aluminum cylinder it pushes the chamber
lid making the o-ring seal between the chamber body and the chamber lid,
the o-ring seal between the chamber lid and the front cap, and the o-ring
seal between the front cap and the aluminum cylinder. Also it makes the
electrical connection between the connectors on the chamber lid and the wire
planes when the front cap is mounted on the aluminum cylinder pushing the
chamber lid on the chamber body (See Figs. 3 and 5).

Shown in Fig. 6 is a photograph of the detector assembly and the gas panel.

2.3 Wire chamber gas

The requirements discussed earlier that the wire chamber gas consist of rela-
tively heavy molecules made of low Z atoms and practical requirements (avail-
ability, aﬀordability, etc) limited our choices for the gas almost uniquely to
heavy hydrocarbon gases.

We chose neopentane (C5H12, also known as 2,2-Dimethylpropane) because of
the high vapor pressure at room temperature (1125 torr). Typically we oper-
ated the wire chamber at 100 torr, which is safely below the vapor pressure.
Also, as discussed below, we were able to develop a thin window that can

6

Cathode preamp

Detector housing
front cap

Entrance window frame

Kevlar fiber frame

Kevlar supported 
entrance window

PCB card

Card-edge 
connector
receptacle

Exit window
Exit window frame

Wire planes

SHV feedthrough

Chamber lid

Chamber body

Detector housing
(aluminum cylinder)

Fig. 3. Cross section of the MWPC. When the chamber lid is pushed against the
chamber body, the electrical connection between the wire planes and the feedthrough
connectors on the chamber lid are made, as well as the o-ring seal between the
chamber body and the chamber lid. For the cathode signals, the connection between
the chamber lid and the wire planes are provided by a PCB card that slides into a
card-edge connector receptacle mounted on the FR4 glass epoxy frame for the wire
plane. The contact pads on the PCB cards are soldered to pins on a ﬂat ribbon
cable connector receptacle that is glued into an opening on the chamber lid serving
as a feedthrough connector. For the anode, the connection between the wire plane
and the chamber lid is provided by a metal pin mounted on the SHV feedthrough
connector sliding into a receptacle mounted on the FR4 glass epoxy frame of the
anode wire plane. See also Fig. 5.

safely withstand a 100 torr pressure diﬀerence. Neopentane at 100 torr has a
electron density of 1.5 × 1020/cm3. For comparison, P10 gas at 1 atm has an
electron density of 4.6 × 1020/cm3. Thus we expect a reasonably similar detec-
tion eﬃciency for 100 torr neopentane compared to 1 atm P10 gas, provided
that we get a reasonably good gas gain and charge collection.

We note that n-pentane (normal pentane, C5H12) has already been used as
a proportional chamber gas. Ref [7] discusses the use of gas mixtures of n-
pentane-CO2, n-pentane-CO2-CH4, and n-pentane-CO2-CF4, while Ref. [8]
discusses the use of various hydrocarbon gases such s isobutane, ethylene,
n-pentane, and n-heptane at very low pressures (0.3 − 10 torr). Although n-
pentane is more cost eﬀective than neopentane, it is not a practical choice for
the following reasons:

7

Fig. 4. A photograph of the MWPC. The chamber lid is mounted on the chamber
body to enclose the MWPC gas volume. The window and the Kevlar support are
both installed on the chamber lid (see Section 2.7).

• The high reactivity, which would considerably limit the material allowed for

the construction of the MWPC.

• The low vapor pressure (424 torr at 20◦C), which would make the operation
of the gas panel more demanding to avoid accidental liquefaction of the gas.

We will discuss the measured properties of neopentane as a wire chamber gas
in Section 3.1

2.4 Wire plane construction

Heavy hydrocarbon gas such as isobutane is commonly used as a quencher gas,
not as the main component of the wire chamber gas. In order to obtain a high
enough gain from neopentane, which is also a heavy hydrocarbon gas, a wire
with a small diameter has to be used for the anode wire plane. We chose to
use gold-plated tungsten wires with a diameter of 10 µm. 64 anode wires are
strung with a 2.54 mm spacing, giving an eﬀective area of 163 mm × 163 mm,
and are soldered onto a 0.092-in. thick FR4 glass epoxy frame. A tension of
9 gf, which is about 80% of the breaking point of the wire, was applied to each
wire. All the anode wires are connected together by conductor tracks etched
onto the FR4 glass epoxy plate, which are then connected to the HV resistor
located outside the MWPC through an SHV feedthrough connector mounted
on the chamber lid (see Sections 2.2 and 2.5 and Fig. 3).

In order to minimize electron backscattering, we chose to use wires also for the

8

Fig. 5. Photographs of the chamber lid (top) and the chamber body (bottom). The
PCB cards on the chamber lid slide into the card-edge connector receptacle on the
cathode wire plane frames, providing the electrical connection for cathode signals
between the wire planes and the feedthrough connectors on the chamber lid. (The
longer PCB cards are for the bottom cathode plane and the short ones are for
the top cathode plane.) Also the metal pin mounted on the SHV feedthrough on
the chamber lid slides into a receptacle on the anode plane frame, providing the
electrical connection for the anode HV and signals between the wire plane and the
chamber lid.

cathode planes, instead of more conventionally used thin strips of conductor
etched on a substrate such as Mylar sheet [9]. The entrance and exit windows
cannot be used as the cathode planes because the thin windows bow out by
up to 1 cm (as measured at the center) due to the pressure diﬀerence across
the windows. Also, the use of wires instead of conductor strips etched on a
thin substrate facilitated the pump-out operation necessary prior to ﬁlling the
MWPC with 100 torr neopentane.

Gold-plated aluminum wires 50 µm in diameter were used for the cathode

9

Fig. 6. A photograph of the detector assembly and the gas panel.

planes. Each cathode plane has 64 wires, strung with a 2.54 mm spacing
with a 50 gf tension and soldered onto a 0.092-in. thick FR4 glass epoxy
frame. Every four neighboring cathode wires are connected to one conductor
strip etched on the FR4 glass epoxy plate, which then was connected to a
card edge connector receptacle mounted on the FR4 epoxy plate. (There are
16 strips on each cathode plane.) The card edge connectors then provide a
connection to the outside of the MWPC through feedthrough connectors on
the chamber lid, on which Multi Channel Systems CPA16 ampliﬁer carrier
boards are mounted [10] (See Sections 2.2 and 2.6).

Wire planes were constructed using a wire-winding machine built according to
Ref. [11]. The wire-winding machine was originally built for time projection
chambers for the DRIFT dark matter search experiment [12]. We modiﬁed
it replacing the weight that provides a constant tension to the wire with a
hysteresis clutch/brake [13] which provides a constant torque, for a simpler
operation. The wire was wound onto a frame made of aluminum, and then
transfered onto the G10 frame.

The distance between the anode plane and a cathode plane was chosen to be
10 mm, about 4 times the anode wire spacing [14]. The two cathode planes
are mounted in such a way that the wires on one plane run perpendicular to
the wires on the other plane, thus providing positional information in both
directions that are perpendicular to the axis of the SCS spectrometer (see
Fig. 7).

10

2.5 Bias High Voltage Systems

In order to collect the charge deposited between the windows and the cathode
planes, the cathode planes are designed so that they can be held at a positive
potential (up to ∼ 400 V) with respect to the windows which are grounded.
The anode plane then is held at a positive potential (∼ 2700 V) with respect
to the cathode planes.

The anode bias high voltage is supplied through a 25 MΩ resistor (See Fig. 7).
A 6.8 nF HV capacitor was inserted between the ground and the HV and
served as a ﬁlter. The 25 MΩ resistor, the 6.8 nF capacitor, and the 3.3 nF
decoupling capacitor were all enclosed in a box (“HV box”) that was ﬁlled
with Araldite 2011 epoxy [15] to prevent discharge due to the low pressure
(100 torr nitrogen) environment.

The high voltage to the HV box was provided through an SHV cable that
must be operated in the 100 torr nitrogen atmosphere. We found that most
of the commercially available SHV cables failed in this low pressure environ-
ment. Detailed tests revealed that for some cables this failure was due to the
SHV connectors themselves (SHV connectors from some manufactures always
failed), and for others this was due to the way cables were assembled. We used
SHV cables that were obtained from Dielectric Sciences [16].

2.6 Readout method and electronics

The basic readout method is shown in Fig. 7. As discussed in section 2.4 the
signals from all the anode wires are summed on the anode wire plane, providing
the information on the total energy deposited in the MWPC. The signals
from every four neighboring cathode wires are summed, giving 16 channels to
read out for each cathode plane. For the given cathode-anode plane distance
(10 mm), the distribution of the induced charge on the cathode planes has
a width of about 2 cm (FWHM), thus three to four cathode strips (each
strip is a collection of four neighboring cathode wires) receive a detectable
signal for each hit on the MWPC. The center of gravity of the signals of each
cathode plane provides the coordinate of the location of the avalanche in the
direction perpendicular to the cathode wire. Combining the information from
both cathode planes determines the location of the avalanche.

The summed anode signal is extracted to the outside of the MWPC through
an SHV feedthrough connector and fed to a Multi Channels System PA3300
ampliﬁer module through a decoupling capacitor of 3.3 nF (See Fig. 7). The
PA3300 module contains a charge-sensitive preampliﬁer and a shaping ampli-
ﬁer. The gain and the shaping time are chosen to be 2 V/pC and 0.25 µs,

11

C athode plane
A node plane
C athode plane

amplifier

To ADC

To ADC 

To HV PS 

HV box

Fig. 7. Schematic showing the readout method for the anode and cathode wire
planes. The anode wires are all ganged together, providing the information on the
total energy deposited to the MWPC. Every four cathode wires are ganged together,
with the center of gravity of the cathode signals providing the location of the hit.

respectively.

The signal from each of the 16 cathode strips is also extracted to the outside
of the MWPC and is fed to a Multi Channel Systems PA3300 ampliﬁer. For
the cathode, the 16 PA3300 ampliﬁers are mounted on a Multi Channel Sys-
tems CPA16 carrier board, which provides a decoupling capacitor (rated up
to 500 V) for each channel as well as power for the PA3300 ampliﬁers. For the
cathode, the gain and shaping time for the PA3300 ampliﬁers are chosen to
be 25 V/pC and 0.25 µs, respectively.

The ampliﬁed anode and cathode signals are digitized by a CAEN peak sensing
multi-event ADC V785 [17].

2.7 Thin entrance and exit windows

The entrance window is 15 cm in diameter and is made of 6 µm thick alu-
minized Mylar sheet, reinforced by 200 denier Kevlar ﬁber [18]. The window
is glued onto the window frame with Araldite 2011 epoxy, and is then inserted
into the opening on the chamber lid. An o-ring provides a seal between the

12

Kevlar fibers

Mylar window

Kevlar fiber frame

Entrance window
frame

Chamber lid

Groove to capture
excess glue

Mylar sheet

Glued surface

Fig. 8. Schematic showing the structure of the entrance window and the Kevlar
support.

window frame and the chamber lid. The Kevlar ﬁber is strung with a 5 mm
spacing, and is epoxied onto a separate aluminum frame which is inserted into
the opening of the window frame (See Fig. 8).

During the developmental tests, we found that it was very important not to
let the excess epoxy ﬂow out onto the surface of the Mylar sheet when the
window frame is glued on to a Mylar sheet. The epoxy hardened on the surface
of the Mylar sheet causes a tear to develop when the window is subject to a
pressure diﬀerence and needs to bow in or out. Machining a groove on the
window frame to capture the excess epoxy (see Fig. 8) substantially improved
the longevity of the windows.

Thin Kevlar reinforced Mylar windows are discussed in Ref. [19]. However,
our method diﬀers from that in Ref. [19] as follows. In Ref. [19], the window
is of a cylindrical shape, and therefore the best performance was obtained
when the Kevlar ﬁbers were glued on the surface of Mylar sheet preformed
to a cylindrical shape. In our case, the window is glued onto a ﬂat circular
frame, and yields to some radius when a pressure diﬀerence is applied across
the window. If the Kevlar ﬁbers are directly glued on to the surface of the
Mylar sheet, it tends to rip the Mylar sheet oﬀ as the window bows out under
a pressure diﬀerence. The best performance was obtained when the Kevlar
ﬁbers are only ﬁxed on the frame, allowing them to move against the surface

13

of the Mylar sheet when it bows out under a pressure diﬀerence.

The entrance window withstands a pressure diﬀerence of up to 200 torr. We
chose this conﬁguration as a result of a compromise between the strength (and
the leak rate) and the amount of material. For example, 3 µm Mylar sheet
could not be used because of the high leak rate due to pin holes on the sheet.

The exit window is 15 cm in diameter and is made of 6 µm thick aluminized
Mylar sheet. Since there is only a small pressure diﬀerence (∼ 5 torr), there
is no need for Kevlar reinforcement.

2.8 Gas handling system

The function of the gas handling system is as follows.

• In normal operation, it maintains the MWPC gas pressure at 100 torr within
1%, while ﬂowing gas into the MWPC at a rate of ∼ 10 − 15 cc/min. It
also maintains the pressure in the nitrogen volume to be ∼ 5 torr below the
MWPC gas pressure.

• During the initial pump-out, it evaculates the MWPC and the nitrogen vol-
ume while keeping the pressure diﬀerence across the front and back window
within the limit given for each window.

• It protects the MWPC windows and the wire planes in case of accidents,

including a loss of the SCS vacuum and a power failure.

Figure 9 shows how the constant gas ﬂow and the constant pressure in the
MWPC volume and the constant gas pressure in the nitrogen volume are
maintained during normal operation (the ﬁrst item listed above). The mass
ﬂow controller (MKS type 1179A) [20] ensures that a constant mass ﬂow of
gas enters the MWPC gas volume, while the pressure valve (MKS type 248A)
throttles its opening to control the ﬂow of gas that leaves the MWPC gas
volume so that the pressure is maintained at the target pressure (100 torr).
The pressure of the gas in the MWPC gas volume is measured by a capacitance
manometer (MKS Baratron 626 [21]), and the pressure information is used by
a controller (MKS type 146C) that controls the pressure valve.

The nitrogen pressure was controlled by a pneumatic relay (Fairchild Model
14212EJ). It uses the control pressure (in this case the MWPC gas pressure)
to control the output pressure (in this case the nitrogen pressure). There is a
constant ﬂow of nitrogen gas through the input. The excess gas is directed to
a vacuum pump.

With this system, we are able to control the MWPC gas to maintain its
pressure at 100 torr within 0.5%. The nitrogen pressure in the nitrogen volume

14

Pneumatic relay 

Neopentane bottle

Mass flow controller

Neopentane @ 100 torr

Nitrogen @ 100 torr

Spectrometer
Vacuum

Pressure valve

Window (6µm Mylar)

Nitrogen bottle

Window (6µm Kevlar-
 supported Mylar)

Fig. 9. Schematic of the gas ﬂow

is typically maintained at 5 torr below the MWPC gas pressure within a few
torr. (We would like to keep the MWPC gas pressure slightly higher than the
nitrogen pressure so that the exit window will slightly bow out to keep it from
touching the cathode wire plane.)

Figure 10 shows the actual gas panel diagram, including valves and pressure
switches that allow us to pump out the MWPC volume safely and protect the
MWPC windows in case of accidents.

3 Detector performance test and results

Two identical MWPCs were successfully constructed. An oﬀ-line detector test
was performed using an 55Fe source to study the MWPC response to mono-
energetic x rays. The pulse height of the 5.9 keV signal was studied as a
function of the bias voltage. A 130-keV electron gun was then used to test the
MWPC for its response to an electron beam. Each of these tests are described
in detail below.

15

Fig. 10. Diagram of the actual gas handling system

3.1 Gas property study with an 55Fe source

The response of the UCNA MWPC was ﬁrst studied by irradiating the MWPC
by 5.9 keV x rays (Mn K x rays) from an 55Fe source. At this energy, the
photon-matter interaction is dominated by the photoelectric eﬀect. Since the
average energy deposition of β-decay electrons in the MWPC is several keV,
the total energy peak of the 5.9 keV x rays provides an almost ideal means to
study the performance of the UCNA MWPC.

Because of the technical and administrative diﬃculties associated with placing
the 55Fe source in vacuum, the tests were done using an arrangement as follows.
The MWPC front window was replaced with an aluminum plate with a 25.4-
mm diameter hole. A window made of 12-µm thick Mylar sheet was glued over
the hole, and x rays were introduced through this hole.

For comparison, we also performed the same tests with the MWPC ﬁlled with
1 atm P10 gas (90% argon, and 10% ethane), which is commonly used as an
MWPC gas.

Shown in Fig. 11 is a typical x-ray spectrum with the MWPC ﬁlled with
100 torr neopentane gas. In addition to the Mn K x rays at 5.9 keV, we also
see the Al K x rays at 1.5 keV, which are generated by Mn K x rays incident

16

s
t
n
u
o
c

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0

0

5.9 keV

1.5 keV

100

200

300

400

500

ADC channel

Fig. 11. Typical x-ray spectrum with the MWPC ﬁlled with 100 torr neopentane
gas. In addition to the Mn K x rays at 5.9 keV, we also see the Al K x rays at
1.5 keV, which are generated by Mn K x rays incident on the chamber body which
is made of aluminum.

on the chamber body which is made of aluminum.

We also measured the pulse height of the ampliﬁer output of the anode signal
for 5.9 keV x rays as a function of the bias voltage between the anode and the
cathode with the MWPC ﬁlled with 100 torr neopentane. For this measure-
ment, the cathode and the entrance and exit windows were kept at the same
potential for simple operation. Also, the same measurement was performed
with the MWPC ﬁlled with 1 atm P10 gas for a comparison. Figure 12 shows
the measured pulse height as a function of the bias voltage. As seen from
the ﬁgure, a reasonable pulse height was obtained with 100 torr neopentane.
From a detection eﬃciency measurement, the nominal operational voltage was
chosen to be 2700 V.

In principle, the measured pulse height can be related to the gas multiplication
factor as follows.

V = GampExray

eMǫcc,

1
W

(1)

where V is the size of the ampliﬁer output voltage pulse, Gamp is the gain of
the ampliﬁer which converts a charge pulse to a voltage pulse, Exray is the
energy of an x-ray photon, W is the amount of energy necessary to create
one electron-ion pair in the gas, e is the absolute value of the charge of the
electron (e = 1.6 × 10−19 C), and M is the gas multiplication factor. ǫcc
accounts for the reduction in the pulse height due to the fact that the shaping
time of the ampliﬁer is shorter than the time it takes for the pulse to reach
its maximum amplitude. For this particular geometry, it is estimated that

17

Fig. 12. Measured pulse height of the ampliﬁer output of the anode signal for 5.9 keV
x rays as a function of the bias voltage with the MWPC ﬁlled with 100 neopentane.
Also shown for comparison is the measured pulse height with the MWPC ﬁlled with
1 atm P10 gas.

Source head

Einzel lens

acceleration column

steering coils

pumping
cross

H

V

BPM

FC

MWPC

Scintillator

Fig. 13. Schematic of the setup used to test the MWPC with a 130 keV electron
beam.

ǫcc ∼ 0.4. With Exray = 5.9 keV and Gamp = 2 V/pC, and assuming W = 26 eV
for neopentane, 5 we obtain for the gas multiplication factor M ∼ 7 × 103 at
2700 V.

3.2 Tests with a low energy electron gun

The response of the UCNA MWPC was then studied using the 130 keV Kellogg
electron gun. A schematic of the set up for this test is shown in Fig. 13. The
Kellogg electron gun was able to provide an electron beam of up to 130 keV
and the current could be varied from a few electrons per second to several
microamperes. A more detailed description of the Kellogg electron gun can be
found in Ref. [22].

For this test, the electron current from the Kellogg electron gun was adjusted
so that the event rate on the MWPC was a few kHz. The trigger was provided

5 The W -value for methane (CH4) is known: W = 27.1 eV. The W -value is typically
20 − 30 eV for most gases.

18

Fig. 14. Distribution of the scintillator and the MWPC anode pulse height with
a 130-keV electron beam incident on the detector. The trigger is provided by the
scintillator. The events where the MWPC recoded no signal are due to room back-
ground.

by the plastic scintillator located downstream of the MWPC. In Fig. 14, we
show pulse height spectra of the anode signal and the scintillator signal.

As discussed in Section 2.6, the hit position for each event was reconstructed
by ﬁrst obtaining the center of gravity of the signals on each cathode plane,
and then combining the information from both cathode planes. The top panel
of Fig. 15 shows the reconstructed position along the axis perpendicular to
the anode wire direction.

Since there is no strong magnetic ﬁeld along the direction of the beam (as in
the full experiment), the overall position distribution (full width∼ 15 mm) is
dominated by multiple scattering in the front window and the MWPC gas. A
Monte Carlo simulation was performed and it was conﬁrmed that the observed
position distribution is consistent with the simulation (see the middle panel of
Fig. 15). In addition to this 15 mm wide distribution, there are narrow spikes.
These are due to events in which only one cell 6 received energy deposition. The
position of the spikes corresponds to the location of the anode wires around
which the avalanche occurred. The continuum below the spikes is due to events
where more than one cell received energy deposition. The width of the spikes

6 An MWPC is divided into cells, each containing one anode wire at its center.
Electric ﬁeld lines going through any part of a given cell terminate at the same
anode wire.

19

0
-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

Y (mm)

Simulation (B=0 T)

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

Y position (mm)

Simulation (B=0.6 T)

Data (B=0 T)

2400

2200

2000

1800

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0
-30

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

0
-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

Y position (mm)

Fig. 15. Distribution of the reconstructed position of the electron hit along the axis
perpendicular to the anode wire direction. The position was reconstructed from
the cathode information. Top panel: data taken with an electron beam from the
Kellogg electron gun with no magnetic ﬁeld. Middle panel: Monte Carlo simulation
with no magnetic ﬁeld. (Note that the eﬀect of electronic noise is not included in
the simulation and also that the location of the beam center with respect to the
center of the MWPC is diﬀerent between the simulation and the data.) The bottom
20
panel: Monte Carlo simulation with a magnetic ﬁeld of 0.6 T.

is ∼ 0.8 mm and is the position resolution of the MWPC in the absence of
multiple scattering. This resolution is dominated by electronic noise. This,
combined with simulations, indicates that the position of the center of the
spiral of each beta particle entering the MWPC can be determined to better
than 1.5 mm once the MWPC is put in the 0.6 T magnetic ﬁeld of the ﬁeld
expansion region of the SCS magnet, which will greatly suppress the multiple
scattering eﬀect (see the bottom panel of Fig. 15).

4 Summary

A new multiwire proportional chamber was designed and constructed for pre-
cision studies of neutron β decay angular correlations. Its design has several
novel features, including the use of neopentane as the MWPC gas and the
Kevlar supported thin entrance window. Two such MWPCs were successfully
constructed. Various oﬀ-line tests conﬁrmed that these MWPCs have suﬃcient
sensitivity to low energy β particles and allow hit position determination with
suﬃcient position resolution.

5 Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge the technical support of R. Cortez and J. Pendlay.
We thank J. Mohnke for his suggestion of using neopentane as the MWPC
gas, P. Chan for his help with setting up the wire winding machine, and
E. Lin and C. Kessens for their help with the thin window development. We
thank D. Snowden-Iﬀt of Occidental College for generously loaning us his wire
winding machine. We thank C. Morris for various valuable suggestions. This
work was supported by the National Science Foundation.

References

[1] H. Abele, et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 33, 1 (2004).

[2] C. L. Morris, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 272501 (2002).

[3] A. Saunders, et al., Phys. Lett. B593, 55 (2004)

[4] The UCNA Collaboration, A proposal for an accurate measurement of the
neutron spin−electron angular correlation in polarized neutron beta-decay with
ultracold neutrons, 2000.

[5] B. Plaster, et al., in preparation.

21

[6] T. Tabata, R. Ito, and S. Okabe, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 94, 509 (1971).

[7] D. Lazic, et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 410, 159 (1998).

[8] A. Breskin, R. Chechik, and N. Zwang, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 165, 125 (1979).
[9] Mylar R(cid:13) is a registered trademark of DuPont Teijin Films.

[10] Multi Channel Systems, http://www.multichannelsystems.com

[11] M. Kuze, et al. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 26, 1348 (1987).

[12] D. P. Snowden-Iﬀt, C. J. Martoﬀ, and J. M. Burwell, Phys. Rev. D 61,

101301(R) (2003).

[13] PHT Permanent Magnet Clutch/Brake Model PHT-0.05s, Ogura Industrial

Corp., http://www.ogura-clutch.com/.

[14] F. Sauli, CERN Report 77-09 (1977).
[15] Araldite R(cid:13) is a registered trademark of Huntsman Advanced Materials.

[16] Dielectric Sciences Inc., 88 Turnpike Rd., Chelmsford, MA 01824-3526.

[17] CAEN S.p.A. Construzioni Apparecchiature Ellecttroniche Nucleari,

http://www.caen.it/.

[18] Kevlar R(cid:13) is a registered trademark of DuPont.

[19] L. G. Atencio, C. L. Morris, and C. P. Sadler, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 334,

643 (1993).

[20] MKS Instruments, Inc., http://www.mkinst.com/.
[21] Baratron R(cid:13) is a registered trademark of MKS Instruments, Inc.

[22] J. W. Martin et al., Phys. Rev. C 68, 055503 (2203).

22

