Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

C. Gu´enaut · G. Bollen · S. Chouhan
F. Marti · D.J. Morrissey · D. Lawton ·
J. Ottarson · G.K. Pang · S. Schwarz ·
B.M. Sherrill · M. Wada · A.F. Zeller

The cyclotron gas stopper project at
the NSCL

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Gas stopping is becoming the method of choice for converting
beams of rare isotopes obtained via projectile fragmentation and in-ﬂight
separation into low-energy beams. These beams allow ISOL-type experi-
ments, such as mass measurements with traps or laser spectroscopy, to be
performed with projectile fragmentation products. Current gas stopper sys-
tems for high-energy beams are based on linear gas cells ﬁlled with 0.1-1 bar
of helium. While already used successfully for experiments, it was found that
space charge eﬀects induced by the ionization of the helium atoms during the
stopping process pose a limit on the maximum beam rate that can be used.
Furthermore, the extraction time of stopped ions from these devices can ex-
ceed 100 ms causing substantial decay losses for very short-lived isotopes. To
avoid these limitations, a new type of gas stopper is being developed at the
NSCL/MSU. The new system is based on a cyclotron-type magnet with a
stopping chamber ﬁlled with Helium buﬀer gas at low pressure. RF-guiding
techniques are used to extract the ions. The space charge eﬀects are con-
siderably reduced by the large volume and due to a separation between the
stopping region and the region of highest ionization. Cyclotron gas stopper
systems of diﬀerent sizes and with diﬀerent magnetic ﬁeld strengths and ﬁeld
shapes are presently investigated.

Keywords Cyclotron · Ion beam stopper

PACS 29.20.Hm

C. Gu´enaut · G. Bollen · S. Chouhan · F. Marti · D.J. Morrissey · D. Lawton ·
J. Ottarson · G.K. Pang · S. Schwarz · B.M. Sherrill · A.F. Zeller
Michigan State University, 1 Cyclotron, East Lansing MI-48824-1321, USA
Tel.: +1-517-333-6463
Fax: +1-517-353-5967
E-mail: guenaut@nscl.msu.edu

M. Wada
RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama, Japan

7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
2
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

1 Introduction

Rare isotope production via relativistic projectile fragmentation and in-ﬂight
separation produces nuclides with short half-lives without limitations due
to element selectivity. Several fragmentation facilities exist worldwide. At
all of them slowing down and stopping of fast rare isotope beams is un-
der development. The goal is to produce low-energy beams that can then
be used for ISOL-type experiments, i.e. experiments using low-energy ra-
dioactive beams with small phase space volume, such as mass measurements
with traps or laser spectroscopy, or post-accelerated for low-energy reaction
studies. LEBIT [1], installed at the NSCL at MSU, was the ﬁrst to demon-
strate that relativistic (150 MeV/u) rare isotope beams can be thermalized
to low-energy (∼ 5 keV)and be used for precision experiments. A number of
high-precision mass measurements have already been performed, for exam-
ple on 38Ca [2], 66As, 64Ge, 69Se, and 40,42S. At GSI, a stopping test with
a large linear gas cell [3] was successfully carried out. At RIKEN, a laser
spectroscopy experiment with trapped radioactive Be ions, obtained via gas
stopping of fast fragments, was performed recently [4].

Present gas stopping schemes are all based on the slowing down of the
fast fragments in solid degraders and a ﬁnal stopping of the ions in a chamber
ﬁlled with helium gas. Remaining singly or doubly-charged, ions are guided
out of the gas using electric ﬁelds and gas ﬂow and then prepared into a
low-emittance, low-energy ion-beam by means of radio-frequency (RF) ion
guiding techniques. Diﬀerent concepts are applied for the ion extraction.
In the case of low-pressure gas cells (< 300 mbar He) a combination of
electrostatic and RF potentials is often employed. The gas cell [5] of LEBIT
is operated at high pressure (1 bar He). Static electric ﬁelds guide the ions
to an extraction nozzle where the force provided by the gas ﬂow transports
them out of the gas cell.

A rate-dependent eﬃciency for linear gas cells has been observed in a
variety of systems [6,7,8,9]. Extraction eﬃciencies of existing linear gas cells
decrease precipitously with the ionization rate density (rate of generation of
ion pairs (IP) per volume) inside the gas cell. The decrease in eﬃciency is
attributed to space-charge eﬀects, which lead to ion losses inside the gas cell.
Next generation facilities will oﬀer exotic beam rates of 109 /s, requiring the
eﬃcient handling of ionization rate densities of about 1011 IP/cm3/s. This is
not achievable with existing gas cells without a signiﬁcant loss in eﬃciency.
For the stopping of rare isotope beams with an energy of about 100 MeV/u,
linear gas cells need to be operated with a pressure-length product of typi-
cally p · L=0.5 bar·m. Limited by the maximum applicable electric ﬁeld for
ion transport and extraction inside the gas cell the average extraction time
is about 100 ms. Such long extraction times do not match the advantage of
fast-beam production and lead to decay losses.

In order to maximize the beneﬁt of the gas stopping approach, the fol-

lowing requirements have to be fulﬁlled:

– Short extraction times. In order to minimize decay losses the extraction
time should be comparable or shorter than the shortest half-life of the
ions to be studied. Extraction times of 10 ms or less are desirable.

3

Fig. 1 Schematic view of the cyclotron gas stopper showing the main components
of the system. A cyclotron-type focusing magnet contains a vacuum chamber ﬁlled
with helium at low pressure, a beam degrader, charge collection electrodes, and an
RF carpet for ion extraction.

– Eﬃcient stopping and extraction at high beam intensities. Next-generation
facilities will provide rare isotope beam intensities of up to 109 /s, many
orders of magnitude higher than available at present fragmentation facil-
ities.

– Applicability to all fragment beams. In order to be universal, the gas
stopper needs to be able to handle beams of isotopes with largely diﬀerent
charges Z and neutron-to-proton ratios.

A new concept, the cyclotron gas stopper, promises to fulﬁll these re-
quirements and to overcome the limitations of linear gas stoppers [10]. Such
a system, based on a cyclotron-type focusing magnet with a gas-ﬁlled stop-
ping chamber and using radio-frequency (RF) ion guiding techniques for ion
extraction, is presently under development at the NSCL.

2 Concept

Figure 1 presents the main components of the cyclotron gas stopper. Ions
injected into the system will ﬁrst interact with a solid degrader and then
be slowed down in helium gas at low pressure. The focusing properties of
the magnet conﬁne the ions during the deceleration process. The ions are
ﬁnally extracted by means of static electric ﬁelds, an RF carpet [6] and radio-
frequency ion guides.

With a long stopping path, a low pressure may be used inside the cy-
clotron gas stopper. This low pressure will allow for a fast drift inside the
magnet and a fast extraction, which will match the advantages of fast-beam
production. The larger volume as compared to linear gas cells and a separa-
tion of the stopping region from the primary ionization directly contribute
to the minimization of space charge eﬀects.

4

A similar concept has been used for the production of antiprotonic, pionic
and muonic atoms [11] and has also been discussed for the stopping of light
ions [12]. The beneﬁt of this concept for the stopping of intense rare isotope
beams was ﬁrst shown in simulations performed at the NSCL/MSU [10].

An RF carpet has already been used successfully [6] in a linear gas cell.
Because of its low pressure (< 20 mbar) the cyclotron gas stopper provides an
ideal environment for the operation of RF carpets. The modest damping of
the ion motion, as compared to high-pressure linear gas cells, allows carpets
to be used with a relatively large pitch and low voltages, while still providing
a strong repelling force. Static potentials will be used to guide the ions onto
the carpet surface and to the extraction oriﬁce.

3 Mechanical design

The mechanical design of the cyclotron gas stopper is underway and will
be based on detailed simulations discussed below. At the present stage of
design a vertically oriented magnet system is favored. Superferric magnets
have been designed that produce peak magnetic ﬁelds between 1.6 and 3 T.
Two separated coil packages will be used in order to be able to open the
yoke, facilitating the access to the inner part of the system. Figure 2 presents
a conceptual design of one of the systems under consideration. The vertical
arrangement has advantages in particular for the extraction and transport
of the low-energy beams out of the fringe ﬁeld. The magnet system will
house a cryogenically cooled vacuum chamber, ﬁlled with helium gas at a
typical pressure of 10 mbar or less. The beam degrader and beam monitors
are inserted radially. The diameters of the systems presently considered range
from 3−4 m with beam injection radii between 0.7−1.5 m. Options considered
are sector ﬁelds for stronger transverse focusing, diﬀerent ﬁeld shapes, and
the use of multiple degraders.

4 Beam stopping simulations

Various detailed numerical calculations based on realistic magnetic ﬁelds are
being carried out to optimize and characterize the system. They include
the Lorentz force, energy loss, charge-exchange collisions, and small-angle
multiple-scattering [13]. The simulations are being performed for light to
heavy isotopes of key nuclides with diﬀerent A/Z. Bromine isotopes 70,79,94Br
were chosen to represent the central region of the nuclear chart. Iodine iso-
topes 108,127,144I for heavier isotopes and 6,9,11Li for the very lighter mass
region. The choice of these nuclides was also based on the availability of data
for low-energy charge-exchange cross sections with helium [14,15].

A C++ version [16] of the ATIMA [17] code is used to model the interac-
tion of the incoming beam with the degrader. ATIMA calculates the stopping
power, the energy loss, the energy-loss straggling, the angular straggling, the
range, and the range straggling.

Diﬀerent magnet sizes and ﬁeld shapes are under investigation. Weakly
focusing and a sector-ﬁeld magnet are considered. Examples for the resulting

5

Fig. 2 Design concept of a vertical superconducting magnet under consideration.

6

Fig. 3 Realistic magnetic ﬁelds obtained in a weakly focusing magnet (left) and a
sector-ﬁeld magnet (right), calculated with the TOSCA code.

ﬁelds are shown in Figure 3. Both systems allow ions to be stopped eﬀectively.
The sector-ﬁeld magnet oﬀers some advantages since the injection for isotopes
with large A/Z (high-rigidity) is simpliﬁed.

Beam simulations were for example performed for 79Br isotopes with
100 MeV/u before the degrader in a weakly focusing magnet with Bmax = 2 T
and with 60 MeV/u in the case of the sector-ﬁeld magnet with Bmax = 2.6 T.
In both cases helium gas pressure of about 10 mbar was used. Figure 4 shows
typical results. On the left the trajectory of a single ion inside the weakly
focusing magnet is presented. The two ﬁgures on the right show stopped ion
distributions (crosses) together with energy loss (ionization) densities (col-
ored/greyscale areas) inside the gas. A key advantage of the cyclotron gas
stopper is that there is a separation in-between the region of highest ioniza-
tion and the central region were the ions stop. Compared to linear stoppers
this leads to a large reduction of space charge eﬀects.

Stopping and extraction eﬃciencies higher than 95 % have been achieved
for the bromine beams so far investigated. The systematic exploration of the
stopping properties for other rare isotope beams is on its way.

Acknowledgements This work has been supported by MSU and by DOE under
contract number DE-FG02-06ER41413.

References

1. R. Ringle et al, Precision mass measurements with LEBIT at MSU, Int. Journal

Mass Spectr., 251, 300 (2006).

7

Fig. 4 Trajectory of a single 79Br ion with an energy of 610 MeV after the degrader
inside the weakly focusing magnet ﬁlled with 10 mbar He (left). Energy deposition
and stopped ion distribution (crosses) for a weakly focusing magnet (middle) and
a sector-ﬁeld magnet (right).

2. G. Bollen et al, Experiments with thermalized rare isotope beams from projec-
tile fragmentation: a precision mass measurement of the superallowed β emitter
38Ca,Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 152501 (2006).

3. W. Trimble et al., Development and ﬁrst on-line tests of the RIA gas catcher

prototype, Nucl. Phys, A746, 415C (2004).

4. M. Wada et al., these proceedings.
5. L. Weissman et al, First extraction tests of the NSCL gas cell, Nucl. Phys.,

6. M. Wada et al., Slow RI-beams from projectile fragment separators, Nucl. Inst.

A746, 655C (2004).

Meth., B204, 570 (2003).

7. L. Weissman et al., Conversion of 92 MeV/u 38Ca/37K projectile fragments into

thermalized ion beams, Nucl. Inst. Meth., A540, 245 (2005).

8. A. Takamine et al, Space-charge eﬀects in the catcher gas cell of a rf ion guide,

Rev. Sci. Instr., 76, 103503 (2005).
9. M. Facina et al., these proceedings.
10. G. Bollen, D.J. Morrissey, S. Schwarz, A Study of Gas-Stopping of Intense

Energetic Rare Isotope Beams, Nucl. Instr. Meth., A550, 27 (2005).

11. L.M. Simons, The cyclotron trap for antiprotons, Hyperﬁne Interactions, 81,

253 (1993).

12. I. Katayama, M. Wada, Cyclotron ion guide for energetic radioactive nuclear

ions, Hyperﬁne Interactions, 115, 165 (1998).

13. P. Sigmund, K.B. Winterbon, Small-angle multiple scattering of ions in the

screened coulomb region, Nucl. Inst. Meth., 119, 541 (1974).

14. H.-D. Betz, Charge States and Charge-Changing Cross Sections of Fast Heavy

Ions, Rev. Mod. Phys., 44, 465 (1972).

15. O. Woitke et al, Target ionization and projectile charge changing in 0.5-8-

MeV/q Liq+ +He (q=1,2,3) collisions, Phys. Rev., A57, 2692 (1998).

16. O. Tarasov, D. Bazin, LISE++: design your own spectrometer, Nucl. Phys.,

A746, 411 (2004).

17. http://www-linux.gsi.de/∼weick/atima/

