7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
7
1
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The ATLAS pixel detector
Markus Cristinziani 1
Physikalisches Institut, Nussallee 12, 53115 Bonn, Germany

Abstract

After a ten years planning and construction phase, the ATLAS pixel detector is nearing its completion and is
scheduled to be integrated into the ATLAS detector to take data with the ﬁrst LHC collisions in 2007. An
overview of the construction is presented with particular emphasis on some of the major and most recent problems
encountered and solved.

Key words: vertex detector, pixel detector, radiation damage

1. Introduction

2. Overview

The LHC proton-proton collider is expected to
operate at a center-of-mass energy of 14 TeV, a
bunch-crossing rate of 40 MHz and a design lumi-
nosity of 1034 cm−2 s−1. With the data recorded
by the multi-purpose detectors, ATLAS and CMS,
the mechanism of electroweak symmetry breaking
and physics beyond the Standard Model will be
explored. The high radiation environment and the
large data rate pose severe constraints on the detec-
tor technology, in particular for the inner detectors.
In ATLAS, the inner detector consists of a pixel
inner tracking subsystem, surrounded by a silicon
microstrip and a transition radiation trackers. The
lifetime equivalent neutron dose which need to be
sustained by the pixel detector is 50 Mrad or 1015
neutron equivalent.

The pixel detector (1) is arranged in a cylindri-
cal symmetry around the beam pipe (barrel) and
in addition two end-cap subsystems (plugs) in the
forward and backward region. The three barrel lay-
ers are located at a distance of 5cm, 9cm and 12cm
from the beam axis and are equipped with 1456
partially overlapping identical pixel modules. Each
endcap consists of three parallel planes at a nom-
inal distance of 50 cm, 58 cm and 65 cm from the
interaction point and houses 288 modules. This ge-
ometrical arrangement allows a coverage in pseu-
dorapidity for tracks with |η| < 2.5.

3. Modules

Email address: Markus.Cristinziani@cern.ch (Markus

Cristinziani).
1 for the ATLAS pixel collaboration

The basic unit of the pixel detector is a module.
It consists of a silicon sensor, 16 front-end read-out
chips arranged in two rows of 8 chips, a Kapton
ﬂex circuit with the Module Controller Chip and a

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

Fig. 1. Schematic cross section of a pixel module unit.

pigtail connector. A schematic cross section view
of a pixel module is shown in Fig. 1.

The sensor (2) has an active area of 60.8 mm
× 16.4 mm. The 47268 pixels are implemented as
n+ implants on the read-out side in 250 µm thick
oxygenated ﬂoat-zone silicon n-bulk material. Ra-
diation damage will type invert the sensor bulk
and then increase the depletion voltage. A multi-
ple guard-ring structure on the back side of the
sensor allows for a maximum bias voltage of 600 V.
This will provide nearly full depletion even after
ten years operation in the LHC environment.

ous reconstruction of hit positions, there is no
dead area on the sensor surface (Fig. 2).

The silicon sensor is connected to the read-out
front-end chips through ﬁne pitch bump bonding
with the ﬂip-chip technique to form a bare mod-
ule. The bump bonds provide electrical, mechani-
cal and thermal contact at the same time. This fab-
rication step was done by two diﬀerent providers,
IZM and AMS, with PbSn and In technology, re-
spectively.

The front-end chip FE-I3 is described in detail
elsewhere (4). It is implemented in a standard
0.25 µm CMOS process with a radiation toler-
ant layout, which has been demonstrated up to
100 Mrad of total dose. It contains 2880 read-out
cells, arranged in a 18 × 160 matrix matching the
sensor pixel geometry. In the analog section the
charge deposited in the sensor is ampliﬁed and
compared to an individually tunable threshold by
a discriminator. The digital readout buﬀers the
pixel address, a time stamp, and the signal am-
plitude as time-over-threshold (ToT) of hits. Hits
which are selected by trigger signals within the
Level 1 latency (3.2 µm) are read-out, otherwise
they are deleted.

Fig. 2. Pixel cell design on the silicon sensor. The standard
design in modiﬁed in the inter-chip region (long pixels and
ganged pixels) in order to maximize acceptance.

Fig. 3. A completely assembled module inside a ﬂex holder
used for safe manipulation during tests and transportation.

Each pixel cell has the dimensions 50 µm ×
400 µm which will provide a point resolution of
10 µm in the rφ−coordinate (3). In the regions
between front-end chips, pixels have either a mod-
iﬁed geometry (50 µm × 600 µm) or are connected
with each other, such that, at the cost of ambigu-

The last step of module assembly (“dressed
module”) consists in gluing a ﬂexible Kapton
(ﬂex) printed-circuit board to the back side of the
bare module and connecting it through ultrasonic
micro-wirebonds (Fig. 3). The ﬂex contains pas-

2

illuminated with a radioactive source to determine
dead or ineﬃcient pixels. The ToT response is
calibrated into charge using the on-chip injection
circuit and veriﬁed to agree to expectations based
on the radioactive source measurement.

4. Production and integration

Fig. 4. Number of modules vs. dead channels for high-qual-
ity modules available for the innermost barrel layer.

Figure 4 shows a distribution of dead channels
for the modules chosen for the innermost layer.
More than 300 modules resulted with less than 10
dead channels.

sive components and the Module Controller Chip
(MCC) (5) which steers the communication be-
tween the data acquisition system and the front-
end chips. Event building and error handling are
managed at this stage by the MCC.

All module components have been extensively
tested in irradiation runs to ensure that the op-
eration of the pixel detector will be possible even
after the expected lifetime dose of 50 Mrad. Seven
fully assembled production modules were irradi-
ated and tested in the laboratory. A typical noise
increase of only 10% was observed. Other modules
were characterized in a test beam, showing an al-
most fully depleted sensor, slightly reduced charge
collection eﬃciency due to trapping, and excellent
performance in high rate tests. See ref. (3) for de-
tails.

Approximately 70,000 front-end chips have been
produced on 250 wafers with a yield exceeding 80%.
Extensive testing was performed on each wafer be-
fore and after bumping, thinning down to 190 µm
and dicing. At the bare module level, the front-
end chips were again tested, in particular to detect
defective bump bonds. A reworking procedure has
been developed to recover these modules with high
eﬃciency. Approximately 10% needed to undergo
reworking. The recovery eﬃciency was 90%, aver-
aged over the two vendors.

Approximately 2000 modules have been assem-
bled and tested at ﬁve production sites (Fig. 3).
Each module receives a ranking penalty measured
in equivalent dead channels (edc) which determines
the later placement of the module in the detector.
Only 4% of the modules were rejected at this stage.
Laboratory measurements on production mod-
ules are described in detail elsewhere (6). For the
threshold scan diﬀerent charges are artiﬁcially in-
jected and the number of hits recorded. Thus the
threshold of the discriminator can be determined
and adjusted for each individual channel. The
timewalk is measured to ensure that hits can be
associated to the correct bunch crossing during
normal data taking at LHC. The module is then

Fig. 5. One pixel endcap.

The modules are loaded onto carbon-ﬁber struc-
tures in three sites. For the endcap (Fig. 5), six
modules are mounted on a sector assembly plate

3

Fig. 6. View of a bistave, two barrel staves connected by
the same cooling line.

corresponding to 1/8 of a disk. Two subsequent
disks are rotated to optimize coverage. For the bar-
rel (Fig. 6), 13 modules are precisely glued on a
stave. A quick connectivity test for all modules is
performed to exclude damage during loading. The
components are then sent to CERN for ﬁnal inte-
gration.

layer

barrel endcaps

inner

0.13% 0.04%

center 0.17% 0.16%

outer

0.27% 0.22%

Table 1
Fraction of dead channels per module, averaged over all
modules integrated into the detector.

A maximum ranking value of 60 edc was required
for a module to be integrated on a stave for the
innermost layer. Table 1 shows the fraction of dead
channels per module, averaged over all modules
which have been integrated into the detector.

5. Integration status

At the time of writing the three barrel layers and
the two endcaps have been fully assembled. One
endcap is being tested on a cosmic-ray setup, while
the barrel layers are arranged in their ﬁnal position
around the beam pipe. Fig. 7 shows the completed

4

Fig. 7. View of the completely assembled outermost layer
of the barrel. The inner layers have also been assembled
and inserted into this one.

outermost barrel layer. All modules are connected
and tested to work properly with minor degrada-
tion with respect to the previous laboratory tests.
In parallel, a system test has been setup to assess
the read-out and DAQ readiness (7).

During construction, a number of unforeseen is-
sues and potential bottlenecks for the ﬁnal detec-
tor completion arose and solutions were found.

To protect the delicate wirebonds of the front-
end chips, of the pigtail connection and of the
MCC, a protective coating (potting) is applied to
prevent accidental mechanical breakage. During
thermal stress tests a number of bonds connecting
the MCC to the ﬂex broke. While thorough studies
demonstrated that a similar eﬀect is not observed
for the other potted bonds, it was decided to man-
ually remove the potting on the MCCs and rebond
them, which was achieved with 100% eﬃciency,
even on dressed modules.

Two problems connected to the stave design
were detected at a relatively late stage of produc-
tion. Owing to the non-circular cross-section of
the cooling pipe and the pressure of the coolant
and the particular linear geometry of the stave,
delamination of the carbon-carbon structure from
the cooling pipe has been observed. This problem
was resolved by adding a peek collar to the stave
extremities (Fig. 8 left). Secondly, some cooling
pipes were discovered to be leaky due to corro-

6. Summary

A short description of the ATLAS pixel detec-
tor has been presented. The radiation environment
and occupancy demanded the development of new
technologies that started more than ten years ago.
The project recently ﬁnished the module produc-
tion and integration phase. Several issues were dis-
covered and solved. Installation of the three-layer
pixel detector is currently planned by April 2007
and is on schedule.

The three-layer pixel detector is currently ex-
pected to be installed as the last sub-detector into
ATLAS on schedule by April 2007.

7. Acknowledgements

The development and construction of

the
ATLAS pixel detector involves more than 100
dedicated scientists and engineers from Berkeley,
Bonn, Dortmund, Geneva, Genoa, Marseilles, Mi-
lan, New Mexico, Ohio, Oklahoma, Prague, Siegen,
Udine and Wuppertal. This work is partially
funded by BMBF under contract 05 HA4PD1/5.

References

[1] Technical design report of the ATLAS pixel de-
tector, CERN/LHCC 98-13, Geneva 1998.
[2] M. S. Alam et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 456

[3] A. Andreazza, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 565

[4] I. Peri´c et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 565

[5] R. Beccherle et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A

(2001) 217.

(2006) 23.

(2006) 178.

492 (2002) 117.

568 (2006) 252.

[6] J. Grosse-Knetter, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A

[7] C. Schiavi,

these proceedings; J. Grosse-
Knetter et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 565
(2006) 79.

Fig. 8. Example of a delaminated stave (left). The pipe
insertion solution to the leak problem (right).

sion. The cause was found to be the brazing of the
cooling ﬁtting followed by a not accurate enough
quality control (water vapor in the pipe). Cooling
tubes and ﬁttings were designed and laser welded
in a new production. For existing, unloaded staves,
the cooling pipe was replaced. For the approxi-
mately 40 already loaded staves, new pipes were
inserted into the old ones (Fig. 8 right) providing
a still satisfactory thermal contact.

Fig. 9. Low mass cable in the region of the connector (left).
Cracks in the insulation are evident by closer inspection
(right).

During loading of the ﬁrst barrel staves, failures
of some low-mass cables were observed at the pig-
tail connector junction due to excessive stress on
the 100 µm-300 µm thick wires. After closer inspec-
tion, cracks in the insulation of the power cables
(Fig. 9) were discovered in an important fraction of
the cables. The speciﬁc production technique was
identiﬁed as the origin of the failure, and was cor-
rected in time. A second batch of cables produced
with the rectiﬁed process did not exhibit this prob-
lem.

5

