7
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
4
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
3
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Characterising a Si(Li) detector element for
the SIXA X-ray spectrometer

T. Tikkanen

Observatory and Astrophysics Laboratory, P.O. Box 14 (T¨ahtitorninm¨aki),
FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland

S. Kraft, F. Scholze, R. Thornagel, G. Ulm

Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, Abbestr. 2–12, D-10587 Berlin, Germany

Abstract

The detection eﬃciency and response function of a Si(Li) detector element for the
SIXA spectrometer have been determined in the 500 eV to 5 keV energy range
using synchrotron radiation emitted at a bending magnet of the electron storage
ring BESSY, which is a primary radiation standard. The agreement between the
measured spectrum and the model calculation is better than 2%.

PACS: 95.55.Ka; 07.85.Nc; 29.40.Wk; 85.30.De

Key words: Si(Li) detectors, X-ray spectrometers, detector calibration, X-ray
response, spectral lineshape

1 Introduction

The SIXA (Silicon X-Ray Array) spectrometer [1] is a focal plane instrument
of the SODART X-ray telescope on board the Russian Spectrum-X-Gamma
satellite scheduled for launch in 1998. SIXA is a closely packed array of 19
discrete Si(Li) detector elements which collect X-rays in the energy range
between 500 eV and 20 keV with an energy resolution of 200 eV at 6 keV.
The detector crystals are kept at a temperature of about 120 K by a passive
cooling system.

Although simple calibration methods involving a set of discrete X-ray lines
from radioactive sources may be adequate for many applications of Si(Li)
detectors, this is not the case in X-ray astronomy where one often wants to
resolve emission or absorption line features superposed on a continuum. Fine

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

2 February 2008

structures in the instrumental response associated with absorption edges of
the constituent elements of the instrument can mimic such line features, and
these spurious lines may coincide with real lines from astronomical sources.
Modern instruments combining high throughput X-ray optics with detectors
of high resolving power have proved to be able to resolve such ﬁne eﬀects: for
example, the spectrum of the Crab Nebula (which normally has no features)
had a hump at the L absorption edge of xenon when observed by the xenon-
ﬁlled GSPC’s on board the Japanese Tenma satellite [2] and line features near
the K edges of silicon, aluminium and oxygen when observed by NASA’s Broad
Band X-Ray Telescope which contained these elements in its segmented Si(Li)
detector and entrance window [3,4].

Synchrotron radiation (SR) is needed to resolve X-ray absorption ﬁne struc-
ture (XAFS) or to obtain accurate characterisation in the photon energy range
below 5 keV where other appropriate X-ray sources are not available. Soft X-
ray transmission of the entrance window of SIXA was measured using SR [5].
XAFS of the detector surface has been measured recently and is to be pub-
lished in a future paper. Simulations suggested that the eﬀect of the entrance
surface on the detection process in Si(Li) detectors, as modelled by Scholze
and Ulm [6], is of particular importance for SIXA in the range below 3 keV. In
this paper we report the characterisation of a SIXA detector element carried
out following their procedure, which resulted in the experimental determi-
nation of the detector response and the detection eﬃciency. Another goal of
this experiment was to investigate a temperature dependent low-energy tailing
phenomenon reported by the manufacturer (Metorex International Oy, Espoo,
Finland).

2 Detector model

2.1 Detector design

The detector elements fabricated for SIXA are top-hat Si(Li) detectors which
are 3.5 mm thick and have an active diameter of 9.2 mm (see Fig. 1). X-
rays enter through a contact layer of Au/Pd alloy whose nominal thickness
is 30 nm with a mass composition of 60% Au and 40% Pd. The anode side
of the crystal has a smaller diameter to reduce the readout capacitance, thus
yielding a better energy resolution. The diameter is greater on the cathode side
where the drifted region is encircled by uncompensated p-type silicon which
has been left there to facilitate the handling of the crystal. The edge is coated
with polyimide to provide passivation.

2

2.2 X-ray response

The X-ray response of the SIXA elements was modelled according to ref. [6]
where a detailed description of the detector model is given, so that here only
a summary of the basic concepts of the model is presented. The main fea-
ture of the model is that no inactive layer of silicon is assumed; instead, the
”window eﬀect” is explained by a strong expansion of the charge cloud before
thermalisation and consequent escape of electrons into the contact material.

A photon impinging on the detector can either be transmitted or absorbed in
the detector crystal, the contact material or possible contamination layers such
as carbon and oxygen. Absorption in the contact layer produces photo- and
Auger electrons and ﬂuorescence photons which can be lost without being
detected or, with a calculable probability, enter the crystal. Every photon
absorbed in the crystal and every electron entering the crystal produces a cloud
of electron–hole pairs in the Si(Li) crystal. The charge carriers are thermalised
and start to drift in the electric ﬁeld set up in the detector, which produces
a charge signal on the electrodes. The detection eﬃciency is deﬁned as a
total detection eﬃciency ǫ(E) which includes all pulses produced by photons
absorbed in the detector.

The total detection eﬃciency ǫ(E) of a SIXA crystal is equal to the absorp-
tance of the active region times the transmittance of the Au/Pd contact and
the contamination layers plus the probability PAu/Pd(E) that an incident pho-
ton absorbed in the Au/Pd alloy will produce a pulse:

ǫ(E) = (1

τSi)τAu/PdτCτice + PAu/Pd.

(1)

−

As indicated above, the latter contribution originates from absorption events
where a photo- or Auger electron or a ﬂuorescence photon is generated in the
contact layer and emitted into the crystal. Unlike the full-peak detection eﬃ-
ciency, which includes only the Gaussian part of the peak, ǫ(E) is independent
of the attenuation coeﬃcient of silicon at low energies.

The pulse height distribution C(E) measured with the detector exposed to
the spectral photon ﬂux ΦE(E) is given by

C(E) =

Z

R(E′, E)ǫ(E′)ΦE(E′) dE′.

(2)

Knowledge of the normalised response function R(E′, E) and the photon ﬂux
ΦE(E) facilitates the determination of ǫ(E) from the measured pulse height
distribution C(E).

3

2.3 Simulation

The inﬂuence of the detector model on the analysis of astronomical data ac-
quired by SIXA was investigated by simulating an observation of a typical as-
tronomical target by SIXA, following the procedure described in ref. [5] where
it was applied to XAFS in the entrance window. The same power-law spec-
trum modiﬁed by interstellar absorption (simulating the Crab Nebula) was
folded through the combined instrumental response of SIXA and SODART
to compute the simulated data. The data were then modelled in a traditional
way assuming a dead layer of silicon to explain the window eﬀect; the response
function in this model consisted simply of two Gaussian peaks, the full-energy
peak and the escape peak. The result is presented in Fig. 2. The dead layer
thickness was 160 nm which would have been the result of a measurement
with a 55Fe source.

Although the dead layer model can reproduce the data very well at higher
energies, it introduces spurious structures at the K edge of silicon and at the
M edges of gold, and below 1 keV the models are completely in disaccord. The
result indicates clearly that if full scientiﬁc return at low energies is required,
the detector response has to be accurately determined using an appropriate
model with parameters abstracted from SR calibration data.

3 Experiment

The SR measurements were performed at the PTB radiometry laboratory at
the electron storage ring BESSY. The SX700 plane grating monochromator
of the PTB radiometry laboratory [7] was utilized to measure the response
function in the 0.6 keV to 1.5 keV photon energy range and the double crystal
monochromator KMC of BESSY [8] was used in the 1.8 keV to 5.9 keV energy
range. The measurements with undispersed SR were carried out at a specially
designed beamline of the PTB radiometry laboratory. The photon ﬂux of
undispersed SR emitted at a bending magnet of the electron storage ring
BESSY is calculable with an uncertainty well below 0.5% in the desired energy
range [9–11]. The accuracy of the calibration is mainly limited by the ability
to extract the thicknesses of the contact and contamination layers. Because of
the moderate resolution of the detector, ﬁne structures cannot be recovered.

The SIXA ﬂight assembly was being assembled during the measurement shift
at BESSY and therefore the characterisation had to be done using one of
three available crystals which were left over after the selection of the best
crystals for the ﬂight model. The three crystals were studied at Metorex using
an electron microscope in order to select the best representative of a typical

4

ﬂight model crystal with respect to the temperature dependent tailing eﬀect.
Many crystals appeared to have a critical temperature (which usually fell near
the expected in-orbit operation temperature) where the low-energy tail started
to grow rapidly with temperature. One of the three crystals did not exhibit
this eﬀect even at 170 K, while another one was found to have suﬀered from
shelf storage. The third one was suitable: the tail between the main peak and
the escape peak became about two times higher when the temperature was
raised from 125 K to 130 K. This crystal was chosen to be characterised with
SR and to serve as transfer standard detector for calibration of the other SIXA
crystals.

4 Measurement and modelling of the response function

4.1 Homogeneity

The detector homogeneity was tested by positioning the beam at ﬁve diﬀerent
locations on the crystal (cf. Fig. 1). At the position ’0 mm’ the beam was
located at the edge of the active region so that half of the total intensity was
detected. As can be seen in Fig. 3 the response function was very similar at the
three central positions, while the tail is much higher at the ’0 mm’ position.
At the ’8.2 mm’ position near the opposite edge, a slight increase of the tailing
is observable. The temperature was 124 K and the beam width about 1 mm.
The temperature dependence was studied with the beam positioned at the
centre. No change in the tail structure was seen up to the temperature of
132 K, although noise and the FWHM increased as expected (see Fig. 4).

These results suggest that the previously observed growth of the tailing be-
tween 125 and 130 K, which was measured using an isotropic source and an
aperture diameter of 9.2 mm, occurs only at the periphery of the detector.
Top-hat detectors typically suﬀer from tailing in peripheral regions where the
signal electrons drift towards the side surface rather than the anode because
an n-type channel is formed on the surface [12]. Despite their polyimide pas-
sivation, SIXA crystals are obviously subject to this eﬀect as well. Leakage
current is generated on the same surface and the leakage currents were found
to be as high in polyimide coated crystals as in uncoated crystals [13]. The
sensitivity of the surface potential to ambient conditions provides an obvious
explanation for the observed temperature dependence of the tailing. This is
illustrated in Fig. 5 which depicts the detector at two diﬀerent temperatures.
The potential proﬁles were computed by the two-dimensional modelling pro-
gram SCORPIO [14] with diﬀerent eﬀective doping densities of the surface
channel. Photon absorptions at the periphery yield defective pulses because
electron clouds generated at greater radial distances drift to the side surface

5

where electrons can be trapped. Tailing is more pronounced in the situation of
the lower plot where the eﬀective doping is higher, corresponding to a higher
temperature. The result of the homogeneity test can be understood with the
upper plot. The ’0 mm’ position was at a radial distance of about 4.6 mm.
Electron paths starting around this distance end at the side surface, thus
explaining the tail. On the other hand, electrons from around 3.6 mm head
towards the back surface outside the anode, producing pulses with almost full
energy which cause the small broadening of the left side of the peak at the
’8.2 mm’ position. The tail feature further from the peak is caused by the part
of the beam extending closer to the edge.

4.2 Response function

The measured response functions were ﬁtted by using the HYPERMET func-
tion in the form of [6] including a Gaussian peak, an escape peak, an expo-
nential tail and a ﬂat shelf. The total function includes ten energy dependent
parameters. The shelf contribution is attributed to the escape probabilities
of primary electrons to and from the contact layer (Au/Pd alloy). The cal-
culated and ﬁtted shelf contribution can be seen in Fig. 6; the calculation
includes the most probable Auger and photoelectron energies. The short tail
is caused by the escape of hot electrons into the contact layer. Fig. 7 shows
this contribution as a function of energy and a ﬁt with R = 210 nm, where
R is the radius of the spherical electron cloud. It can be seen that below
1.8 keV the diﬀerence to the ﬁtted tail contribution increases with decreasing
energy. The measurement in this energy region was taken at the plane grating
monochromator, where more stray light exists at energies above 1 keV result-
ing in higher tailing contributions. At lower energies the peak cannot properly
be extracted from the noise leading to ﬁts with lower tail contributions. These
diﬃculties demonstrate the necessity of a theoretical model which allows an
extrapolation of the ﬁt parameters to lower energies.

Using these parameters the response function in the 500 eV to 4 keV range can
be constructed for the central region. Fig. 8 shows a comparison of some typical
measured distributions and the corresponding theoretical curves described by
the response function. The inhomogeneity of the response should be taken into
account, because the aperture diameter in the ﬂight model array will be about
9 mm and thus the excess tailing can aﬀect a great part of the active area.
Excluding the peripheral region by additional collimation is to be avoided as it
would diminish the eﬀective area. At 124 K about 10% of the area seems to be
aﬀected in the present case, but Fig. 5 suggests that the aﬀected area can be 2
or 3 times larger at depths of 1–2 mm where more energetic photons would be
absorbed. The aﬀected region can be expected to grow with the temperature,
and the region will have a diﬀerent size for each Si(Li) crystal.

6

5 Calibration with undispersed synchrotron radiation

For the measurements with undispersed SR the number of stored electrons
was decreased to either 5 or 2 electrons, yielding respectively about 3600 and
1500 photons per second striking the detector. The ﬂux through an aperture
with an area of 27.8(2) mm2 at a distance of 15783(3) mm from the source
point was calculated from the known electron storage ring parameters [9] in
the energy range 100 eV to 5 keV. The measured spectra were compared to the
model calculations of Eq. (2). The determined response function of the central
area is valid for this measurement because the aperture was small enough and
the coldﬁnger temperature was 125 K.

A proper comparison of the measured spectra and the predicted spectra re-
quires an energy calibration of the multichannel analyser with an uncertainty
of about 0.1%. For the energy calibration the line position at 900 eV was deter-
mined by the Gaussian peak position of the best ﬁt of the response function.
The SX700 energy scale is more accurate than 0.5 eV at this point. At 6.4 keV
the Fe Kα emission line(s) of a 55Co source was used for the calibration. A
linear gain was assumed.

A considerable pile-up contribution in the spectra measured with 2 and 5 elec-
trons in the electron storage ring was observed. The pile-up rate or coincidence
probability of two pulses with the count rates N(E1) and N(E2) occuring in
the interval TR is equal to the product [15],

NP(E1 + E2) = N(E1)N(E2)TR,

(3)

≪

if TRN(E)
1. The resolving time TR is in ﬁrst approximation a constant.
The pile-up contribution NP(E) of the whole spectrum can be extracted via
the calculation of the auto-correlation function of the calculated spectrum
[16,17]:

NP(E)

C(E′)C(E

E′) dE′.

−

∞

∼

Z
0

(4)

Two photons impinging within the time interval TR cannot be resolved by
the electronics and appear as one pile-up pulse. From the diﬀerence of the
spectra taken with 2 and 5 electrons in the electron storage ring TR can be
determined in the way that with the appropriate TR both spectra coincide after
a pile-up correction. TR can be used as a proportionality constant for Eq. (4).
The doubled number of calculated pile-up pulses NP have to be subtracted

7

afterwards, so that the pile-up corrected spectrum C ′(E) is

C ′(E) = C(E)

2

NP
N (cid:19)

1
(cid:18)

−

+ NP(E).

(5)

Applying this formula to the present spectra results in a constant relative
deviation of 3% for the 2 electron spectrum and of about 10% for the 5 electron
spectrum. An explanation of the result might be that in the real detection
process the deadtime is overestimated. An inﬂuence of low energy pulses which
are part of the calculation but cannot be seen by the electronics might also
be possible. The deadtime of the measurements was 11% and 23% with 2
and 5 electrons respectively. To account for a realistic pile-up distribution, the
numerical calculated pile-up pulses are not only distributed in the sum energy
corresponding channel, but also in all channels between both contributing
pulses. This has been taken into account for the present calculations. In order
to obtain two coincident spectra the factor 2 in Eq. (5) has to be replaced by
√2. Fig. 9 shows the comparison of the measured and calculated spectra. A
resolving time of 25 µs has been used in order to ﬁt the measurements.

If the pile-up rejection works, the deadtime and the pile-up inﬂuence is ne-
glectable for a typical photon ﬂux of a few hundred per second. The excellent
agreement within the statistical uncertainty in the energy range 500 eV to
4 keV for both the low count rate spectrum and the high count rate spectrum
conﬁrms the correctness of the calculation in this particular case. The lowest
deviation is found with thicknesses of 20.1(3) nm and 20.1(3) nm for Au and
Pd, respectively, and an ice layer of 16(3) nm. This is equivalent to a contact
layer thickness of 40.7 nm and nearly consistent with the mass ratio of 60:40
of the elements Au and Pd. A possible carbon layer can be neglected. The
detection eﬃciency calculated with the determined parameters from Eq. (1)
as well as the full-peak eﬃciency are shown in Fig. 10. The uncertainty reﬂects
the thickness determination of the Au, Pd and ice layers and the shelf. The
accuracy of the total photon ﬂux is limited by the knowledge of the detector
aperture size. It should be mentioned that the uncertainties are determined
on the basis of results obtained with diﬀerent models of pile-up calculations
and would have been lower without any pile-up eﬀect.

6 Conclusion

With the aid of dispersed and undispersed SR, the response function and
the detection eﬃciency in the central region of a Si(Li) crystal for the SIXA
spectrometer in the soft X-ray range have been determined. The agreement
between the calculated and the measured spectra within 2% is a further con-
ﬁrmation of the correctness of the physical detector model. The detection

8

eﬃciency has been determined with an uncertainty below 1.5% above 1 keV.
Although excellent results have been obtained after a pile-up correction, a
repetition of the measurement with undispersed SR is recommended, because
the characterised detector element will be taken as a transfer standard for the
calibration of the SIXA ﬂight assembly.

The previously observed temperature dependence was found to arise from the
inhomogeneity of the response near the edge of the cylindrical crystal. This
eﬀect is presumed to cover a large part of the detector area and requires
therefore further study.

We thank M. Jantunen of Metorex for information about the crystals and the
test results.

Acknowledgements

References

[1] O. Vilhu, J. Huovelin, T. Tikkanen, P. Hakala, P. Muhli, V.J. K¨am¨ar¨ainen, H.
Sipil¨a, I. Taylor, J. Pohjonen, H. P¨aivike, J. Toivanen, R. Sunyaev, A. Kuznetsov
and A. Abrosimov, Proc. SPIE 2279 (1994) 532.

[2] K. Koyama, T. Ikegami, H. Inoue, N. Kawai, K. Makishima, M. Matsuoka, K.
Mitsuda, T. Murakami, Y. Ogawara, T. Ohashi, K. Suzuki, Y. Tanaka, I. Waki
and E.E. Fenimore, Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 36 (1984) 659.

[3] K.A. Weaver, Legacy - The Journal of the HEASARC, Nr. 5 (1994) 12.

[4] P.J. Serlemitsos, F.E. Marshall, R. Petre, K. Jahoda, E.A. Boldt, S.S. Holt,
R. Mushotzky, J. Swank, A. Szymkowiak, R. Kelley and M. Loewenstein, in
Frontiers of X-Ray Astronomy. 28
Yamada meeting, eds. Y. Tanaka and K.
Koyama, Tokyo: Universal Academy Press, 1991, p. 221.

th

[5] T. Tikkanen and J. Huovelin, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 379 (1996) 130.

[6] F. Scholze and G. Ulm, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 339 (1994) 49.

[7] F. Scholze, M. Krumrey, P. M¨uller and D. Fuchs, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 65 (1994)

[8] J. Feldhaus, F. Sch¨afers and W. Peatman, Proc. SPIE 733 (1986) 242.

[9] H. Rabus, F. Scholze, R. Thornagel and G. Ulm, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 377

3229.

(1996) 209.

[10] J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 75 (1948) 1912.

9

[11] D. Arnold and G. Ulm, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 60 (1989) 2287.

[12] J.M. Jaklevic and F.S. Goulding, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 19 (1972) 384.

[13] M. Jantunen and S.A. Audet, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 353 (1994) 89.

[14] K.J. Grahn, Acta Polytechnica Scandinavica, El. 76 (1993) 1.

[15] G.F. Knoll, Radiation detection and measurement, 2

ed., Wiley, New York

nd

1989, p. 304.

[16] F.H. Tenney, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 219 (1984) 165.

[17] D.W. Datlowe, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 145 (1977) 365.

10

Fig. 1. Cross section of a Si(Li) detector element of the SIXA array. The compen-
sated region is denoted by hatching. Beam positions of the homogeneity test (Fig. 3)
are indicated.

Fig. 2. Illustrating the signiﬁcance of detector characterisation with simulated obser-
vations of the Crab Nebula by SIXA/SODART: simulated data from a 5000 s obser-
vation (points), obtained by folding an absorbed power-law model spectrum through
the predicted instrumental response matrix, are compared to a model (curve) com-
puted using a simpler detector model with a dead layer. The curve in the lower
panel represents residuals with inﬁnite observation time.

Fig. 3. Variation of the detector response function across the crystal surface. The
spectra obtained at the positions 2.3 mm, 4.6 mm and 6.9 mm almost coincide.

Fig. 4. The measured response function at 2.68 keV with coldﬁnger temperatures
of 128 K (solid curve) and 99 K (dotted curve) normalised to the number of counts
above 1 keV.

Fig. 5. Equipotential curves (eV) and drift paths of electrons in the detector at
diﬀerent temperatures (upper plot depicts a lower temperature).

Fig. 6. Contribution of the shelf, measured (points) and calculated (curve).

Fig. 7. Contribution of the short tail as ﬁtted by the measured response functions
compared to the best-ﬁt model calculation with R = 210 nm. Usage of a theoretical
model overcomes the larger uncertainties of the measurement at low energies like
here below 1.8 keV (see text).

Fig. 8. Typical response functions at low energy and near and far above the Si K
absorption edge compared to the model functions.

Fig. 9. Upper ﬁgure: Comparison of the measured pulse height distributions taken
with an electron current of 2 and 5 electrons in the storage ring and the calculations
including the pile-up contribution. C(E) is the number of counts or photons per
stored electron and eV. The dashed curve indicates the calculated spectrum without
pile-up. Lower ﬁgure: Relative diﬀerence to the calculations for the measurements
with 5 (crosses) and 2 (diamonds) electrons stored in the electron storage ring. The
statistical uncertainty is indicated by the solid lines.

Fig. 10. Upper part: Determined detection eﬃciency (DE) of the Si(Li) detector
according to the transmittance of 20.1(3) nm Au, 20.1(3) nm Pd and 16(3) nm
ice and the calculated shelf contribution. The dashed curve denotes the full-peak
eﬃciency. Lower part: Corresponding total uncertainty including the transmittance
uncertainty (dashed line), the shelf uncertainty (dashed-dotted line) and the uncer-
tainty of the aperture size.

11

