7
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
8
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
3
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Transmission properties of the X-ray window
for the SIXA spectrometer

T. Tikkanen and J. Huovelin

Observatory and Astrophysics Laboratory, P.O. Box 14 (T¨ahtitorninm¨aki),
FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland

Abstract

The ultrathin X-ray entrance window for the spaceborne spectrometer SIXA was
characterised using synchrotron radiation. X-ray absorption ﬁne structure near the
absorption edges of the constituting elements (aluminium, carbon, oxygen and nitro-
gen) was measured. Large scale positional variations were also studied. In addition,
the opacity of the window was tested by observing the eﬀect of photocurrent in the
detector generated by light leaked through the window.

1 Introduction

SIXA (Silicon X-Ray Array) spectrometer [1] is a focal plane instrument of the
SODART X-ray telescope onboard the Spectrum-X-Gamma satellite. SIXA is
an array of 19 discrete Si(Li) detector elements which collect X-rays in the
range 0.5–20 keV with an energy resolution of about 200 eV at 6 keV. The el-
ements are circular with an active diameter of 9.2 mm and they are arranged
in a hexagonal pattern with a centreline distance of 12 mm. The detector
crystals are kept at a temperature of about 120 K by a passive cooling sys-
tem. X-rays focussed by the telescope enter the detector through an entrance
window which forms a part of the cooler shield.

The X-ray entrance window for SIXA was fabricated by Metorex International
Oy. A speciﬁc advantage of this window construction [2] is that a polyimide
mesh is utilised to support an ultrathin polyimide membrane. Thus the active
area of the window (70 mm in diameter) is shadowed by the support structure
only at the lowest X-ray energies. In addition to being transparent in X-
rays, the window is required to be tight against heat leakage, opaque to light
from near IR to far UV and compatible with space environment. The window
comprises two separate units, both coated with aluminium.

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

16 December 2013

Because the window absorbs a considerable fraction of the softer X-rays, de-
termination of its X-ray transmittance is an important part of the detector
characterisation. Transmission properties can be fairly well predicted from
tabulated data for the constituent elements over the energy range of SIXA ex-
cept for the regions above the K absorption edges of aluminium and oxygen.
Transmission in these regions is aﬀected by X-ray absorption ﬁne structure
(XAFS) which depends on the chemical structure of the materials.

We applied synchrotron radiation from the electron storage ring BESSY to
investigate the soft X-ray transmission properties. In addition to the energy
dependence of the transmittance, we studied the dependence on the position
on the window surface. As SIXA consists of large elements which do not have
any spatial resolution, only large scale positional variations were of interest.
Furthermore, we studied the opacity to light, which is required to suppress
the degradation of the X-ray detection performance by photocurrent in the
Si(Li) crystals.

2 X-ray window units

In the fabrication process a layer of BPDA-PPD PI-2610 polyimide was ﬁrst
made by spin casting a low viscosity polyamic acid resin onto a silicon wafer
and baking the resin for conversion to polyimide. Next the support grid was
formed of photosensitive PI-2732 polyimide which was patterned into a hexag-
onal honeycomb structure with a 500 µm pitch. Finally, the silicon substrate
was removed and a 30 nm layer of aluminium was sputtered on both sides.
Thus one window unit consists of a thin layer of polyimide, a polyimide sup-
port grid, and a layer of aluminium on each surface. The chemical composition
of the polyimide is H10C22N2O4 and its bulk density is about 1.4 g/cm3. The
density of the thin ﬁlm polyimide is about 5% higher.

A set of window units was manufactured and the best ones were selected
for the ﬂight model (FM) and the ﬂight spare model (FSM) of SIXA. The
polyimide parameters of these as well as a few other units used for calibration
are given in Table 1. Nominal aluminium thickness is 60 nm for all units in
the table. Native oxide layers of thickness of about 3 nm are formed on the
aluminium coatings. Thicknesses of the polyimide membranes were measured
with a calibrated proﬁlometer and they varied from 237 to 275 nm. However,
it was found later that a soft coating on a hard substrate, such as polyimide on
silicon, is compressed during the measurement [3]. The tabulated values have
been corrected to account for the error. The shadowing ﬁgures are averaged,
which is suﬃcient because the detector elements are large compared to the
mesh (the active area covers 300 hexagons).

2

3 X-ray transmission

3.1 Experiment

Window units 19 and 14 were used for the X-ray transmission measurements.
The main purpose of the experiment was to measure the X-ray absorption
ﬁne structures which would be used to calculate the transmission properties
of the FM and FSM window units. As all window units are composed of similar
layers produced by the same process, they are likely to have similar XAFS.

The soft X-ray transmittance of the two window units was studied at the
SX700 plane grating monochromator beamline [4] of the radiometry labora-
tory of the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB) which is located at
the BESSY synchrotron facility. Control over the position of the beam was
provided by a movable sample holder. The beam covered the area of about
5 hexagons of the honeycomb grid structure with its full width at tenth max-
imum (1.5 mm horizontal and 0.8 mm vertical). Consequently, the fraction S
of the beam shaded by the grid was aﬀected by the precise positioning of the
beam, and the values of S during separate measurements varied about the
average shadowing given in Table 1.

Transmittance as a function of energy was obtained by scanning photon ener-
gies from 60 eV to 1800 eV with steps varying from 0.1 eV to 10 eV, depending
on the expected detailed features in the transmittance curve. The beam was
positioned at the centre. The results are plotted in Fig. 1. The similarity of the
two window units throughout the measured range, including the absorption
edges, suggests that XAFS is indeed identical for all SIXA window units. The
near-edge structures of the polyimide constituents resemble those reported for
other windows manufactured by Metorex [5], while XAFS of aluminium is
diﬀerent which is natural because there are no AlN layers in our windows.

Dependence on position was studied by performing line scans in the x direction
across the window surface at a few settings of the y coordinate. This was
repeated at four discrete energies slightly below the K edges of the elements
C, N, O and Al. The scan step was 2 mm. Transmission along the scanned lines
is shown in Fig. 2. It was originally measured in arbitrary units and later scaled
to the transmittances of the energy scans by ﬁtting a second order polynomial
to the data from the scan along y = 0 and setting the value of the polynomial
in the centre (its x coordinate being that obtained in the analysis in section
3.3) equal to the energy scan transmittance at the respective energy. The
transmittance grows with the radial distance from the centre of the window.

3

3.2 Analysis of energy scans

The model of the transmittance of a window unit is

T = exp

−

1 − S + S exp

3

j=1  
X

µ
ρ !j

ρjtj


(





−
"

 

µ
ρ !4

ρ4t4

,

#)

(1)

where the sum goes over the three thin ﬁlm materials (aluminium, oxide and
polyimide) and index 4 refers to the grid. This equation, with the experimental
data for T , was applied to calculate the mass attenuation coeﬃcients (µ/ρ)
wherein the ﬁne structures are incorporated. The transmittance of the FM
window units was then calculated using the model and the values of Table 1
for S and the layer thicknesses tj.

The experimental data is compared to the model (Eq. 1 with absorption data
from ref. [6] and window parameters from Table 1) in Fig. 3a. The diﬀer-
ence between the residuals of the two window units is plotted in Fig. 3b. The
residuals exhibit considerable structure above each absorption edge with very
similar shape for the two units. Most of the residuals can therefore be at-
tributed to XAFS which can extend several hundred eV above the K edges.
The residuals in the range 600–1550 eV are due to the deviation of the actual
beam shadowing S during the energy scans from the average values in Ta-
ble 1. Measurement errors and errors in the tj data of Table 1 are also partly
responsible for the residuals. Because the contribution to the residuals from
the errors in the tj is smaller than the features arising from XAFS, more ac-
curate values for the tj than those in Table 1 can not be abstracted from the
data. Moreover, derivation of layer thicknesses from transmission data yields
poor results in general, because the dependence of µ/ρ on the X-ray energy is
very similar for all materials outside the XAFS regions. In consequence, when
ﬁtting a function of the form of Eq. 1 to the data, the thicknesses are strongly
correlated and their best-ﬁt values have very large error ranges.

However, the diﬀerence between the residual curves of the two units can be at-
tributed to relative errors in the tj between the units. We reduced the relative
errors with a set of relative corrections ∆tj, where the corrected values of the
layer thicknesses tj,19 and tj,14 of the two units are tj,19 + ∆tj and tj,14 − ∆tj.
First we minimised the L1 norm of the diﬀerence in the range 60–530 eV with
the beam shadowing and the corrections of the thin ﬁlm thicknesses as free pa-
rameters. This energy region was chosen because it contains structures which
bear relationships with these parameters, whereas the intermediate region 530–
1560 eV was excluded because in this region measurement errors are greater
than the errors attributable to the tj (see e.g. the abrupt changes in the diﬀer-
ence curve at 690 eV and 900 eV, and note that the absolute deviation of the
data from the model is much smaller at the lower energies where the transmit-

4

tance is small). The result was S19 = 0.162 and S14 = 0.160, ∆tAl = 0.27 nm
(for the original aluminium thickness before oxidation), ∆tpi = 0.96 nm, and
∆tox = −0.56 nm. Next the correction of the grid thicknesses was sought that
minimised the L1 norm of the diﬀerence in the range 1560–1800 eV, yield-
ing −0.26 µm. The residuals with the new window parameters are plotted in
Fig. 3c and their diﬀerence in Fig. 3d.

The µ/ρ of aluminium was solved from Eq. 1 for both units, and the result is
shown in Fig. 4 for the two XAFS regions above the K and L absorption edges.
The ﬁne structures are typical of a solid, consisting of a multiple scattering
peak in the narrow XANES (X-ray absorption near-edge structure) region just
above the absorption edge and oscillations from single scattering in the wider
EXAFS (extended XAFS) region. Small diﬀerences between the two units are
seen in the K-edge XAFS, and EXAFS clearly continues beyond 1800 eV.
The results for carbon, nitrogen and oxygen are presented in Fig. 5. The
diﬀerence in the oxide thickness between the two units may be responsible for
the apparent diﬀerence in the cross section of oxygen (the oxide contributes
12% to XAFS in unit 19 and 14% in unit 14).

The remaining diﬀerences between the transmission data and the results cal-
culated from Eq. 1 using the extracted µ/ρ data are plotted in Fig. 6. Data
from the two units were averaged and interpolated in the appropriate energy
ranges (carbon in 283–400 eV, nitrogen in 400–530 eV, oxygen in 530–605 eV
and aluminium in 73–282 eV and above 1554 eV) to yield the XAFS data for
the modelling of the ﬂight model window. The K-edge EXAFS of aluminium
was extrapolated into 1800–2000 eV with a third-order polynomial. The result
is shown in Fig. 7. The resulting transmittance of the FM window is plotted
in Fig. 8.

3.3 Analysis of line scans

The line scans were analysed by solving a group of four nonlinear equations,
constructed using Eq. 1 and the data at the four energies, at each beam posi-
tion. The four variables were S and the layer thicknesses, excluding the oxide
which is the least absorbing. The results for the total aluminium thickness
and for the polyimide membrane thickness are plotted in Fig. 9. The overall
radial variation is clearly explained by the total aluminium thickness which de-
creases with the radial distance owing to the nature of the sputtering process.
Variations in the polyimide thickness do not exhibit any radial pattern.

As suggested by the curves in Fig. 9, tAl can be modelled to good accuracy

5

with the functional form

tAl(r) =

1 −
"

2

r
r0 (cid:19)

#

(cid:18)

tAl(0).

(2)

This equation was ﬁtted to the data with r0, tAl(0) and the coordinates of
the centre as free parameters. The best-ﬁt r0 was 77.74 mm for unit 19 and
77.56 mm for unit 14. The values for tAl(0) were 60.43 nm (unit 19) and
59.61 nm (unit 14), in good accord with the ∆tAl of the energy scan analysis.

3.4 Discussion

The signiﬁcance of the radial variation is modiﬁed by the point spread func-
tion PSF of the SODART telescope. For an on-axis point source and ideal
alignment of SIXA with SODART, PSF decreases rapidly with small values
of r and more slowly when r increases, and the estimated fraction of photons
encircled in the central element is about 0.6 depending on the energy [7]. The
count rate at energy E in a certain detector element is

C(E) =

Φ(hν)Aeﬀ (hν)

PSF(hν, ~r)ǫ(hν, r) da

P (hν, E)h dν,

(3)

Z

(cid:20)Z

(cid:21)

where Φ is the incident photon ﬂux, Aeﬀ is the eﬀective area of SODART,
the surface integration is over the active area of the element and ǫ is the
detection eﬃciency and P the response function of the element. Assuming
perfect homogeneity of the crystal, ǫ(hν, r) equals T (hν, r) times a function of
hν.

T (r) with the radial dependence given by Eq. 2 varies very slowly near the
centre of the window. The surface integral over the central element lies between
the two limits obtained by letting PSF approach a delta function and letting
PSF be constant:

T (hν, 0)

PSF da ≥

PSF(hν,~r)T(hν, r) da ≥ hTi

PSF da,

(4)

Z

Z

Z

where the average of T over the active area of the central element (radius R)
is given by

hT i =

= T (hν, 0)

(5)

T da
da

R

R

eF R2

−1

F R2

,

−2tAl(0)µAl(hν). The relative diﬀerence of the two limits is
where F (hν) = r0
below 5 × 10−4 in the energy range of SIXA; thus the ﬁrst limit is a very good

6

approximation for an on-axis point source.

For the other elements, the integration yields

hT i =

T (hν, 0)
F R2

"

−1 + eF D2

∞

Xk=0

(F D)2k
(k!)2 Ck

,

#

where D is the distance between the centre of the element and the centre of
the window, and

(6)

(7)

eF R2
R2k eF R2

if k = 0,

− k

F Ck−1 if k > 0.

Ck = 




The results calculated for the elements in the SIXA array are shown in Fig. 10.
The diﬀerences between the elements are at most 1% in the energy range of
SIXA. When weighted with PSF as in the surface integral in Eq. 3, the averages
become even closer to T (hν, 0), because T varies more slowly than PSF even
for the outer elements. In any case, the smallness of the diﬀerences between
the elements shows that Eq. 2 with r0 = 77.7 mm obtained by ﬁtting to the
experimental data from units 19 and 14 is a more than suﬃciently accurate
model of the positional variation of T across the SIXA window.

The eﬀect of XAFS on actual observations was studied by comparing data
from a simulated observation to a model which neglects XAFS in the window
materials. The simulated target was the Crab Nebula which was assumed to
be a point source with a simple power-law spectrum (Φ ∝ E−2.2) modiﬁed by
interstellar absorption (NH = 3 × 1021 cm−2). This kind of spectrum with no
emission or absorption line features is useful for revealing spurious lines arising
from instrumental eﬀects not properly accounted for in the response matrix.
Both the simulated data and the model were calculated for the central element
of SIXA from Eq. 3, where the surface integral in Eq. 4 was approximated
by 0.6 × T (hν, 0) and Aeﬀ was obtained from measurements with SODART
telescope models [8]. T shown in Fig. 8 was used for the simulated data, while T
for the model was calculated from Eq. 1 with the data from ref. [6]. The model
by Scholze and Ulm [9] was used for P and the rest of ǫ with experimental
XAFS data for the K edge of silicon [10]. Poisson noise, which results from the
stochastic nature of the X-ray emission and detection processes, was added to
the data assuming an observation time of 5×103 s. The result of the simulation
is presented in Fig. 11a. Spurious line features can hardly be distinguished
from Poisson noise, but if the noise was omitted from the calculation, it is
observed that there is an emission line feature at 1.8 keV (equivalent width
1.5 eV, maximum residual 0.5%), an absorption line at 0.6 keV (equivalent
width 0.4 eV, maximum residual 0.3%) and a continuous feature below the
energy range of SIXA.

7

The smallness of the overall eﬀect of XAFS and the similarity of XAFS for
the two window units suggest that the derived XAFS is accurate enough for
the ﬂight model. The main advantage of characterising the actual FM window
would have been the reduction of the uncertainty propagating from the un-
certainties in the layer thicknesses and polyimide densities. The uncertainty
of the transmittance including the propagated uncertainties of the layer thick-
nesses is shown in Fig. 8. Uncertainties given in Table 1 were used for the
polyimide membranes and grids. The mean deviation of the nominal value
from the values of tAl(0) derived from the line scans (section 3.3) was taken
to be the standard deviation of tAl, while |∆tox| (section 3.2) was used for tox.
The uncertainties of the derived XAFS, based on the diﬀerence in the data
from the two window units, were negligible. Uncertainties of S, the densities
or the cross sections from ref. [6] may have small contributions to the real
uncertainty.

The signiﬁcance of the uncertainty is illustrated in Fig. 11b with a simulated
case that the actual transmittance of the FM window is greater than modelled
by the estimated uncertainty. The residual would then be 2.2% at 0.5 keV and
decrease towards higher energies, falling below 1% at 0.8 keV.

4 Light transmission

4.1 Sensitivity of SIXA to light

The photocurrent generated in a detector element is

Iph = qA

Φ(hν)T (hν)η(hν)h dν,

(8)

Z

where Φ is the incident ﬂux, A is the active area of the element and η(hν) is
the quantum eﬃciency. Fluctuations in the total current Iph + Il (where Il is
the leakage current) are a source of parallel current noise. Expressed in terms
of the number of carrier pairs, the magnitude of the noise is

(Iph + Il),

(9)

2

NS
q

σI

2 = v
u
u
t

8

2 is a noise index which depends on the signal shaping [11] (about

where NS
5 µs for SIXA). The FWHM energy resolution is

(∆E0)2 + (2.35 W )2 NS
q

2

Iph,

∆E = v
u
u
t

(10)

where ∆E0 is the FWHM with no photocurrent and W is the mean pair-
creation energy.

For example, the energy ﬂux from a star of magnitude 5 is 2.0×105 eV/(cm2s).
With an average photon energy of 2 eV, the ﬂux on the focal plane of SODART
is then 1.1 × 108 cm−2s−1. If all photons were absorbed in one element with
100% eﬃciency, the photocurrent without a window would be 12 pA and the
resolution would be degraded by 60 eV (from 200 eV). If Iph was reduced by
two magnitudes with a 1% transmitting window, the resolution would increase
by 0.7 eV only.

Silicon detectors can have very high quantum eﬃciencies for visible light up
to a cutoﬀ wavelength which corresponds to the energy gap and is about
1.06 µm at the operating temperature of SIXA. For SIXA crystals, η(hν)
depends mainly on the reﬂection and absorption properties of the cathode
coating (gold–palladium alloy) on the detector surface. In addition, the in-
cident ﬂux is ampliﬁed by multiple reﬂections between the cathode and the
window. We estimated η(hν) with the help of a program which was written to
compute transmission properties of thin windows [3] as a part of the project
Development of thin optical ﬁlters and windows at XUV wavelengths which
belongs to the General Support Technology Program of the European Space
Agency. The detector structure was approximated with a multilayer formed
by 30 nm of gold, 3 mm of silicon and 250 nm of aluminium. The estimate of
η obtained by subtracting the absorptivity computed for a single gold layer
from the absorptivity of the multilayer is presented in Fig. 12, together with
η multiplied by the ampliﬁcation due to multiple reﬂections. The reﬂectances
of the multilayer and of the window are also shown.

4.2 Experimental

The light transmission of SIXA window unit 16 was measured in the context
of the mentioned ESA project. The measured data are plotted in Fig. 13a
together with transmittance curves computed with the associated program.
Interference peaks in the transmittance computed using data of Table 1 for
unit 16 (dotted curve) are shifted by 100–200 nm towards shorter wavelengths
compared to the measured data. Interference wavelengths depend on the thick-
ness of the polyimide membrane, but the shift does not necessarily imply a

9

large error in the thickness measurement. Instead, the optical constants of
the thin ﬁlm polyimide are probably diﬀerent from those incorporated in the
program because the material is denser than the bulk material and the poly-
imide is also of another type. With a 20% greater thickness for the polyimide,
the computed curves come closer to the data (dashed curves). The computed
transmittance of the FM window is shown in Fig. 13b.

The transmission measurement and calculations suggest that the window is
more than suﬃciently opaque. As the worst case, Sirius could degrade the
energy resolution of an outer detector element by 0.01 eV, provided that its
emission was concentrated in the region of maximum transmittance at 400–
410 nm (where it actually has a strong Hδ absorption line) and that all photons
were absorbed in one element with 100% eﬃciency. In the near-IR region
the maximum transmittance between the interference wavelengths of the two
units is slightly higher. However, there are no astronomical sources outside
the solar system with so high apparent magnitude in the near IR that they
could degrade the energy resolution of SIXA.

The eﬀect of photocurrent generated by light leakage through the window was
also tested by comparing the resolution in the dark to the resolution when
the detector was illuminated with visible light. The detector used was a Si(Li)
crystal produced for SIXA, connected to a preampliﬁer of a type similar to
the ﬂight electronics. The crystal was operated in a cryostat with a mylar
window, and a piece cut from the SIXA window unit 16 was placed in front of
the cryostat. The crystal was cooled with liquid nitrogen and heated to 122 K
in order to generate some dark current. Filtered light from a tungsten lamp
was applied to generate photocurrent. The emission in the wavelength range
250–800 nm was measured with a photodetector and it was of the order of
10−9 Wcm−2nm−1 for the longer wavelengths at a distance of 1.2 m.

When X-rays from a 55Fe source were detected, the FWHM of the Mn Kα
peak was 187 eV in the dark. The interval between resets of the preampliﬁer
was 12 s when the detector was not exposed to either light or X-rays. With
the lamp switched on, it varied from 1.1 s to 30 ms with diﬀerent ﬁlters used
in front of the lamp. The reset interval is directly proportional to Iph + Il,
and ﬁtting Eqs. 8 and 9 to the data yielded Il = 0.1 pA. The FWHM varied
from 194 to 380 eV with the same ﬁlters. When another piece of the window
unit 16 was added, no photocurrent was observed. The incident spectra in the
range 800–1060 nm were known poorly, but the measured photocurrents were
of expected magnitude. The overall eﬀective quantum eﬃciency for red and
near-IR light was roughly 30%.

10

5 Conclusions

The X-ray entrance window for SIXA was characterised using synchrotron ra-
diation and two window units of a type similar to the ﬂight model. The contri-
bution of the X-ray window to the system response of the SIXA spectrometer
was adequately well determined. It can be accounted for in the analysis of
astronomical data by using the energy and spatial dependence of the window
transmittance presented in this paper.

X-ray absorption ﬁne structures of the constituting elements were extracted
from the data obtained with two non-ﬂight window units. The transmittance
of the ﬂight model window was calculated using the derived cross sections in
the regions where XAFS appears.

Spatial variation of the transmittance was observed to have a radial pattern
which is attributed to a radial variation of the thickness of aluminium. The
thickness could be closely modelled as a parabolic function of radial distance
from the window centre. The variation is less than 1% in the energy range of
SIXA.

Transmittance of visible and infrared light was studied and it was found that
transmitted light from the observed targets will have no observable eﬀect on
the X-ray energy resolution.

Acknowledgements

We thank T. Lederer of the PTB for performing the SX700 measurements.
V.-P. Viitanen of Metorex International Oy is acknowledged for providing
the windows and answers to several questions about them. We thank also C.
Budtz-Jørgensen of the Danish Space Research Institute (DSRI) for the beam-
time and help at the SX700, H. Harvela of Metorex for the light transmission
data and M.-A. Jantunen of Metorex and E. Tetri of the Helsinki University
of Technology for collaboration with the photocurrent test.

References

[1] O. Vilhu, J. Huovelin, T. Tikkanen, P. Hakala, P. Muhli, V.J. K¨am¨ar¨ainen, H.
Sipil¨a, I. Taylor, J. Pohjonen, H. P¨aivike, J. Toivanen, R. Sunyaev, A. Kuznetsov
and A. Abrosimov, Proc. SPIE 2279 (1994) 532.

11

[2] V.-P. Viitanen, S.A. Nenonen, P. Partanen, H. Sipil¨a and R. Mutikainen, Proc.

SPIE 1743 (1992) 245.

[3] H. Harvela, Modeling of optical properties of ﬁlters for spaceborne X-ray
and VUV instruments, Master’s thesis, Helsinki University of Technology,
Department of Electrical Engineering, Espoo 1995, 81 p.

[4] F. Scholze, M. Krumrey, P. M¨uller and D. Fuchs, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 65 (1994)

3229.

[5] M. Bavdaz, A. Peacock, A.N. Parmar, D. Fuchs, P. M¨uller, F. Scholze, G. Ulm

and A.C. Wright, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 345 (1994) 549.

[6] B.L. Henke, E.M. Gullikson and J.C. Davis, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data

Tables 54 (1993) 181.

[7] F.E. Christensen, A. Hornstrup, P. Frederiksen, S. Abdali, P. Grundsøe, J.
Polny, N.J. Westergaard, H.U. Nørgaard-Nielsen, H.W. Schnopper, C. Hall and
R. Lewis, Proc. SPIE 2515 (1995) 458.

[8] N.J. Westergaard, private communication.

[9] F. Scholze and G. Ulm, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 339 (1994) 49.

[10] A. Owens, S. Bayliss, G. Fraser and S.J. Gurman, report JET-X(94) UL-241

WP:2220, University of Leicester, 1994.

[11] F.S. Goulding and D.A. Landis, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. NS-29 (1982) 1125.

12

Fig. 1. Measured transmission at the centres of window units 19 (solid curve) and
14 (dotted curve). The insets show the absorption edges enlarged.

Fig. 2. Measured transmission at diﬀerent positions on the surfaces of window
units 19 and 14 at four diﬀerent X-ray energies. The y coordinate is 0 (solid curves),
10 (plus signs) or -10 mm (squares).

Fig. 3. Adjustment of window unit parameters by the comparison of transmission
data with the model: residuals (data/model - 1) with (a) parameters from Table 1
and (c) adjusted parameters for the window units 19 (solid curves) and 14 (dashed
curves), (b) the diﬀerence between the two residual curves in (a), and (d) the dif-
ference between the two residual curves in (c).

Fig. 4. Cross section of aluminium above the K and L absorption edges, extracted
from the transmission data of window units 19 (solid curves) and 14 (dashed curves).
The dotted curves show the data from ref. [6].

Fig. 5. Cross sections of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen extracted from the transmis-
sion data of window units 19 (solid curves) and 14 (dashed curves). The dotted
curves show the data from ref. [6].

Fig. 6. Residuals between the measured and modelled transmittance for window
units 19 (solid curve) and 14 (dashed curve).

Fig. 7. Modelled linear attenuation coeﬃcient of aluminium derived from the trans-
mission data between 1554–1800 eV and extrapolated into 1800–2000 eV. The dot-
ted curve shows the data from ref. [6].

Fig. 8. Calculated transmittance of the ﬂight model window at its centre. The upper
curves are for units 6 and 17 and the lowest curve is the total transmittance. The
insets show the uncertainty (standard deviation) of the transmittance calculated in
section 3.4.

Fig. 9. Variation of the total aluminium thickness tAl and the thickness tpi of the
polyimide membrane across the window surfaces. The residuals of tAl after ﬁtting
Eq. 2 are plotted in the central panels. The y coordinate is 0 (solid curves), 10 (plus
signs) or -10 mm (squares).

Fig. 10. Transmittance of the ﬂight model window for the elements in the SIXA array
at diﬀerent distances from the window centre. The curves depict the diﬀerence of the
transmittance averaged over the active area of an element from the transmittance at
the centre, and they apply (from top to bottom) to the outer 6 elements of the outer
ring, inner 6 elements of the outer ring, and 6 inner ring elements, respectively.

13

Fig. 11. Illustrating the accuracy of the window characterisation with simulated
observations of the Crab Nebula by SIXA: (a) simulated data compared to an ab-
sorbed power-law model spectrum folded through an instrumental response matrix
where X-ray absorption ﬁne structures in the window transmittance are neglected,
and (b) assuming that the modelled transmittance of the window has an error equal
to the estimated standard deviation (Fig. 8). In the upper panels the data are in-
dicated by plus signs and the model by solid curves. In the lower panels the plus
signs indicate the residuals between the data and the model, while the solid curves
represent the residuals with the data without Poisson noise.

Fig. 12. Estimates of the quantum eﬃciency η of SIXA detector elements, the re-
ﬂectances of the detector (Rdet) and the window (Rwin, computed for the centre
of unit 6), and an ”eﬀective” quantum eﬃciency η∗ which incorporates the ampli-
ﬁcation of the incident ﬂux by multiple reﬂections between the detector and the
window.

Fig. 13. Light transmittance of (a) window unit 16, measured (solid curves) and
calculated (dashed and dotted curves), and (b) ﬂight model window (solid curves)
and its constituting units 6 (dashed curves) and 17 (dotted curves), calculated. The
lower curves apply to the window centre and the upper curves to the radial distance
of 2.86 cm where the active detector area ends. In order to compensate for the
apparent errors in the optical constants of polyimide, 20% greater thicknesses were
used for the polyimide membranes in the computation of the dashed curves in (a)
and all the curves in (b).

Table 1
Polyimide membrane and grid parameters of X-ray window units fabricated for
SIXA. Units 6 and 17 have been chosen for the ﬂight model, units 1 and 9 for the
ﬂight spare model and the others were used for calibration. The given 2σ uncer-
tainties of the polyimide membrane thickness are uncertainties of the proﬁlometer
measurement multiplied by the correction which was applied to account for a sys-
tematic measurement error.

Unit Membrane

Grid

thickness

thickness width

shadowing

6

17

1

9

19

14

16

283 ± 17 nm 17–18 µm 42 µm

16.1%

308 ± 23 nm 20–22 µm 46 µm

17.6%

283 ± 17 nm 19–20 µm 44 µm

16.8%

268 ± 13 nm 19–20 µm 44 µm

16.8%

308 ± 23 nm 19–21 µm 46 µm

17.6%

308 ± 23 nm 24–26 µm 44 µm

16.8%

308 ± 23 nm 20–21 µm 44 µm

16.8%

14

