7
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
2
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
8
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The detective Modulation Transfer
Function applied to scanned digital
radiographic detectors.

D.J. Miller∗ and A. Papanestis
University College London, UK

∗Corresponding author
Dept. of Physics & Astronomy
University College London
Gower St.
London WC1E 6BT
UK

email: djm@hep.ucl.ac.uk
tel: +44 171 3807152
fax: +44 171 3807145

Abstract

An extension of the traditional modulation transfer function (MTF), the

detective MTF, is proposed for the evaluation of the resolution of X-ray imag-

ing detectors with non-uniform eﬃciency on the scale of individual detector

elements. The dMTF is shown to give a better representation than does the

MTF of the improved resolution reported when the readout of the detectors

is enhanced.

1 Introduction

The resolution of an imaging detector is frequently expressed in terms of

a modulation transfer function (MTF); the Fourier transform of the line

spread function (LSF) in one dimension, or of the point spread function

(PSF) in two dimensions [1]. But for certain kinds of detector [2] it has been

noticed that changes in the operating mode of the readout electronics can

bring clear improvements to the quality of the image without any signiﬁcant

change in the MTF, as normally deﬁned. A simple modiﬁcation to the LSF

is suggested, giving a “detective line spread function” (dLSF), the Fourier

transform of which is the detective modulation transfer function (dMTF).

For the detectors studied the resulting measure of the resolution is shown to

be signiﬁcantly improved when the readout mode is changed, matching the

results of other methods of assessing the resolution of the system.

2 Detectors and Readout

The Siberian Digital Radiographic Device (SDRD) [2, 3, 4] detects X-rays in

a Xenon-ﬁlled multiwire proportional chamber working at high pressure. It

is a linear array of independent sub-detectors, with 320 separate sense wires,

5 cm long and approximately 1 mm apart. To eliminate parallax the wires

are aligned along the local direction of the X-ray beam, giving an increase

of spacing from 1.20 to 1.25 mm over the thickness of the chamber. Each

wire is connected to its own pre-ampliﬁer, which is followed by thresholding

and logic circuits that feed into parallel scalers. Every 15 or 30 milliseconds

(depending on the version of the device) the contents of the whole set of

scalers are transferred to memory to give a single scan line. The detector,

the X-ray source and the collimators which limit acceptance are all mounted

on a rigid gantry which is scanned transversely at a rate of about 10 cm/sec,

1

building up a 2-dimensional picture which is stored in RAM.

In the original low resolution standard (ST) version of the device there is

one scaler associated with each sense-wire. Because of the ﬁnite size of the

charge cluster produced by a single X-ray, a signiﬁcant fraction of all hits

gives pulses above threshold on two adjacent channels. A coincidence circuit

is provided between each pair of channels to inhibit counts from these double

hits. Only channels with single hits are counted for the image.

In the high resolution (HR) version a second set of scalers is provided,

one between each pair of wires. Single hits are counted in the wire scalers,

as before, but double hits are counted in the extra coincidence scalers, giving

a much higher eﬃciency. The HR system has been shown to resolve signif-

icantly ﬁner detail than the ST system, both in laboratory tests [5] and in

clinical use [6].

The present work is motivated by the development of a new imaging

system, optimised for mammographic examinations, which will use a similar

scanning geometry and electronics to the SDRD, but with a diﬀerent kind

of detector, a microstrip gaseous chamber (MSGC) with a strip pitch of

approximately 200 micrometres. Although the intrinsic resolution of the
MSGCs is expected to be a factor of ∼1/5 of that in the SDRD, the response

function of each strip has a very similar shape.

Laboratory tests have been made on test MSGCs with parallel strips,

both with Xenon at high pressure and with Argon at atmospheric pressure.

On the basis of these tests a computer simulation has been developed which

can be used to predict the performance of a high pressure MSGC with the

strips tapered towards the X-ray source in the same way as in the SDRD

(similar tapered-strip MSGCs are also being developed for the CMS detector

at the CERN Large Hadron Collider [7]).

2

3 Resolutions and Eﬃciencies

In Figure 1 curve a) shows the simulated response of one MSGC strip when

a narrow X-ray source is scanned across it. This represents the line spread

function of the linear detector. If the same kind of coincidence electronics

is used as in the SDRD, then the LSF is sharpened by the suppression of

double hits, as shown by curve b). And if a second set of scalers is provided,

as in the HR mode of the SDRD, then an additional LSF can be obtained,

representing the response of the coincidence channel as the narrow source is

scanned across the detector (curve c). The RMS spreads of the LSFs are

shown in the same ﬁgure.

Just as with the SDRD, it is possible to consider operating the MSGC

device in either the ST mode, with only single hits on strips counted and

used in the image, or in HR mode, with an extra set of scalers for the double

hits. Figure 2 shows the eﬃciency of the detector in registering hits from

X-ray photons that have converted in its active area η(x). Clearly the HR

mode makes much better use of the X-rays which reach the detector, hence

minimising the dose to the patient. (It appears from Figure 2 that the HR

mode can sometimes exceed very slightly 100% eﬃciency. This is due to the

few events in which 3 channels are hit giving two apparent hits from a single

event. There is no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the argument given here.)

The LSFs shown in Figure 1 for the single strip hits and for the coin-

cidences are very similar in width. But an apparent paradox arises if the

normal deﬁnition of MTF is used to estimate the eﬀective resolution of the

chamber in the two modes. In the ST mode one would use the LSF of curve

b) on Figure 1. In the HR mode it would be reasonable to take the average

of curves b) and c) as the response of the detector (Figure 1 curve d), which

means that the predicted MTFs in the two modes would be almost identical.

As mentioned in section 2 above, if this is taken to mean identical image

3

quality it contradicts both laboratory measurements and clinical experience

with the SDRD.

4 Deﬁnition of the dLSF and the dMTF

The detective line spread function is deﬁned as:

dLSF (x) = LSF (x)/η(x)

(1)

For the ST system, with rejection of coincidences, the LSF as a function of x

from Figure 1, curve b), is divided by the eﬃciency η(x) from Figure 2, giving

a fatter curve for the dLSF shown as circles in Figure 3 a), (for comparison,

the stars represent the unmodiﬁed LSF from Figure 1). The corresponding

dMTF is obtained by taking the Fourier transform of the dLSF (Figure 3

b). The 10% level on the dMTF gives a resolution of 4.5 line pairs per mm,

whereas the unmodiﬁed MTF would suggest a resolution of 6.5 line pairs per

mm.

In the HR mode the combined relative eﬃciency of the two kinds of

channel remains close to η(x) = 1 for all x, so there is no visible diﬀerence

between the LSF and the dLSF, shown in Figure 3 c), or between the MTF

and the dMTF, shown in Figure 3 d). The resolution at the 10% level of

either the MTF or the dMTF is 6.5 line pairs per millimetre.

The detailed shapes of the dLSF and dMTF curves in Figure 3 show that

the response of the ST mode resembles the response of a detector with a

200 µm square aperture, while that of the HR mode resembles a Gaussian

response with a FWHM of 138 µm.

4

5 Conclusions

The detective line spread function, deﬁned in equation 1, can be Fourier

transformed to give the detective modulation transfer function (dMTF) which

is a more realistic measure of the true resolution for a detector whose eﬃ-

ciency varies signiﬁcantly with position within the scale of variations of the

LSF. Using the dMTF it is possible to give an objective prediction of the

improved performance which can be expected from a Microstrip Gaseous

Detector if it is operated in the HR mode, with separate scalers for single-

strip hits and for coincidences between adjacent wires. With a strip pitch of

approximately 200 µm the resolution in HR mode is 6.5 line pairs per millime-

tre whereas, in standard (ST) mode, the resolution would be 4.5 line pairs

per millimetre due to signiﬁcant reductions in eﬃciency midway between the

strips. This result explains the clear improvement in image quality which

has been reported for the Siberian Digital Radiographic Device [5] when it

was upgraded from the ST to the HR mode.

6 Acknowledgements

This work would not have been possible without the collaboration and hos-

pitality of L.I. Shekhtman and A.G. Khabakhpashev of the Budker Institute

of Nuclear Physics in Novosibirsk, Russia, or the advice of R.D. Speller of

the UCL Medical Physics Department. Support was received from the UK

Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council and from the European

Union Radiation Protection programme.

References

[1] A Li Evans The Evaluation of Medical Images Adam Hilger 1981

5

[2] Baru S.E., Khabakhpashev A.G., Shekhtman L.I. Nucl. Instr. Meth.

A283 (1989) 431

[3] Baru S.E., Khabakhpashev A.G., Makarov I.R., Savinov G.A., Shekht-

man L.I., Sidorov V.A. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A238 (1985) 165

[4] Babichev E.A., Baru S.E., Khabakhpashev A.G., Kolachev G.M., Savinov

G.A., Shekhtman L.I., Sidorov V.A., Volobuev A.I. Nucl. Instr. Meth.

A310 (1991) 449

A348 (1994) 241

(1992) 49

[5] Mart´ınez-D´avalos A., Speller R.D., Miller D.J., Shekhtman L.I.,

Baru S.E., Khabakhpashev A.G. and Ponomarev O.A. Nucl. Instr. Meth.

[6] Babichev E.A., Baru S.E., Khabakhpashev A.G., Kolachev G.M., Pono-

marev O.A., Savinov G.A. and Shekhtman L.I. Nucl. Instr. Meth. A323

[7] CMS Technical Proposal CERN/LHCC 94-38

Figure 1. The simulated LSFs of an MSGC operating at diﬀerent modes:

a) single strip without special electronics; b) single hits; c) coincidences; d)

average of b) and c).

modes.

Figure 2. Comparison of the eﬃciency of the detector in registering hits

from X-ray photons that have converted in its active area for the ST and HR

Figure 3. The LSF compared with the dLSF, and the MTF compared

with the dMTF for the ST and HR modes.

6

Figure 1. The simulated LSFs of an MSGC operating at diﬀerent modes:

a) single strip without special electronics; b) single hits; c) coincidences; d)

average of b) and c).

Figure 2. Comparison of the eﬃciency of the detector in registering hits

from X-ray photons that have converted in its active area for the ST and HR

modes.

7

Figure 3. The LSF compared with the dLSF, and the MTF compared with

the dMTF for the ST and HR modes.

8

