7
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
8
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
0
0
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Electrode thickness measurement of a Si(Li)
detector for the SIXA array

T. Tikkanen

Observatory and Astrophysics Laboratory, P.O. Box 14 (T¨ahtitorninm¨aki),
FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland

K. H¨am¨al¨ainen, S. Huotari

Department of Physics, P.O. Box 9, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland

Abstract

Cathode electrodes of the Si(Li) detector elements of the SIXA X-ray spectrometer
array are formed by gold-palladium alloy contact layers. The equivalent thickness of
gold in one element was measured by observing the characteristic L-shell X-rays of
gold excited by monochromatised synchrotron radiation with photon energies above
the L3 absorption edge of gold. The results obtained at 4 diﬀerent photon energies
below the L2 edge yield an average value of 22.4
3.5 nm which is consistent with
the earlier result extracted from detection eﬃciency measurements.

±

PACS: 29.40.Wk; 85.30.De; 07.85.Nc; 95.55.Ka

Key words: Si(Li) detectors, X-ray spectrometers, X-ray ﬂuorescence, detector
calibration, gold electrodes, synchrotron radiation

1 Introduction

The SIXA (Silicon X-Ray Array) detector [1] is a focal plane instrument of the
SODART X-ray telescope on board the Spectrum-X-Gamma satellite sched-
uled for launch in 1998. SIXA detects X-rays in the energy range between
500 eV and 20 keV with a closely packed array of 19 discrete Si(Li) detector
elements. The elements are cylindrical and their active detection volume is
9.2 mm in diameter and 3.0 mm in thickness.

X-rays impinge on the detector through the cathode side of the Si(Li) crystals.
The cathode consists of a contact layer manufactured by sputter deposition
of gold-palladium alloy on the crystalline silicon. The Au/Pd mass ratio of

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

22 July 2013

the alloy is 60:40 and the nominal thickness is 30 nm but deviations from this
value are expected to be large for the individual detectors because the Si(Li)
crystals are batch processed to deposit the alloy. Knowledge of the individual
Au/Pd thickness for each element in the array is necessary, since the electrode
thickness is the dominant factor determining the detection eﬃciency in the
lower part of the energy range.

The electrode thickness can be deduced from absolute measurements of the
detection eﬃciency at low energies. Such a measurement was carried out for
one detector element using synchrotron radiation in the soft X-ray energy re-
gion from the electron storage ring BESSY, yielding a result of 40.7 nm [2].
However, in this case the windowless detector was operated in the beamline
vacuum, which is not practically achievable for all SIXA elements which are
assembled in a common capsule. Instead, the calibration of the ﬂight detec-
tor array will be done with harder X-ray sources such as X-ray tubes and
radioisotopes.

We used the method of Hansen et al.
[3] to measure the gold thickness by
detecting the gold L-shell ﬂuorescence induced by primary X-rays of higher
energy. In principle, the palladium thickness could be measured similarly using
primary photon energies above the K edge of palladium, but this measurement
would not be possible with the ﬂight array because its data acquisition system
has an upper limit of 20 keV. It has been noted that the ﬂuorescence lines are
spread into broad bands due to the escape of photoelectrons from the contact
layer into the active detection volume [4] and an experimental correction for
the resulting error was applied by Campbell and Wang [5]. We have modelled
the full shape of the ﬂuorescence lines, including the low-energy tails as well
as the high-energy tail contributions from the escape of Auger electrons and
photoelectrons. Primary photon energies above the L1 absorption edge of gold
were used in other reported measurements [6,4,7], but we used also energies
between the L3 and L2 edges in order to eliminate the uncertainties from
quantities related to the individual L subshells.

2 Experiment

Using the transfer standard SIXA detector element which has been charac-
terised at BESSY in the energy range below 5 keV [2], we recorded energy
spectra using monochromatised synchrotron radiation at the beamline X18B
of the electron storage ring NSLS at the Brookhaven National Laboratory. The
detector was operated at about 106 K in a cryostat sealed with an aluminium-
coated polyimide window. In addition, an 8.5 µm thick beryllium window was
used to suppress light. The windows were transparent in a circular area hav-
ing a diameter of 5.9 mm. Between the detector and the exit window of the

2

beamline were an ionisation chamber and about 40 cm of air. We attenuated
the beam by 8 orders of magnitude in order to reach reasonable count rates
of about 1000 s−1. This was achieved by using two pinhole apertures.

Spectra were acquired ﬁrst with the beam directed at the centre of the detector
surface. A few examples are shown in Fig. 1 together with model functions
of the primary peak including the low-energy tail extrapolated from the low-
energy characterisation results. The gold Lα line was best resolvable at the
photon energy of 12.5 keV and we used this energy when we recorded spectra
with the beam directed at 4 diﬀerent positions on the detector surface.

3 Fluorescence model

When the Si(Li) detector is irradiated with X-rays, the gold atoms in the
contact layer emit characteristic photons isotropically into all directions. The
detected ﬂuorescence lines have more tailing than lines produced by normally
incident primary radiation. High-energy tails are formed by events where the
characteristic photon is accompanied with an energetic electron escaping from
the electrode into the active detection volume. Low-energy tails due to en-
ergy loss across the alloy/silicon interface are higher for isotropically incident
radiation because absorption is more concentrated near the surface.

In the primary photon energy range of 11.919–13.734 keV between the L3
and L2 edges, Lα1 is the strongest ﬂuorescence line and Auger electrons have
usually greater energies than photoelectrons. The most probable Auger elec-
tron to follow Lα1 photon emission is M5N5N7 (energy 1.79 keV). Its range
in the Au/Pd alloy is RAug = 21 nm [8]. Assuming isotropic initial direction
distribution of the Auger electrons, the fraction of Auger electrons generated
within the distance d
RAug from the alloy/silicon interface which will cross
≤
the interface is given by piso(d/RAug), where

piso(x) = 1

4 arcsin x + 1

4x√1

x2

−

−

1
6

2x
(cid:16)

−

3
2 .

x2

(cid:17)

(1)

For most if not all detector elements the electrode thickness T is greater than
RAug and as the primary photons are absorbed very homogeneously through-
out the whole thickness, the Auger electron escape probability is PAug =
ωM5)pisoRAug/T , where ωM5 is the M5-shell ﬂuorescence yield and piso ≡
(1
piso(1) = π
1
6. The photoelectron escape probability is obtained similarly:
Ppho = pphoRpho/T , where ppho = 0.153 [9] is the average escape probability
of the photoelectrons generated within their range Rpho from the interface.
Adding these and subtracting the probability of simultaneous escape of both

8 −

−

3

electrons to prevent these events from being counted twice, the tail-to-total
ratio for the high-energy tail is obtained as

Ph = PAug + Ppho(1

PAug).

−

(2)

The components of the low-energy tail for isotropically incident radiation are
obtained by integration over all directions. For the silicon escape peak the
result is, neglecting escape through the sides and rear of the cylinder,

Pesc =

ωKfK

1

x ln

1 +

+

ln (1 + x)

,

(3)

1
8

−

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

1
x (cid:19)

1
x

(cid:21)

where ωK is the K-shell ﬂuorescence yield of silicon, fK is the fractional con-
tribution of the K shell to µ (the linear attenuation coeﬃcient of silicon at the
primary photon energy) and x = µK/µ, where µK is the linear attenuation co-
eﬃcient of silicon at the K line energy. The other components are derived from
the physical model of Scholze and Ulm [9]. For the short tail, the integration
yields

Pt = 1
2

1

1

−

Z0 (cid:16)

e−µR/x

dx,

(cid:17)

where R = 210 nm is a parameter of the model. When calculating the escape
of the primary electrons from silicon into the electrode, it is assumed that the
photoelectrons are ejected isotropically into all directions because the absorbed
photons arrive isotropically from the half-space. The resulting contribution to
the ﬂat shelf is

PSi = 1

2piso

1

2

−

Z0 (cid:16)

e−µRpho/x

e−µRAug/x

dx.

−

(cid:17)

The low-energy tail contributions are compared to those for normally incident
radiation from an external source of the same energy in Table 1. The ﬂat shelf
contribution was calculated with T = 40.7 nm. The total fraction of counts in
the low-energy tail is 1.8% while for normally incident radiation it is 0.7%.

When the primary beam is directed at the central region, all L-series charac-
teristic photons emitted by gold atoms into the half-space formed by the Si(Li)
bulk are detected and the full-peak absolute quantum detection eﬃciency for
the characteristic line is

ǫAu = 1

2 (1

A) (1

Ph) (1

−

−

Pesc −

Pt −

−

PSi) ,

(6)

4

(4)

(5)

where A is the self-absorption probability in the electrode given by

A = 1

1

x
µAu/PdT

−

Z0

1

−

(cid:16)

e−µAu/PdT /x

dx,

(cid:17)

(7)

which yields 2.2% for the Lα line. With the approximation that the self-
absorption events are uniformly distributed across the electrode thickness,
the shelf contribution from the escape of primary electrons into the active
detection volume is obtained as

PAu/Pd =

A
µAu + µPd

Pd

Xi=Au

µi

piso

"

 

T
Rpho,i !

+ piso

RAug,i

,

T #

(8)

since the applicable photoelectron ranges are now greater than T .

Calculated shapes of the ﬂuorescence lines from L3 shell ionisation are shown
in Fig. 2, including Lα1, Lβ2,15, Lα2, Lι, Lβ5 and Lβ6. The electron ranges
in Eqs. (2), (5) and (8) were calculated using the most probable Auger and
photoelectron energies. The high-energy tail, being produced like the ﬂat shelf
by escape of energetic electrons, consists of two step functions convolved with
a Gaussian, one due to the Auger electron and the other one to the photo-
electron. For primary photon energies above the L2 edge, a third one due to a
Coster–Kronig electron is added.

When the primary photon energy E is between the ionisation energies of the
L3 and L2 shells of gold, the intensity ratio of the Au Lα line and the primary
line is given by

IAu
I(E)

= ωL3fLα

ǫAu
ǫ(E)

1

−

(cid:16)

e−µL3 (E)t

,

(cid:17)

(9)

where ωL3 is the ﬂuorescence yield of the gold L3 shell, fLα is the intensity ratio
of Lα to all L3-series lines, ǫ is the quantum detection eﬃciency of the Si(Li)
detector, µL3 is the L3-shell linear attenuation coeﬃcient of gold and t is the
equivalent gold thickness. Above the L2 and L1 absorption edges the Lα line
includes contributions from absorptions to the other L subshells followed by
µt the thickness
Coster–Kronig transitions. With the approximation 1
is given by

e−µt

−

≈

t =

I(E)
IAu !  

1
ωL3fLα !

ǫ(E)
ǫAuµL3(E) + f23ǫAu,2µL2(E) + (f13 + f12f23) ǫAu,1µL1(E)

 

,(10)

where the f ’s are the applicable Coster–Kronig yields and ǫAu,2 and ǫAu,1
have diﬀerent high-energy tails than ǫAu because the photoelectron energies

5

are diﬀerent and the escape of Coster–Kronig electrons add new tail contri-
butions. Our calculation includes the high-energy tail contribution PCK,2 =
1
2f23pisoR23/T for ǫAu,2, where the factor 1
2 represents roughly the probabil-
ity that the Coster–Kronig electron is energetic (i.e. not of the LLM series)
and R23 is the range of the L2L3N1 Coster–Kronig electron. For ǫAu,1 we set
PCK,1 = f13pisoR13/T . The contributions of the individual L subshells to µ
were calculated from the jump ratios using the data of Henke et al.

[10].

4 Results

Net counts in the gold ﬂuorescence lines were calculated by ﬁtting the modelled
shape of the lines plus continuum to the data in the region of the Lα peak.
Ideally, the continuum is formed by the low-energy tail of the primary peak.
However, the measured continua are higher than the modelled tails in certain
energy regions (see Fig. 1). A broad feature above 8 keV appears in all spectra
up to the primary photon energy of 13.0 keV, including the data taken at
11.8 keV which is below the L edges of gold. This feature can be a measurement
artifact or reﬂect the real shape of the tail; our extrapolated tail model is
based on a physical model which applies to photon energies below 4 keV [9].
At photon energies above 13.0 keV, the Lα line of lead at 10.5 keV appears.
This line originates in lead impurities in the slits and apertures. The continuum
might as well be modelled using the original form of the modiﬁed HYPERMET
function [11,12]. We tried both forms and added a ﬁrst-order polynomial to ﬁt
the unknown feature. The best-ﬁt lead Lα lines were added to the continuum
at photon energies above the L3 absorption edge of lead. An example is shown
in Fig. 3 (original form).

±

Fig. 4 presents the thicknesses obtained from Eq. (10), both using the original
HYPERMET form and the form of Ref. [9]. Statistical uncertainties (standard
deviation in the true photon number) were derived from the net counts in the
Lα peak. Weighted average of the results from 12.0 to 13.5 keV at the detector
centre is 22.4 nm with a standard deviation of 3.5 nm with the original form
3.5 nm with the other form. The 16% standard deviations are
and 22.2
higher than the real uncertainty of the intensity. This is explained by the
ﬂuctuations of the continuum counts and by errors in the electron ranges,
absorption coeﬃcients and other data. Inclusion of the results up to 16.0 keV
2.9 nm with the original form (results at 17.0 keV and above are
yields 22.8
excluded because the continuum is dominated by Compton scattering). The
results at 12.5 keV at diﬀerent positions yield an average of 23.9 nm with a
standard deviation of 2.3 nm which means that thickness variations across the
detector surface greater than the overall precision were not found.

±

6

5 Conclusion

The gold-palladium alloy contact layer thickness of a Si(Li) detector element
for the SIXA array was measured using monochromatised synchrotron radia-
tion to excite L-shell ﬂuorescence from gold. The ﬂuctuation of the result as
function of primary photon energy yields an accuracy of about 3 nm in the
equivalent thickness of gold. The result is in agreement with an earlier result
20.1
0.3 nm derived from a detection eﬃciency measurement [2]. The contact
layer thicknesses of the elements in the SIXA ﬂight array are to be measured
using monochromatised radiation of an X-ray tube with longer acquisition
times which will reduce the uncertainty from photon statistics. The accuracy
will be limited by the knowledge of the shape of the low-energy tail of the
primary peak and the uncertainty in the electron ranges and the absorption
coeﬃcients and other data regarding the L subshells of gold.

±

Acknowledgements

We thank L. Furenlid of the Brookhaven National Laboratory for collaboration
at the beamline and Metorex International Oy (Espoo, Finland) for providing
the detector. S. Kraft of the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, Berlin, is
acknowledged for extrapolating the HYPERMET function parameters to the
higher part of our energy range. This work was supported by the Academy of
Finland (contract SA-8582).

References

[1] O. Vilhu, J. Huovelin, T. Tikkanen, P. Hakala, P. Muhli, V.J. K¨am¨ar¨ainen,
H. Sipil¨a, I. Taylor, J. Pohjonen, H. P¨aivike, J. Toivanen, R. Sunyaev, A.
Kuznetsov, A. Abrosimov, Proc. SPIE 2279 (1994) 532. Nordic Conference on
Theoretical High Energy Astrophysics, Copenhagen, September 14–16, 1997
(proceedings to be published in Physica Scripta).

[2] T. Tikkanen, S. Kraft, F. Scholze, R. Thornagel, G. Ulm, Nucl. Instr. and Meth.

A 390 (1997) 329.

[3] J.H. Hansen, J.D. McGeorge, D. Nix, W.D. Scmidt-Ott, I. Uns, R.W. Fink,

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 106 (1973) 365.

[4] W. Maenhaut, H. Raemdonck, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 1 (1984) 123.

[5] J.L. Campbell, J.-X. Wang, X-ray Spectrom. 20 (1991) 191.

[6] K. Shima, K. Umetani, T. Mikumo, J. Appl. Phys. 51 (1980) 846.

7

[7] J.L. Campbell, P.L. McGhee, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 248 (1986) 393.

[8] H.-J. Fitting, Phys. Status Solidi (a) 26 (1974) 525.

[9] F. Scholze, G. Ulm, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 339 (1994) 49.

[10] B.L. Henke, E.M. Gullikson, J.C. Davis, Atom. Data and Nucl. Data Tables 54

(1993) 181.

[11] G.W. Phillips, K.W. Marlow, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 137 (1976) 525.

[12] J.L. Campbell, B.M. Millman, J.A. Maxwell, A. Perujo, W.J. Teesdale, Nucl.

Instr. and Meth. B 9 (1985) 71.

8

Fig. 1. Measured pulse height spectra of monochromatised X-rays at photon energies
11.8, 12.5, 13.5 and 15.0 keV. The curves show the calculated shape of the primary
line including its low-energy tail.

Fig. 2. Calculated pulse height spectra of X-ray ﬂuorescence from the electrode
with primary photon energies of 12.0 keV (dashed curve), 13.5 keV (solid curve)
and 15.0 keV (dotted curve). The total count rate is normalised to the total rate of
primary photon absorption events by gold atoms.

Fig. 3. Illustration of the data analysis at the primary photon energy of 13.0 keV:
measured data (points) and the best-ﬁt model function (curve) are shown in the
upper panel and their diﬀerence in the energy region used in the ﬁtting in the
lower panel. The thin curves are the gold Lα ﬂuorescence line and the added linear
background component.

Fig. 4. Equivalent gold thickness calculated from data obtained using diﬀerent pri-
mary photon energies. The error bars show the statistical 1σ uncertainties from
the limited number of the gold Lα photons. Results using an alternative method
to compute net counts (extrapolated low-energy model function for the tail of the
primary peak) are indicated by squares. Oﬀ-centre results acquired at 12.5 keV are
plotted at 12.4 keV for the sake of clarity.

9

Table 1
Components of the low-energy tail of the Si(Li) detector for the Lα1 characteristic
line of gold: normally incident radiation (left column), ﬂuorescence generated in the
electrode (right column).

External (%) Electrode (%)

Si escape

Short tail

Flat shelf (Si)

Flat shelf (total)

0.10

0.17

0.10

0.46

0.16

0.58

0.41

1.01

10

