7
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
5
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
1
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

CONTRIBUTION TO THE CONFERENCE
”NEUTRINO PHYSICS AND ASTROPHYSICS”, Eilat May 29 - June 3 , 1994

LUMINESCENT BOLOMETER AND NEUTRINO PHYSICS

L. GONZALEZ-MESTRES

Laboratoire d’Annecy-le-Vieux de Physique des Particules,
B.P. 1110 , 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France
and
Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Coll`ege de France,
11 place Marcellin-Berthelot, 75231 Paris Cedex 05 , France

The luminescent bolometer, proposed in 1988 , is now seriously considered for several
applications in nuclear and particle physics: dark matter searches, double beta decays,
low energy neutrino physics, heavy ion physics...
It is also a very promising device for
basic condensed-matter physics and chemistry experiments, and may lead to astrophysical
applications. The luminescent bolometer is based on the simultaneous detection of light
and phonons, allowing for particle identiﬁcation and for a detailed study of the detector
response. Digitized analysis of the signals produced in several sensors installed on the same
crystal is then a very powerful tool. Superconducting sensors allow to detect the scintilla-
tion light pulse followed by the delayed front of phonons, and can be extremely sensitive
leading to single photon counting in the visible range. They also provide information on
the position of the event inside the absorber, and can be fast enough for all proposed ap-
plications. The luminescent bolometer, with superconducting sensors, appears extremely
promising for real time solar neutrino experiments based on new indium single crystal
scintillators. We focus on this particular application, discussing the status of the art as
well as open problems and presenting an updated description of a full scale real time solar
neutrino experiment sensitive to the low energy sector.

Other applications of the luminescent bolometer (e.g. spectroscopy or neutrino detec-
tion at reactors), involving indium compounds and other single crystal scintillators, are
equally considered and discussed in detail.

1

1. The Luminescent Bolometer

Simultaneous detection of light and phonons in a single crystal scintillator cooled to
very low temperature was proposed in 1988 1 as a new tool for particle detection. The
new technique was expected to: a) provide slow thermal detectors with a fast light strobe,
allowing for a much better timing without crucially spoiling energy resolution; b) make
possible particle identiﬁcation through the phonon/light ratio, thus improving background
rejection. As thermal bolometers evolve nowadays towards the detection of nonequilibrium
phonons, ﬂuorescence appears as a natural complement. Many crystals are expected to
produce an important light yield at very low temperature. The device operating simulta-
neous detection of light and phonons at very low temperature was called the luminescent
bolometer 2. Simultaneous detection of ﬂuorescence light and nonequilibrium phonons
would allow 3,4 to combine good energy resolution, fast timing, position information and
high background rejection, leading to a new generation of very performant devices. Several
extremely diﬃcult experiments may become feasible, whereas a certain number of present
day experiments would be seriously improved by the new cryogenic device.

A number of well-known scintillators (BGO, CdWO4 , CaWO4 , GSO:Ce, CeF3 ,
YAG:Ce, CaF2:Eu...) exhibit fast luminescence at low temperature and are serious candi-
dates for absorbers. But other substances, which do not scintillate at room temperature,
become eﬃcient luminophores when cooled down as thermal quenching disappears. Two
examples may be particularly relevant to particle detection:

a) PbMoO4 green ﬂuorescence is known 5,6 to increase by four orders of magnitude
between room temperature and LN2 temperature. Its ﬂuorescence properties have been
studied down to He4 temperature 6. Following a proposal to apply cooled PbMoO4 to
double beta experiments 7, a PbMoO4 2×2×2 cm3 single crystal read by a photomultiplier
through a quartz light guide was characterized down to LN2 temperature and showed a
photopeak pulse height equal to 16% of that of room temperature NaI:Tl 8.

b) Some indium oxides studied by J.P. Chaminade 9 following a proposal 10,11,4 to
develop a scintillating single crystal incorporating 115In as a basic element, exhibit encour-
10,12 which has
aging scintillating properties at low temperature. An example is In2Si2O7
been characterized down to 4K 12, and many other compounds can be considered 10.

If the properties of the absorber (Debye temperature, phonon propagation, low temper-
ature scintillation light yield and decay time...) are crucial to the quality of a luminescent
bolometer, the sensors are equally key elements. The ﬁrts design proposed 1,2 the use of
separate sensors for the light and the phonons. Semiconductors, thin black bolometers
and superconductors were considered as photon sensors 1,2,11. The ﬁrst successful feasibil-
ity study, made by the Milano group, adopted such an approach 13,14 using a photodiode
as the cryogenic photosensitive device. This practical solution allowed to demonstrate
the principle without previously undertaking long technical developments. The results
were naturally limited in threshold and energy resolution, as has been discussed in recent
reviews 15,16, but the situation can be improved. In 1991 , we proposed 3,4 a new design
incorporating: a) a common sensor for both the light strobe and the delayed phonon signal;

2

b) the use of arrays of superconducting tunnel junctions (STJ) as the new sensor.

2. Relevance of superconducting sensors

Superconductors are natural sensors for both phonons and photons, and should per-
form better than semiconductors due to the comparatively low gap for quasiparticle exci-
tation. Low impedance superconducting ﬁlms already provide the best phonon sensors 17,
and photosensitive superconducting devices are an active research subject 18. A perfor-
mant superconducting sensor, sensitive to the light strobe followed by the delayed pulse
of phonons, would considerably simplify and improve the architecture of the luminescent
bolometer. This seems feasible nowadays due to the success of arrays of superconducting
tunnel junctions 19 and of other superconducting sensors 20. The new device, made of
a single crystal low temperature scintillator with an appropriate superconducting sensor
implanted on each of its faces, may become the ultimate detector for several physics goals.

2a. ST J arrays

With a series array of 432 Al-Al STJ, implanted on a Si wafer with an area of 12
× 12 mm2 and a thickness of 0.5 mm, the Oxford group obtained 19 at T ≃ 360 mK
(base temperature of the cryostat) a resolution of 700 eV FWHM on a 25 keV X-ray peak
produced from the ﬂuorescence of an indium foil. A naive extrapolation suggests 3,4 that a
similar STJ array could be sensitive to ≈ 1 keV of photons absorbed near the array, which
corresponds to the light yield of a ≈ 10 keV electron or photon in an eﬃcient scintillator.
According to the Oxford group19, most of the 25 keV peak width was due to drifts in the
cryostat temperature and to electronic noise. These considerations motivated our proposal
to use arrays of STJ for the detection of both photons (the fast strobe) and phonons (the
delayed pulse). To absorb the scintillation light we considered, either implanting a thin
layer between the radiation absorber and the STJ array (but care must be taken of phonon
propagation through the layer), or to use blackened STJ arrays covering a large fraction
of the crystal surface (which requires working in an optical cavity).

An interesting possibility would be to deposit the STJ arrays on a superconducting
substrate of higher critical temperature, covering the full crystal surface (an array per
face). Nb or Sn can be the substrate for a Al STJ array. Thus, both the photons and the
phonons from the absorber would be converted into quasiparticles by the substrate layer in
an eﬃcient way. Such quasiparticles would subsequently be detected by the STJ array. The
photon signal would immediately originate in the substrate, whereas phonons would ﬁrst
undergo a number of scattering processes depending on the size and quality of the crystal.
With an ADC and a DSP after the electronic chain, for each face of the crystal, digital
analysis would allow to reach a very low threshold for both the ﬂuorescence and the phonon
signal. It should be noticed that, when the expected signal is a sum of exponentials, on-line
digital ﬁltering allows for iterative algorithms leading to very performant trigger schemes
21, which apply to ﬂuorescence in a straightforward way and can be adapted to phonon
detection. Energy resolution would also be very good, as total energy can be reconstructed

3

from light and phonon pulses. Digital analysis of the phonon pulse would lead to excellent
space resolution inside the crystal. Timing would depend on the ﬂuorescence properties
and on the superconducting read-out, but it seems reasonable to expect to reach fast timing
(down to 100 ns) with suitable choices. However, the crystal size and phonon scattering
properties will necessarily set an intrinsic limit to the detector performance. Phonons
reaching the crystal surface with an energy E < 2∆ (the gap of the STJ superconducting
material) cannot contribute to the signal.

Even if the scheme and goals are not identical, it is worth noticing that Perryman et
al. propose22 optical photon counting with a superconducting substrate in combination
with an array of widely spaced STJ of lower energy gap. In our case, we are not interested
in optical photon counting but in the detection of 102 - 105 optical photons produced by
a particle interacting with the cooled scintillator. On the other hand, we must face the
extra requirement of eﬃcient phonon detection from large absorbers. The fact that several
intrinsic scintillators work at low temperature is encouraging, as doped scintillators may
exhibit poor phonon propagation. An attempt to model non-equilibrium signals in a series
array of STJ has recently been performed by the Oxford group 23.

2b. Other techniques

Superconducting ﬁlms are very successful 17,24 and solutions based on this technique,
others than STJ arrays, deserve serious consideration. But eﬃcient detection of scintilla-
tion light is likely to limit the freedom of the design. It is possible to consider superheated
superconducting dots25 when only four faces of the crystal need to be used (allowing for
a magnetic ﬁeld parallel to the four faces), or for cylinder structures. But this may limit
space resolution. Sensitivity may also be a problem. It seems diﬃcult to simultaneously
detect light and external phonons using superheated microspheres, but we may hope for
technical progress in the interface between the granules and the scintillating absorber.

2c. A critical remark

Although luminescence properties are not expected to drastically change between 4K
and dilution temperatures, it must be noticed that only two experiments 13,14,26 have stud-
ied the luminescence of a thermal bolometer cooled to very low temperature, and only one
of them 13,14 incorporated a sensor for the scintillation light. Many more experiments are
required on luminescence at very low temperature before setting the design of a super-
conducting sensor for light and phonons. However, STJ arrays present the advantage of
operating with excellent performances at He3 and even at He4 temperatures, which simpli-
ﬁes several basic problems. Simultaneous detection of light and phonons presents a similar
advantage as compared to simultaneous detection of ionization and heat.

3. Proposed applications

3a. Non-baryonic dark matter

4

This was the ﬁrst proposed application of the luminescent bolometer 2, in view of
background rejection and nucleus recoil identiﬁcation. The approach has recently been
criticized on the grounds of the high threshold of existing prototypes 16, but as has been
explained in this paper the present situation can be considerably improved introducing
superconducting sensors: then the threshold of the luminescent bolometer will become as
low as that of any device performing simultaneous detection of ionization and heat. The
possibility to work well above dilution temperatures will then become a deﬁnite advantage
of dark matter experiments using the luminescent bolometer. The reliability of a large scale
experiment would be much better with our approach, where 100 kg to 1 ton detectors can
indeed be cooled to the operating temperature with existing and well established cryogenic
techniques. Furthermore, targets such as 7Li, 19F, 27Al, 127I, 183W... can be incorporated
in the cold scintillator approach. If particle physics and cosmology still provide a ground
to experiments aiming at the direct detection of dark matter WIMPs (there is to date no
evidence for new particles!), the luminescent bolometer with a superconducting read-out
is to be the right technique for that purpose. However, many basic studies remain to be
performed on the low temperature behaviour of the relevant scintillators.

3b. Double beta

Applications to double beta experiments were proposed in 1989 7, with the idea to re-
ject the alpha background in high Q materials. CdWO4 and PbMoO4 were then explicitly
considered. The use of CdWO4 seems indeed to be a promising way 27,15. To our original
proposal, the Milano group has added the successful development of a CaF2 luminescent
bolometer 13,14. The use of superconducting sensors would be crucial to improve energy
resolution, allowing for: a) a better background rejection (rejection of α’s, but also even-
tually separation between β or γ and 2β events); b) eventually, the necessary separation in
energy between the tail of double beta decays with neutrinos and neutrinoless double beta
events, feasible only through energy resolution and possibly through a careful analysis of
the phonon pulse sensitive to the details of electron energy losses. Comparison between
the ﬂuorescence and the phonon pulse will be crucial, not only because of phonon/light
ratio but also through the study of the delay between both pulses on the six faces of the
crystal. With these tools, a molybdenum experiment using a molybdate cooled to very low
temperature should be seriously considered. After suitable technical developements, the
luminescent bolometer can potentially incorporate any double beta target. The elementary
cells of a double β experiment can be ≈ 2 × 2 × 2 cm3 crystals, which amounts to ≈ 25
crystals and ≈ 150 electronic channels per Kg of detector.

3c. Solar and reactor neutrinos (indium target)

This may become the most important and far-reaching application of the luminescent
bolometer, as no technique allows by now to detect in real time low energy neutrinos.
Recent progress on indium single crystal scintillators is encouraging 9, but it is unlikely
that a room temperature scintillator would lead to a correct background rejection3,4. 2β
and 3β coincidences from 115In radioactivity, as well as coincidences between a 115In β and
an erratic gamma, are the main worries for a solar neutrino detector with a 115In target.

5

Room temperature scintillation does not seem to provide enough information to ﬁght such
a background, but detecting phonons in addition would considerably improve space and
energy resolution, which are crucial to evaluate the detector performance.

Several indium compounds seem to scintillate mainly at low temperature. To the in-
dium germanates, silicates and other oxides presently under study, some of which (e.g.
In2Si2O7) give excellent results at low temperature, InCe oxides should be added in or-
der to possibly exploit the ﬂuorescence of trivalent cerium. Fluorides deserve further
consideration9,10, as some of them can scintillate and crystal growth seems easier than
with oxides. A large scale, real time solar neutrino experiment based on Raghavan’as
reaction, with a luminescent bolometer made of an indium compound, has already been
described 3,4,28 and nothing to date contradicts its potential feasibility. With ≈ 1cm space
resolution in 4 × 4 × 4 cm3 single crystals, segmentation in a few million elementary cells
would be achieved, allowing for a signature based on the triple coincidence between the 115
β and the two, spatially separated, delayed γ’s (116 and 496 keV). But the large number of
crystals (∼ 3.104) and electronic channels (∼ 2.105) required, with on line digital analysis,
makes it a great challenge even if the appropriate scintillating crystals become available.

A neutrino-antineutrino oscillation experiment at a reactor would be ∼ 100 times
smaller. It must therefore be considered as a preliminary step, working at a higher neutrino
energy (higher inverse β energy) which should considerably simplify the above discussed
background rejection. On the other hand, ambient background is much worse and deserves
a careful study where self-sheilding (active) is likely to play a crucial role.

The possibility to actually ﬁnd performant intrinsic indium single crystal scintillators
is real and exciting 9. Such a breakthrough would considerably improve the prospects for
phonon detection in large scintillating indium crystals. However, light yield and ﬂuores-
cence lifetime under β and γ irradiation remain a challenge, as very sharp performances are
required in the proposed experiments. Superconducting sensors appear as the only solution
to build a feasible detector, satisfying all requirements in view of background rejection.

3d. Other applications

Basic physics and chemistry, as well as nuclear physics and technology, are generat-
ing many potential applications of the luminescent bolometer. The study of relaxation
phenomena would considerably beneﬁt from such a progress in instrumentation, allowing
to detect in real time several components of the degraded energy. Nuclear spectroscopy
requiring particle identiﬁcation (phonon analysis may even allow to distinguish between a
β and a γ inside a crystal), neutron detection at low counting rate (e.g. with a lithium
target3,26), low radioactivity measurements including study and detection of long lived iso-
topes... are applications of increasing interest in both scientiﬁc and industrial domains,
where detector performance can be combined with self-shielding3 potentialities. Heavy ion
physics also appears as an ideal domain for the new device 28, as the luminescent bolometer
may replace with success all kinds of detectors of present-day experiments (semiconduc-
tors, scintillators, forward detectors...). The luminescent bolometer may become relevant
to nuclear and particle physics and technology, astrophysics and space science and tech-

6

nology, material science, environment, biology and medical uses. Superconducting sensors
as well as on line digital analysis are essential tools to fully exploit the potentialities of a
detector whose basic performance will be the ability to record in real time a large amount
of physical information on the interaction of particles with matter.

4. References

1. L. Gonzalez-Mestres and D. Perret-Gallix, in ”Low Temperature Detectors for Neu-
trinos and Dark Matter - II”, Proceedings of LTD-2 Annecy May 1988 , Editions Fronti`eres.
2. L. Gonzalez-Mestres and D. Perret-Gallix, Proceedings of the XXIV International
Conference on High Energy Physics, Munich August 1988 , Ed. Springer-Verlag, p. 1223 .
3. L. Gonzalez-Mestres, in ”Low Temperature Detectors for Neutrinos and Dark Matter

- IV”, Proceedings of LTD-4, Oxford September 1991 , Ed. Fronti`eres, p. 471-479 .

4. L. Gonzalez-Mestres, Proceedings of TAUP 91 , Toledo September 1991 , Nuclear

Physics B (Proc. Suppl.) 28A (1992), p. 478-481 .

5. Hj. Bernhardt, Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 91 (1985), p. 643 .
6. W. Van Loo and D.J. Wolterink, Phys. Lett. 47A (1974), p. 83 .
7. L. Gonzalez-Mestres and D. Perret-Gallix, Moriond Workshop ”The Quest for Fun-

damental Constants in Cosmology”, March 1989 , Ed. Fronti`eres, p. 352-354 .

8. M. Minowa, K. Itakura, S. Moriyama and W. Ootani, University of Tokyo preprint

UT-HE-92/06 (1992).

9. See, for instance, T. Gaewdang, Thesis Universit´e de Bordeaux I ”Cristallochimie

et luminescence de quelques oxides et ﬂuorures d’indium”, November 1993 .

10. L. Gonzalez-Mestres and D. Perret-Gallix, Proceedings of the ”Rencontre sur la

Masse Cach´ee”, Annecy July 1987 , Ed. Annales de Physique, p. 181-190 .

11. L. Gonzalez-Mestres and D. Perret-Gallix, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A279 (1989), p.

382 .

12. T. Gaewdang et al. , to appear in Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., and in reference 9 .
13. A. Alessandrello et al., Proceedings of LTD-4 , p. 367 .
14. A. Alessandrello et al., Proceedings of the Moriond Workshop ”Progress in Atomic

Physics, Neutrinos and Gravitation” January 1992 , Ed. Fronti`eres, p. 201 .

15. E. Fiorini, Proceedings of LTD-5 , Berkeley July-August 1993 , Journal of Low

Temperature Physics 93 (1993), Numbers 3/4 , p.189 .

16. B. Sadoulet, same Proceedings, p. 821 .
17. See, e.g. P. Ferger et al. ”A Massive Cryogenic Particle Detector with Good Energy

Resolution”, Max-Planck-Institut preprint Munich 1994 .

18. A. Barone and M. Russo in Advances in Superconductivity, Plenum 1993 .
19. See, e.g. D.J. Goldie, Proceedings of the Workshop on Tunnel Junction Detectors

for X-rays, Naples December 1990 , World Scientiﬁc.

20. See, e.g. Proceedings of LTD-5 .
21. L. Gonzalez-Mestres, unpublished; see S. Dil, Rapport de stage DESS Universit´e

Jean Monnet, Saint-Etienne June 1992 .

22. M.A.C. Perryman, C.L. Foden and A. Peacock, ESA preprint September 1992 .
23. A.D. Hahn et al. in LTD-5 , p. 611 , and R.J. Gaitskell et al., in LTD-5 , p. 683 .

7

24. V. Nagel et al. in LTD-5 , p. 543 , and H. Kraus et al., in LTD-5 , p. 533 .
25. C. Berger et al. , same Proceedings, p. 509 .
26. P. de Marcillac et al., Nuclear Instruments and Methods A 337 (1993), p. 95 .
27. Y. Zdesenko et al., Proceedings of the Moriond Workshop ”Progress in Atomic

Physics, Neutrinos and Gravitation” January 1992 , Editions Fronti`eres, p. 183 .

28. L. Gonzalez-Mestres, same Proceedings, p. 113-118 .

8

