7
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
2
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The instrument response function in air-based scanning tunneling microscopy

P. Fraundorf and J. Tentschert
Physics & Astronomy, U. Missouri-StL (63121),
Corporate Research, Monsanto (63167),
Physics, Washington U. (63130),
St. Louis, MO, USA
(February 2, 2008)

The distinction between point and line resolution in transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
arises because an ability to image sub-0.2 nm fringes is a necessary, but not a suﬃcient, condition
for imaging individual atoms. In scanned tip microscopy, as in TEM, empirical data on instrument
response should precede assertions about point resolution. In the “slow scan limit”, time-domain
noise and geometry eﬀects decouple, and tip shape can take on the role of a 2-dimensional impulse
response function. We indicate here that nuclear track pits can be used to quantitatively measure tip
geometry with nanometer-scale resolution in three dimensions, that stationary tip images provide
a robust measure of time-domain instabilities, and that when these data are taken before and after
imaging an unknown, images with instrument response quantitatively constrained by experiment
are possible. Specimen-induced tip eﬀects also become measurable in situ. Also Ultramicroscopy 37
(1991) 125-129.

06.30.Bp, 07.79.-v, 61.16.Ch, 87.64.Dz

I. INTRODUCTION

In the literature of air-based scanned tip microscopy, images with 0.2 nm (or larger) fringes are often described as
“atomically-resolved”.1 The assumption that fringe spacings provide an upper limit on point resolution in tunneling
images was plausible, prior to the availability of recent evidence: (a) that tunneling in air or poor vacuum generally
involves mechanical contact between specimen and tip,2 (b) that “corrugation depths” between 0.2 nm rows in
tunneling images of h001i graphite and other layered structures can be many tenths of nm,3 (c) that the above
images can become increasingly noise-free as tip sharpness decreases and mechanical contact between specimen and
tip increases, and (d) that scanning force images unlikely to have point resolutions on the atomic scale also show
atomic scale periodicities.4 Mechanical contact between specimen and tip (always present in repulsive van der Waals
force microscopy) leaves open the possibility that a periodic raft of specimen atoms, and not the tip itself, is sliding
across the specimen, averaging periodicity information over distances much larger than a single unit cell. The ease
of imaging fringes on layered structures thus provides evidence that lattice fringes alone, as in transmission electron
microscopy, provide no proof of point resolution alone.

For this reason, and because the instrument response function in scanned probe microscopy introduces artifacts in
the time domain as well as in space, researchers involved in air-based scanned tip studies should be at least as cautious
as electron microscopists5 in documenting their instrument’s response. Because of the serial mode of data acquisition
in scanning tunneling, spatial and temporal aspects of instrument response may require separate measurements. We
show here how the elements for characterizing time domain instrument response are already present in the literature,
and how nuclear particle track pits (etched6 or unetched7) provide a means for measuring the three-dimensional
interaction proﬁle for a given tip, while on site in the microscope.

II. COMPONENTS OF INSTRUMENT RESPONSE

Measuring instruments generally start with some property associated with a specimen, and end up producing a
data object for analysis. For example, the contrast transfer function in high-resolution TEM begins with the electron
wave-function at the exit surface of the specimen, and produces an image which may contain partial information on
exit surface deBroglie phase from point to point. In scanned probe instruments, one begins with the proﬁle from point
to point of another quantity (e.g. the piezo height z(x, y) associated with current I at bias voltage V ). From the
resulting image we seek information on the local proﬁle of some height h (i.e., of constant current for an arbitrarily
sharp tip at constant conductivity I/V ). We refer here to instrument response as that function R which maps the local
proﬁle h(x′, y′) into the collected image z(x, y), i.e., it is the function for which z(x, y) = R(x, y, {h(x′, y′)∀x′, y′}).

1

Because the z(x, y) values are obtained sequentially in time, the geometric aspects of R are intertwined with time-
domain components of instrument response which are at best partially known. However, in the slow scan limit, for
which the tip is allowed to assume a steady state with each new value of x and y (i.e., when the feedback loop is
fast enough to follow specimen topography for the scan rates in use), the geometric and time domain eﬀects can be
separated, and z(x, y) can be written as:

′
z(x, y) = Rg (x, y, {h(x

′

′
)∀x

, y

′

, y

}) + N (x, y),

where Rg is a strictly geometric version of the instrument response, and N (x, y) respresents the time-domain noise
in the system. The next section discusses procedures for measuring the second moment statistics of N (x, y), as well
as Bayesian (i.e., best guess) strategies for subtracting N (x, y) from images therewith. The remaining function Rg
depends only on the details of tip structure, and of course on the signal being measured. In the simplest case of a
proﬁle which is: (i) dominated by tunneling current through the inﬁnitesimal point on the tip nearest the specimen,
and (ii) dependent on gap distance but not on local curvature, composition, etc., Rg takes the form8 of

′
Rg(x, y) = h(0, 0) + max [{h(x + x

, y + y

′

′
) − t(x

′

′
)} ∀x

, y

′

, y

] .

Here t(x′, y′) are z-coordinates of the tip surface while it is pointing toward a specimen in the negative z-direction,
with the tip positioned horizontally so that its scan coordinates are {x, y} = {0, 0}, and vertically so that t(0, 0) equals
the height of the specimen at the scan origin. In practice, of course, we ignore absolute heights and consider relative
heights only. Note here that t(x′, y′) serves as a kind of impulse response function, since it predicts the shape of the
noise-subtracted image for the limiting case of an inﬁnitely sharp specimen. In low-magniﬁcation air-based scanning
tunneling microscopy on rough specimens, where tip geometry has major eﬀects and the nature of tip-specimen
interaction is poorly known, measured proﬁles of the eﬀective tip-interaction geometry tef f (x′, y′) provide useful
estimates of the impulse response in these images as well. A simple method for measuring proﬁles of tip-interaction
geometry in the microscope, on the nanometer scale, is therefore discussed in the section on tip ﬁngerprints below.

(1)

(2)

III. STATIONARY TIP IMAGES

Before discussing use of stationary tip images to determine the power spectrum of N(x,y), we should ﬁrst discuss
violations of the slow scan assumption. Time-domain artifacts associated with response of the feedback loop to slope
changes on the specimen include spikes, associated with rapid encounters by the tip with slopes that rise too quickly,
and “hand-glide” artifacts associated with slopes which drop away too soon. Imaging of objects more than once, with
diﬀerent scan rates and amplitudes, can help detect features like these, and comcomitant violation of the assumptions
which go into eq. (1). Slowing the scan rate, of course, entails compromise itself, not the least of which in air is the
amount of thermal drift that takes place during image acquisition.

The statistical properties of N (x, y) in eq. (1), given its appropriateness for a speciﬁc set of images, have been
examined, and statistical removal by one-dimensional9 and two-dimensional10 Wiener optimal ﬁltering has been
proposed provided a suitable model for the noise power spectrum is available. These ﬁltering techniques are a special
case of Bayesian background subtraction, a technique which is now ﬁnding application in place of Fourier averaging
for the removal of noise from HREM images as well.11 For the empirical background model in STM, Stoll and Marti12
have proposed using stationary tip images (deﬁned here as images taken with the x and y tip scan-range set to
zero). These stationary tip images are of special importance because, like HREM images of aperiodic material used
in quantifying instrument contrast transfer, they can be obtained: (i) on the same specimen, (ii) under the same
imaging conditions, and (iii) at almost the same time as the image whose instrument response is being considered.

We note in passing that stationary tip images, also like HREM images of aperiodic material, provide a robust
measure of the eﬀect of time-domain instability. They are quite sensitive to changes in instrument and environment,
but insensitive to changes in tip and often feedback loop settings.13 Hence they can be used to measure instrument
performance as well as the eﬀects of site instability on that performance.

IV. FINGERPRINTS OF THE TIP

After removal of time-domain artifacts with help from stationary tip and multiple-scan images, the task of relating
z(x, y) to some local property of the specimen remains. In HREM, the analogous setp involves determining the contrast
transfer function for a given image, with help from aperiodic structure in the image as well as prior information on
instrument response. A specimen-independent ﬁngerprint of instrument response in scanned probe images does not

2

appear to be available. The empirical approach is therefore simple: constrain the tip response before and after taking
an unknown image by observations on a known.

The simplest known for this purpose would be an otherwise ﬂat surface populated with identical Poisson-distributed
delta-functions (i.e., atomically sharp peaks).
In principle such specimens can exist for both tunneling and force
microscopy, but in practice they remain to be identiﬁed. However, the nuclear particle track formation mechanism
can already provide geometrically uniform, nanometer-sized damage regions capable of systematic enlargement by
etching to diameters well over a micron.

Fig. 1 shows an image obtained by averaging scanning tunneling images of four nearby 50 nm diameter etched and
Au-Pd coated nuclear particle track pits.14 Individual data points in this pit proﬁle showed standard deviations of
only 2 nm, and the standard deviation image indicated that spatial correlations in these errors, if any, were conﬁned
to regions of steep slope. The contours in Fig. 1 represent levels of three standard deviations in the average rms pixel
spread from image to image. A well deﬁned and repeatable structure of ledges is present. Resolution is near to (or
better than) 5 nm in all directions, and we suspect this is limited in part by grain size in the Au-Pd coating, and in
part by variations (obviously quite small) from pit to pit.

This geometric pit proﬁle of Fig. 1 can be inverse-transformed (see inset) to provide a three-dimensional view
of those portions of the tip-interaction proﬁle which we can geometrically (and/or electronically) bring into contact
with the inside of a 50 nm diameter ring.15 In other words, quantiﬁed pit images like those shown in Fig. 1 provide
“better-than-convex envelope’ characterizations of tef f (x′, y′), in this case with quantitative spatial resolution in three
dimensions on the order of one-tenth of the hole diameter. These pit images can be obtained before and after imaging
an unknown specimen, thus allowing one to characterize tip modiﬁcations as well as tip structure.16 Use of smaller
and larger pits allows characterization of tip geometry on smaller and larger size scales as well. We expect the strategy
will allow formation of reproducible pits in the nm size range for scanning force work, although as pit size decreases
for scanning tunneling work the problem of texture in the conductive coating is expected to increase in severity.

V. CONCLUSIONS

It is, of course, possible to compare unknown specimen images with other specimen images, and with model
expectations based on prior information, and thereby to do a great deal of microscopy without hard information on
instrument response. In vacuum-based scanned probe microscopy, prior information about both specimen and tip
may be adequate to obviate the need for empirical data on instrument response. In air- and liquid- based scanned
probe study, however, a strength of the technique is that the instruments are capable of examining true unknowns.
But before structure images, in the electron microscopic sense5, can be obtained in general, an empirical protocol for
inferring (and removing) the eﬀects of instrument response is necessary.

We have illustrated how theoretically, in the slow-scan limit, the time-domain and geometric components of scanned
probe instrument response can be decoupled, and how the geometric interaction proﬁle of the scanned tip in that
case can become a two-dimensional impulse response function. Further, we have shown how stationary tip images
may serve as a robust source of information on time-domain instabilities, obtainable while the tip is in place on the
unknown of interest. Finally, we illustrated that the geometric proﬁle of a tip in air (or liquid or vacuum) can be
measured with 5 nm or better resolution, in the microscope before and after examination of an unknown specimen.
This conﬁrms our earlier observation that nuclear particle tracks are a promising tool in this regard, and further opens
the door to quantitative studies of the eﬀect of specimens on tips: a needed complement when tip-induced changes
to the specimen are being considered. Overall, feeling the need because we have been “spoiled” by elegant tools for
characterizing instrument response in electron phase contrast imaging, we: (i) have proposed a strategy for obtaining
data on scanned probe instrument response almost on an image-by-image basis, and (ii) where we have not seen the
components used elsewhere have illustrated their workability.

1 e.g. R. J. Colton, S. M. Baker, J. D. Baldeschwieler, and W. J. Kaiser, Appl. Phys. Lett. 51 (1987) 305; T. R. Albrecht and
C. F. Quate, J. Appl. Phys. 62 (1987) 2599; Y. Nakagawa, A. Ishitani, T. Takahagi, H. Kuroda, H. Tokumoto, M. Ono and
K. Kajimura, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A8 (1990) 262.

2 M. Kuwabara, W. Lo and J. C. H. Spence, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A7 (1989) 2745.
3 cf. J. Schneir, R. Sonnenfeld, P. K. Hansma and J. Tersoﬀ, Phys. Rev. B34 (1986) 4979.
4 e.g. R. G. Miller and P. J. Bryant, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A7 (1989) 2879.

3

5 cf. J. Spence, Experimental High-Resolution Electron Microscopy (Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1981 and 1988), 1st and

6 cf. R. L. Fleischer, P. B. Price and R. M. Walker, Nuclear Tracks in Solids (U. California Press, 1975).
7 P. Fraundorf and J. Tentschert, Proc. Intern. Congress on Electron Microscopy 1 (1990) 584.
8 e.g. R. M¨oller, A. Esslinger and M. Rauscher, J. Vac. Sci. and Technol. A8 (1990) 434.
9 S. I. Park and C. F. Quate, J. Appl. Phys. 62 (1987) 312.
10 E. Stoll and A. Baratoﬀ, Ultramicroscopy 25 (1988) 144.
11 P. Fraundorf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 (1990) 1031, cond-mat/9711309; P. Fraundorf and K. Pollack, Ultramicroscopy 37 (1991)

12 E. Stoll and O. Marti, Surface Science 181 (1987) 229.
13 L. Fei and P. Fraundorf, Abstracts to the 38th Midwest Solid State Conference (University of Nebraska in Lincoln, 1990),

2nd ed.

72.

E2-3.

14 J. Tentschert and P. Fraundorf, ibid., E2-2.
15 P. Fraundorf, unpublished (1990).
16 J. Tentschert and P. Fraundorf, Abstracts to the American Physical Society March 1991 Meeting (1990) submitted.

FIG. 1. Image obtained by averaging 32 × 32 pixel images of four 50 nm diameter etched, and Au-Pd coated, nuclear particle
track pits in polycarbonate. The pit images were cut from larger 12-bit images obtained with an 8 µm Digital Instruments
head using a single mechanically formed Pt-Ir tip. The bottom of the pit is white, while the surrounding ﬂat polycarbonate
is dark. Contours (at intervals of 3 standard deviations in the rms pixel variation from image to image) are white in regions
surrounding the pit, and dark in the deeper regions of the structure. The pit base contour (white) is round and approximately
50 nm in diameter, although it appears oval here because of diﬀerent magniﬁcations in the x and y scan directions. Depth from
base to bottom is of the order of 20 nm (around 487 greyvalue units), based on rough z-gain calibrations using 30 nm collodial
gold on graphite. The inset shows the resulting envelope (z-height exaggerated) for the 20 nm end of the tip used to take this
data (see text).

4

This figure "irfstmf1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9712003v1

