8
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
0
1
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A 10 MHz Beam Counter and a Multiplicity Detector
for the E864 Spectrometer

P. Haridasa, I.A. Plessa, G. Van Burena, J. Tomasia,M.S.Z. Rabinb,
K. Barishc, R.D. Majkac

a. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
b. University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003 USA.
c. Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520 USA.

Abstract

The E864 experiment at BNL requires a beam counter and multiplicity
detector system that can perform at an incident beam rate of 107 Au ions
per second. We have developed and tested a 150 µm thick quartz Cherenkov
beam counter and a scintillator based multiplicity-trigger counter during the
ﬁrst run of this experiment in 1994. We obtained a time resolution of 78 ps
for the beam counter at an incident beam rate 5×105 Hz and 100 ps at a rate
of 1×107 Hz. Pulse height discrimination is used to obtain a minimum bias
and a 10% centrality trigger from the multiplicity detectors. The multiplicity
counter has a time resolution of 250 ps.

1. Introduction

We report on a beam and multiplicity-trigger counter system that we have
developed and tested for the E864 spectrometer at the Brookhaven National
Laboratory (BNL). E864 is designed to search for rare composite states, stran-
glets and other novel forms of matter which may be produced in a small fraction
of relativistic Au-Pb collisions at the BNL Alternating Gradient Synchrotron
(AGS). The momentum of the Au beam at the AGS is 11.7 A GeV/c. The
beam, veto and multiplicity counters constitute the front end of the E864 spec-
trometer. This spectrometer provides momentum, time of ﬂight and energy
(calorimetry) information for charged and neutral secondary particles produced
in central ( small impact parameter ) Au-Pb interactions. In order to realize a
sensitivity of 10−11 per interaction for the detection of rare particles within a

reasonable running period, it is required that the incident beam intensity be of
the order of 107 s−1. Stable long term performance and good time resolution
(80 - 100 ps) at these high rates were the central criteria that dictated the
design and development of the beam and trigger counters.

As is well known, light emission of a solid scintillator rapidly deteriorates
due to radiation damage when exposed to heavy-ion beams. To minimize ra-
diation damage as well as the number of beam particle interactions in the
detector material we have used a thin (150 µm) quartz plate for the beam
counter. Cherenkov light emitted by a relativistic ion traversing the quartz
plate emerges through the edges of the plate after a series of total internal re-
ﬂections. Two photomultipliers (PMT) optically coupled to opposite edges of
the quartz plate provide the beam counter with superior signal characteristics
as compared to a scintillator counter of similar construction. Although this
technique has been employed in other experiments [1], the reported results are
at an incident beam intensity of about 106 Hz, which is an order of magnitude
less than the desired E864 beam intensity of 107 Hz. Thus the main eﬀort
behind the development of our beam counters has been to achieve good time
resolution at high rates while maintaining small PMT anode currents to pre-
vent the deterioration of the photomultiplier tubes due to overheating of the
dynodes. In Section 2 we describe the construction and signal characteristics
of the beam counter and in Section 4 we give results on time resolution and
stability.

The E864 experiment uses a multiplicity trigger to select central events, be-
cause in relativistic heavy-ion collisions there is a strong correlation between
particle multiplicity and centrality. The E864 multiplicity detector is an annu-
lar piece of fast BC420 scintillator placed around the beam pipe 13 cm down-
stream of the target. The annulus is segmented into four quadrants and each
quadrant is viewed by a photomultiplier. The centrality trigger is obtained by
imposing a high discriminator threshold on the summed signals from the four
counters. We discuss the multiplicity counter in detail, in Section 3.

Fig. 1 shows the entire beam and multiplicity-trigger counter assembly. The
quartz Cherenkov beam counter is housed in a light tight box that is located
on the extreme left side in Fig.1. In order to veto beam particles which are
more than 0.5 cm away from the beam axis a quartz-Cherenkov hole counter is
placed immediately upstream of the beam counter, within the same light-tight
enclosure housing the beam counter. Another, larger hole veto counter made of
scintillator is placed downstream of the beam counter to detect and veto those

events in which a beam particle interacted in the beam counter quartz plate.
This counter also helps to veto events which have a beam particle accompanied
by a halo of charged particles that originate from interactions in the upstream
beam magnets and collimators. The target assembly and the multiplicity-
trigger counters are shown on the right side in Fig.1. Lead shielding placed
between the target and the scintillator hole counter minimizes the possibility
of triggering the veto counter by secondary particles backscattered from the
target. Lead shielding upstream of the scintillator veto counter protects it
from knock-on electrons ( δ-rays ) produced by the gold beam passing through
the upstream apparatus.

2. The Quartz Beam and Hole Counter

2.1 Detector Assembly

As mentioned previously, the quartz Cherenkov hole-veto and beam coun-
ters are housed in a light-tight aluminium box with easily removable front and
back cover plates for quick access. The photomultiplier tubes are mounted
vertically with respect to the beam axis. To describe the optical part of the
assembly in greater detail we provide in Fig. 2 a sketch of the two detectors
from side (a) and perspective (b) views, where VC and BC are the hole-veto
and beam counters, respectively. The quartz plates for both counters are
mounted in PET (Polyester Terephthalate) frames. This material was chosen
so that humidity changes will not aﬀect the dimensional stability of the frame.
Two 0.5 cm thick lucite plates embedded in the PET frame provide the optical
coupling between the quartz plates and the front faces of the 2 inch photo-
tubes. The top and bottom edges of the beam counter quartz plate and one
edge of each of the veto counter quartz plates are held in narrow slits on the
front face (i.e. away from the PMT face) of the lucite coupler.

Because the beam counter quartz plate (5 cm x 8.8 cm) is only 150 µm
thick it is mounted in a way that minimizes the stress on the plate and simul-
taneously ensures excellent optical contact with the front face of the PMT.
This is done by ﬁlling the slits containing the edges of the quartz plate with
immersion oil (refractive index =1.515 ) as illustrated in the expanded part
in Fig.2. The immersion oil is held in the slit by the capillary action of the
liquid between the lucite and quartz plate surfaces. No dripping or draining
of the oil was observed, regardless of the orientation of the frame. We chose
Supersil-1 for the beam counter quartz plate because of its low radiation dam-
age properties [2], and its property of being striation free in all three directions.

While mounting the plate, suﬃcient care has to be taken to ensure that no
air bubbles are trapped in the immersion oil ﬁlling the slits. The width of the
slit proved to be an important factor in achieving a bubble free quartz - lucite
interface, and a width of 375 µm was used in the ﬁnal design.

The hole veto counter uses a 1 mm thick Corning 2940 quartz plate. Be-
cause they are less fragile than the beam counter plate, these plates were
optically cemented into the slits in the lucite. The hole veto counter consists
of two ”L-shaped” pieces, which when mounted with a small overlap as shown
in Fig. 2(b), provide a center hole of dimension 1 cm x 1 cm. As each quartz
plate of the quartz hole counter is viewed by only one phototube, the quartz
plates need not be perpendicular to the beam. In fact, tilting the quartz plate
by 10 degrees maximized the amount of Cherenkov light that reaches each
phototube.

2.2 Photomultiplier Tube Base modiﬁcations

We have used Hamamatsu 12-stage photomultiplier tubes R4001 and R2059
for the hole and beam counters, respectively. These PMTs belong to the
1828-01 family of 2 inch phototubes with a rise time of 1.4 ns and transit
time jitter of 0.6 ns [3] at the recommended operating voltage of 2500 V.
These photomultiplier tubes were the most economical choice with adequate
rise time and a suﬃciently high anode current limit. It is important for high
rate (107 Hz) operation of PMTs to prevent voltage sag in the last dynodes,
because such voltage sag will cause a degradation of the rise time of the signal.
It is also important to maintain low PMT anode currents to prevent gain
losses due to the overheating of the last dynodes. To satisfy both of these
requirements we must operate the tubes at a low main voltage (∼ 1600 V),
with high current voltage supplies on the eleventh and twelveth dynodes. This
requires a modiﬁcation of the base resistor chain as shown in Fig. 3. In addition
to the external voltage supplies, we have also connected 4.7 nF capacitators
to all the dynodes to provide a ﬁlter for high freqency noise.

2.3 Signal and Pulse Height Distribution

Figure 4 shows the pulses from the top and bottom PMTs of the beam
counter observed on a 300 MHz analog scope during a ∼1s spill of 11.7 A GeV/c
Au ions at a beam rate of 1.2 x 107 Hz. The pulses have a rise time of about
2 ns, an average pulse height of about 30mV (50Ω termination) and FWHM
of about 4 ns. These pulses were obtained after the original signals from
the PMTs were split equally into two, and thus represent 50% of the original

signals. Comparisons of these pulses with those at lower rates ( 5×105 Hz )
show no noticeble changes in the pulse height or pulse width. At an incident
beam rate of 5 x 105 Hz, we estimate the anode current to be about 4µA.
At beam rates of 1 x 107 Hz the anode current is about 80µA, well below
the 200µA maximum anode current limit set by the manufacturers. We also
note here, that for AGS beams of 1 x 107 Hz, the ”average continuous anode”
current for each beam counter photomultiplier is about 20µA, because the
beam spills are at 4 sec intervals. By maintaining a low pulse height we have
been able to operate these PMTs at suﬃciently low anode currents, to ensure
a longer life time for these photomultiplier tubes. We have also compared the
pulses at the begining and end of each spill during a high rate run and seen
no pulse height variations. Any observed diﬀerences would suggest that the
dynode voltages at the end of the resistor chain are sagging below their preset
voltages, or the presence of a dynode heating eﬀect.

The pulse height spectrum as measured using a Fastbus ADC (LeCroy
1881) is shown in Fig. 5. The least count for this ADC is 0.1 pC. The main
peak of the pulse height spectrum is around ADC channel 850 and represents
roughly a 40mV pulse that has been ampliﬁed 10 times, before being routed to
the ADC input. This agrees quite well with the pulse height as seen in Fig.4,
where the peak height of the outer envelope of the band is around 40 mV.
The second smaller peak around 1700 can be identiﬁed as those events with
2 beam particles hitting the counter simultaneously. Third and fourth peaks,
corresponding to the simultaneous passage of three and four gold ions, respec-
tively, through the quartz plate are present at 2550 and 3400 ADC channels.
A Gaussian ﬁt to the main peak gives a sigma of 102 channels which represents
a 12% width for the pulse height distribution.

2.4 Radiation Damage of the Quartz Plate

Although the beam counter was tested at high rates (1×107 Hz) during the
1994 run, most of the data taking was performed at a beam rate of 5×105 Hz,
for a total exposure of 1011 Au ions. Comparison of pulses taken at the be-
gining and the end of the running period showed very little variation in the
pulse height, thus suggesting little or no radiation damage to the quartz plate.
However, during the 1995 run a gradual degradation of the pulse height was
observed as the quartz plate was exposed to a beam rate of 5×106Hz for ex-
tended periods of data taking. The cause of this drop in pulse height was
identiﬁed to be the acumulation of a thin ﬁlm of material in and around the
region where the beam passed through the quartz plate. This surface contam-

ination of the quartz plate adversely aﬀects the total internal reﬂection of the
Cherenkov light thus resulting in a loss of pulse height. It was found that the
plate could be thoroughly cleaned using methanol, thus removing this surface
deposition. Spectroscopic studies showed the surface ﬁlm to be made of carbon
and oxygen compounds.

It should be noted here that all components of the beam counter including
the quartz plate was exposed to air. During the rest of the 1995 run, Nitrogen
was circulated through the beam counter housing in an attempt to prevent the
surface contamination of the quartz plate. Although this could have reduced
the rate of accumulation, close examination of the quartz plate at the end of
the run showed a faint spot on the quartz plate. For the forthcoming run in
1996 we are redesigning the quartz plate holder so that it can be operated
in vaccuum. Additional design modiﬁcations are also being implemented to
facilitate quick changes of the quartz plate, if required, during the run.

3. The Multiplicity Detector

3.1 Detector Assembly

The E864 multiplicity detector covers the angular range from 16.6 ◦ to
45◦ (η = pseudo rapidity = 1.92 → 0.88) measured with respect to the beam
axis.
It is constructed out of four 1 cm thick scintillation counters that ﬁt
around the beam pipe as shown in Fig. 6. A sectional view along the beam is
shown in Fig. 1. It is located 13 cm downstream of the target and is tipped
at an angle of 8◦ to the vertical. Simulation studies have shown that as the
beam traverses the target, δ-ray production would result in about 200 MeV
being deposited in the scintillation counter. To remove this δ-ray eﬀect we
have shielded the entire active surface of the scintillator by a ∼ 6 cm thick
Heavymet [4] ring, around the beam pipe. As shown in Fig. 1 the counters
are mounted on two moving stages that can slide towards or away from the
beam pipe. Each counter is made of a fast (BC 420) quadrant shaped piece of
scintillator viewed by a 2 inch Hamamatsu 1828-01 phototube with the same
PMT base as described in Section 2. Booster voltages to the last two dynodes
can be provided for high rate operation. Each PMT is equipped with an LED
and a ﬁber optic channel so that long term behavior of the phototubes could
be monitored in an independent manner. The operating voltage of the PMTs
was set around 1600 V giving a 300 mV pulse height per counter for high
multiplicity events. The signal from each PMT was ﬁrst split into two equal

half-signals. Four half-signals from the four counters were combined using a
Phillip Scientiﬁc 744 Fan-in/Fan-out module to generate a summed signal and
this signal was discriminated to generate the three triggers (see next section )
used for the fall 1994 run.

3.2 Trigger Scheme

Three diﬀerent interaction triggers were developed for the E864 experiment.
A mimimum bias trigger (INT0) required that the sum of the pulses from the
four multiplicity counters had a threshold greater than 10 mV. A centrality
trigger (INT2) was implemented by selecting the events which had summed
signals from all four counters greater than 340mV. This trigger selected those
events in the highest 10% of the multiplicity distribution.
In addition, an
intermediate multiplicity trigger (INT1) was obtained by triggering on the
summed signals above a 200 mV threshold. Count down scalers were used to
select some fraction of the minimum bias (INT0) and intermediate multiplicity
events (INT1). All central event triggers (INT2) were recorded. A plot of the
pulse height distribution of the minimum bias trigger is given in Fig. 7. The
histogram represented by the dotted lines represents the 10% central events.

3.3 Comparison with Monte Carlo Studies

Because of the correlation between particle mulitiplicity and centrality a
cut in the ADC value of the multiplicity counter translates into a selection
of the impact parameter. To study the correlation between ADC value and
centrality a Monte Carlo program was written. An event is simulated with
GEANT [5] by sending a 11.71 GeV per nucleon gold ion through a 10% lead
target. This ion produces δ-rays until it interacts at a random depth in the
lead target. This collision is simulated with the HIJET [6] event generator.
The geometry for the study included the target, vacuum chamber, Heavymet
shielding, and the scintillator multiplicity counter. All of GEANT’s physics
processes were turned on for the simulation. The program simulates the num-
ber of photoelectrons expected after taking into account the energy deposited
in the scintillator, the emission spectrum for the scintillator, the geometry of
the detector, and the photocathode spectral response of the phototube. The
photoelecron distribution from the simulated data appeared similar to the ob-
served pulse height spectra from the experiment.

The results of the Monte Carlo study on the centrality selection of the
multiplicity counter can be seen in Fig. 8. Fig. 8(a) shows the distribution

of impact parameters for three diﬀerent cuts on the energy deposited in the
multiplicity counter as obtained from the program. Fig. 8(b) shows the trigger
probability for diﬀerent impact parameters for diﬀerent cuts on the energy
deposited in the multiplicity counter as obtained from the program. The solid
line represents a cut on the events with the 10% most energy deposited; the
dashed line represents the 5% most energy deposited; the dotted line represents
the 1% most energy deposited.

Fig. 8 demonstrates that the multiplicity counter can be used to roughly
select the centrality of an event. For example, if we make a cut on events with
the 10% highest pulse heights, we are selecting events with impact parameters
corresponding to the smallest 10% of the impact parameter distribution that
one would expect from a geometric impact parameter distribution 88% of the
time. Even higher pulse height cuts result in higher centrality events, although
with very high cuts the acceptance for these high centrality events also goes
down.

4. Time Resolution and Stability

The times of arrival of pulses from the counters were digitized with Fastbus

TDC modules (

Lecroy 1872A) with a least count of 50 ps. The pulse heights for the beam
counter pulses were 30-40 mV [7] and those signals were discriminated at a
threshold level of 10 mV. Using the ADC information from each PMT we
have slew corrected the TDC data independently for each counter. The slew
corrected distribution of the time diﬀerence of the two counters (tB-tA), at an
incident beam rate of 107 Hz is given in Fig.9. The σ for this distribution
as obtained by a Gaussian ﬁt is 200 ps. From this value we obtain a single
counter resolution of 141 ps, and an overall resolution of the two counter system
of 100 ps, which is the uncertainity in the start time, t0 ( = 0.5(tA+tB)) for
the E864 experiment. At the lower beam rate of 5×105 Hz our slew corrected
time resolution is 78 ps.

The time of arrival of the pulses from the four multiplicity counters were
also digitized using Fastbus TDC channels and each counter was slew corrected.
We have deﬁned the time as measured by the multiplicity counter to be the
four-fold average of the individual times from the four counters. To obtain the
time resolution of the multiplicity counter we give in Fig. 10 the distribution
of the average time minus the start time as measured by the beam counter.
When ﬁtted to a Gaussian this distribution gives a σ of 250 ps which is the
time resolution for our multiplicity counter.

5. Summary

We have developed and tested a beam counter and multiplicity detector
system at an incident beam rate of 107 Au ions s−1. To our knowledge (based
on published results) this is the ﬁrst time a quartz plate as thin as 150µm
has been successfully tested for a heavy ion beam counter. The beam counter
has a time resolution of 100 ps at an incident beam rate of 1×107 Hz and an
energy resolution of 12%. An important feature of this beam counter is the
low average photomultiplier anode current (80 µA) drawn during a one second
spill of 107 Au ions. The scintillator multiplicity counter provides a minimum-
bias, intermediate multiplicity and very high multiplicity (the highest 10% of
the multiplicity distribution) triggers. The multiplicity counter has an overall
time resolution of 250 ps. The beam counter and multiplicity detector system
show good stablity as the incident beam rate is varied from 105 Hz to 107 Hz.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants from the Department of Energy (DOE)
High Energy Division, the DOE Nuclear Division and the machine shop sup-
port of the Physics department at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
We would like to thank machinists Bob Verner and Richard Wilkey of the Uni-
versity of Massachusetts, Amherst for an excellent job of building the beam
and multiplicity counters. We also thank engineers Will Emmet and John Sin-
nott (Yale University) and Bill McGahern (BNL) for their design of the E864
front-end support systems and for their assistance in the ﬁnal installation of
the counters in the BNL beamline.

References

[1] see N. Maeda et. al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 346 (1994) 132-136 and

references quoted therein.

[2] P. L. Mattern, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, Vol.NS-21, Decem-

ber 1974.

[3] Photomultiplier Tubes and Assemblies for Scintillation Counter and High

Energy Physics, Hamamatsu.

[4] Heavymet is the trade name for an alloy consisting of 95% Tungsten, 3.5%

Nickel and 1.5% Copper and having a density 18.5 gm/cc.

[5] R. Brun et al., GEANT User’s Guide, Program Library W5013, CERN

1993.

[6] T. Ludlam et al., HIJET. A Monte Carlo Event Generator for p-Nucleus

and Nucleus-Nucleus Collisions, BNL Upton – BNL-37196.

[7] Other tests of quartz Cherenkov counters have used much larger pulse
heights (example 800mV, Private Communication, Dana Beavis, BNL)

Figure Captions

Figure 1. The E864 front-end conﬁguration of detectors consisting of the

Quartz-Cherenkov hole-veto and beam counters on the left, a
scintillator hole-veto counter in the middle, followed by the
target assembly and Multiplicity-trigger counters on the right.

Figure 2. A sketch illustrating the optical assembly of the quartz hole-veto

and beam counters; (a) shows the side view and (b) the perspective
view.

Figure 3. The modiﬁed base for the Hamamatsu 1828-01 PMT with power

suplies attached to the last two dynodes

Figure 4. Beam counter pulses during a spill of 1×107 Au ions. The vertical
scale is 20 mV/div and the horizontal scale is 5 ns/div.

Figure 5. The pulse height spectrum of the beam counter at an incident

beam rate of 1.2×107 Au ions per second.

Figure 6. Beam’s eye view of the multiplicity-trigger counters.

Figure 7. The averaged (over the four counters) multiplicity detector pulse

height distribution for minimum-bias (solid line) and 10%
most central events (dashed line).

Figure 8. Monte Carlo study of the centrality selection of the multiplicity counter.

The three diﬀerent curves represent diﬀerent cuts on the energy
deposited in the multiplicity counter. The solid line represents a cut
on the events with the 10% most energy deposited, the dashed line
represents the 5% most energy deposited, and the dotted line represents
the 1% most energy deposited. (a) Distribution of impact parameters
(in fm) which pass a 10%, 5% and 1% cut on the energy deposited in
the four scintillation counters in the multiplicity detector.
(b) Trigger probability for a particular impact parameter event to pass
a 10%, 5%, and 1% energy deposit cut.

Figure 9. The distribution of the time diﬀerence between the bottom (B) and top (A)

PMTs of the beam counter. σ(tB-tA) = 200 ps and
σ(t0)=σ(0.5(tB+tA)) = 100 ps.

Figure 10. The averaged (over the four counters) intrinsic time resolution (σ=250 ps)

of the multiplicity-trigger counter system.

Figure 1: The E864 front-end conﬁguration of detectors consisting of the
Quartz-Cherenkov hole-veto and beam counters on the left, a scintillation hole-
veto counter in the middle followed by the target assembly and Multiplicity-
trigger counter on the right.

BC-A

VC-A

BC-A

VC-A

Ion Beam

LUCITE

FRAME

QUARTZ PLATE
SUPERSIL-1

(150 

PMT
BC-B

PMT
VC-B

PMT
BC-B

IMMERSION OIL
LUCITE

QUARTZ PLATE
CORNING 2940
(1 mm)

PMT
VC-B

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: A sketch illustrating the optical assembly of the quartz hole-veto
and beam counters; (a) shows the side view and (b) the perspective view.

K

G1

Dy1 Dy2 Dy3 Dy4 Dy5 Dy6 Dy7 Dy8 Dy9 Dy10 Dy11 Dy12

A

C1

C1

C2

C2

C2

C2

C2

C2

C2

R1

R2

R3

R4

R5

R6

R7

R8

R9 R10 R11 R12 R13 R14 R15

C3

C3

C3

C3

C3

C3

C3

C3

C3

C3

C3

C3

C1 = 1nF
C2 = 10nF
C3 = 4.7nF

HV

R1 = 107kW
R2 = 360kW
R3 = 68kW
R4 = 100kW
R5 = 56kW

R6 = 56kW
R7 = 68kW
R8 = 82kW
R9 = 110kW
R10 = 164kW

R11 = 224kW
R12 = 320kW
R13 = 450kW
R14 = 280kW
R15 = 10kW

Dy11 Dy12

Anode

Figure 3: The modiﬁed base for the Hamamatsu 1828-01 PMT with power
supplies attached to the last two dynodes.

Figure 4: Beam counter pulses during a spill of 1×107 Au ions. The vertical
scale is 20 mV/div and the horizontal scale is 5 ns/div.

ADC CHANNEL NUMBER

Figure 5: The pulse height spectrum of the beam counter at an incident beam
rate of 1.2×107 Au ions per second.

.

BC420  Scintillator

Lucite Lightguide

Figure 6: Beam’s eye view of the Multiplicity-trigger counters.

ADC CHANNEL NUMBER

Figure 7: The averaged (over the four counters) Multiplicity detector pulse
height distribution for minimum-bias (solid line) and 10% central events
(dashed line).

IMPACT PARAMETER OF COLLISION (fm).

Figure 8: Monte Carlo study of the centrality selection of the multiplicity
counter. The three diﬀerent curves represent diﬀerent cuts on the energy
deposited in the multiplicity counter. The solid line represents a cut on the
events with the 10% most energy deposited, the dashed line represents the
5% most energy deposited, and the dotted line represents the 1% most energy
deposited. (a) Distribution of impact parameters (in fm) which pass a 10%,
5% and 1% cut on the energy deposited in the four scintillation counters in the
multiplicity counter. (b) Trigger probability for a particular impact parameter
event to pass a 10%, 5%, and 1% energy deposit cut.

10000

s
t
n
e
v
E

 
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

8000

6000

4000

2000

0

-2.0

-1.0

0

1.0

2.0

T(B) -T(A)  (ns)

Figure 9: The distribution of the time diﬀerence between the bottom (B) and
top (A) PMTs of the beam counter at an incident beam rate of 1×107 Au ions.
σ(tB-tA)=200 ps and σ(t0)= σ(0.5(tB+tA)=100 ps.

3

)
 
 

0
1
x
(
 
s
t

n
e
v
E

 
f

o

 
r
e
b
m
u
N

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

-2

-1

2

0
<          >
TMULT

1

(ns)

Figure 10: The averaged (over the four counters) intrinsic time resolution
(σ=250 ps) of the Multiplicity-trigger counter system.

