8
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
6
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Testrun results from prototype ﬁber detectors
for high rate particle tracking

E.C. Aschenauer, J. B¨ahr, V. Gapienko 1, B. Hoﬀmann 2,
H. L¨udecke, A. Menchikov 3, C. Mertens 4, R. Nahnhauer ∗
R. Shanidze 5

DESY Zeuthen, 15738 Zeuthen, Germany

Abstract

A ﬁber detector concept has been realized allowing to registrate particles within
less than 100 nsec with a space point precision of about 100 µm at low occupancy.
Three full size prototypes have been build by diﬀerent producers and tested at a
3 GeV electron beam at DESY. After 3 m of light guides 8 - 10 photoelectrons were
registrated by multichannel photomultipliers providing an eﬃciency of more than
99 %. Using all available data a resolution of 86 µm was measured.

1 Introduction

The advantageous use of ﬁber detectors for particle tracking has been demon-
strated for very diﬀerent conditions e.g. in the UA2-Experiment [1], CHORUS
[2], for D0 [3] and the H1-Forward Proton Spectrometer [4]. Due to the diﬀer-
ent experimental situations in these applications three types of optoelectronic
read out techniques are applied – Image Intensiﬁers plus CCD’s, Visible Light
Photon Counters (VLPC) and Position Sensitive Photomultipliers (PSPM).
However, all have in common that the precision of space point measurements
is given by hits of overlapping ﬁbers of several staggered ﬁber layers. For high
rate experiments demanding online tracking of several hundred particles per
∗ corresponding author, phone: +49 33762 77346, Fax: +49 33762 77330,

e-mail: nahnhaue@ifh.de

1 on leave from IHEP Protvino, Russia
2 now at Esser Networks GmbH, Berlin
3 on leave from JINR Dubna
4 Summerstudent from University of Clausthal Zellerfeld
5 on leave from High Energy Physics Institute, Tbilisi State University

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

2 February 2008

100 nsec bunch crossing such a concept may not work due to too high occu-
pancy of single ﬁber channels.

We propose in the following to use overlapping ﬁber roads composed of several
thin scintillating ﬁbers read out with one clear optical ﬁber. The demands and
the solutions presented below match to a possible application of the detector
as the inner tracker in the HERA-B project at DESY [5]. Similar ideas have
been used by others [6] to build a ﬁber detector for the DIRAC experiment at
CERN.

2 Detector Principle

The ﬁber detector under discussion is aimed to detect throughgoing particles
with more than 90 % eﬃciency within less than 100 nsec and a precision of
better than 100 µm. The ﬁbers should not change their characteristics signif-
icantly after an irradiation of 1 – 2 Mrad. The sensitive detector part should
have a size of about 25 x 25 cm2. The scintillating ﬁbers should be coupled
to clear optical ﬁbers of about 3 m length guiding the light to photosensors
placed outside the experimental area.

It is assumed that most particles of interest hit the detector perpendicular, i.e.
with angles less than ﬁve degrees with respect to the beam axis. In this case
low occupancy and high light yield are guaranteed by using overlapping ﬁber
roads like schematically drawn in ﬁg. 1. One ﬁber road consists of several thin

Fig. 1. Schematic view of the proposed ﬁber detector cross section and coupling
principle (LG: light guide ﬁber)

2

scintillating ﬁbers arranged precisely behind each other and coupled to one
thick light guide ﬁber. The scintillating ﬁber diameter determines the space
point resolution of the detector. The number of ﬁbers per road is ﬁxed by the
scattering angle of particles and the allowed amount of multiple scattering.
It will also inﬂuence the factor of background suppression for tracks with
larger inclination or curvature. The pitch between ﬁber roads is deﬁned by
demanding a homogeneous amount of ﬁber material across the detector width.

Keeping in mind the conditions at HERA-B, the following choices are made:

Φf ib = 480µm Nf ib/road = 7

Lf ib = 30 cm

proad

= 340 µm

Φlg = 1.7 mm Nroad

= 640

Llg = 300 cm Wdet

= 217.6 mm

with Φ and L: diameter and length of scintillating and light guide ﬁbers,
Nf ib/road: number of ﬁbers per road, proad: distance between neighboured road
centers, Nroad: number of roads per detector, Wdet: detector width.

The light guide ﬁbers are read out with the new Hamamatsu 6 64 channel
PSPM R5900–M64 with a pixel size of 2 x 2 mm2 [7]. To diminish optical
cross talk the thickness of the entrance window of the device was decreased
to 0.8 mm.

The coupling between scintillating and light guide ﬁbers is done by loose
plastic connectors. The light guides are coupled to the PSPM using a plastic
mask ﬁtting the corresponding pixel pattern.

3 Material Studies

Double clad ﬁbers of three diﬀerent producers 7
9 were tested concerning
light output, light attenuation and radiation hardness for several ﬁber diam-
eters and wavelengths of the emitted light. Details of these measurements are
given in [8]. A few results are summarized below.

8

The light output of ﬁbers of 500 µm diameter is shown in ﬁg. 2. Generally it

6 Hamamatsu Photonics K.K., Electron tube division, 314–5, Shimokanzo, Toky-
ooka Village. Iwatagun, Shizuoka–ken, Japan
7 BICRON, 12345 Kinsman Road, Newbury, Ohio, USA
8 pol. hi. tech., s.r.l., S.P. Turanense, 67061 Carsoli(AQ), Italy
9 KURARAY Co. LTD., Nikonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103, Japan

3

Fig. 2. Light output from 500 µm diameter ﬁbers for several ﬁber materials of three
producers

can be seen, that the light yield decreases with increasing scintillator emission
wavelength because the PM sensitivity curve is not unfolded. There is no
remarkable diﬀerence between the best materials of the three producers. A
mirror at the end of the ﬁber increases the light output by a factor 1.7.

Several tests were performed to couple scintillating and light guide ﬁbers.
Finally the coupling eﬃciency became better than 95 %, independent of the
medium between both parts (air, glue, grease).

The light attenuation of clear ﬁbers was measured coupling them to single
scintillating ﬁber roads excited by a Ruthenium source. The clear ﬁbers were
cutted back to the length under investigation. Results for two producers are
given in ﬁg. 3.

Radiation hardness tests of ﬁbers were made using an intense 70 MeV proton
beam at the Hahn–Meitner–Institute Berlin. 1 Mrad radiation was deposited
within a few minutes. For all materials investigated we observed a damage of
the scintillator and the transparency of the ﬁber which was followed by a long
time recovery of up to 600 h. An example is shown in ﬁg. 4. More detailed
studies using glued and nonglued ﬁbers and irradiate them in air and nitrogen
atmosphere are still ongoing.

Summarizing all results of our material studies we decided to use the KU-

4

Fig. 3. Light attenuation in clear ﬁbers of 1.7 mm diameter produced by Kuraray
and pol.hi.tech.

Fig. 4. Time evolution of light output for KURARAY SCSF 78M ﬁbers irradiated
with 0.2 and 1.0 Mrad at 10 and 20 cm respectively. The solid and dotted curves
correspond to measurements with a source placed at 20 and 25 cm.

RARAY ﬁbers SCSF-78M with a diameter of 480 µm for the scintillating part
of our detector prototypes. For clear ﬁbers still two choices seem to be possible:
1.7 mm ﬁbers from KURARAY or pol. hi. tech..

5

Fig. 5. Photograph of part of the polished endface of the Zeuthen prototype detector

Similar investigations of the same materials have been done by our colleagues
from Heidelberg University [9]. For their irradiation tests they used a Co60
source.

4 Detector Production

Using winding technology as developed for the CHORUS experiment [10] we
built a detector production chain at our institute. A drum of 80 cm diameter
allows to produce ﬁve detectors at once. The production time for winding one
drum is about 14 h. Sticking the ﬁbers to the connector holes was still done
by hand and rather time consuming. A part of the polished endface of one of
our detectors is shown in ﬁg. 5.

Two other detector prototypes are ordered from industry. GMS–Berlin 10 fol-
lowed a technology proposed by the university of Heidelberg [9] mounting
single layers on top of each other using epoxy glue. Each layer is prepared on
a v-grooved vacuum table. One layer per day can be produced in this case.
The connector is here also added by hand. The production technology used
by KURARAY is unknown to us.

To get the precision of the detector geometry quantiﬁed we measured the
coordinates of all ﬁbers of the polished endface of the three detectors. In ﬁg.
6 the deviation from the ideal position is given per ﬁber road. Some stronger
local eﬀects are visible. Averaging these results characteristic accuracies of 20
µm, 50 µm and 10 µm are calculated for the Zeuthen, GMS and KURARAY
detectors respectively.

10 GMS - Gesellschaft f¨ur Mess- und Systemtechnik mbH, Rudower Chaussee 5,
12489 Berlin, Germany

6

Fig. 6. Deviation of ﬁbers from ideal position per ﬁber road for the prototype
detectors from Zeuthen, GMS and KURARAY

5 Opto–Electronic Readout

The 640 channel scintillating ﬁber detectors are coupled via plastic connectors
to ten 3 m long light guide cables of 64 clear ﬁbers of 1.7 mm diameter. Each
cable is coupled to a Hamamatsu 64 channel position sensitive photomultiplier
R5900 - M64. The coupling is done using a plastic mask, ﬁtting the anode
pattern of the PSPM with 2 · 2 mm2 pixel size. A detailed description of the
photomultiplier is given by the producer in [11].

The pulse rise time of the PSPM under study is a few nanoseconds. Therefore
the time behaviour of the ﬁber detector will be mainly restricted by the readout
electronics. For a high rate experiment the signals have to be digitized and
pipelined in an early stage. We will not treat this problem here instead we try
to measure the total light amplitude as seen by the PSPM. For this purpose
we used the readout boards originally developed for the L3 ﬁber detector
[12]. Like in previous beam tests [13], [14] the serial output of these boards is
digitized by a SIROCCO–II ﬂash–ADC using a VME OS9 online data taking
system with CAMAC interface.

7

We got the ﬁrst prototypes of the PSPM just before the testrun started. Finally
we used only one exemplar for the beam measurements. The corresponding
light guide cable could be moved to all ten connector places across the de-
tectors. Mechanical precision was guaranteed using precise pins and holes for
each position. Using 20 nsec long light pulses of diﬀerent intensity produced
by a LED coupled to a ﬁber we made an extensive check of the behaviour of
the PSPM in combination with our readout electronics. In the meantime ﬁve
other exemplars of the photomultiplier have been studied with similar results.

In ﬁg. 7 we show the amplitude distribution for one pixel illuminated with
weak light signals. Beside a narrow pedestal a clear one photoelectron peak
is seen. The gain of the PSPM comes out to be independent of the number
of incoming photons up to more than 10 photoelectrons and linear in the
high voltage range between 800 and 980 V. This allows to calibrate the light
output measured in FADC-channels to the corresponding average number of
photoelectrons. What has to be taken into account in addition in this case
is the diﬀerent sensitivity of the PSPM pixels. We measured it, putting the
same amount of light to each channel and found a variation by about a factor
of two.

The applicability of a PSPM for ﬁber detector readout is limited by its cross
talk properties, i.e. the response of other pixels than the illuminated one to the
incoming light signal. In case of the R5900-M64, Hamamatsu has decreased
the cross talk already considerably by decreasing the thickness of the entrance
window from 1.3 mm to 0.8 mm. Nevertheless the cross talk depends strongly
on the threshold cut applied and is still about 10 % for a one photoelectron
cut and typical light signals as can be seen from ﬁg. 8. From the ﬁgure one
observes also that most of the cross talk comes from the nearest neighbours
of the directly illuminated pixel. Using an appropriate hit selection procedure
this cross talk can be strongly suppressed. If for instance a local maximum
selection is used it vanishes completely [13], [14].

Whereas the amount of cross talk depends only weakly on the PSPM high
voltage, it is strongly correlated to the amount of incoming light to a pixel
(see ﬁg. 9). The diameter of the light guide ﬁbers connected to the pixels starts
to inﬂuence the cross talk behaviour above 1.5 mm.

Our ﬁber detector data taking in the testbeam has been synchronized with re-
spect to data taking with a four plane Microstrip Detector Hodoscope (MSD).
To increase the ﬁnal data rate for the two systems with free running clocks
a long trigger gate of 2 µsec was chosen. As found later, that leads already
to discharge eﬀects for early PSPM signals. In ﬁg. 10 the ﬂash ADC response
to a constant light signal arriving at diﬀerent trigger times is shown. For our
testrun data the arrival time of a trigger is unknown but uniform. Correspond-
ingly we had to unfold all ﬂash ADC spectra using the behaviour measured
in ﬁg. 10 to determine the correct average number of photoelectrons.

8

Fig. 7. Flash ADC spectrum for one
pixel of the 64 channel photomulti-
plier R5900-M64 illuminated with weak
light signals from a LED

Fig. 8. Detection probability for light
signals corresponding to about 8 pho-
toelectrons in dependence of a thresh-
old cut given in numbers of photoelec-
trons for the illuminated pixel (circles),
cross talk from direct neighbouring pix-
els (squares) and cross talk from dis-
tant ones (triangles)

Fig. 9. Detection probability for sig-
nal (circles), near (squares) and far (tri-
angles) cross talk for incoming light of
diﬀerent intensity given in number of
photoelectrons. An one photoelectron
cut has been applied to the data.

Fig. 10. Average number of FADC -
channels in dependence of the arrival
time of the corresponding trigger in a
2 µsec gate for constant light signals
of two diﬀerent intensities (squares and
circles)

9

6 Testrun Setup

In a two weeks testrun in October 1997 the three available detector prototypes
have been studied in the 3 GeV electron beamline T21 at DESY. More than
5*105 triggers have been recorded under several conditions in various runs.
The setup is schematically drawn in ﬁg. 11.

Fig. 11. Schematic view of the testrun setup. M1-M4: silicon microstrip detectors,
RD1 and RD2: ﬁber reference detectors, T1-T4: trigger paddles, FD: ﬁber detector
to be tested

A trigger system of four scintillator paddles T1 - T4 selects by 4-fold coinci-
dence a beam region of 2*2 cm2. The corresponding trigger rate was 50 kHz,
leading to a ﬁnal data acquisition rate of about 5 Hz.

Two ﬁber reference detectors RD1 and RD2 ﬁxed to the same support as the
MSD hodoscope paddles are used mainly to perform an independent alignment
of these components. Each ﬁber reference detector is made out of two double
layers of 32 ﬁbers of 1 mm diameter. The total intrinsic resolution of the
system is 72 µm.

The MSD hodoscope consists of four paddles with 320 or 640 strips of 100 µm
pitch. The intrinsic resolution for one hit clusters is about 30 µm.

The distribution of diﬀerences of coordinates measured by the ﬁber reference
detector and the corresponding MSD paddle has been used to align the mea-
suring system. Alignment errors of 58 µm, 70 µm, 13 µm, and 10 µm have
been found for the paddles 1 to 4. The result reﬂects problems of the geomet-
rical arrangement with respect to the beam divergence. The MSD prediction
precision at the ﬁber detector position has been calculated from ﬁts of four

10

hit tracks to be 75 µm.

The ﬁber detector FD is movable in x and y direction perpendicular to the
beam. About 30 diﬀerent positions have been used for measurements. The
alignment of the ﬁber detector with respect to the MSD-coordinate system
has been done separately for every position with a precision of about 10 µm.

7 Results from Testrun Data

All testrun data have been sensitivity corrected corresponding to the correc-
tion table measured before for the PSPM operating with a high voltage of
980 V. A noise threshold of 35 FADC channels has been applied afterwards
leaving 1 o/oo eﬃciency for a noise hit per beam trigger. The threshold to se-
lect events with more than one photoelectron seen is chosen to be 150 FADC
channels at this high voltage with the one photoelectron peak observed at 100
FADC channels.

For the selection of hitted ﬁber roads in principle a simple cut excluding single
photoelectron hits would be suﬃcient to reduce background from cross talk
and other sources. Results can be improved, if a local maximum search is
possible removing all nearby cross talk hits [13], [14]. In the following we will
use both selection criteria in common.

After selecting hits, a cluster algorithm combines neighbouring ones to a track
cluster. As can be seen from ﬁg. 12 from geometry one or two ﬁber roads could

Fig. 12.
leading to one or two hit events

Illustration of the diﬀerent zones A and B for overlapping ﬁber roads

11

Fig. 13. Unfolded light output spectra as measured by the FADC for the detectors
from a.) Zeuthen, b.) GMS and c.) KURARAY

be hitted by a particle crossing perpendicular to the detector plane .

In ﬁgures 13 a-c the unfolded FADC spectra are shown for the detectors pro-
duced by Zeuthen, GMS and KURARAY respectively. Using the described
calibration leads to an average number of photoelectrons between eight and
ten and correspondingly eﬃciencies above 99 % if the one photoelectron cut
is applied (see table 1). The larger values for the GMS detector seem to be
due to the very good quality of the polished and mirrored detector endface.

As can be seen from ﬁg. 14 the eﬃciency varies only weakly for diﬀerent

Table 1
Average number of photoelectrons < Npe >, eﬃciency ǫ and resolution σ for the
ﬁber detectors produced by Zeuthen, GMS and KURARAY

detector

< Npe > ǫ/% σ/µm

Zeuthen

GMS

KURARAY

99.4

99.9

99.0

94

90

88

8.2

10.1

7.5

12

Efficiency for 1 PE cut

Fig. 14. Eﬃciency at diﬀerent positions of the ﬁber detector prototypes from
Zeuthen (squares), GMS (triangles) and KURARAY (circles) averaged for 64 ﬁber
roads. Particles hit 5 cm from the near (open symbols) or far (ﬁlled symbols) end of
the ordered detector part. An one photoelectron cut has been applied to all data.

positions of the light guide cable, i.e. diﬀerent ﬁber roads across the detector.
The variation of the eﬃciency along the ﬁbers is also marginal. However the
distance between near and far measurements is only about 15 cm.

Expecting in principle only one incoming particle from beam triggers one
observes in the data after the one photoelectron cut still 10 % of events with
more than one track cluster in the ﬁber detector. A rough GEANT Monte
Carlo simulation including only the detector material comes up with about
4 % additional hits produced by matter eﬀects. These hits increase the number
of two hit track clusters and lead to additional ”matter” tracks. 2 % of such
tracks are observed. Fig. 15 shows the distance between tracks in multi-track
events for data and Monte Carlo. Comparing both one can not exclude cross
talk at the percent level. Possible sources are accidentals (noise), the PSPM
glass window, ﬁbers in the detector, connectors or light guide cables.

To calculate the intrinsic resolution of our ﬁber detector geometry one has to
keep in mind again that the ﬁber roads have two regions A and B where one
or two of them should give light signals for throughgoing particles (see ﬁg. 12).

13

Fig. 15. Distribution of distances between tracks in multitrack events after an one
photoelectron cut on the light output has been made for a.) data and b.) Monte
Carlo simulation.

Table 2
Width, fraction of appearance, intrinsic geometrical resolution and resolution mea-
sured in beam test for the two regions of a ﬁber road where one or two hits are
produced by a crossing particle.

region width/µm fraction/% σgeom/µm σF D /µm

A

B

A + B

280

60

340

82

18

100

81

17

69

97

30

86

With a ﬁber diameter of 480 µm, a cladding thickness of 30 µm and a pitch of
340 µm values of 260 µm and 80 µm are derived for the widths of the regions
A and B. Keeping in mind that the one photoelectron cut excludes low light
signals one calculates the values given in table 2 for the width of the regions,
the fraction of crossing particles and the corresponding resolution. Combining
these numbers an overall intrinsic resolution of 69 µm could be expected.

14

Fig. 16. Distribution of the diﬀerence of coordinates measured by the ﬁber detectors
and the MSD hodoscope after an one photoelectron cut has been applied. The curve
is the result of a ﬁt with two gaussian functions.

The diﬀerence between the coordinates of a crossing particle measured with
the ﬁber detector and with the MSD hodoscope is distributed in ﬁg. 16 for
all data of all runs. A ﬁt with two gaussian functions yields a resolution of
σ = 114µm for the main component. Unfolding the MSD precision of 75
µm a ﬁber detector resolution of 86 µm is calculated, near to the theoretical
expectation.

Separating events with one and two ﬁber roads hit allows to calculate the
resolution for tracks crossing regions A and B. The values given in the last
column of table 2 are also close to the theoretical estimates. Only the double
road hit distribution needs two gaussian functions to be described reasonably.
The second component with a large width is mainly due to matter eﬀects like
delta-electrons which lead to additional hits in neighbouring ﬁbers.

The resolution has also been measured for diﬀerent positions in diﬀerent de-
tectors (see ﬁg. 17 and table 1). No remarkable variations were observed. The
statistics and precision of measurements are not suﬃcient to establish local
eﬀects due to problems in mechanical detector production.

15

Fiber Detector Resolution

Fig. 17. Resolution at diﬀerent positions of the ﬁber detector prototypes from
Zeuthen (squares), GMS (triangles) and KURARAY (circles) averaged for 64 ﬁber
roads. Particles hit 5cm from the near (open symbols) or far (ﬁlled symbols) end of
the ordered detector part. An one photoelectron cut has been applied to all data.

A few additional phenomena which may inﬂuence the tracking precision in an
experiment have also been considered during the testrun. All prototypes have
”unordered” ﬁber regions of about 7cm near to the 640 channel connector.
Throughgoing particles are registrated in this region with a precision of about
1 mm.

The 640 clear ﬁbers of 1.7 mm diameter and 3 m length give a good possibil-
ity to produce Cerenkov light if crossed by charged particles. That depends
strongly on the light guide arrangement: the largest eﬀect can be expected
near to the connector. Exposing this region to the electron beam, less than
1 % of crossing particles produced hits after applying the one photoelectron
cut.

Particle showers from nearby material increase background and occupancy
and decrease the detector resolution. A small eﬀect of this kind may be seen
already in ﬁg. 17 comparing the values measured for the detector boundaries
with those in the central region.

16

8 Summary

Three ﬁber detector prototypes have been tested. They are made out of 640
overlapping roads of seven 480 µm ﬁbers coupled to 1.7 mm diameter light
guides of 3 m length readout with 64 channel photomultipliers.

For all three detectors an eﬃciency of about 99 % and a resolution better
than 100 µm have been measured in an exposure to a 3 GeV electron beam
at DESY.

These results together with radiation hardness studies of the used ﬁber mate-
rials seem to make it possible to use a corresponding detector in a high rate
experiment like HERA-B.

The readout of such a detector - connectors, light guides, mask arrangement,
front end electronics - has to be adapted with care to the speciﬁc demands of
the application.

Acknowledgement

Part of this work was done in close collaboration with groups from the uni-
versities of Heidelberg and Siegen. We want to thank our colleagues for their
good cooperation and many fruitful discussions.

In particular we thank Prof. F.Eisele for providing the KURARAY detector,
bought by Heidelberg University, for the beam tests.

The ﬁber irradiation tests were possible only due to the kind support of the
Hahn-Meitner-Institute Berlin. We are deeply indebted to the ISL accelerator
team and want to thank in particular Dr. D. Fink, Dr. K. Maier and Dr. M.
M¨uller from HMI and Prof. H.A. Klose from GMS for a lot of practical help.

We acknowledge the beneﬁt from the DESY II accelerator crew and the test
area maintainance group.

References

[1] Ansorge, R., et al., NIM 265, 33 (1988)

[2] Annies, P., et al., NIM A367, 367 (1995)

17

[3] Bross, A.D., Nucl. Phys. B (Proc.Suppl.) 44, 12 (1995)

Adams,D.,et al., Nucl. Phys. B (Proc.Suppl.) 44, 332 (1995)

[4] B¨ahr, J., et a., Proceedings of the 28th Intern. Conf. on High Energy Physics,

Warsaw, Poland, 1996, eds. Z.Ajduk,A.K.Wroblewski V. II, p. 1759

[5] Lohse, T., et al., HERA-B Technical Proposal, DESY-PRC 94/02 (1994)

[6] Ferro–Luzzi, M., et al., contribution presented by A.Gorin, to appear in

Proceedings of the workshop SCIFI97, Notre Dame, USA, 1997

[7] Yoshizawa, Y., et al., to appear in Proceedings of the workshop SCIFI97, Notre

Dame, USA, 1997

[8] Aschenauer, E.C., et al., preprint DESY 97-174 (1997)

[9] Dreis, B., et al., preprint DESY 98-049 (1998)

[10] Nakano, T., et al., Proceedings of the workshop SCIFI93, Notre Dame, USA,

1993, eds. A. Bross, R. Ruchti, M. Wayne, p. 525

[11] Yoshizawa, Y., et al., Hamamatsu technical information, No. TPMH 9002E01

[13] B¨ahr, J., et al., Proceedings of the workshop SCIFI93, Notre Dame, USA, 1993,

[12] Akbari, H., et al., NIM A302, 415 (1991)

eds. A. Bross, R. Ruchti, M. Wayne, p.578

[14] B¨ahr, J., et al., NIM A371, 380 (1996)

18

