8
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
0
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN HYBRID PHOTON DETECTORSa

DANIEL FERENC
Div. PPE,
CERN,
1211-Geneva,
Switzerland
E-mail: Daniel.Ferenc@CERN.ch

New developments in HPD design are presented, triggered by applications in high
energy physics and astrophysics. The presented HPD designs are based on three
innovations. (i) In order to achieve the highest possible surface coverage in a RICH
detector, we introduced a photoelectron focussing method which is eﬃcient to the
periphery of the photocathode. (ii) To prevent positive ion feedback in HPDs, we
introduced a permanent potential barrier in front of the anode. (iii) To replace a
transmittive by a reﬂective photocathode, we arrived at a conceptually new HPD
design with surprisingly good imaging characteristics, high quantum eﬃciency and
low cost.

1 Introduction

With the onset of new technologies, Hybrid Photon Detectors (HPDs) became
the most favourable option for detection of Cherenkov photons in large area
Ring Imaging Cherenkov (RICH) detectors. Modern HPD detectors comprise
high quantum eﬃciency, high photoelectron collection eﬃciency and sharp im-
age reproduction. We present some new developments in HPDs, of particular
importance for applications in RICH detectors. The goals achieved in the
presented HPD designs are:

1. minimized dead area of individual HPDs, and consequently maximized

active area of a RICH detector, 81% in a hexagonal HPD packing,

2. protection against the positive ion feedback, particularly important in

gamma ray astronomy, and

3. application of a low cost and high quantum eﬃciency reﬂective photo-

cathode in an HPD.

For all the electron optics simulations presented, the SIMION 3D software 1 has
been used. In the ﬁgures presented, only functional elements (conductors) are
aPresented at the conference NEW DETECTORS, 36th WORKSHOP of the INFN
ELOISATRON PROJECT, ETTORE MAJORANA CENTRE FOR SCIENTIFIC CUL-
TURE, Erice, Trapani, Sicily, November 1-7, 1997. To appear in the proceedings, World
Scientiﬁc, Editors C. Williams and T. Ypsilantis.

1

shown. Electrons are simulated with the initial energy of 0.25 eV and emission
angles +45◦, -45◦ and 0◦ relative to the normal.

2 “Killing the dead area”

The most important problem in the integration of HPDs into a matrix of a
large-surface RICH detector is the low overall photon-sensitive surface cov-
erage, caused by a typically high HPD dead area. HPDs have usually been
designed as stand-alone devices, and very little, if any care has been taken
of the relationship between the physical and the sensitive surface areas. In
those applications when the Cherenkov photon detection pixel size of 1-2 cm
is suﬃciently small, one can use single-pixel HPDs (without internal imaging)
and take care of the large dead area by focussing the light to the sentive area
by the means of lenses or Winstone cones. In the applications which require
a smaller pixel size (e.g. 1 mm), one has to use large diameter HPDs with
internal imaging.

irregular electron trajectory!

Figure 1: Proximity-focussing 5 inch diameter pad-HPD. Photons enter HPD from the left
side, photoelectrons are focussed onto the silicon-pad detector on the right side. Photoelec-
trons emerging from the periphery of the photocathode are incorrectly focussed. Electrodes
are kept at the following potentials, from left to right, respectively: -20 kV, -15 kV, -11 kV,
-4.7 kV and 0 V. Electrons are simulated with an initial energy of 0.25 eV and an emission
angle of +45◦, -45◦ and 0◦ relative to the normal.

Proximity-focussing HPD designed for the LHCb experiment 2, is an ex-
ample of a large imaging HPD (Fig. 1). It has been conceptually designed to
have a small dead area, for close hexagonal packing.

2

Figure 2:
the small radius of curvature of equipotential lines.

Incorrect electron focussing close to the periphery of the photocathode is due to

new electrode

Figure 3: The new electrode allows the potential lines to be conducted out from the HPD
through the created slot, curing the unwanted strong curvature of the equipotential lines
seen in Fig. 3.

3

Photons enter the HPD detector from the left side, and photoelectrons
(emerging from the photocathode on the internal surface of the entrance win-
dow) undergo acceleration and (electrostatic) focalization onto the silicon-pad
detector on the right side. There is a good mapping between the image on
the photocathode and the projected image on the pad detector, except for
the region close to the periphery of the photocathode. Although the physical
shape of this HPD is optimized for close packing (the photocathode has been
extended towards the periphery as much as possible), there is still a rather
large functionally dead area.

Figure 4: An appropriate focussing of all electrons, including those from the edge of the
photocathode, results from the application of a new electrode. Potential lines are “con-
ducted” out from the tube through the slot between this electrode and the window support.
Electrodes are kept at the following potentials, from left to right, respectively: -20 kV, -19.45
kV, -15 kV, -11 kV, -4.7 kV and 0 V.

The reason for the failure becomes evident from Fig. 2. Equipotential lines
have a rather small radius of curvature close to the edge of the photocathode.
Photoelectrons emitted from that region are therefore too strongly accelerated
along the potential gradient, i.e. towards the center of the HPD.

To ﬁx this problem, one should reduce the curvature of the potential dis-
tribution. One is tempted to redesign the window supporting structure and let
potential lines leave the tube, but for constructional reasons (related in fact
to the maximal exclusion of the mechanical dead area), this was not possible.
Therefore we searched for another solution with the basic idea to reduce the
ﬁeld curvature by “conducting” some of the potential lines out from the tube,

4

around the metallic window support. The solution was found in the creation of
a slot which acts as a “potential-conductor”, see Fig. 3. The slot was created
by the insertion of a specially shaped new electrode. The unwanted potential
lines are indeed conducted away through the slot between the new electrode
and the body of the tube, and the resulting ﬁeld in the problematic peripheral
region has evidently lost its strong curvature, see Fig. 3, Fig. 4.

Figure 5: A cross-focussing 5-inch diameter HPD, with superior imaging characteristics.
Electrodes are kept at the following potentials, from left to right, respectively: -20 kV, -19.97
kV, -19.4 kV, +100 V, and 0 V.

The same method has been successfully applied in a diﬀerent design, the
so called cross-focussing HPD design, shown in Fig. 5. This HPD can also be
hexagonally packed with the same surface coverage of 81% .

Apart from providing a much narrower spread of photoelectrons on the
silicon pad detector, and thus a superior imaging performance, this design
also provides a simple way to apply the protection against the positive ion
feedback 5, which is the subject of the following section.

3 Potential barrier - protection against the ion feedback

Air Cherenkov Telescopes (ACT) have been considered the ultimate instru-
ments for the ground based detection of high energy cosmic gamma rays 3,4.

5

U = 0 Volts

positive
ions

Figure 6: Positive ion trajectories, when the conical electrode is set to the anode potential
(0 V). Ions emerge from the surface of the anode (right) and become accelerated towards
the photocathode (left), eventually producing damage and operational noise.

potential
barrier

positive
ions

6

Figure 7: HPD design with a conical barrier–electrode at +100 V. Between the barrier–
electrode and the anode a potential barrier is established (see Fig. 8) to repel back the
positive ions emerging from the anode surface.

In order to lower the energy threshold for the detection of cosmic gamma rays
down to 20 GeV – to explore the only unexplored window in cosmic electromag-
netic spectrum (20 GeV to 300 GeV) – one should both increase the detector
area, and achieve an unprecedented photon detection with single photon sen-
sitivity and very high eﬃciency. Considering photon sensors, HPDs currently
present the most promising solution. However, commercial devices have still
some serious drawbacks and need further improvement. In particular, it is very
important to reduce the internal instrumental noise below the present limits,
because other sources of noise in imaging air Cherenkov detectors (like the
night sky background) are irreducible.

The presence of positive ions in a vacuum tube is particularly devastat-
ing because the acceleration and subsequent dumping of positive ions into a
photocathode leads both to creation of noise through electrons released, and
to a damage of the photocathode 6,7. In the high-vacuum tubes the vast ma-
jority of positive ions do not originate from residual gas, but rather from the
impact of accelerated photoelectrons on the surface of the anode. Cesium ions
are particularly abundant because they usually spread inside tubes during and
after the manufacturing of photocathodes.

Trajectories of singly charged positive ions are shown in Fig. 6, emerging
from the anode at normal incidence with energy 44 eV. Note that the angular
and energetic distributions of positive ions are at this point unknown. We have
worked out a measurement scheme, but at the time being we are using only a
very rough estimate that the ions could reach an energy of about 30 eV.

It has been previously demonstrated 5 that the insertion of an electro-
static potential barrier close to the anode solves the ion feedback problem.
Apart from being complete, this solution is easy to implement and it preserves
cylindrical symmetry of the device.

As demonstrated in Fig. 7, the functionality of the conical barrier–electrode
is simple: being kept at a potential somewhat higher than the anode potential,
it breaks down the monotonous decrease of the potential for positive particles
towards the photocathode, and creates a potential barrier in front of the an-
ode. The barrier prevents positive ions from penetrating further towards the
photocathode. The potential distribution in front of the anode plane is shown
in a magniﬁed view in Fig. 8. Trajectories of singly charged positive ions are
simulated with identical initial conditions like before.

The precision of the potential on the barrier–electrode, required for sta-
ble electron focussing, is not a critical issue – variations of even 10% on the
potential will leave the electron focussing essentially unchanged 5,8. The most
common voltage supply may be therefore used to bias the barrier–electrode,
while a separate, unipolar and very stable voltage supply could be used to bias

7

the focussing electrodes.

electrostatic
potential

potential
barrier

positive
ions

anode surface

Figure 8: Potential distribution in front of the anode plane of HPD from Fig. 7. Positive
ions of energy Eion=44 eV and emission angle normal to the anode surface start “climbing”
the potential barrier (Eb=45 eV) but eventually become repelled.

4 HPD with a reﬂective photocathode

Semi-transparent photocathodes, commonly used in photon detectors, present
a problem per se: they need to be opaque for photons, but at the same time
transmittive for photoelectrons.

An alternative solution is to use a photocathode in a reﬂective mode, i.e.
in a conﬁguration when photoelectrons emerge from the same surface through
which photons enter. A considerably higher quantum eﬃciency is granted, but
perhaps equally important, the photocathode manufacturing process is not any
more strictly constrained to extremely high tolerances. In particular, there is
no need to perform some of the most complicated stages in the processing
of the III-V photocathodes (like e.g. GaAsP), namely the attachment of the
epitaxially grown surface onto the entrance window of the phototube, and then
the removal (usually by etching) of the substrate from the opposite side.

Motivated by these considerations, we have developed a conceptually new
HPD device - the imaging HPD with reﬂective photocathode, see Fig. 9. This

8

Figure 9:
Imaging HPD with reﬂective photocathode. Photoelectrons emerge from the
photocathode attached to the surface of conical “blinds”. Note the surprisingly good imaging
performance! Electrodes are kept at the following potentials, from left to right, respectively:
-20 kV, -19.4 kV, +100 V, and 0 V.

9

cylindrically symmetric device converts photons into photoelectrons in the pho-
tocathodes mounted on the surface of the conical “blinds”, attached mechani-
cally and electrically to the entrance window. After a detailed electron optics
optimization, this device provided a surprisingly good imaging quality, see
Fig. 9. Note that two imaging operational modes are possible: (i) a mapping
of each individual blind electrode into a single “point”, in which case the sili-
con detector surface should be placed slightly closer towards the photocathode
than in Fig. 9, and (ii) a point-to-point mapping, as shown in Fig. 9.

Among the drawbacks of this particular design, one should note a compro-
mised photon angular acceptance and a relatively large diﬀerence in the time
of ﬂight of photoelectrons emitted from diﬀerent points on the same blind.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Eckart Lorenz for introducing me into the world of HPDs.
The LHCb-related applications presented in this paper were done in a collab-
oration with Jacques Seguinot and Tom Ypsilantis, and the concept of re-
ﬂective photocathode HPDs has been innitiated in a collaboration with Guy
Pai´c. Many thanks to Dario Hrupec who participated in part of the presented
activities.

References

1. ”SIMION 3D Version 6.0” by David A. Dahl 43ed ASMS Conference on
Mass Spectrometry and Allied Topics, May 21-26 1995, Atlanta, Georgia,
pg 717 .

2. LHCb Technical Proposal, CERN LHCC 98-4, Febr. 1998.

J. Seguinot, contribution to this workshop.

3. MAGIC Proposal, 1997.
4. N. Magnussen, contribution to this workshop.
5. D. Ferenc, D. Hrupec and E. Lorenz, to be published in Nucl.

Inst.

Meth.

A387 (1997) 74.

6. R. Mirzoyan, E. Lorenz, D. Petry, and C. Prosch, Nucl. Inst. Meth.

7. S. Bradbury, R. Mirzoyan, J. Gebauer, E. Feigl, and E. Lorenz, Nucl.

Inst. Meth. A387 (1997) 45.

8. D. Hrupec, Diploma thesis, Rudjer Boˇskovi´c Institute, Zagreb, 1997.
9. D. Ferenc, “A cross–focussing imaging HPD for the LHCb RICH detec-

tors”, LHCb report, 1998.

10

