8
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
3
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
1
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Sonoluminescence as instrument for the measurement of
time parameters of fast photomultipliers

P.V.Vorob’ev, I.N.Nesterenko, A.R.Frolov, T.V.Shaftan

Institute of Nuclear Physics, 630090, Novosibirsk

1 Abstract

The apparatus description for control of the time parameters of photomultipliers with high
time resolution is described. For generation of ultrashort light ﬂashes have been used sono-
luminescence eﬀect – emission of the light ﬂashes which is appearing at the stressed interior
of collapsing air microbubble by sound wave in water.

2 Introduction.

The modern experiment demands of photoelements with a high time resolution. That prob-
lems arises at diagnostic of short electron bunch by synhrotron radiation and the high energy
physics experiments, where is used often the time of ﬂight methods of measurements. For
this experiments it is necessary to realize metrological attestation of photoelements. There-
fore, it is very important to create eﬀective, inexpensive device for generation ultrashort light
pulses. This light source have to possess suﬃcient brightness and wide spectral range. For
generation of ultrashort light ﬂashes have been used the sonoluminescence (SL) eﬀect.

The SL phenomenon was discovered in 1934 [1] and until present time is remaining

enigmatic one. As it turned out, that SL ﬂashes are possessing of unique parameters:

- at the each ﬂash emit 105

106 of photons in spectral range from 150 to 800 nm[2];

−

- the emission spectrum of the ﬂash ﬁt to one of black body at eﬀective temperature

about 50000◦K;

- the ﬂash duration is very small τ

10 psec[3, 2];

≤

- the dispertion of time interval between ﬂashes is about 100 psec[3];

- size of emission region is less than 3 µm;

- position stable of emission region is better than 3 µm (at measurement by 1000 ﬂashes)

[3].

1

The good review about SL that we know and that we unknow one can be found in
[2]. Today amaizing temporal and spectral characteristics of SL phenomena have not of
satisfactory explanation. Neither the approach of Shwinger [4] and his followers [6, 5], which
is basing of presentations about quantum vacuum in cavity with moving acceleration wall,
nor gasdynamics approach are not explaning observation parameters of SL ﬂashes. However,
SL is very simply to observe.

3 Apparatus for generating of sonolumimescence

Many time was noted in [2] the apparatus for observation of SL is simple and inexpensive
(ﬁg. 1) and its can be done in scholl physical laboratory. The main part of the apparutus
is spherical ﬂask with volume about 100 ml. This ﬂask is ﬁlled up clean deaerated water at
temperature near 0◦C.

The ﬁrst spherical harmonic frequency of volumetric luquid oscillation is equal:

about 25 kHz and little bit one is shifted relatively calculated frequency because of inﬂuence
of ﬂask wall. The oscillation is excited by four piezoelectric transducers (PZT), which are
glued at the ﬂask equator. The ﬁfth PZT is placed to ﬂask bottom and one is used only for
control of acoustic resonance. For excitation of four PZT is used highly stabilized generator
and powerful audioampliﬁer (100 W). The ampliﬁer output is loaded by consecutive oscillat-
ing circuit, made up by capacity of the PZT and additional inductance. This circuit is tuned
to the frequency of basic mode of water-ﬁlled ﬂask. A standing spherical wave in water
is producing a dynamical trap in the ﬂask center, in which may be captured gas bubble.
This bubble is produced by microboiler or quick dive in water thin glass stick. The bubble
behaviour depends on the amplitude of sound wave. One can to emphasize four levels of
excitation power at which bubble behaviour qualitatively is changed:

1) power level is suﬃcient for bubble keeping into the trap. The bubble follow in ﬂask
center. However, the bubble life time is limited and one quickly dissolve in deaerated
water.

2) power level, at which the bubble is stable and one exists unrestrictly long time.

3) ”dancing bubble”, at this power level bubble performs randomize jumps with amplitude

about of millimeter.

4) power level, at which ”dance” is ceased and the bubble is stable. In this time bubble

brightness is changed. From begining this power level SL is observed.

5) at greate power level bubble is destroyed.

The bubble existence and one stability is controled by ﬁfth PZT drive signal, which one may
be observed as Lissague ﬁgure on oscilloscope screen.

f =

c
R

2

4 Time measurements

The measurements time resolution of photomultiplier (PMT) was realized with use of correla-
tive method by Brown-Twiss’s scheme (ﬁg. 2). The apparatus includes two photomultipliers,
which are placed at equal distances from the ﬂask center and opposite direction. The PMT’s
signals have been ampliﬁed, formed by discriminators and get to input of time-to-digit con-
verter (TDC). The signal of ﬁrst PMT get to start for TDC, and the impulse of other PMT
after delay line stoped of TDC. In this measurements is used broad band ampliﬁers (with
band 2.5 GHz) and discriminators with watching threshold.

The measurement results for pair of photomultipliers NCT-2 is presented on ﬁg. 3. A
value point of TDC is equal 20 psec (all scale 2000 psec). The dispertion of time intervals
distribution is determined of time resolution of this correlometer and one equaled 56 psec.
The time resolution of each PMT is less in √2 time and equal 40 psec.

5 Conclusion

The simple and inexpensive equipment, which is allowing to get light ﬂashes with a duration
about 10 psec, following with a frequency about 25 kHz have been made. In each ﬂashes is
emitted 105 — 106 photons in spectral range from 200 to 800 nm. The emission spectrum
corresponds to radiation of black body with temperature about 50000 K. The light source
appears in practical like point (size of emission region less 3 µm). For the measurement of
PMT time resolution have been used correlational method, i.e. it is measured the distribution
of time intervals between photocounts from two PMT. The section pathband of registration
electronics equal 2.5 GHz and time resolution about 5 psec. For exception of the inﬂuence
of the PMT impulse amplitude to measurements results we use fast discriminators with
watching threshold [9]. The time resolution of PMT with microchannel plate NCT-2 type,
which is developing by INP in collaboration with plant ”Ekran” [8], is 40 psec. The dispertion
of spread time of the electron avalanche, determining of time resolution, was measured and
one amount 40 psec at illumination of all cathode.

Now we are considering the possibility of measurement of ﬂash duration by other method,
which based on registration of visibility ﬂuctuation of interference image in Michelson’s
interferometer.

References

[1] H.Frenzel and H.Schultes, Z.Phys.Chem.B27 (1934) 421

[2] B.P.Barber et al. Phys.Rep. v.281 N2 1997

[3] M.J.Moran et al. NIM B96 (1995) 651 ,

http://www-phys.llnl.gov/N Div/sonolum/sonolum paper.html

[4] J.Schwinger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90 (1993) 2105

[5] C.Eberlein, Phys. Rev. Lett. v.76 N20 1996

3

[6] S.Liberati et al. e-print LANL quant-ph/9805031

[7] Lothar Frommhold and Wilfred Meyer Collision-induced Emission and Sonolumines-

cence, Spectral Line Shapes (1996), v.9, p.471, Firense, Italy

[8] Anashin V.V., et al., “Photomultipliers with microchannel plates”, Nucl. Instr. and

Meth., A357, pp. 103–109 (1995).

[9] Frolov A.R., Oslopova T.V., Pestov Yu.N., “Double threshold discriminator for timing

measurements”, Nucl. Instr. and Meth., A356, pp. 447-451 (1995).

4

Figure 1: Basic apparatus for generating sonoluminescence. LFG – low frequency generator,
Amp – ampliﬁer, Osc – oscilloscope, L – inductivity.

5

Figure 2: The mounting scheme for measurement time parameters. PMT1, PMT2 – photo-
multipliers, A – ampliﬁers, D – discriminators, DL – delay line.

6

Figure 3: Measured distribution of the time intervals between photocounts.

7

This figure "art_s1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9811005v1

This figure "art_s2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9811005v1

This figure "x_r_gra2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9811005v1

