8
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
6
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
0
1
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Solution to the ion feedback problem

in Hybrid Photon Detectors and Photo Multiplier
Tubesa

1

Daniel Ferenc1,2b, Dario Hrupec1 and
e-mail: Daniel.Ferenc@cern.ch Eckart Lorenz3
1Rudjer Boˇskovi´c Institute, Zagreb, Croatia,
2 CERN, Geneva, Switzerland,
3Max–Planck–Institut f¨ur Physik, M¨unchen, Germany

Abstract

A general solution to the positive ion feedback problem in Hybrid Photon Detectors
(HPD), photo multipliers (PM) and other similar detectors was found in the insertion
of a permanent electrostatic potential barrier which prevents drift of positive ions from
the anode, or the ﬁrst dynode, towards the photocathode. In this paper we present the
method as applied to the Intevac HPD.

1. Introduction

This work has been motivated primarily by the recent developments in gamma ray as-
tronomy. Air Cerenkov Telescopes (ACT) have been considered the ultimate instruments
for the ground based detection of high energy cosmic gamma rays [ 1]. In order to lower
the energy threshold for the detection of cosmic gamma rays down to 20 GeV – to explore
the only unexplored window in cosmic electromagnetic spectrum (20 GeV to 300 GeV) –
one should both increase the detector area, and achieve an unprecedented photon detec-
tion with single photon sensitivity and very high eﬃciency. Considering photon sensors,
Hybrid Photon Detectors (HPD), possibly with high quantum eﬃciency photocathodes,
currently present the most promising solution. However, commercial devices have still
some serious drawbacks and need further improvement. In particular, it is very important
to reduce the internal instrumental noise below the limits imposed by presently available
technology, because other intrinsic sources of noise in imaging Cerenkov detectors (like
the night sky background) are irreducible.
aaccepted for publication in Nucl. Inst. Meth. A
be-mail: Daniel.Ferenc@cern.ch

2

The presence of positive ions in the vacuum tube is specially devastating because the
acceleration and subsequent dumping of positive ions into the photocathode leads both
to creation of noise through electrons released, and to a damage of the photocathode [
2, 3]. In tubes with high vacuum the vast majority of positive ions do not originate from
residual gas, but from the impact of accelerated photoelectrons in the surface of the anode
(the photodiode and the surrounding material). Hydrogen or Oxygen ions from adsorbed
water are the most abundant ions. Cesium ions are particularly abundant in devices with
in situ photocathode activation procedure.

In this paper we demonstrate, using the Intevac HPD [ 3] as an example, how the
insertion of an electrostatic potential barrier close to the anode solves the ion feedback
problem. Apart from being complete, this solution is elegant and easy to implement.

The paper is structured as follows. The basic design of the Intevac HPD is described
in Sect.1. Our modiﬁcation of the Intevac design, which includes the potential barrier,
is described in Sect.2.; two diﬀerent actual designs with equivalent performance are pre-
sented and compared from a technological point of view, by carrying out 3-dimensional
electron optics calculation. In Appendix 1. we discuss for reference an attempt of Intevac
to solve the ion feedback problem by breaking the ﬁeld symmetry in the HPD tube.

For all electron optics simulations presented in this paper we have used SIMION 3D

software [ 4].

2. Intevac Hybrid Photon Detector

The basic design of the considered Intevac HPD [ 3] comprises a cylindrical vacuum
tube, housing a 18 mm diameter photocathode, a set of focussing electrodes, and a pho-
todiode (PD) (or an avalanche photodiode (APD)) placed at a distance of 39 mm away
from the photocathode. Photoelectrons from the entire photocathode are focussed and
accelerated towards a small photodiode, where each electron creates a large number of
electron–hole pairs. The Intevac tube is envisaged to be operated at a potential diﬀerence
ranging from 5 to 10 kV. The lower end is more suitable for ACT experiments due to
possible harsh atmospheric conditions at the experimental sites. All simulations presented
in this paper are therefore performed with 5 kV potential diﬀerence between the photo-
cathode and the photodiode. The relatively low secondary electron yield in the PD1 may
be compensated using an APD with internal multiplication.

The ion feedback problem for the Intevac HPD is demonstrated in Fig. 1, where the
HPD is shown with its photocathode on the left, and the anode complex on the right.
Potentials are indicated for all electrodes, and a set of equipotential lines is presented (not
1 The number of secondary electrons is Ne ≃(U-U0)/3.6V, where U0 is the voltage (in Volts) to accelerate
an electron to an energy suﬃcient to penetrate the inert layer above the semiconductor pn structure.

-5000 V

-4863 V

-4000 V

-3000 V

0 V

3

Figure 1. Positive ion trajectories in the Intevac HPD. Ions emerge from the surface of
the anode (right) and accelerate towards the photocathode (left).

equidistant). Positive ions of energy Eion=15 eV are launched from a set of points on the
anode surface with emission angles +45◦, -45◦ and 0◦. After being accelerated, ions hit
the photocathode, thus giving rise to the “ion feedback problem”.

Note that the angular and energetic distributions of positive ions are, to our best
knowledge, unknown. We have worked out a scheme how to perform a measurement of
those quantities, using actually a tube designed according to our proposal in this paper,
but since the results are not yet available, we are currently using a rough estimate that the
ions could reach an energy of around 15 eV. Once the actual energy will be measured, it
will be straightforward to repeat our simulations and ﬁnd the optimal potential settings.

3. Potential barrier – solution to the ion feedback problem

The essential goal of the new electron optics is to prevent positive ions from leaving
the region around the anode and heading towards the photocathode. That goal is ac-
complished by means of a permanent electrostatic potential barrier created in front of the
anode by a cylindrically symmetric electrode – the so called “barrier–electrode” – kept at
a potential somewhat higher than the anode potential. The method preserves cylindric
symmetry of the entire device. Two diﬀerent designs are presented in this paper: (i) with
a ﬂat barrier-electrode, see Fig. 2, and (ii) with a conically shaped barrier–electrode, see
Fig. 3.
In addition, the potential distribution around the anode plane for the conical
design is shown in a magniﬁed view in Fig. 4. Trajectories of singly charged positive ions
are simulated with identical initial conditions like before.
The functionality of the barrier–electrode is simple:

it creates a potential barrier in

4

front of the anode which does not allow ions to penetrate further towards the photocath-
ode, solving thus the ion feedback problem. The design with the conical barrier–electrode,
Fig. 3, oﬀers certain advantages. Since the conically shaped electrode more closely sur-
rounds the anode area, the barrier–electrode potential needed to establish the potential
barrier of a given height (for the examples presented we used VBarrier=+15.5 V) is much
lower (VBE=+76 V) than needed for the ﬂat electrode (VBE=+350 V). In addition, the
throughput connection to the voltage supply outside the tube appears for the conical
barrier–electrode at a very safe distance from the throughput of the neighboring electrode
of opposite polarity. Further, the conical electrode may better protect the anode area
from cesium vapor deposition during (and after) the manufacturing of the photocathode,
and also captures photoelectrons back-scattered from the PD. Both designs are optimised
for electron focussing. Electron trajectories are shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, for the ﬂat and
the conical barrier–electrode designs, respectively. Electron trajectories were simulated
with the following initial conditions: emission angle normal to the photocathode surface,
and initial energy Eelectron=0.4 eV. An avalanche photodiode with 1 mm in diameter will
eventually collect all the electrons, even if smearing in initial electron energy and emission
angle is considered [ 5].

Let us also mention that some existing HPD and PM tubes do have already elec-
trodes close to their anodes or ﬁrst dynodes - originaly designed for other purposes
- which may be used as our barrier electrodes with the application of an appropriate
potential, and a redistribution of other potentials in the device in order to compen-
sate for the likely change in electron focusing.

The stability of the potential on the barrier–electrode which is required for stable elec-
tron focussing is not a critical issue – variations of even 10% on the potential will leave
the electron focussing essentially unchanged [ 5]. The most common voltage supply may
be therefore used to bias the barrier–electrode.

5

-5000 V

-4947 V

-4700 V

-3800 V

+350 V

0 V

Figure 2. HPD design with a ﬂat barrier–electrode at potential +350 V. Between the
barrier–electrode and the anode a potential barrier is established, which repels positive
ions emerging from the anode surface back towards the anode, see trajectories close to
the anode surface.

-5000 V

-4947 V

-4700 V

-3800 V

+76 V

0 V

Figure 3. The same as in Fig. 2, but for the conical barrier–electrode design.

6

Potential distribution in front of the anode plane of the conical barrier–
Figure 4.
electrode HPD design (Fig. 3). Positive ions of energy Eion=15 eV and emission angles
+45◦, -45◦ and 0◦ start “climbing” the potential barrier and get repelled back.

-5000 V

-4947 V

-4700 V

-3800 V

+350 V

0 V

Figure 5. Electron focussing with a ﬂat barrier–electrode HPD.

-5000 V

-4947 V

-4700 V

-3800 V

+76 V

0 V

7

Figure 6. Electron focussing with a conical barrier–electrode HPD.

4. Summary

A general solution to the positive ion feedback problem in hybrid photon detectors,
photomultipliers and other similar detectors was found in the creation of an electrostatic
potential barrier in front of the anode in HPD’s or the ﬁtst dynode in PM’s. By that means
positive ions originating from the anode surface - released in impacts of photoelectrons
- are not able to penetrate the potential barrier, and therefore cannot get accelerated
towards the photocathode.

In this paper we presented the application of the potential barrier method to the Intevac
HPD. The method is generally applicable, and we have applied it recently also in designs
of some other devices [ 6].

8

5. Appendix 1. Intevac ion deﬂector

In an attempt to solve the ion feedback problem, Intevac introduced [ 3] a method
based on broken cylindric symmetry of the ﬁeld in the tube – an idea essentially diﬀerent
from ours, because there is no attempt to block the propagation of ions towards the
photocathode, but only to deﬂect their trajectories to one side of the tube. The symmetry
breaking is done by inserting an electrode on the anode potential, placed just on one side
of the diode [ 3], the advantage being that no additional positive voltage source is needed.
Note that the high energy photoelectrons are barely deﬂected by the deﬂector electrode.
This deﬂection was compensated by displacing the pickup diode by small distance. A
reproduction of the Intevac deﬂector solution is presented in Fig. 7. The same set of ions
is simulated like above.

Although positive ions become deﬂected to the opposite side of the deﬂector electrode,
a considerable fraction of ions still hit the photocathode and the remaining ones hit the
electrodes or the tube walls, eventually releasing additional electrons and ions into the
chamber vacuum – a result far from being satisfactory.

-5000 V

-4863 V

-4000 V

-3000 V

0 V

Intevac deﬂector modiﬁes the potential distribution in such a way that positive
Figure 7.
ions ﬁnd their way to the opposite side of the tube, but they all hit, with sizeable energies
already, either the photocathode or other parts of the device.

9

REFERENCES

1.

J.A. Barrio et al., The MAGIC Telescope Design Study, Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur
Physik, M¨unchen, Internal report MPI-PhE/98-5, 1998.

2. R. Mirzoyan, E. Lorenz, D. Petry, and C. Prosch, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A387 (1997) 74.
S. Bradbury, R. Mirzoyan, J. Gebauer, E. Feigl, and E. Lorenz, Nucl. Inst. Meth.
3.
A387 (1997) 45.
”SIMION 3D Version 6.0” by David A. Dahl 43rd ASMS Conference on Mass Spec-
trometry and Allied Topics, May 21-26 1995, Atlanta, Georgia, pg 717.

4.

5. D. Hrupec, Diploma thesis, Rudjer Boˇskovi´c Institute, and University of Zagreb,

1997.

6. D. Ferenc,“New developments in Hybrid Photon Detectors”, Presented at the Con-
ference New Detectors Erice, 36th Workshop of the INFN Eloisatron Project, Erice,
Trapani, Sicily, November 1-7, 1997. To appear in the proceedings, World Scientiﬁc.

