1

8
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
1
2
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
0
2
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

X-ray Imaging Using a Hybrid Photon Counting GaAs Pixel Detector
C. Schwarza∗, M. Campbellb, R. Goepperta, E.H.M. Heijneb J.Ludwiga, G. Meddelerd, B. Mikulecb,
E. Pernigottic, M.Rogallaa, K. Rungea, A. S¨oldner-Rembolda, K.M. Smithe, W. Snoeysb, J. Watte

a University of Freiburg, Hermann-Herder-Str. 3, 79104 Freiburg, Germany
b CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
c University and INFN of Pisa, Italy
d Nikhef, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e University of Glasgow, Scotland

The performance of hybrid GaAs pixel detectors as X-ray imaging sensors were investigated at room temper-
ature. These hybrids consist of 300 µm thick GaAs pixel detectors, ﬂip-chip bonded to a CMOS Single Photon
Counting Chip (PCC). This chip consists of a matrix of 64 x 64 identical square pixels (170 µm x 170 µm) and
covers a total area of 1.2 cm2. The electronics in each cell comprises a preampliﬁer, a discriminator with a 3-bit
threshold adjust and a 15-bit counter. The detector is realized by an array of Schottky diodes processed on
semi-insulating LEC-GaAs bulk material. An IV-charcteristic and a detector bias voltage scan showed that the
detector can be operated with voltages around 200 V. Images of various objects were taken by using a standard
X-ray tube for dental diagnostics. The signal to noise ratio (SNR) was also determined.
The applications of these imaging systems range from medical applications like digital mammography or dental
X-ray diagnostics to non destructive material testing (NDT). Because of the separation of detector and readout
chip, diﬀerent materials can be investigated and compared.

1. INTRODUCTION

The most widely used detection medium for
medical X-ray imaging is still photographic ﬁlm.
In the last few years, also digital X-ray imaging
systems have been playing an increasing role. The
main advantages of digital sensors in comparison
to ﬁlm systems are the higher sensitivity due to
better absorption (this implies lower dose for the
patient), the avoidance of time and material con-
suming chemical processing and the beneﬁts of
digital data handling like the possibility to apply
software image processing tools to analyze the im-
age.

The digital X-ray systems which are commer-
cially available since a few years [1], mainly con-
sist of silicon charge coupled devices (CCDs),
with or without a scintillator conversion layer.
Incident photons create electron hole pairs which
are accumulated in potential wells formed by the
electrodes of the CCD. These potential wells are

∗Further author information: Tel: +49 761 203 5935, Fax:
+49 761 203 5931, Email: Christoph.Schwarz@physik.uni-
freiburg.de

located very close to the surface of the CCD. In
contrast to visible light which can be absorbed
very well in this thin region, the absorption of
X-rays is much less eﬃcient due to higher pho-
ton energy. To increase the absorption, the CCD
is often covered with a scintillator layer. This
concept has the disadvantage of decreasing image
resolution and contrast because of scattering of
conversion photons within the scintillator.

Another concept is given by hybrid pixel assem-
blies, which consist of a detector and a readout
chip being connected together by a ﬂip-chip pro-
cess. Diﬀerent developments have been sucess-
fully made especially for high energy physics and
recently medical applications. A big advantage of
the hybrid solution compared to monolithic de-
vices like a CCD is the fact, that both chips can
be optimized separately. While for the readout
circuit the well known silicon CMOS technology
is preferred, materials with an enhanced absorp-
tion eﬃciency for X-rays in the energy range of
10-70 keV such as GaAs or CdTe can be used.

A new step in the readout electronics is made

2

Figure 1. Block diagram of the pixel cell.

by using a single photon counting technique in-
stead of an integrating method. This implies a
faster read-out, low noise and a higher dynamic
range. In this work, detectors processed on semi-
insulating LEC-GaAs (SI-GaAs) bulk material
and bump-bonded to the Photon Counting Chip
(PCC) [2] were used.

2. READOUT ELECTRONICS

The PCC is a further development of the
LHC1/Omega3 [3] chip, used in high energy
physics, towards medical applications. It consists
of a matrix of 64 x 64 matrix of identical square
pixels (170 µm x 170 µm) and covers a total sen-
sitive area of 1.2 cm2. The electronics in each cell
comprises a preampliﬁer with a leakage current
compensation up to 10 nA/pixel, an externally
adjustable comparator with a 3-bit ﬁne tuning for
each pixel, a short delay line which feeds back to
the latched comparator to produce a pulse and a
15-bit pseudo-random counter. The input of the
preampliﬁer is connected via a bump-bond to one
of the detector pixels or can receive alternatively
test signals from an external pulse generator via a
test capacitance. When the shutter signal is low
the pulse coming from the delay line becomes the
clock of the counter. When the shutter is high,
the feedback loop is broken and an external clock

Table 1
Summary of electrical measurements of
PCC [4].

the

Minimum threshold
Threshold linearity

Threshold variation
(no adjust)
Threshold variation
(adjust)
Noise
Maximum input signal
Maximum counting
rate

1400 e−
1400 e− to
7000 e−
350 e−

80 e−

170 e−
> 80000 e−
2 MHz

can be used to shift out the data in a serial fash-
ion. The maximum readout frequency is 10 MHz.
There are two more fully static ﬂip-ﬂops to mask
noisy pixel and to enable electrical testing.

A summary of electrical measurements of the

PCC before bump-bonding is given in table 1.

3. DETECTOR - MATERIAL AND

FABRICATION

The detectors were fabricated in the Freiburg
cleanroom facility on semi-insulating GaAs bulk
material from FCM Freiberg, Germany. This ma-
terial has typically a resistivity of 107Ω cm. It has
been shown that this type of GaAs has very good
properties as a material for radiation detectors
in high energy physics [5] and previously medical
applications. The wafers were ﬁrst lapped down
from 650 µm to 300 µm and implanted on the
backside with oxygen (3 · 1013cm−2 at 190 keV)
to avoid backside ﬁring. The Schottky contacts
were processed on both sides by layers of Ti, Pl,
Au and Ni. The front side is structured by pho-
tolithographic processes into a matrix of small
pixels (gap: 10 µm or 20 µm) of the same di-
mension as the readout electronics. The bond
pads have a diameter of 20 µm, the passivation
was made with a layer of Si3N4. The so called
underbump metallization for the ﬂip-chip process
was another layer of Au with an overlap of 2 µm.

3

Figure 2. Absorption of X-rays in diﬀerent mate-
rials.

Figure 3. IV-characteristic of a ﬂip-chip bonded
assembly.

In ﬁgure 2 the absorption probability of X-rays
in the energy range 10 to 150 keV for Si, GaAs
and CdTe, each 300 µm thick, is plotted. It can
be seen that the absorption of GaAs and CdTe in
the interesting energy range 20 to 70 keV is much
higher than that of Si:
for example at 30 keV,
which is the peak of the X-ray spectra for 70 kV
tube voltage, the detection eﬃciency in Si is only
10%, in contrast to GaAs with nearly 90%. CdTe
performs even better, but until now there are dif-
ﬁculties in terms of homogeneity and processing.
To determine the suitable reverse bias voltage
settings of the detector, a IV-characteristic was
taken with one assembly after the ﬂip-chip bond-
ing. A diode characteristic is expected.
In ﬁg-
ure 3 the leakage current in µA which ﬂows into
the detector is plotted as a function of the reverse
bias voltage.

The characteristic has three distinct regions:

• a region where the leakage current increases
linear with reverse bias voltage to reach a
plateau,

• a saturation area in which the leakage cur-
rent is approximately independent of the
bias voltage,

• a region where the current increases again
with the applied voltage (soft breakdown re-
gion).

The soft breakdown is obtained due to the im-
plantation of the backside of the wafer. The leak-
age current density measures 27 nA/mm2.

4. IMAGING PROPERTIES

To determine the imaging properties of the de-
tector assembly we use a standard X-ray tube for
dental diagnostics1. Measurements using radioac-
tive sources have been sucessfully done by other
groups [4].

In a ﬁrst measurement the assembly was ex-
posed to a 200 ms long, 70 kV X-ray pulse, and
the mean counts per pixel for increasing reverse
bias voltage were determined. We found that the
mean counts per pixel reach a plateau at around
200 V (ﬁgure 4) and that there are almost no
noisy pixels up to 250 V (ﬁgure 5). It should be
mentioned that the bias settings of the readout
chip were determined before, using an external
pulse generator. The mean threshold of the pix-
els after adjustment was calculated to be 3794 e−.
First images were taken from a 10 mm long M2
steel screw, placed on the back of the detector in
a distance of 20 cm from the X-ray tube. The
tube voltage was set to 60 kV, the exposure time

1Supplier: Siemens Type:Heliodent MD.

4

Figure 4. Bias voltage scan of a ﬂip-chip bonded
assembly: Mean counts per pixel.

Figure 5. Bias voltage scan of a ﬂip-chip bonded
assembly: Number of counting pixels.

to 50 ms. These are nearly the minimum settings
of the tube.

In ﬁgure 6 the raw data (the number of counts
for each pixel) is plotted for the whole pixel ma-
trix. The darker the pixel is plotted in the 8-bit
greyscale, the higher the count rate and so the
number of photons being detected in this pixel.
Pixels which are plotted black, have counted more
than 2500. All pixels are working, so the bump-
bonding yield of this assembly seems to be nearly
perfect. Nevertheless there are some small in-
homogeneities, which can be attributed to vari-
ations in sensitivity of the detector.

This non-uniform sensitivity is probably a char-
acteristic of the used bulk material.
In semi-
insulating LEC-GaAs, the deep donor arsenic an-
tisite defect EL2 is normally used to compensate
residual impurities with a ﬂat energy level and
is responsible for the semi-insulating behaviour.
Otherwise the inﬂuence of ﬂat acceptor concen-
trations like carbon would leave the material con-
ducting.

It has been shown that these deep donors could
limit the lifetime of charge carriers by acting as
trapping centres [6]. Electron-hole pairs gener-
ated by incoming X-ray photons can be trapped
on their way to the readout electrodes, so that
only a fraction of the generated charge is de-
tected. This implies a reduced charge collection

eﬃciency (CCE).

The local inhomogeneities also reduce the sig-

nal to noise ratio, which is deﬁned as follows:

SNR =

signal
noise

=

hni
σ

(1)

Here hni represents the mean number of counts
per pixel in the region of interest and σ is the
standard deviation of the signal value.
In case
of photonic noise the SNR should have a square
root dependency on the mean count rate as ex-
pected by the poisson statistic. Depending on the
bias voltage of the detector, the exposure time to
the X-rays and the optical density of the object
and its spatial frequency, the SNR is not ﬁxed.
We obtained for the SNR a value of 4.1 ± 0.1 by
taking a ﬂood image, i.e. a uniform exposure of
the whole detector, for 200 V bias voltage and a
100 ms long X-ray pulse at 70 kV tube voltage
without applying any corrections to the data.

It has been shown [7] that in the case of time
independent inhomogeneities in detector sensitiv-
ity an image correction method can be used to
ameliorate the imaging properties. This method
also increases the SNR by decreasing the σ. Fur-
ther investigations will show if this method is also
suitable for our detector system. Another possi-
bility to get a better homogeneity is given by the
threshold adjust facility of the PCC. Instead of

5

s
w
o
r

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

9821C, 240V, screw, 0.05sec, 60keV

60
columns

10

20

30

40

50

60

Figure 6. X-ray image of a M2 steel screw, 0.05 s
at 60 kV.

Figure 7. Interpolated and inverted X-ray image
of a M2 screw, 0.05 s at 60 kV.

adjusting the individual pixel threshold with a
pulse on the test capacitance like it is done till
now, an adjustment using the mean detector re-
sponse to X-ray exposure could be carried out.

To improve the image quality in a ﬁrst step,
the image was inverted and interpolated. This
is shown in ﬁgure 7.
It should be mentioned
that also the inner structure of the screw (thread,
head) can be recognized.

There are many ways to evaluate the quality
of an image. The most common and suitable
methods are the contrast transfer function (CTF)
and the modulation transfer function (MTF). The
CTF describes the relative contrast response of an
imaging system to a square wave modulation, the
MTF the response to a sinusoidale one. They are
both dependent on the spatial frequency whose
unity is line pairs per mm (lp/mm). The Nyquist
frequency which is deﬁned by Ny = 1/(2 × pitch)
measures 2.95 lp/mm for our detector system.
Images of small slits down to the pixel size were
sucessfully taken and the determination of the
line spread function (LSF) and the correspond-
ing MTF will be done soon.

5. CONCLUSION AND
FUTURE WORK

It has been shown that hybrid GaAs pixel de-
tectors with photon counting electronics oﬀer a
promising alternative as digital X-ray imaging
sensors.
In this work SI-GaAs detectors, fabri-
cated in Freiburg, were ﬂip-chip bonded to 4096
Pixel Photon Counting Chips (PCC), developed
at CERN. The leakage current density of the de-
tector was determined by a IV-characteristic to
27 nA/mm2, which is in accordance to the expec-
tation. A detector bias voltage scan showed that
a voltage around 200 V is enough to have the
detector fully active. There are almost no noisy
pixel for voltages below 250 V, the soft breakdown
region of the detector.

Future work is given by investigations of the ob-
served inhomogeneity in the taken X-ray images.
If they can be attributed to variations in sensitiv-
ity of the detector and are time independent, an
image correction methode can be developed and
applied to the data. As a next step, characteris-
tic quantities of an imaging system like the CTF
and the MTF, will be determined and compared
to other systems.

6

6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by the European
Community under the Brite/Euram project XIM-
AGE (BE-1042). The readout chip was de-
veloped as part of the Medipix project, car-
ried out by CERN, University of Freiburg, Uni-
versity of Glasgow and INFN-Pisa. We grate-
fully acknowledge the contribution of G. Hump-
ston of GEC-Marconi Materials Technology Ltd.,
Caswell, England for the bumb-bonding, G. Mag-
istrati of Laben S.p.A., Milano for the VME-
based readout system and M. Conti and collabo-
rators of INFN-Napoli provided the readout soft-
ware.

REFERENCES

1. U. Welander, ”Resolution as deﬁned by line
spread and modulation transfer function for
four digital intraoral radiographic systems”,
Oral Surg. Oral Med. Oral Pathol., vol 78,

no.1, pp. 109-115, 1994

2. M. Campbell et al., ”Readout for a 64 x 64
Matrix with 15-bit Single Photon Counting”,
IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 45, pp. 751, 1998
3. E. H. M. Heijne et al., ”LHC1: a semiconduc-
tor pixel detector readout chip with internal,
tunable delay providing a binary pattern of
selected events”, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A383,
pp.52, 1996

4. M.G. Bisogni et. al., ”Performance of a 4096
Pixel Photon Counting Chip” to be published
in SPIE.

5. M. Rogalla et al., ”Characterization of semi-
insulating GaAs for detector applications”,
Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A380, pp. 14-17, 1996
6. M. Rogalla et al., ”Analysis of trapping and
detrapping in semi-insulating GaAs detec-
tors”, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A395, pp. 49-54,
1997

7. R. Irsigler et al., ”X-ray Imaging Using a
320 × 240 Hybrid GaAs Pixel Detector”, to
be published in IEEE.

