8
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
5
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
2
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Imaging Hybrid Photon Detectors with Minimized

Dead Area and Protection Against Positive Ion
Feedbacka

1

Daniel Ferenc
Div. PPE,
CERN,
1211-Geneva,
Switzerland
E-mail: Daniel.Ferenc@CERN.ch

Abstract

Imaging Hybrid Photon Detectors (HPD) have been developed for integration in large
area Cherenkov detectors for high energy physics and astrophysics. The presented designs
– developed particularly for the experiments MAGIC, LHCb and AQUA-RICH – comprise
very good imaging properties, protection against positive ion feedback and(or) minimum
dead area. The underlying innovations are discussed in some detail.

1. Introduction

With the onset of new technologies, Hybrid Photon Detectors (HPDs) became one of the
most favorable options for the detection of Cherenkov photons in large area Ring Imaging
CHerenkov (RICH) detectors. In contrast to ordinary Photo Multiplier Tubes (PMT),
where a photoelectron initiates a multi-step ampliﬁcation process in a dynode system, in
HPDs [ 1] a photoelectron undergoes a single-step acceleration from the photocathode
towards the silicon sensor. Due to its relatively high energy (5-20 keV) a photoelectron
releases a large number of electron-hole pairs upon its impact in the semiconductor sensor.
The number of secondary electrons released in a silicon sensor is Ne ≃(U-U0)/3.6V, where
U0 is the voltage (in Volts) to accelerate an electron to an energy suﬃcient to penetrate
the inert layer above the sensitive semiconductor pn structure.

This publication reports on the solution of two important problems – the minimization
of dead area and the protection against positive ion feedback – as implemented in concrete
HPD designs. These solutions are, however, very general and may be implemented (with
appropriate scaling) in a variety of diﬀerent designs.

a Submitted to Nucl. Inst. Meth. A

2

First, we will demonstrate how to minimize the dead area of a large multi-channel
imaging HPD in order to enable eﬃcient integration of individual HPD tubes into a large
area imaging Cherenkov detector. The method we apply provides undistorted image
projection from the entire photocathode to the surface of the pixelized semiconductor
sensor. The presented HPD design has been developed [ 2, 3] for the LHCb experiment.
Excellent imaging properties provided in this way are equally welcome in stand-alone
devices, like in the 20-inch HPD tube designed for the AQUA-RICH neutrino experiment
at Gran Sasso [ 4] – the second design presented in this publication.

Second, in order to solve the positive ion feedback problem, i.e. to prevent positive ions
(released in impacts of photoelectrons from the surface of the semiconductor sensor) from
hitting the photocathode, we followed the same idea originally developed for ion feedback
protection in small single-channel HPDs [ 5]. In particular, we shall demonstrate that
the insertion of a permanent potential barrier for positive ions in front of the anode may
solve the ion feedback problem also in large multi-channel imaging HPDs, but only if
the so called cross-focusing electron optics is applied. The ion feedback protection has
been developed for the cosmic gamma ray Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes (ACT), in
particular for the MAGIC project [ 6].

For all the electron optics simulations presented, SIMION 3D software [ 7] has been
used. In all the ﬁgures presented, only elements important for electron optics (focusing
electrodes) are shown, while the supporting structures are left out. It is assumed that the
medium in the tubes is vacuum.

2. Minimizing the dead area

One of the most important problems in the integration of HPD tubes into a matrix of a
large-surface area RICH detector is the low overall photo-sensitive surface coverage, caused
by a typically high HPD dead area. HPDs have usually been designed as stand-alone
devices, and very little care has been taken of the relationship between the physical and
the sensitive surface areas. In those applications where a pixel size of 1-2 cm is suﬃcient,
one can use a matrix consisting of single-pixel HPDs. The large dead area between the
sensitive surfaces of the individual detectors may be taken care of by focusing the light to
the sensitive photocathode areas by Winston cones or lenses [ 8]. For applications which
require yet a smaller pixel size (e.g. 1 mm), this method is impossible due to the limited
possible size of individual tubes, and therefore one should use large diameter HPDs with
internal electron optics imaging and multi-channel silicon sensors.

The problem in the integration of these large area imaging HPDs into hexagonal ma-
trices is that it is essentially impossible to use Winston cones to redirect light from the
dead area into the sensitive detector area, because that would destroy the image pattern.

3

Demagniﬁcation lenses are still possible, but they would have to be very large.

With the ﬁrst HPD design to be presented, see Fig. 1, the idea was to extend the
sensitive photocathode surface almost to the physical edge of the device. This 5-inch
HPD was designed particularly for the hexagonally close packed Ring Imaging Cherenkov
detectors of the LHCb experiment [ 2, 3]. Its size and the demagniﬁcation factor were
determined from the size of the 2048-channel silicon-pad sensor (5-cm diameter) used
for the detection of the photoelectrons and the required position resolution for Cherenkov
photons. The radius of curvature of the spherically shaped entrance window was originally
taken such that the center of curvature was placed close to the surface of the silicon
sensor. This provides a very good mechanical stability, needed because of the thin window
connection with the body of the tube. Further optimizations of the window curvature for
the electron optics quality are still possible, but it turns out, as we shall demonstrate in
some detail, that a very good result may be achieved already with the original curvature.
However, the optimization of the tube length will be considered below.

Electron focusing is demonstrated in Fig. 1 – photons (not shown in the ﬁgure) enter
HPD from the left side, pass through the entrance window, and release photoelectrons
from the photocathode on the interior of the window. Photoelectrons then undergo accel-
eration and electrostatic focalization towards the silicon-pad sensor, shown on the right
side. Some example trajectories are presented in Fig. 1. A relatively smooth mapping
between the image on the photocathode and the projected image on the silicon sensor
has been achieved close to the axis of the tube but, evidently, mapping completely fails
in the region close to the periphery of the tube where strong image folding is present (the
square symbols in Fig. 2). Although the physical shape of this HPD has been success-
fully optimized for close packing by maximal extension of the photocathode towards the
periphery, the device demonstrates unacceptably large functionally dead area.

The reason for the failure becomes evident from Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. There is a rapid
change in the curvature of the equipotential surfaces as the periphery of the tube is ap-
proached, apparently due to the shape of the conducting surface. Photoelectrons emitted
from that region are directed too strongly towards the center of HPD.

To ﬁx this problem, one should reduce the curvature of the potential distribution. Ide-
ally one would prefer to have equal curvature across the entire photocathode, and would
be therefore tempted to redesign the window supporting structure. However, for construc-
tional reasons - precisely those related to the achievement of the minimum constructional
dead area - this was not possible.

We have searched therefore for another solution with the idea to reduce the ﬁeld cur-
vature by “conducting” some of the potential lines out from the tube, around the metal-
lic window support. The solution was found in the creation of a slot which acts as a

4

“potential-conductor”, see Figs. 5, 6 and 7. The slot was created by the insertion of a
specially shaped new electrode, the so called “bleeder electrode” (since it bleeds oﬀ the
“unwanted” ﬁeld). The unwanted potential lines are indeed conducted away through the
slot between the bleeder electrode and the body of the tube, and the resulting ﬁeld in
the problematic peripheral region has evidently lost its strong curvature, as presented in
Figs. 5, 6 and 7. The mapping quality is presented in Fig. 2, as a function of the potential
on the bleeder electrode. Since the acceptance is extended out to 60 mm away from the
tube axis, 63.5 mm being the outer tube radius, about 89% of the total photocathode
surface now maps correctly onto the silicon-pad sensor, and the functionally dead area
got considerably reduced.

It is interesting to note that a considerably shorter HPD, but of the same transverse
size and entrance window, may provide the same imaging accuracy, consider Fig. 8. The
advantages of this short HPD are a very short time of ﬂight, as presented in Fig. 9, and a
weaker sensitivity to the residual magnetic ﬁeld. The time of ﬂight is not only short, but
the spread corresponding to a given point of origin on the photocathode is very narrow,
as demonstrated by triplets in Fig. 9. The weak sensitivity to the residual magnetic ﬁeld
is due to the lower B L and to the very rapid electron acceleration, since the magnetic
radius of curvature is proportional to the velocity. A certain disadvantage may be the
relative closeness of the electrodes with a large potential diﬀerence.

Excellent imaging properties achieved by this method are equally welcome in stand-
alone devices. Therefore the same method has been applied in the design of the 20-
inch HPD tube (see Fig. 10) for the AQUA-RICH neutrino experiment, proposed for the
CERN–Gran Sasso neutrino beam programme [ 4]. These HPDs are supposed to be placed
in a array with a large distance between units. The AQUA-RICH HPDs should detect
Cherenkov ring images from charged products of neutrino interactions in a huge water
tank. The silicon sensor will consist of 85 pixels. A stronger demagniﬁcation (relative to
the LHCb design) was needed because of the large tube diameter, and the tube length
was therefore increased accordingly. The ﬁrst focusing electrode that follows the bleeder
electrode plays in this design a very active role in appropriate imaging, which was not the
case in the LHCb tube design, where essentially the same imaging performance could be
achieved without any focusing electrode except the bleeder (the other electrodes served
to assure a stable potential distribution).

Timing properties, i.e. the distribution of arrival times of photoelectrons to the semi-
conductor sensor, will be very important for the AQUA-RICH experiment since it is
supposed to supply detailed information about the real-time Cherenkov pattern develop-
ment. Due to the strong potential gradient close to the photocathode, this device has a
relatively good timing characteristics. The time evolution of the electron trajectories is

5

indicated by 1 ns time marks along the trajectories in Fig. 10. Note however that further
optimization is possible. For example, a shorter tube should be considered, like the short
tube in Fig. 8.

To summarize, we have presented HPD designs essentially based on the application of
the bleeder electrode. By suitably changing the ﬁeld conﬁguration in the critical region
close to the periphery of the photocathode, the bleeder electrode provides correct imaging
and considerably reduces the functional dead area in large imaging HPDs. Out of the three
designs presented, the long tube for LHCb has been produced and recently successfully
tested [ 11], and the HPD tube for AQUA-RICH has been ordered for production in a
downscaled size (10-inch diameter) for real physics tests.

The same method has been successfully applied in yet another HPD design, which
incorporates also the protection against the positive ion feedback. That is the second
topic of this publication and the subject of the following section.

3. Ion Feedback Protection in Large-area Imaging HPDs

The presence of positive ions in the PMT and HPD vacuum tubes presents one of
the main drawbacks, particularly in applications with high background or low signal
photon rates, like in Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes (ACT) in the ﬁeld of gamma ray
astronomy [ 5, 9, 10], or in Cherenkov neutrino experiments. Acceleration and subsequent
dumping of positive ions into a photocathode leads both to creation of noise through
electrons released, and to a rapid damage of the photocathode [ 5, 9, 10]. In high-vacuum
tubes the vast majority of positive ions do not originate from residual gas, but rather
from the the surface of the anode, upon the impact of accelerated photoelectrons. Apart
from Oxygen and Hydrogen atoms from adsorbed water, Cesium atoms are particularly
abundant because they usually spread inside tubes during and after the manufacturing
(activation) of photocathodes.

General solution to the problem of the feedback of positive ions emerging from such
processes was found [ 5] in the insertion of a permanent electrostatic potential barrier in
front of the surface of the Photo Diode (PD) in HPDs, or in front of the ﬁrst dynode in
PMTs. This method was originally proposed [ 5] to modify the small (2-cm-diameter)
single-pixel Intevac HPD [ 10]. In this paper we demonstrate that the same idea may be
successfully applied to a large area imaging HPD.

The potential barrier is created by the so called “barrier electrode” placed in front
of the silicon sensor and kept at a positive potential with respect to the anode. The
potential needed to establish a suﬃciently high potential barrier strongly depends on the
size of the opening in the barrier electrode, which is in turn determined by the width of
the beam of photoelectrons, in order to allow a free passage of the photoelectrons. The

6

wider the opening, the higher the positive potential on the electrode.

The HPD tube designed for LHCb, presented in the previous section, Fig. 7, is char-
acterized by proximity focusing electron optics (i.e. the diameter of the electron pattern
shrinks progressively down to the silicon sensor size). Due to the very wide electron pat-
tern the barrier electrode should have a wide opening, and that would require a very high
positive potential in order to establish the barrier eﬀect. The proximity focusing design is
therefore very unsuitable for the implementation of the positive ion feedback protection.
However, a modiﬁed HPD design (see Fig. 11) with the so called “cross-focusing” elec-
tron optics provides the means to apply our positive ion protection method. The point is
that electron trajectories originating at any point on the photocathode cross in a single
place about the middle of the tube, and it is possible to insert a barrier electrode with a
very narrow opening, placed just at the crossing point of the electron trajectories. There
are many reasons why this electrode should have a conical shape, as in Fig. 11, like e.g.
the need to separate the connection to the power supply outside the tube as far as possible
from the throughput of the neighbour electrode with opposite polarity.

3.1. Cross Focusing Electron Optics

Before we turn to the discussion of the functionality of the conical electrode for ion
protection, let us ﬁrst review its functionality in electron optics of a cross focused device.
Roughly speaking, the conical electrode acts as a “zoom” in the electron lens. The space
enclosed by the conical electrode is practically ﬁeld-free, see Fig. 12, and therefore from
its entrance onwards electrons keep their velocities and directions until they hit the anode
surface. The zooming functionality of the conical electrode is related precisely to this
feature - the electron velocity vectors are “frozen” after they enter the cone, consider
Figs. 12, and placing the cone entrance earlier or later along the electron trajectories
freezes the electron momenta with more or less divergence, respectively. This feature is
demonstrated in Fig. 13 – the conical electrode was moved closer to the photocathode,
and consequently the image got magniﬁed.

To achieve a good “image sharpness”, on the other hand, one should optimize the

potential on the electrode placed between the conical electrode and the photocathode.

In the development of the cross focused tube, presented in Fig. 11, we started from the
proximity focused HPD design, presented in Fig. 7, and introduced a number of signiﬁcant
modiﬁcations. We kept the same diameter (5-inch) and shape of the entrance window in
order to be able to use the same parts in tests. However, the tube got considerably elon-
gated to provide the means for the cross-focusing electron optics. The conical electrode
and the electrode closer to the photocathode were introduced.

The bleeder electrode stayed in place with essentially the same functionality. The eﬀects
of potential variations on the bleeder electrode are presented in Figs. 14, 15, 16 and 17.

7

It is evident that the bleeder electrode plays again an important role in the shaping of the
trajectories, although the mapping is more robust than in the proximity focusing HPD.
A very coherent time evolution for all trajectories may be achieved by careful tuning, as
demonstrated in Figs. 11 and 17. Compared to the short proximity focused HPD (Figs. 8
and 9), the optimized cross focused device oﬀers a much more coherent time evolution
over the entire area, while the total time of ﬂight is around four times longer, and the
time spread for a given point of origin Rorigin is wider.

3.2. Ion Feedback Protection

To demonstrate the positive ion feedback, in Fig. 18 the conical electrode is kept at
the anode potential i.e. the ion protection was set “oﬀ”. Trajectories of singly charged
positive ions are shown, emerging with energies of 44 eV at normal incidence from the
anode surface on the right side of the ﬁgure, and moving towards the photocathode on
the left side.

Note that the angular and energetic distributions of positive ions are, to our best
knowledge, unknown. We have worked out a scheme how to perform a measurement of
those quantities, using actually a tube with a barrier electrode, but since the results are
not yet available, we are currently using a rough estimate that the ions could reach an
energy of around 40 eV. Once the actual energy will be measured, it will be straightforward
to repeat the simulations and ﬁnd the optimal potential settings.

The conical electrode starts to play the role of the “barrier electrode” [ 5] when a
suﬃciently high positive potential is applied. As demonstrated in Fig. 19, monotonous
decrease of the potential for positive particles towards the photocathode breaks down, and
a potential barrier (for positive particles) is created in front of the anode. This barrier
prevents positive ions from penetrating further towards the photocathode and solves the
ion feedback problem. For more clarity the potential distribution in front of the anode
plane is shown in a magniﬁed view in Fig. 20. Trajectories of singly charged positive ions
are simulated with identical initial conditions like before. Ions of energy lower than the
barrier always get repelled back from the barrier and never can reach the photocathode.
As argued already in [ 5], the precision of the potential on the barrier electrode which
is required for stable electron focusing is not a critical issue – variations of even 10%
on the potential will leave the electron focusing essentially unchanged. An independent,
very common voltage supply may be therefore used to bias the positive conical barrier
electrode.

Apart from providing for the positive ion protection, this tube is characterized by a
much narrower spread of photoelectrons on the silicon-pad sensor and therefore with a
superior imaging performance. There are also other beneﬁts from the conical barrier
electrode: (i) it will capture a large fraction of electrons back-scattered from the semicon-

8

ductor sensor, and (ii) to some extent it will protect the anode area from pollution during
(and after) the manufacturing of the tube, in particular in case of in-situ photocathode
activation.

Our cross focusing HPD should be tested soon – it was designed in a way to be rather
easily assembled from the elements of the proximity focusing HPD (Fig. 7) (entrance
window with photocathode, cylindrical body, base plate and silicon sensor), which have
already been produced.

The presented cross focused HPD, with all its virtues, seems to be a very good choice
for Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes, Cherenkov neutrino detectors and in general in
applications which reqire good imaging, low noise and coherent timing.

4. Conclusions and Outlook

Imaging Hybrid Photon Detectors (HPD) have been developed for integration in large
area imaging Cherenkov detectors to be used in high energy physics and astrophysics.
The presented designs have been developed in particular for experiments MAGIC, LHCb
and AQUA-RICH. Apart from a very good imaging performance, the presented HPDs
comprise protection against positive ion feedback and(or) minimal dead area. A detailed
discussion of the underlying innovations was presented. We have introduced a new elec-
trode (“bleeder”) which modiﬁes the ﬁeld conﬁguration in the critical region close to the
periphery of the photocathode, thus providing correct image mapping and minimization
of the dead area in large imaging HPDs. Three proximity focused and one cross focused
HPD design were presented that are based on the application of the bleeder electrode.
The latter design also incorporates the protection against the positive ion feedback, a
feature very important for Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes, but also for Cherenkov
neutrino detectors.

So far, the presented HPD designs have already evolved beyond the design stage:

(i) Proximity focusing HPDs for LHCb (Fig. 7) were produced and tested recently [ 11].
The results fully conﬁrm the presented design.
(ii) Cross focusing HPDs (Fig. 11) should be assambled (essentially from parts of proximity
HPDs) and tested soon.
(iii) Half-sized (10-inch diameter) HPDs for AQUA-RICH (Fig. 10) are in production for
real physics tests in a water container exposed to a muon or hadron beam at CERN [ 12].

Acknowledgments

Very stimulating discussions with Enrico Chesi, Eckart Lorenz, Dario Hrupec, Eugenio
Nappi, Guy Pai´c and Jacques Seguinot are gratefully acknowledged. I am particularly
grateful to Tom Ypsilantis who also strongly motivated this publication.

9

REFERENCES

1. R. Kalibjan, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Sciences, June 1966, p. 51.

J.M. Abraham, Advances in electronics and electron physics, 1966, p 671.
P. Chevalier, Nucl. Inst. Meth. 50 (1967) 346.
J. Fertin et al., IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Sciences, Vol. NS 15 June 1968.
R. DeSalvo et al., Nucl. Inst. Meth. A315 (1992) 375.

2. D. Ferenc, New Detectors – 36th Workshop of the INFN Eloisatron Project, Ettore
Majorana Centre for Scientiﬁc Culture, Erice, Trapani, Sicily, November 1-7, 1997.
To appear in the proceedings, World Scientiﬁc, also physics/9810004.

3. J. Seguinot, ibid.
4. T. Ypsilantis, J. Seguinot and A. Zichichi, CERN-LAA/96-13.

T. Ypsilantis et al., Nucl. Inst. Meth. A371 (1996) 330.

5. D. Ferenc, D. Hrupec and E. Lorenz, accepted for publishing in Nucl. Inst. Meth. A

(1999), also physics/9811028.

6. J.A. Barrio et al., The MAGIC Telescope Design Study, Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur

Physik, M¨unchen, Internal report MPI-PhE/98-5, 1998.

7. D.A. Dahl, 43rd ASMS Conference on Mass Spectrometry and Allied Topics, May

21-26 1995, Atlanta, Georgia, pg 717.

8. R. Winston, J. Opt. Soc. Amer. 60, 245-247, 1970.
9. R. Mirzoyan, E. Lorenz, D. Petry, and C. Prosch, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A387 (1997) 74.
10. S. Bradbury, R. Mirzoyan, J. Gebauer, E. Feigl, and E. Lorenz, Nucl. Inst. Meth.

A387 (1997) 45.
11. LHCb report 98-037.
12. T. Ypsilantis, AQUA-RICH 3 Ton test (private communication).

10

Proximity-focusing 5-inch diameter HPD. Photoelectrons are focused onto
Figure 1.
the silicon-pad sensor on the right side. Photoelectrons emerging from the periphery of
the photocathode are incorrectly focused. Electrodes are kept at the following potentials,
from left to right, respectively: -20 kV, -15 kV, -11 kV, -4.7 kV and 0 V. Photoelectrons
are simulated with an initial energy of 0.25 eV and an emission angle of +45◦, -45◦ and
0◦ relative to the normal.

11

Figure 2. Mapping of the image from the photocathode to the silicon pad sensor. In the
simulation electrons originate from the photocathode at a radius Rorigin from the HPD
axis, and hit the silicon sensor at Rhit. Two diﬀerent HPD designs are presented: without
and with a new “bleeder electrode”. The original HPD without the bleeder electrode
(squares) fails in imaging.

12

Figure 3.
to the bunching of equipotential surfaces near the edge.

Incorrect electron focusing close to the periphery of the photocathode is due

13

Figure 4. Distribution of the potential (or potential energy) inside the tube. This way of
presentation is similar to the old rubber-sheet deformation method that has been widely
used to visualize potential distributions. Strong ﬁeld curvature is evident in the region
close to the periphery of the photocathode (right upper corner of the ﬁgure).

14

Figure 5. A cure for the strong curvature of the equipotential lines seen in Fig. 1, 3
and 4 was found in the insertion of a new electrode - the “bleeder electrode”. Surplus
potential lines are conducted out from the HPD through the slot created between the
bleeder electrode and the body of the tube.

15

Figure 6. The bleeder electrode relaxes the strong ﬁeld curvature considered in Fig. 4
and enables correct focusing.

16

Figure 7. Thanks to the bleeder electrode, the entire photocathode maps correctly onto
the silicon sensor. Electrodes are kept at the following potentials, from left to right,
respectively: -20 kV, -19.45 kV, -15 kV, -11 kV, -4.7 kV and 0 V.

17

Figure 8. A considerably shorter version of the 5-inch HPD demonstrates a faster time
response, and should be less sensitive to residual magnetic ﬁelds. Time marks of 1 ns are
drawn along the trajectories. Electrodes are kept at the following potentials, from left to
right, respectively: -20 kV, -19.6 kV, -13 kV and 0 V.

18

Figure 9. Time of ﬂight in the short HPD from Fig. 8 as a function of Rorigin.

19

Figure 10. 20-inch diameter HPD for the AQUA-RICH experiment. Electrodes are kept
at the following potentials, from left to right, respectively: -45 kV, -44.25 kV, -37.5 kV,
-33 kV, -13.5 kV and 0 V. Marks along the electron trajectories indicate time intervals of
1 ns.

20

Figure 11. Cross-focusing 5-inch diameter HPD, with superior imaging characteristics
and positive ion feedback protection. Electrodes are kept at the following potentials, from
left to right, respectively: -20 kV, -19.97 kV, -19.4 kV, +100 V, and 0 V. Marks along
the electron trajectories indicate time intervals of 1 ns.

21

Figure 12. A view on the potential distribution in HPD from Fig. 11. The interior of
the conical electrode is essentially ﬁeld-free and the electron trajectories are “frozen” at
the entrance.

22

Figure 13. The “zooming” functionality of the conical electrode in the electron lens –
the size of the projected image has increased after the conical electrode was moved closer
to the photocathode.

23

Figure 14.
HPD from Fig. 11 with modiﬁed potential U(Bleeder Electrode) = -19.9
kV. Trajectories originating close to the periphery of the photocathode demonstrate odd
behavior. Marks along the electron trajectories indicate time intervals of 1 ns.

24

Figure 15. HPD from Fig. 11, now with potential U(Bleeder Electrode) = -20.0 kV.
Trajectories originating close to the periphery of the photocathode again show odd be-
havior, but in the opposite direction than in Fig. 14. Marks along the electron trajectories
indicate time intervals of 1 ns.

25

Figure 16.
Image mapping from the photocathode to the silicon pad sensor. Electrons
originate at radius Rorigin away from the HPD axis and hit the silicon sensor at Rhit. The
bleeder electrode has a weaker inﬂuence on mapping than in the proximity focusing HPD
(Fig. 2), but it strongly inﬂuences trajectories in their early stage, compare Figs. 11, 14,
and 15.

26

Figure 17. Time of ﬂight in the cross focused HPD as a function of Rorigin, for diﬀerent
potential settings on the bleeder electrode. The bleeder electrode has a weaker inﬂuence
on mapping than in the proximity focusing HPD (Fig. 2), but it strongly inﬂuences trajec-
tories in their early stage, and therefore also the timing properties; compare Figs. 11, 14,
and 15.

27

Ion feedback protection set “oﬀ” – conical electrode at the anode potential
Ions emerge from the surface of the anode (right) and accelerate towards the

Figure 18.
(U=0).
photocathode (left), causing damage and operational noise.

28

Figure 19.
Ion feedback protection “on” – conical barrier electrode at +100 V. Between
the barrier electrode and the anode a potential barrier is established to repel back positive
ions emerging from the anode surface.

29

Figure 20.
Ion feedback protection. Potential distribution in front of the anode plane
of HPD from Fig. 19. Positive ions of energy Eion=44 eV and emission angle normal to
the anode surface start “climbing” the potential barrier (Eb=45 eV) but become repelled
back and therefore never reach the photocathode.

