9
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
8
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
4
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The X-ray CCD camera of the MAXI
Experiment on the ISS/JEM

E. Miyata a,c,e, H. Tsunemi a,c,e, H. Ogata a, D. Akutsu a,
K. Yoshita a, Y. Hashimoto a, K. Torii c, M. Matsuoka b,c,
N. Kawai b,c, A. Yoshida b,c, T. Mihara b,c, T. Kotani b,
H. Negoro b, H. Kubo b, H. Matsumoto b, Y. Shirasaki b,
B.C. Rubin b, I. Sakurai b, and M. Yamauchi d

aDepartment of Earth & Space Science, Graduate School of Science, Osaka
University, 1-1 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan
bThe Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN)
cTsukuba Space Center, National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA)
dFaculty of Engineering, Miyazaki University
eCREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST)

Abstract

MAXI, Monitor of All-sky X-ray Image, is the X-ray observatory on the Japanese
experimental module (JEM) Exposed Facility (EF) on the International Space Sta-
tion (ISS). MAXI is a slit scanning camera which consists of two kinds of X-ray
detectors: one is a one-dimensional position-sensitive proportional counter with a
total area of ∼ 5000 cm2, the Gas Slit Camera (GSC), and the other is an X-ray
CCD array with a total area ∼ 200 cm2, the Solid-state Slit Camera (SSC). The
GSC subtends a ﬁeld of view with an angular dimension of 1◦ × 180◦ while the SSC
subtends a ﬁeld of view with an angular dimension of 1◦ times a little less than
180◦. In the course of one station orbit, MAXI can scan almost the entire sky with
a precision of 1◦ and with an X-ray energy range of 0.5−30 keV.

We have developed the engineering model of CCD chips and the analogue elec-
tronics for the SSC. The energy resolution of EM CCD for Mn Kα has a full-width
at half maximum of ≃ 182 eV. Readout noise is ≃ 11 e−rms.

1 Introduction

The charge coupled device (CCD) is a standard X-ray detector due to its high
X-ray detection eﬃciency, moderate X-ray resolving power, and high spatial

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

2 February 2008

resolving power. The Solid-state Imaging Spectrometer, SIS, onboard ASCA
is the ﬁrst CCD camera used as a photon counting detector and equipped on
board the satellite ([1]). Following SIS, many satellites such as HETE ([2]),
Chandra ([3]), XMM ([4]), and Astro-E ([5]) carry a X-ray CCD camera on
their focal planes.

2 MAXI

The International Space Station (ISS) will be placed in a nearly circular, high
inclination (51.6◦), low Earth orbit having a 96 minute orbital period with
respect to a point in the sky. ISS will rotate synchronously with its orbit so that
one side will always point toward the center of the Earth and the opposite side
will permanently view the sky. A payload is attached to the main structure of
the JEM which rotates and has unpredictable disturbances. Therefore, pointed
observations are very diﬃcult on the JEM. On the other hand, synchronous
rotation with orbital revolution provides access to the entire sky in one orbit
without a moving mechanism. Considering these characteristics, we conclude
that a monitoring mission or survey of a large ﬁeld of the sky is suitable, and
can produce signiﬁcant scientiﬁc results.

The schematic view of MAXI is shown in ﬁgure 1. MAXI can scan almost the
entire sky with a precision of 1◦. MAXI carries two kinds of X-ray detectors: a
one-dimensional position-sensitive proportional counter (GSC) and an X-ray
CCD camera (SSC). Combining these two cameras, MAXI can monitor X-ray
sources with an energy band of 0.5−30 keV. The total weight of MAXI is about
500 kg. Simulations of the data expected from MAXI have been performed in
([6]). A detailed description of MAXI can be found in ([7], [8]).

3 SSC

The SSC is an X-ray CCD camera system. The SSC consists of two X-ray
CCD cameras, each comprising 16 CCD chips. The block diagram of the SSC
camera is shown in ﬁgure 2. The SSC consists of three parts: two CCD cameras,
analogue electronics (SSCE), and a digital processing unit (DP). Detailed
speciﬁcations of the SSC are shown in table 1.

The CCD is fabricated by Hamamatsu Photonics K.K. (HPK). The CCD chip
is three-side buttable with full-frame transfer and has 1024 × 1024 pixels of
24µm×24µm size with two phase gate structures. The CCD chip is covered
by ∼2000˚A Al to block optical light. The CCD is operated at −60◦C, which

2

is achieved by using a passive cooling system and a Peltier cooling system
(TEC). TEC is supported with glasses to hold out the launch shock.

The SSCE is developed by Meisei Electronics. There are several CCD signal
processing techniques ([9] and references therein). To measure the voltage of
each charge packet, we need a reference voltage between the ﬂoating level and
the signal level. The correlated double sampling technique is widely used for
this purpose. In practice, it is advantageous to integrate or take the sum of
the signals rather than merely spot sample ﬂoating and signal levels. Thus, a
delay-line circuit is used in SIS/ASCA and an integrated circuit is introduced
for SXC/HETE, ACIS/Chandra and XIS/Astro-E. We plan to develop all
these circuits for the SSC and will select the one that possesses the lowest
readout noise.

Since the data rate of CCD is fairly high, an onboard data reduction system
is important. We developed an eﬃcient reduction system based on our expe-
riences with SIS/ASCA and XIS/Astro-E. There are three parts in DP: the
control unit, the event handling unit (EHU), and the telemetry unit. Two
CPU boards (RAD 6000) on the VME bus will be used for EHU and another
CPU board will be used for the control unit, the telemetry unit, and GSC
data processing.

There are two interfaces between MAXI and JEM Exposed Facility (EF):
medium-speed interface (10Base-T ethernet) and low-speed interface (MIL1553B).
All CCD data will be downlinked through the ethernet whereas part of health
and status (HS) data will be transferred through MIL1553B.

Based on the SIS/ASCA, we have learnt much about radiation damage on
the CCD ([10]). One serious problem is the increase in dark current and its
non-uniformity. To minimize the eﬀects of radiation damage on the CCD, we
allocate a dark level buﬀer for every pixel. The dark level for each pixel is
updated for every frame based on the pulse height of pixel of interest. For the
recovery of the radiation damage, we use an annealing process. However, we
think that the radiation damage would be small because the lifetime of MAXI
is two years (might be extended) and the orbit is lower than other missions
(≃ 400km).

Since the SSC is a one-dimensional X-ray camera, we use the spatial resolv-
ing power of the CCD only for the horizontal axis. Thus, we operate CCD
in the parallel summing mode (same as the fast mode for SIS/ASCA). The
vertical axis of the CCD corresponds to the time. The binning number can be
changed as 2n (n=2∼8). 16 CCD chips in one camera are read cyclically using
a multiplexer.

3

4 SSC Engineering Model

The engineering model (EM) of the CCD chip has been completed and tested
at the Osaka University X-ray CCD laboratory. EM of CCD is shown in ﬁgure 3
where CCD is ﬁxed on the Al plate. Two cables connected to the CCD are
used for the Peltier cooler.

There are three types of CCD produced for EM: a standard chip (standard),
a deep depletion type I (deep-I), and a deep depletion type II (deep-II). There
is a diﬀerence both in the depletion layer and in the dark current among these
three types of CCDs. The details of these three chips can be referred to in
Miyaguchi et al. (1999, [11]).

EM of the SSCE has been fabricated by MEISEI on the VME board. The
function test of the EM SSCE is underway.

5 X-ray Responsivity

5.1 Experimental Setup and Analysis

We evaluated the X-ray responsivity of deep-I EM CCD. We cooled the CCD
chip down to −100◦ with a He cryogenic system in the vacuum chamber. We
used the C4880 CCD camera system, which is the X-ray CCD data acquisition
system manufactured by HPK. Exposure time was set at 5 seconds.

CCD frame ﬁles were transfered to a workstation through the ethernet with
FITS format after they were acquired by C4880. HK information was collected
with a workstation and stored in a hard disk.

Dark current image was constructed with several CCD frame ﬁles using the
same algorithm as that of XIS/Astro-E ([5]). Before the X-ray event extrac-
tion, the dark current image was subtracted from each frame.

5.2 Results

Figure 4 shows the energy spectrum of X-rays from 55Fe for single-pixel events.
The split threshold is ≃ 70 eV. Mn Kα and Kβ lines are clearly separated.
The energy resolution of Mn Kα has a full-width at half maximum of ≃ 182
eV. Readout noise is ≃ 11 e−rms.

4

Since the energy resolution of HPK CCD is ∼40% less than that obtained
by CCDs fabricated by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory (e.g. [5]). HPK plans to
improve the CCD to achieve performance comparable to those of other X-ray
CCD devices.

6 Conclusion

MAXI is an X-ray all-sky monitor on the International Space Station and
is due for ﬂight in 2003. It is designed to scan almost the entire sky with a
precision of 1◦ and with an X-ray energy range of 0.5−30 keV in the course
of one station orbit.

We have developed the engineering model of the analogue electronics and
the CCD chips for the X-ray CCD camera, SSC. We evaluated the X-ray
responsivity of the EM CCD chip. The energy resolution of Mn Kα X-rays
has a full-width at a half maximum of 182 eV. Based on the EM results, we
will improve the performance of CCD and its electronics.

References

[1] Tanaka, Y., Inoue, H., and Holt, S.S., PASJ, 46, L37, 1994

[2] Ricker, G.R. Proc. of All-Sky X-Ray Observations in the Next Decade, 366, 1998

[3] Weisskoph, M.C., O’Dell, S.L., Elsner, R.F., van Speybroeck, L.P. Proc. SPIE,

2515, 312, 1995

[4] Barr P. et al. ESA SP-1097, March 1988

[5] Hayashida, H. et al. Proc. SPIE, 3445, 278, 1998

[6] Rubin, B.C. et al. Proc. of All-Sky X-Ray Observations in the Next Decade, 61,

[7] Matsuoka, M. et al. Proc. SPIE, 3114, 414, 1997

[8] Matsuoka, M. et al. Prof. of All-Sky X-Ray Observations in the Next Decade,

1998

275, 1998

[9] McLean, I.S. Electronic Imaging in Astronomy, 1997

[10] Yamashita, A. et al. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 44, 847, 1997

[11] Miyaguchi, K. et al. Nuclear Instruments and Method in this volume, 1999

5

Table 1
Speciﬁcations of the SSC

CCD type

Number of cameras

Number of CCD chips per camera

Number of CCD pixels

Pixel size

Eﬀective depletion depth (target)

Field of view

Angular resolution

CCD operating temperature (target)

Annealing temperature

HPK CCD (Frame transfer; two phase)

2

16
1024 (H) × 1024 (V)
24 µm × 24 µm
30 − 50µm
≈ 1◦ × 180◦
≈ 1◦
−60◦C
up to 20◦C

Clocking mode

Normal (diagnostics) and P-sum (observation)

6

1m

Fig. 1. Schematic view of MAXI

7

MAXI/SSC  Block Diagram

SSC-A

Clock

Data

32 CCD chip
(HPK)

Command

SSC-B

Clock

Data

32 CCD chip
(HPK)

Command

ver0.0 (1998.05.16)

HK data

Main data
HK data

Health & Status
HK data

SSCE

Command

Clock driver
board

P-sum mode
Diagnostic mode

Readout circuit

Delay circuit
Peak hold
A/D conversion

SSC-A
Pixel data

Control
board

HK interface
TEC Control
Data interface

Command

SSC-B
Pixel data

DP
three CPU boards

Control
&
Telemetry Edit
Unit
& GSC

Event Handling
Unit-A (EHU)

Event Extract
Dark update

Event Handling
Unit-B (EHU)

Event Extract
Dark update

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the SSC

8

Fig. 3. Photo of EM CCD chip

9

55 Fe Single Event Spectrum
182 eV @ 5.9 keV (FWHM)

NH9 17-4

250

200

150

s
t
n
u
o
C

100

50

0

2

3

5
4
Energy [keV]

6

7

Fig. 4. 55Fe spectrum obtained with the EM SSC camera

10

