Dissipation of Mechanical Energy in Fused Silica Fibers

Andri M. Gretarsson∗ and Gregory M. Harry†

Department of Physics, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY13244-1130

Abstract

To determine the dissipation induced by the surface of fused silica ﬁbers,

we measured the quality factor of ﬁbers having various diameters. We mea-

sured a maximum quality factor of 21 million and extrapolated to obtain an

intrinsic quality factor for fused silica of 29 million. Dissipation in the sur-

face dominated at diameters less than about 1 mm. We developed a method

for characterizing surface-induced dissipation that is independent of sample

geometry or mode shape.

9
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
8
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
0
4
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic mail: andri@phy.syr.edu

†Electronic mail: gharry@phy.syr.edu

1

I. INTRODUCTION

In experiments of suﬃciently high sensitivity, ﬂuctuations in the thermal energy of signal-

band degrees of freedom can become an important source of noise. These ﬂuctuations are

due to coupling between the signal-band degrees of freedom of the detector and the thermal

bath of other degrees of freedom. Since this coupling is also the cause of dissipation, one

can relate the thermal noise in a detector to the dissipation of signal-band excitations.

The relationship is quantiﬁed, for a wide class of couplings, by the Fluctuation-Dissipation

Theorem:

x2(f ) =

kBT
π2f 2 Re

1
Z(f ) #

,

"

(1)

where x(f ) is the spectral density of the ﬂuctuations, T is the temperature of the detector,

and Z −1(f ) is the admittance of detector excitations.1–3 The real part of the admittance is

proportional to the dissipation, so to minimize the thermal noise of a detector at a given

temperature we must minimize its dissipation.

In mechanical experiments, such as gravitational wave detectors, the relevant thermally

excited degrees of freedom are actual mechanical vibrations of detector components. The

level at which such a detector is limited by thermal noise can therefore depend on the

internal friction of the material from which the detector components are fabricated. The

lower the dissipation in the material, the lower the thermal noise. Fused silica (synthetic

amorphous SiO2) has extremely low dissipation for audio frequency oscillations at room

temperature. Therefore, fused silica is an excellent choice of material for the fabrication of

critical components of a thermal noise limited detector, operating at room temperature in

the audio frequency regime.4

Many authors have reported measurements of the dissipation in fused silica.5–10 However,

the measured quality factors, Q, are usually limited by dissipation mechanisms other than

the intrinsic dissipation of the bulk material.11–13 Particularly worrisome is the eﬀect of

a structurally defective and chemically impure surface, such as might result from normal

2

handling, exposure to the atmosphere, or diﬀerential cooling during fabrication.14 Although

the current investigations are focused on fused silica, the condition of the surface is also a

concern for other high-Q materials.

To investigate the amount of dissipation induced by the surface, we measured the dissi-

pation in fused silica ﬁbers of varying diameters, and hence varying surface-to-volume ratio.

In addition to providing information about the eﬀect of the surface, our results may be

extrapolated to give an approximate value for the dissipation in the bulk material.

II. THE EXPERIMENT

Our ﬁbers were hand drawn in air, from Heraeus Co. “Suprasil 2”-brand fused silica rods,

using a natural gas ﬂame. The rods had diameters between 5 and 9 mm, and the ﬁbers were

drawn from the rods as supplied, with no additional surface preparation, either before or

after drawing.

The dissipation in the ﬁbers was measured at room temperature using the ringdown

method.15,11 The ﬁbers, hanging freely, were excited with a comb capacitor providing an

oscillating electric ﬁeld with a large gradient.16 Due to the dielectric properties of fused

silica, an oscillating force is felt by the ﬁber. After a resonant mode was excited, the ﬁeld

was turned oﬀ, the capacitor grounded, and the ﬁber allowed to ring freely.

The displacement of the ﬁber as a function of time was measured by a split photodiode

shadow sensor. The envelope of the displacement was extracted and ﬁt to the functional

form

setup.

x0e−πfnφ(fn)t + C,

(2)

where t is time, x0 is the initial amplitude, C is the level of ambient noise, and φ(fn) is

the dissipation in the ﬁber at the resonance frequency fn. Figure 1 shows the experimental

Great care was taken to eliminate all extrinsic sources of dissipation, or “excess loss.” In

any measurement of ﬁber Q’s, there are several sources of excess loss that must be considered:

3

residual gas damping, rubbing at the clamp-ﬁber interface, recoil damping, and eddy-current

damping.11

The damping due to residual gas molecules in the vacuum chamber is given by

φgas =

¯v
πf d

ρgas
ρf iber

,

(3)

where d is the ﬁber diameter, f is the frequency of vibration, ¯v is the average speed of the

gas molecules, ρgas is the mass density of the gas, and ρf iber is the mass density of the ﬁber.

Gas damping was made negligible by conducting our measurements at pressures around

10−6 torr. Taking typical values for the parameters, we estimate φgas ≈ 10−9.

To eliminate rubbing at the clamp-ﬁber interface we ensured that the ﬁber oscillation

did not induce elastic deformation of the ﬁber material in the clamp. This was achieved by

drawing the ﬁber monolithically from a much thicker rod (i.e. leaving the ﬁber attached to

the rod from which it was drawn), then clamping the rod in a collet as shown in Fig. 1.17

Recoil damping is due to coupling between the resonant modes of the ﬁber and low-Q

resonances of the support structure. The main diagnostic for recoil damping is a strong

frequency dependence of the Q.13 Resonance modes of the ﬁber having frequencies close to

resonances of the supporting structure will be very strongly damped, while other modes may

show excellent Q’s. Recoil damping was minimized by isolating the ﬁber resonances from

the support resonances by a structure analogous to a double pendulum. Figure 2 shows

the three diﬀerent ﬁber structures used in this experiment. In each case we measured the

dissipation in the lowest ﬁber only. In the design of type 3, the lowest “ﬁber” is simply

the undrawn rod, as supplied. The entire structure below the clamp must be monolithic to

prevent interface rubbing.

Eddy-current damping occurs when the oscillating ﬁber carries a charge, and the motion

of the charges induces eddy currents in nearby conductors. Resistance in the conductors

dissipates the mechanical energy stored in the currents, degrading the Q. The dissipation in

any given ﬁber was not noticeably dependent on the arrangement of, or distance to, nearby

conductors. We conclude that eddy-current damping was negligible in our measurements.

4

Finally, we note that our ﬁbers were drawn from fused silica rather than fused quartz

rods. Fused quartz is fabricated from naturally occurring SiO2, while fused silica is made of

synthetic SiO2. Fused quartz has been measured to have intrinsic room temperature Q’s of

at most a few million.5, 18–20 These values are too low for our purposes and would obscure

the dissipation induced by the surface layer.

Figure 3 shows the variations in Q measured with and without some of the precautions

mentioned above. If the ﬁber is held directly in a clamp instead of being left attached to the

rod from which it was drawn, friction due to rubbing in the clamp dominates. Without an

isolation bob, recoil damping dominates and there is strong frequency dependence. Fibers

clamped and hung by the rods from which they were drawn, and having a central isolation

bob show the highest Q’s, with much less frequency dependence. In these ﬁbers, the diﬀer-

ence between fused quartz and fused silica becomes apparent, with fused silica exhibiting

substantially higher Q.

III. DISSIPATION VERSUS FREQUENCY FOR A TYPICAL FIBER

For each ﬁber, the dissipation was measured at a number of resonance frequencies. For

ﬁbers of the type 1 design, the resonance frequencies agree well with the resonance frequen-

cies of a beam of circular cross section clamped at one end:

Y d2
ρL4 (0.597)2 n = 1
Y d2
ρL4 (n − 1
2)2 n ≥ 2,

π
8

π
8

q

q

fn = 



(4)

where Y is Young’s modulus, d is the ﬁber diameter, L is the ﬁber length, ρ is the mass

per unit volume, and n = 1, 2 . . . is the mode number.21 Figure 4 shows the agreement

between the the measured and predicted resonance frequencies for a typical ﬁber of type 1.

The mode frequencies may be used to calculate the diameter of the ﬁber, and we ﬁnd good

agreement with the average diameter measured using a micrometer. Similarly, for the ﬁbers

of type 3, the resonance frequencies agree with those of a free beam of circular cross section.

As expected, the resonance frequencies of the ﬁber of type 2 are not well modeled by either

5

a free or a clamped beam. This is due to the large diameter of the excited ﬁber relative to

the ﬁrst (lowest) isolation bob which takes some part in the motion. Because of this, the

ﬁber of type 2 was made with an extra isolation bob.

Figure 5 shows the dissipation versus frequency for the ﬁber whose resonance frequencies

are shown in Fig 4. The graph shows a loss peak peak around 100 Hz which is due to

thermoelastic damping.22 Thermoelastic damping is given by

φtherm =

Y α2T0
C

σf
1 + σ2f 2 ,

(5)

where Y is Young’s modulus, α is the thermal expansion coeﬃcient, T0 is the ﬁber temper-

ature (absolute scale), C is the heat capacity per unit volume, and f is the frequency of

vibrations. The constant σ is

σ =

2π
13.55

Cd2
κ

,

where d is the ﬁber diameter and κ is the thermal conductivity. We found good agreement

between the average measured diameter and the diameter calculated from the position of

the thermoelastic damping peak.

modeled by the form

As can be seen from the graph, the dissipation is not purely thermoelastic and can be

φ(f ) = φtherm(f ) + φc,

(6)

where φtherm(f ) is thermoelastic damping and φc is a frequency-independent damping term.

The dissipation in most of the ﬁbers is in good overall agreement with the form of Eq. 6.

(Several ﬁbers have a small number of modes showing anomalously high dissipation. This

indicates an undiagnosed source of dissipation aﬀecting these modes.)

The appearance of a frequency-independent φc suggests the presence of a dissipation

source whose microscopic components have a wide range of activation energies.23 Dissipation

in the bulk material is likely to be of this type. However, a frequency-independent term might

also arise from defects or impurities in the surface layer, or possibly from other sources.

6

One way of obtaining further information as to the source of φc is to measure its depen-

dence on the ﬁber diameter. In this way it is possible to distinguish between dissipation

occurring in the bulk volume of the ﬁber and dissipation occurring in the surface layer.

IV. MODEL OF DIAMETER DEPENDENCE

The constant dissipation term φc is modeled as consisting of two parts, one due to

dissipation in the bulk and one due to dissipation in the surface layer:

φc = (∆Ebulk + ∆Esurf )/E,

where ∆Ebulk is the energy lost per cycle in the bulk material, ∆Esurf is the energy lost per

cycle in the surface layer, and E is the total energy stored in the oscillating ﬁber.

If we make the rather general assumption that ∆Esurf is proportional to the surface area

S while ∆Ebulk is proportional to the volume V , we may write

∆Esurf
∆Ebulk

∝

S
V

.

The coeﬃcient of proportionality depends on the ratio of the dissipation angle of the surface

layer to the dissipation angle of the bulk material. It also depends on the ratio of energy

stored in the surface layer to energy stored in the bulk. Some complication arises because

both the dissipation angle of the surface layer and the density of energy stored in the surface

layer are functions of depth. While we can normally calculate the energy density from the

strain proﬁle of the mode shape, we know little about dissipation in the surface layer. Since

we are interested in characterizing the dissipation in the surface independently of the mode

of oscillation or sample geometry, we write the coeﬃcient of proportionality as a product of

two factors

(7)

(8)

(9)

The geometrical factor µ depends only on the geometry of the sample and on the mode of

oscillation, while the “dissipation depth” ds depends only on the strength of dissipation in

∆Esurf
∆Ebulk

= µ

ds
V /S

.

7

the surface layer relative to the bulk. The appropriate expressions for µ and ds are calculated

in the Appendix. When the Young’s modulus of the surface layer is the same as that of the

bulk, we have

ds =

h

1
φbulk Z

0

φ(n)dn,

(10)

where n is a coordinate measuring the distance inward from the surface, φbulk ≡ ∆Ebulk/Ebulk

is the dissipation in the bulk, φ(n) is the dissipation in the surface layer as a function of

depth, and h is the thickness of the surface. For our ﬁbers, having circular cross section and

oscillating in transverse modes, we have µ = 2.

For samples with simple geometries, µ is of order unity and the volume-to-surface ratio

has the same order of magnitude as the minimum thickness of the sample. When the

dissipation depth is small compared to the minimum thickness of the sample, the eﬀect of

the surface on the dissipation is also small. When the dissipation depth is greater than or

on the order of the minimum thickness of the sample, dissipation in the surface is likely to

Since φ(n) is seldom known explicitly, a measurement of the dissipation depth provides

a convenient way of comparing the surface condition of diﬀerent samples. Since E ≈ Ebulk

we may rewrite Eq. 7 in terms of the dissipation depth,

In our case V /S = d/4, and the theory predicts

φc = φbulk(1 + µ

ds
V /S

).

φc = φbulk(1 + 8

).

ds
d

(11)

(12)

Equation 12 is the model to which we shall compare our data on dissipation versus ﬁber

dominate.

diameter.

V. DISSIPATION VERSUS DIAMETER

For all of the ﬁbers, the constant dissipation term φc was measured with the surface

condition “as drawn”. The surface of ﬁbers drawn in a ﬂame is largely free from micro-

8

cracks24, 25 and we tried to avoid damaging this surface. Although care was taken during

transport and during installation in the apparatus, some of the ﬁbers did get lightly knocked

against aluminum or glass components. This represents the only physical contact with the

ﬁber surface.

Measurements of φc were made in the following way. Since φ(f ) → φc far from the

thermoelastic damping peak, a measurement of the total dissipation φ at a frequency where

thermoelastic damping is known to be negligible, constitutes a direct measurement of φc.

In each case φc was taken as the lowest value of dissipation measured for a particular ﬁber.

In most cases, measurements of φ could be taken at a suﬃciently large range of frequencies

so that those modes exhibiting the lowest dissipation gave a good approximation to the φc

asymptote. The three thickest ﬁbers however, posed some problems. We were only able to

excite two or three modes in each, and no direct veriﬁcation could be made of the existence of

a φc asymptote. In addition, the dissipation in these ﬁbers is very small, and correspondingly

more sensitive to excess loss. Table I lists the Q’s measured for the three thickest ﬁbers.

While Fiber G exhibits constant Q’s, the Q’s of Fiber J and Fiber K are quite frequency

dependent. This is particularly striking for the split-frequency, third resonance mode of

Fiber K, where the Q changes by a factor of 3 within 4 Hz. This source of this excess loss

is undiagnosed.

Figure 6 shows φc versus diameter for the 10 ﬁbers measured. Systematic errors are

likely to be far larger than the uncertainty shown (which represents the repeatability).

The main source of systematic error is the upward bias of the measured dissipation due to

undiagnosed sources of excess loss. We ﬁt the data to Eq. 12 and have tried to minimize

the error induced by undiagnosed excess loss by including in the ﬁt only those ﬁbers whose

graphs of dissipation versus resonance frequency do not have points deviating signiﬁcantly

from the form predicted by Eq. 6. (For example, the ﬁber shown in Fig. 5 satisﬁes this

criterion well.) The ﬁt determines ds and φbulk, which have the values

ds = 167 ± 20 µm,

(13)

9

φbulk = 3.47 ± 0.3 × 10−8.

(14)

This value for φbulk is consistent with the lowest dissipation measured in fused silica.6, 9 A

quality factor of approximately 3 × 107 has been seen in hemispherical resonators of surface-

treated, Russian brand KS4V fused silica at 3.7 kHz.26

With knowledge of the dissipation depth, we can use Eq. 9, to calculate the ﬁber diame-

ter, deq, at which surface-induced dissipation becomes equal in importance to bulk-induced

dissipation:

deq = 8ds ≈ 1300 µm.

In order to obtain an estimate for the average dissipation in the surface layer, we

model the surface layer as a homogeneous shell of thickness h having constant dissipation,

φ(~r) ≡ φsurf . Equation 10 gives

The literature suggests several mechanisms for chemical surface damage penetrating to a

depth of order 1 µm.27 Taking h = 1 µm and using the values given by Eqs. 13 and 14 we

obtain

ds = h

φsurf
φbulk

.

φsurf ≈ 10−5.

(15)

(16)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank Peter Saulson for advice, suggestions, support, and careful reading

of the manuscript. We also thank William Startin and Steven Penn for useful discussions

and reading the manuscript. Thanks to Yinglei Huang for teaching us the basics of ﬁber

measurements and to Mark Beilby for helpful discussions. Additional thanks are due to

Vinod Balachandran for contributing his time in the lab during the summer of 1998, and

to John Schiller who is extending this work by performing surface treatments on fused

silica ﬁbers. We would especially like to thank the glassblower to Syracuse University, John

10

Chabot, who drew all the ﬁbers used in these measurements. This work was supported by

Syracuse University and by The National Science Foundation.

APPENDIX: FORM OF THE GEOMETRICAL FACTOR AND THE

DISSIPATION DEPTH

It is possible (in a continuum approximation) to deﬁne a point dissipation angle,

φ(~r) ≡ ∆ρE(~r)/ρE(~r),

(A1)

where ~r represents the location within the sample, ρE(~r) is the energy density stored at ~r,

and ∆ρE(~r) is the change in ρE(~r) per cycle.

The bulk may then be deﬁned as the region of points within the sample where φ(~r)

is constant. For the purposes of our model, we assume that there exists a surface layer of

maximum thickness h where φ(~r) varies, while elsewhere in the sample φ(~r) has the constant

value φbulk.

Recalling

where Y (~r) is the Young’s modulus and ǫ(~r) the strain amplitude, we can write

ρE(~r) =

Y (~r)ǫ2(~r)

1
2

∆Esurf =

φ(~r)Y (~r)ǫ2(~r) d3r

1
2 ZSL

where SL is the region constituting the surface layer. If we make the assumption that φ(~r)

and Y (~r) may be treated as functions of depth alone, we can write

∆Esurf =

φ(n)Y (n)

h

1
2 Z

0

ǫ2(~r)d2r

dn,

)

(ZS(n)

where n measures the distance in from the surface and S(n) is a surface of integration at

depth n, parallel to the actual surface of the sample. For the bulk we have

(A2)

(A3)

(A4)

(A5)

∆Ebulk =

φbulkYbulk

ǫ2(~r)d3r

1
2

ZV

11

where V is the region of the bulk and Ybulk is Young’s modulus of the bulk.

We now make the assumption that h is suﬃciently small that

where S = S(0) is the actual surface of the sample. Using Eqs. A4–A6 we can write

where V is the volume of the sample, S is its surface area, and µ and ds are assigned the

values

ǫ(~r ∈ SL) ≈ ǫ(~r ∈ S),

∆Esurf
∆Ebulk

= µ

ds
V /S

,

µ =

S ǫ2(~r)d2r
V
V ǫ2(~r)d3r
S R
R

,

ds =

h

1
φbulkYbulk Z

0

φ(n)Y (n)dn.

The geometrical factor µ is a dimensionless constant which depends only on the sample

geometry and on the class of resonances excited. The dissipation depth ds has the dimensions

of length and provides a direct measure of the total dissipation induced by the surface layer

(normalized to the dissipation in the bulk).

In uncoated samples, the dissipation depth

provides a measure of the physical and chemical damage suﬀered by the surface of the

sample.

in cylindrical coordinates, by

For a transversely oscillating ﬁber of circular cross section, the strain amplitude is given,

where u(z) is the displacement amplitude of the ﬁber from equilibrium. Using Eq. A8 we

immediately have

ǫ(~r) =

r cos θ,

∂2u(z)
∂z2

µ = 2.

12

(A6)

(A7)

(A8)

(A9)

(A10)

(A11)

REFERENCES

[1] H. B. Callen and T. A. Welton, Phys. Rev. 83 35 (1951).

[2] H. B. Callen and R. F. Greene, 86 703 (1952).

[3] P. R. Saulson, Phys. Rev. D 42 2437 (1990).

[4] V. B. Braginskii, V. P. Mitrofanov, and V. I. Panov, Systems with Small Dissipation,

English Translation by Erast Gliner, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1985.

[5] D. B. Fraser, J. Appl. Phys. 39, 5868 (1968); 41, 6 (1970).

[6] W. J. Startin, M. A. Beilby, and P. R. Saulson, Rev. Sci. Instr. 69 3681 (1998)

[7] A. D. Gillespie, PhD. thesis (California Institute of Technology, 1995) Unpublished.

[8] M. N. Danchevskaya, B. S. Lunin, I. V. Batov, V. N. Smirnov, A. N. Tselbrovsky, G.

P. Panasyuk, and V. B. Lazarev, Proceedings of the Xth National Scientiﬁc and Tech-

nical Conference–Glass and Fine Ceramics–Summaries, Vol. 1, Glass; Varna Bulgaria,

October 18-20, 1990, pp. 197-198.

[9] M. N. Danchevskaya, B.S. Lunin, and I.V. Batov, VIIth All-Union Scientiﬁc-Technical

Conference on Fused Silica, Reports, St. Petersburg, Nov. 19-20, 1991. (Transl. by L.

Espovitch for Delco Systems Operations.)

[10] E. J. Loper, D. D. Lynch, and K. M. Stevenson, IEEE PLANS (Position Location and

Navigation Symposium) Record, Caesar’s Palace, Las Vegas, Nevada, November 4-7,

1986, pp. 61-64, Table 2.

[11] Y. L. Huang and P. R. Saulson, Rev. Sci. Instr. 69 544 (1998)

[12] V. B. Braginskii, V. P. Mitrofanov, K. V. Tokmakov, Physics Doklady 40 564 (1995),

Transl. from Doklady Akademii Nauk, 345 324 (1995)

[13] J.E. Logan, N. A. Robertson, J. Hough, Phys. Lett. A 170 352 (1992).

13

[14] B.S. Lunin, S. N. Torbin, M. N. Danchevskaya, and I. V. Batov, Bulletin of Moscow

State University, Series 2, Chemistry 35 24 (1994)

[15] J. Kovalik and P. R. Saulson, Rev. Sci. Instr. 64 2942 (1993).

[16] A. Cadez and A. Abramovici, J. Phys E: Sci. Instr. 21 453 (1988).

[17] T. J. Quinn, C.C. Speake, W. Tew, R. S. Davis, and L. M. Brown, Phys. Lett. A, 197

197 (1995).

(1998).

March 1999.

[18] S. Rowan, R. Hutchins, A. McLaren, N. A. Robertson, S. M. Twyford, and J. Hough,

Phys. Lett. A, 227 153 (1997).

[19] S. Rowan, S. M. Twyford, J. Hough, D.-H. Gwo, and R. Route, Phys. Lett. A, 246 471

[20] G. Cagnoli, Presentation at LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration Meeting, Gainesville, Florida,

[21] P. M. Morse, Vibration and Sound. McGraw-Hill, 1948.

[22] C. Zener, Phys. Rev. 52 230 (1937).

[23] F. K. du Pr´e, Phys. Rev. 78 615 (1950).

[24] R. H. Doremus, Glass Science, pp. 284-285, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1973.

[25] D.R. Uhlman and N.J. Kreidl ed., Elasticity and Strength in Glasses, Academic Press,

New York, 1980.

May 4, 1997.

Press, New York, 1979.

[26] B. S. Lunin, Chemistry Department, Moscow State University, Private communication,

[27] R. H. Doremus, in Treatise on Material Science and Technology, Vol. 17, Academic

14

FIG. 1. Schematic diagram of the experimental setup. The signal from the split photodiode

shadow sensor is fed through a diﬀerential ampliﬁer, bandpass ﬁlter, a lock-in ampliﬁer and com-

FIGURES

puter data acquisition system.

FIG. 2. Three diﬀerent designs for ﬁber isolation structures. In each case, only the dissipation

in the lowest section was measured.

In total, ten ﬁbers were measured. Seven were of type 1,

having diameters less than or equal to about 1050 µm, one was of type 2, having diameter of about

3500 µm, and two were of type 3, having diameters of about 4885 µm and 5934 µm.

FIG. 3. The eﬀect of isolation techniques. The left-hand graph shows the results for three

natural fused quartz ﬁbers having diameters between 350 and 500 µm. The crosses indicate a ﬁber

of type 1 (see Fig. 2) clamped in a collet by the rod from which it was drawn. The circles indicate

a similar ﬁber clamped in a collet by the rod from which it was drawn, but lacking an isolation

bob. The triangles indicate a ﬁber detached from the rod from which it was drawn, lacking an

isolation bob, and clamped between two plates. The right-hand graph shows the results for a single

fused silica ﬁber of type 1, having diameter approximately 400 µm. The crosses represent the ﬁber

clamped in a collet by the rod from which it was drawn. The circles represent the same ﬁber, in

the same collet, but clamped and hung from the isolation bob.

FIG. 4. Fit of theoretical cantilever beam resonance frequencies to the resonance frequencies

of a typical ﬁber of type 1. The crosses are the measured values and the solid line is a ﬁt of the

measured values to Eq. 4.

FIG. 5. Measured φ vs. resonance frequency for a typical ﬁber of type 1. The circled bars

represent the measured dissipation and uncertainty. The solid line represents the theoretical ther-

moelastic plus constant damping and is a ﬁt of the measured values to Eq. 6. The dashed line is

the thermoelastic term from the ﬁt.

15

FIG. 6. Measured φc vs. average measured ﬁber diameter. The circled points represent ﬁbers

whose dissipation vs. frequency graph follows Eq. 6, without anomalous points. The uncertainty

in φ shown is the approximate repeatability (5%). The uncertainty shown in the average measured

diameter is an estimate for the uncertainty induced by the ﬁber taper, where it exits the rod from

which it was drawn. The solid line shows a least squares ﬁt of Eq. 12 to the circled points. The

diameter of the thinnest ﬁber was not measured directly but obtained from the position of the

thermoelastic damping peak.

16

TABLES

TABLE I. Quality factors exhibited by the the three thickest ﬁbers. Repeated measurements

typically vary by about 5%; this is larger than the measurement uncertainty. The large uncertainty

in the average measured diameter is due to the taper at the upper end of the ﬁber, where it exits

the ﬁrst isolation bob.

17

Table I

Sample

Avg. diameter (µm)

Mode number

f (Hz)

Q

Fiber Ga

3500 ± 250

Fiber Jb

4885 ± 120

Fiber Kb

5934 ± 70

2

3

2c

2c

3c

3c

4

732.0 ± 0.1

1582.5 ± 0.1

2157.3 ± 0.1

2.1 × 107

2.1 × 107

1.0 × 107

2167.3 ± 0.1

0.41 × 107

1725 ± 0.5

0.68 × 107

1729 ± 0.5

2.0 × 107

3364.0 ± 0.1

0.35 × 107

aType 2.

bType 3.

cSince ﬁber cross sections are not perfectly circular, mode frequencies are split.

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

