9
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
5
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
4
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Extruded Plastic Scintillation Detectors

Anna Pla-Dalmau, Alan D. Bross and Kerry L. Mellott
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
P. O. Box 500, Batavia, IL 60510, USA

As a way to lower the cost of plastic scintillation detectors, commercially available polystyrene
pellets have been used in the production of scintillating materials that can be extruded into diﬀerent
proﬁles. The selection of the raw materials is discussed. Two techniques to add wavelength shifting
dopants to polystyrene pellets and to extrude plastic scintillating strips are described. Data on light
yield and transmittance measurements are presented.

I. INTRODUCTION

Plastic scintillation detectors have been used in nuclear and high energy physics for many decades [1]. Their
advantages and disadvantages are recognized. Among their beneﬁts are fast response, ease of manufacture and
versatility. Their main drawbacks are radiation resistance and cost. Many research projects have concentrated on
improving the fundamental properties of plastic scintillators [2,3], but little attention has focussed on their cost.
Currently available plastic scintillating materials are high quality products whose cost is relatively expensive, and
because of that, their use in very large detectors has not been a feasible option. For instance, MINOS (Main Injector
Neutrino Oscillation Search) will require 400,000 Kg of plastic scintillator for its detector [4]. With the price of
cast scintillator at approximately $40 per Kg, such a detector would not be aﬀordable. However, recent studies
using commercial polystyrene pellets as the base material for extrudable plastic scintillators have allowed the MINOS
collaboration to consider a less expensive alternative in building a plastic scintillation detector. Furthermore, the D0
experiment at Fermilab has been able to use extruded plastic scintillator to build and upgrade their Forward and
Central Preshower Detectors. In this case, the driving force was not the cost of the material, since only 2,000 Kg of
plastic scintillator were needed, but the opportunity to use a particular shape (triangular bar) that would have been
expensive to machine out of cast plastic scintillator sheets [5,6].

II. EXTRUDED PLASTIC SCINTILLATORS

Several factors contribute to the high cost of plastic scintillating sheets and wavelength shifting ﬁbers. The main
reason is the labor-intensive nature of the manufacturing process. The raw materials, namely styrene, vinyltoluene,
and the dopants, need to be highly pure. These puriﬁcation steps often take place just prior to the material utilization.
Cleaning and assembly of the molds for the polymerization process is a detail-oriented operation that adds to the
overall timeline. The polymerization cycle lasts several days. It consists of a high temperature treatment to induce
full conversion from monomer to polymer, followed by a controlled ramp-down to room temperature to achieve a
stress-free material. Finally, there are machining charges for sheets and tiles, and drawing charges for ﬁbers that
cannot be overlooked.

In order to signiﬁcantly lower the cost of plastic scintillators, extruded plastic scintillation materials need to be con-
sidered. In an extrusion process, polymer pellets or powder must be used. Commercial polystyrene pellets are readily
available, thus eliminating monomer puriﬁcation and polymerization charges. In addition, extrusion can manufacture
nearly any shape, increasing detector geometry options. There are, however, some important disadvantages. The
extruded plastic scintillator is known to have poorer optical quality than the cast material. The main cause is high
particulate matter content within the polystyrene pellets. General purpose polystyrene pellets are utilized in numer-
ous products but few of them have strict optical requirements. A way to bypass the short attenuation length problem
is to extrude a scintillator shape and use a wavelength shifting (WLS) ﬁber as readout. Our ﬁrst approach was a
two-step process that involved adding dopants to commercial polystyrene pellets to produce scintillating polystyrene
pellets, which were then used to extrude a scintillator proﬁle with a hole in the middle for a WLS ﬁber (Figure 1).

1

The goal in the ﬁrst step was to prepare scintillating pellets of acceptable optical quality in a factory environment.
In addition to careful selection of the raw materials, the manufacturing concerns dealt with possible discoloration of
the scintillating pellets because of either residues present in the equipment or degradation of the polymer pellets and
the dopants in the processing device. The latter could be induced by the presence of oxygen at the high temperatures
and pressures which constitute the typical operating conditions.

(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)

(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)
(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:16)

d

FIG. 1. Rectangular scintillator proﬁle with a hole in the middle for a WLS ﬁber.

After producing the ﬁrst batch of scintillating pellets, samples were cast to perform light yield and radiation
degradation studies. Samples of standard cast scintillators such as BC404 and BC408, and samples prepared through
bulk polymerization at Fermilab were also included in the studies (Table I). All the samples had similar dopant
composition and were cut as 2-cm cubes. The light yield measurements were performed using a 207Bi source (1
MeV electrons). The light yield results (Table I) showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence among them. The Bicron samples
are made of poly(vinyltoluene) instead of polystyrene which accounts for the 20% increase in light output [1]. The
samples for radiation damage studies were placed in stainless steel cans and connected to a vacuum pump for two
weeks to remove dissolved air and moisture. The cans were then back-ﬁlled with nitrogen and irradiated with a 60Co
source at the Phoenix Memorial Laboratory of the University of Michigan. The irradiations took place at a rate of
approximately 15 KGy/h to a total dose of 1 KGy. After irradiation and annealing, the extruded scintillator cubes
showed a 5% decrease in light yield which is similar to the losses observed in regular scintillator of this composition.
Based on these tests, there was no sign of degradation in the scintillating pellets. The material was then used to
produce extruded scintillator of diﬀerent proﬁles with a hole in the middle for a WLS ﬁber.

TABLE I. Relative light yield of samples with similar compositions but from diﬀerent manufacturing processes.

Scintillator
404
408

a

Bicrona
1.0
1.0

extruded
0.80
0.85

bulk polymerized
0.78
0.77

Bicron scintillator has a poly(vinyltoluene) matrix which yields 20% more light than a polystyrene one [1].

A. Selection of Raw Materials

There are many manufacturers and grades of polystyrene pellets. Most of them fall under the category of general
purpose polystyrene. Only a few oﬀer optical quality polystyrene pellets. Needless to say, there is a substantial
diﬀerence in price. Nonetheless, the ﬁrst plastic scintillating pellets were prepared using an optical grade polystyrene
from Dow, labeled XU70251, which was later superseded by XU70262 (Dow 262). The price for Dow 262 is about
$4.5 per Kg. After conﬁrmation by the initial tests that high quality extruded plastic scintillators were feasible, the
quest began to replace the costly optical grade pellets with general purpose material. Various samples of diﬀerent
polystyrene grades were received from Dow, Fina, Nova, BASF, Huntsman, etc. These samples had been selected
based on price, availability and melt ﬂow rate for ease of extrusion. These materials were cast into cylinders up
to 3 inches long. Transmittance measurements were performed using a Hewlett-Packard 8452 spectrophotometer.
The materials tested were compared to cast samples of Dow 262 pellets. Often polystyrene contained additives that
absorbed at long wavelengths such as the Fina pellets illustrated in Figure 2. This absorption would diminish the

2

amount of light produced by the dopants that need to be added to make a particular scintillator. Other features
observed were long absorption tails and haziness caused by additives and debris in the pellets. There were a couple
of materials that were repeatedly tested and showed high clarity and lack of absorptions at long wavelengths. Dow
Styron 663 (Dow 663) was chosen as the general purpose polystyrene grade to conduct our extrusion studies. Its price
ranges from $1.3/Kg to $1.7/Kg depending, among other things, on the quantity ordered.

FIG. 2. Transmittance data of commercial polystyrene pellets.

A variety of organic ﬂuorescent compounds can be used as primary and secondary dopants in plastic scintillator
applications. The primary dopant is commonly used at a 1–1.5% (by weight) concentration. The secondary dopant
or wavelength shifter in scintillator is utilized at a concentration of 0.01–0.03% (by weight). The goal was to prepare
a blue-emitting scintillator that could be readout with a green WLS ﬁber. Most green ﬁbers are doped with K27,
and thus the emission of the scintillator would have to match as best as possible the absorption of K27 in the ﬁber.
The selection of dopants was based on these spectroscopic requirements as well as price and ease of manufacture.
para-Terphenyl ($200–225/Kg) and PPO ($100–160/Kg) were considered as primary dopants. POPOP and bis-MSB
(both at $0.5–1/g) were tested as secondary dopants. The ﬁnal choice for the extruded plastic scintillator was PPO
and POPOP in Dow 663. Figure 3 plots the transmittance spectrum of an extruded scintillator sample of this type.

B. Manufacturing Techniques

The majority of the extruded scintillator prepared has used Method 1, a two-step process conducted at two separate
facilities. Figure 4 depicts the ﬂow chart for this method. The ﬁrst step was carried out at a company whose function
was to add the dopants to the polystyrene pellets. (In the plastics industry, this trade is typically referred to as a
color or compounding business.) Prior to the coloring run, polystyrene pellets were purged for several days with an
inert gas, generally argon, to remove dissolved oxygen and moisture. The coloring step was a batch process where
polystyrene pellets and dopants were tumble-mixed for 15 min. and then added to the hopper of an extruder. Each
batch prepared 45 Kg of mixture. A silicone oil was used as a coating aid to achieve better distribution of the dopants
on the pellet surface. An argon ﬂow was also added to the hopper to minimize the presence of oxygen in the extruder.
The die at the extruder head generated several strings of material which were cut yielding the scintillating pellets. At

3

the end, the scintillating pellets collected in many containers during the run were blended to homogenize the material.
These pellets could now be used to produce plastic scintillators through several procedures — namely extrusion,
casting and injection molding. In this case, the scintillating pellets were taken to an extrusion company to extrude
the desired scintillator proﬁle.

FIG. 3. Transmittance data of extruded plastic scintillator.

polystyrene pellets

dopants and additives

-

mixture batch

inert gas (argon)

?

?

processing device

-

extrusion

injection mold

(cid:27)

scintillating pellets

-

cast

extrude to form scintillating proﬁle

FIG. 4. Two-step process: batch coloring and extrusion (Method 1).

?

?

4

Using this batch process, there is also the possibility of directly extruding the scintillator proﬁle and thus by-passing
the pelletizing step. This is the route that the MINOS collaboration has chosen to investigate. This variation of
Method 1 can be less expensive since all the work is done in one facility.
It also reduces the heat history of the
product by removing its exposure to another high temperature cycle and minimizes the chance of optical degradation.
The drawback is in the batch work since the polymer and the dopants still need to be weighed for each mixture, and
in the tumble-mixing step which is susceptible to contamination and prone to errors.

An alternative to these operations is given by Method 2 which is summarized in Figure 5. Method 2 is a continuous
in-line coloring and extrusion process. It emphasizes the most direct pathway from polystyrene pellets to the scintil-
lator proﬁle with the least handling of raw materials. In this situation, the purged polystyrene pellets and dopants
are metered into the extruder at the correct rate for the required composition of the scintillator. An argon ﬂow is
still used at the hopper. Coating agents are no longer needed. The appropriate die proﬁle gives rise to the extruded
scintillator form of choice. If the die can produce strands, these can also be pelletized and the scintillating pellets
used in other processes. Method 2 has been tested and produces plastic scintillator of high quality and homogeneity.
Although it is a simple concept, the equipment needed to accurately meter small quantities of powders such as the
dopants and to achieve a good distribution of the powders in the molten polymer is not widely available. The diﬃculty
in testing this process was ﬁnding a facility with the adequate instrumentation.

polystyrene pellets

dopants and additives

inert gas (argon)

?

?

?

processing device

-

scintillating pellets

?

extrude to form scintillating proﬁle

-

-

-

cast

injection mold

extrusion

FIG. 5. Continuous in-line coloring and extrusion process (Method 2).

III. LIGHT YIELD OF EXTRUDED PLASTIC SCINTILLATORS

Light yield studies have been performed on many samples of extruded plastic scintillators. Although a variety of
shapes and sizes is available, the measurements have mostly been carried out on 11.5-cm long rectangular extrusions
(1cm x 2cm) with a hole in the middle for a green WLS ﬁber. Each extrusion is tightly wrapped in Tyvek for this
test. The WLS ﬁber utilized is BC91A (0.835 mm diameter, 1.5 m long) with one mirrored end. The light yield test
setup uses an electron spectrometer with 106Ru source whose 3-MeV beam is momentum selected. There is a small
trigger counter in front of the extruded sample. The photomultiplier tube used is a Hamamatsu R2165 which has
excellent single photo-electron resolution. The ﬁber is held at a ﬁxed position from the PMT surface to minimize
ﬂuctuations among measurements. The light yield is determined from the following calculation:

5

where the mean and the gain are deﬁned as:

LightY ield =

M ean − P edestal
Gain

M ean =

n
i vixi
P
n
i vi
P

Gain = F irstP eak − P edestal

where vi is the number of entries for each ADC value, xi. The data are ﬁtted to locate the position of the ﬁrst and
second peaks, and the pedestal. Figure 6 presents the light yield distribution of an extruded sample and the ﬁt for
the ﬁrst and second electron peaks.

The results from a series of light yield measurements are listed in Table II. RDN 262 extrusions were prepared by
the two-step batch process (Method 1) using Dow 262 optical grade pellets. Leistritz 262 and 262P samples were
produced by the continuous procedure (Method 2) using Dow 262 polymer. Leistritz 663 samples were also prepared
by Method 2 but used general purpose polystyrene pellets (Dow 663). Although the samples are from diﬀerent runs,
their light output is similar. The Leistritz 262 samples show a slightly lower light yield but their proﬁle is smaller
than that of the remaining samples. These samples were collected early in the extrusion run when the proﬁle was not
completely to speciﬁcation. These results indicate that there is no major diﬀerence in light yield between Method
1 and Method 2. This test proves that the continuous in-line coloring and extrusion process (Method 2) yields a
homogeneous part with the right concentration of dopants. This aspect is less of a concern in Method 1 since the
ﬁrst step includes batch tumble-mixing and post-blending of the scintillating pellets before the scintillating proﬁle
is extruded. In addition, these numbers conﬁrm that Dow 663 (general purpose polystyrene pellets) can replace the
optical grade pellets initially utilized. More measurements are underway to compare these extrusions to samples of
commercial plastic scintillator sheets which have been cut to the same proﬁle.

FIG. 6. Light yield distribution of extruded plastic scintillator (RDN 262) with WLS ﬁber. Solid curve is 2-gaussian ﬁt to

ﬁrst and second peaks.

6

Scintillator
RDN 262
Leistritz 262
Leistritz 262P
Leistritz 663

TABLE II. Light yield of extruded plastic scintillator samples.
Light Yield
2.05
1.81
2.02
2.22

No. of samples
30
10
10
15

St. Dev.
0.09
0.14
0.10
0.07

Characteristics
Dow 262, Method 1
Dow 262, Method 2
Dow 262, Method 2
Dow 663, Method 2

IV. CONCLUSIONS

Research on extruded plastic scintillator was driven by the high cost of cast plastic scintillator. The goal was to
use commercially available polystyrene pellets, in particular from a general purpose grade, and standard extrusion
equipment to lower the price of plastic scintillators. Extruded plastic scintillator strips have been manufactured and
tested. The estimated price for extruded scintillator ranges from $3.5/Kg to $6/Kg. About 50% of the cost is due to
raw materials with the remaining 50% due to processing. The results indicate that the extruded scintillator proﬁle
with a WLS ﬁber as readout is a valid system for scintillation detectors. The MINOS experiment will build a very
large detector using this technology. The D0 experiment is assembling the Central and Forward Preshower detectors
using extruded scintillating triangular strips.

[1] J. B. Birks, The Theory and Practice of Scintillation Counting, Pergamon Press, The MacMillan Co., New York, NY, 1964.
[2] A.D. Bross, R.C. Ruchti and M.R. Wayne, Editors. Proceedings of SCIFI 93: Workshop on Scintillating Fiber Detectors,

World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1995.

[3] A.D. Bross, R.C. Ruchti and M.R. Wayne, Editors. Proceedings of SCIFI 97: Conference on Scintillating Fiber Detectors,

AIP Conference Proceedings 450, American Institute of Physics, Woodbury, New York, 1998.

[4] The MINOS Detectors, Technical Design Report, NuMI-L-337 (1998).
[5] The Central Preshower Detector for the D0 Run II Upgrade, D0 note number 2137 (1994).
[6] M. Adams et al. (D0 Collaboration), Nuclear Instruments and Methods A378, 131-142 (1996).

7

