9
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
8
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
0
6
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Discrimination between Nuclear Recoils and Electron Recoils by

Simultaneous Detection of Phonons and Scintillation Light

P. Meunier, M. Bravin, M. Bruckmayer, S. Giordano, M. Loidl, O. Meier, F. Pr¨obst,

W. Seidel, M. Sisti, L. Stodolsky, S. Uchaikin, and L. Zerle.

Max Planck Institut f¨ur Physik, F¨ohringer Ring 6, M¨unchen, Germany.

Abstract

We have developed a detector, consisting of a cryogenic calorimeter with a scintil-

lating crystal as absorber, and a second calorimeter for the detection of the scintil-

lation light, both operated at 12 mK. Using a CaWO4 crystal with a mass of 6 g as

scintillating absorber, we have achieved a discrimination of nuclear recoils against

electron recoils with a suppression factor of 99.7% at energies above 15 keV. This

novel method will be applied for background rejection in the CRESST (Cryogenic

Rare Event Search with Superconducting Thermometers) experiment looking for dark

matter Weakly Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs).

c(cid:13) American Institute of Physics, 1999.

Direct dark matter WIMPs (Weakly Interacting Massive Particles) searches are looking

for nuclear recoil events caused by WIMPs scattering oﬀ a nucleus in a detector. The

kinetic energy of a recoiling nucleus due to a WIMP interaction is expected to be of order

of a few tens of keV. Such recoils have a low ionization and scintillation eﬃciency and are

therefore hard to detect in conventional detectors. In contrast, cryogenic calorimeters are
fully sensitive to nuclear recoils and can achieve much lower energy thresholds1–3 making

them the most promising detectors for a dark matter search.

Since these dark matter events are expected to be very rare, such experiments have to

be carefully shielded against cosmic radiation and ambient radioactivity. The sensitivity of

1

these experiments is ﬁnally determined by the residual background, dominated by β, α and

γ emissions from radioactive contaminations of the detectors and the surrounding materials.

In contrast to WIMP interactions, this background deposits energy in the detector mostly

by electron recoils, which are characterized by a higher ionization or scintillation eﬃciency

than nuclear recoils. Thus the simultaneous measurement of ionization and phonons or

scintillation light and phonons can be used to discriminate between electron and nuclear re-

coils, and can therefore suppress this background, leaving over nuclear recoil events caused

by ambient neutrons and WIMPs. The use of a cryogenic calorimeter in conjunction with

conventional ionization or scintillation measurement can provide high sensitivity together

with excellent discrimination capability. The simultaneous measurement of ionization and

phonons for a dark matter search has been developed and successfully implemented in the

CDMS (Cryogenic Dark Matter Search) experiment3 and is also being used in the EDEL-

WEISS (Experience pour DEtecter Las WImps En Site Souterrain) experiment4. In view of

achieving background suppression in the CRESST (Cryogenic Rare Event Search with Su-

perconducting Thermometers) experiment - which relies on dielectric absorbers -1,2, we have

characterized several scintillators at millikelvin temperatures. Since this kind of background

rejection was proposed5,6, it had only been possible to discriminate between α-particles and

photons7,8. We report here simultaneous measurement of scintillation light and phonons

and demonstrate a clear discrimination between electron and nuclear recoils down to 10 keV

energy.

In order to obtain a good background suppression it is important to ﬁnd dielectric crystals

with good scintillation properties at low temperatures.

For measuring diﬀerent scintillators, we prepared the scintillator holder in such a way

that it was possible to remove and exchange the scintillating crystal without any change

in the light detector and in the geometrical set-up. As light detector, we used a cryogenic

calorimeter consisting of a sapphire substrate (10x20x0.5 mm3) that was coated on one 10x20

mm2 surface with silicon to improve the light absorption and had a tungsten superconducting

phase transition thermometer deposited on the opposite surface. This set-up was mounted in

2

a dilution refrigerator and cooled to about 12 mK, which is the operating temperature of the

light detector. An 241Am source was mounted inside the cryostat, irradiating the scintillator

with 5.5 MeV α particles and 60 keV photons. For energy calibration, the light detector was

irradiated with a 55Fe source emitting 5.9 keV and 6.5 keV X-rays. The scintillators measured

so far are BGO (Bi4Ge3O12), BaF2, PbWO4 and CaWO4. We have found that they all work

suﬃciently well at mK temperatures. Only the BGO crystal changed its properties after a

few cooling cycles.

In table I the energies of the detected light for the measured scintillators are shown.

These numbers are the detected energies and are not corrected for light collection eﬃciencies

which vary for diﬀerent scintillators because of their diﬀerent refraction indices and light

wavelenghts. In BGO the detected light created by an α particle was a factor 2.2 smaller

than for a photon of the same energy. For CaWO4 this factor was 3.6.

Since the scintillation eﬀect in tungstates is connected to the [WO4

2−]-ion, presumably

also other tungstates may work. Molybdates are other promising candidates for scintillation

detectors at mK temperatures. We will test these materials in the near future.

Among the measured crystals, we chose CaWO4 as a scintillator for the ﬁrst simultaneous

measurement of scintillation light and phonons.

Fig. 1 shows the set-up. It consists of two independent detectors: a 6g CaWO4 scintil-

lating crystal with a tungsten superconducting phase transition thermometer, and a second

calorimeter placed next to it to detect the scintillation light. The scintillator has been sur-

rounded by three aluminum mirrors in order to improve the photon collection eﬃciency.

With this set-up an equivalent light energy of 480 eV has been measured for 60 keV γ-ray

interactions in CaWO4.

Both detectors were operated at about 12mK. The CaWO4 crystal was irradiated with

122 keV and 136 keV photons from a 57Co source and simultaneously with electrons from

a 90Sr β-source. The two sources contributed about equally to the count rate. The photon

lines were used for the energy calibration (in both detectors). The trigger is provided by the

phonon detector.

3

The left plot in ﬁg. 2 shows a scatter plot of the pulse height observed in the phonon

detector versus the pulse height observed in the light detector. A clear correlation between

the light and phonon signals is observed. The right hand plot shows an additional irradiation

with neutrons from an americium-beryllium source. A second line can be seen due to

neutron-induced nuclear recoils. It is to be observed that electron and nuclear recoils can

be clearly distinguished down to a threshold of 10 keV.

The scatter plots in ﬁg. 3 show the ratio of the pulse height in the light detector to the

pulse height in the phonon detector versus the pulse height in the phonon detector. The

lower band in the right plot is caused by nuclear recoils while the upper band with the ratio

around 1 is caused by electron recoils. From the two ratios a quenching factor of 7.4 can

be inferred. The quenching factor for an α particle interaction is diﬀerent, is approximately

half of it, but it still allows to discriminate α from neutron interactions.

The leakage of some electron recoils into the nuclear recoil line gives the electron recoil

rejection according to the quality factor of ref.9. A detailed evaluation together with the

data without neutrons, shown in the left plot of ﬁg. 3, yields a rejection factor of 98% in the

energy range between 10 keV and 20 keV, 99.7% in the range between 15 keV and 25 keV and

better than 99.9% above 20 keV. The energy spectrum measured with the phonon detector

due to the irradiation with electrons and photons is shown in ﬁg. 4a. Besides the lines at

122 keV and 136 keV there are two lines at 63 keV and 55 keV caused by the escape of Kα and

Kβ tungsten X-rays, excited by the 122 keV line in the CaWO4 crystal. The corresponding

energy spectrum measured in the light detector is shown in ﬁgure 4b.

The residual background which can’t be rejected with this method at the present state

of art consists of neutron events. Other events that can have the same signature of a WIMP

event are nuclear recoils induced by an α decay taking place inside the detector very close to

the surface so that the α particle can escape with an energy release in the crystal lower than

a few tens of keV. Also the interaction of a nucleus emitted by the shield surface surrounding

the detector as a consequence af an α decay taking place at the surface of this material can

have the same signature of an WIMP event. This kind of background due to α emitter

4

surface contamination can be rejected completely by surrounding the CaWO4 crystal with

a passive shield made of the same scintillating material. In this way, whenever the recoil

nuclei induced by the α decay excites the CaWO4 crystal, the light detector can also detect

the scintillation light of the α particle , and therefore the event can be rejected.

The simultaneous measurement of light and phonons has several advantages over the

simultaneous measurement of phonons and charge.

In the charge measurement electrical

contacts always produce an unfortunate dead layer on the surface which causes surface

events, especially electrons from outside, to leak into the nuclear recoil band. As our mea-

surements with electrons clearly show, this problem does not exist in the light detection.

The large quenching factor of the CaWO4 gives a very eﬀective separation of nuclear recoils

from electron recoils. As opposed to charge measurement, light collection does not suﬀer

from problems such as space charge build-up, ﬁeld inhomogeneities or phonons produced

by drifting the charges. Due to these advantages many of the eﬀects, known from charge

and phonon measurement to cause leakage of electron recoils into the nuclear recoil band,

are absent. As a result the background suppression eﬃciency of the light-phonon detection

is excellent and it works equally well for photon and electron backgrounds, thus avoiding

particle dependent systematic uncertainties in the discrimination.

The opportunity to employ diﬀerent scintillators with diﬀerent target nuclei gives an

unique handle for understanding and reducing backgrounds in dark matter searches. Even

the neutron background, always considered to be the ultimate limitation for such experi-

ments, could be investigated by varying the target nuclei.

In summary, a cryogenic particle detector which measures simultaneously the scintillation

light and the thermal signal has been developed. Four diﬀerent scintillating crystals have

been tested as cryogenic detector absorbers, and they all showed to work adequately at low

temperature. Using a 6 g scintillating CaWO4 crystal, it has been demonstrated that this

technique allows a discrimination between nuclear and electron recoils with a suppression

factor of 98% in the energy range between 10keV and 20keV, 99.7% in the range between

15 keV and 25 keV and better than 99.9% above 20keV. Applying our present techniques2

5

and optimizing the design we are very conﬁdent to produce detectors with a mass of a few

hundred grams and similar performances.

This work was supported by the Max Planck Institute for Physics, and by the EC-

Network Program ”Cryogenic Detectors”, Contract no.ERBFMRXCT980167.

6

References

1. M. Buehler, L. Zerle, F. Proebst, A. Rulofs, U. Schanda, W. Seidel, C. Abmaier, N. E.

Booth, C. Bucci, P. Colling, S. Cooper, F. v.Feilitzsch, P. Ferger, G. Forster, A. Gabutti,

C. Hoess, J. Hoehne, J. Igalson, E. Kellner, M. Koch, M. Loidl, O. Meier, A. Nucciotti,

U. Nagel, M. J. J. v.d. Putte, G. L. Salmon, M. Sisti, L. Stodolsky, A. Stolovich, ”Status

and low background consideration for the CRESST dark matter search”, Nucl. Instr.

Meth. A 370 237 (1996).

2. M. Sisti, C. Bucci, M. Buehler, S. Cooper, F. v.Feilitzsch, J. Hoehne, V. Joergens, M.

Loidl, O. Meier, U. Nagel, F. Proebst, A. Rulofs, M. L. Sarsa, J. Schangal, W. Seidel,

L. Stodolsky, A. Stolovits, L. Zerle, ”Performance of the CRESST detectors and status

of the experiment”, proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Low Temperature

Detectors LTD-7, August 1997, Munich, Germany.

3. T. Shutt, N. Wang, B. Ellman, Y. Giraud-Heraud, C. Stubbs, P. D. Barnes, A. Cum-

mings, A. DaSilva, J. Emes, E. E. Haller, A. E. Lange, J. Rich, R. R. Ross, B. Sadoulet,

G. Smith, W. Stockwell, S. White, B. A. Young, D. Yvon, ”Simultaneous high resolu-

tion measurement of phonons and ionization created by particle interaction in a 60 g

Germanium crystal at 25 mK”, Phys Rev. Lett. 69, 3531 (1992).

4. G. Chardin, A. Benoit, L. Berge, B. Chambon, M. Chapellier, P. Charvin, M. De Jesus,

P. Di Stefano, D. Drain, L. Dumoulin, C. Goldbach, A. Juillard, D. Lhote, J. Mallet,

S. Marineros, L. Miramonti, L. Mosca, X. F. Navick, G. Nollez, P. Pari, C. Pastor, S.

Pecourt, R. Tourbot, D. Yvon, ”Preliminary results of the EDELWEISS experiment”,

Proc. of the 2nd Int. Workshop on the Identiﬁcation of Dark Matter, Buxton, England,

7-11 Sept.1998.

5. L. Gonzales-Mestres, Proc. of the IV International Workshop on Low Temperature De-

tectors for Neutrinos and Dark Matter (LTD IV), Oxford, UK, Sept. 4-7 (1991).

6. J. S. Adams, S. R. Bandler, S. M. Brouer, R. E. Lanou, H. J. Maris, T. More, G. M.

7

Seidel, ”Simultaneous calorimetric detection of rotons and photons generated by particles

in superﬂuid helium”, Phys. Lett. B 341 189 (1995).

7. A. Alessandrello, V. Bashkirov, C. Broﬀerio, C. Bucci, D. V. Camin, O. Cremonesi, E.

Fiorini, G. Gervasio, A. Giuliani, A. Nucciotti, M. Pavan, G. Pessina, E. Previtali, L.

Zanotti, ”A scintillating bolometer for experiments on double beta decay”, Phys. Lett.

B 420, 109 (1998).

8. C. Bobin, I. Berkes, J. P. Hadjout, N. Coron, J. Leblanc, P. de Marcillac, ”Alpha/gamma

discrimination with a CaF2(Eu) target bolometer optically coupled to a composite in-

frared bolometer”, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 386, 453 (1997).

9. J. R. J. Gaitskell, P. D. Barnes, A. DaSilva, B. Sadoulet, T. Shutt, ”The statistic of

background rejection in direct detection experiment for dark matter”, Nucl Phys. B.

(Proc. Suppl.) 51 B, 279 (1996).

8

FIGURES

Fig. 1.

Schematic view of the arrangement used for the simultaneous light and phonon detection.

Fig. 2.

Pulse height in the light detector versus pulse height in the phonon detector. The scatter

plot on the left side has been measured with an electron and a photon source, while a neutron

source was added to measure the right plot.

Fig. 3. Ratio of the pulse height in the light detector to the pulse height in the phonon detector

versus pulse height in the phonon detector for irradiation with photons and electrons (left), and

with photons, electrons and neutrons (right). Electron recoils are in the upper band while nuclear

recoils are in the lower band.

Fig. 4.

a): The energy spectrum measured with the phonon detector; the detector has been

irradiated with a 90Sr β source and a 57Co γ source and neutron source. b): The measured energy

spectrum with the light detector; the energy scale applies for the heat measurement.

9

Table I. Energies of the detected light for the measured scintillators at a working temperature of

TABLES

12 mK.

Crystal

CaWO4

BGO

PbWO4

BaF2

Detected Light

Energy (keV)

for 5.5 MeV α

5.2

8.4

1.9

2.1

Detected Light

Energy (eV)

for 60 keV γ

210

200

-

-

10

