9
9
9
1
 
l
u
J
 
3
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
0
7
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measurements of the radiation hardness of
selected scintillating and light guide ﬁber
materials

E.C. Aschenauer, J. B¨ahr ∗ , R. Nahnhauer, R. Shanidze 1

DESY Zeuthen, 15738 Zeuthen, Germany

D. Fink, K.H. Maier, M. M¨uller

Hahn-Meitner-Institut, Glienicker Str. 100, D-14109 Berlin, Germany

Ingenieurb¨uro OPTOMET,D.-Brinkmann-Str. 39B, D-26125 Oldenburg, Germany

H.A. Klose

M. Sprenger

Lambda Physics, Hans-B¨ockler-Str. 12, D-37079 G¨ottingen, Germany

Abstract

Radiation hardness studies of KURARAY SCSF-78M scintillating ﬁbers and clear
ﬁbers from KURARAY and pol.hi.tech. performed under diﬀerent dose rate con-
ditions in proton and electron beams are summarized. For high dose rates in-situ
measurements of the ﬁber light output were done. During several months after ir-
radiation all ﬁbers were measured concerning light emission and transparency.

Fibers irradiated at high rates to about 1 Mrad are clearly damaged but recover
within a few hours up to several weeks. Using smaller rates up to the same integral
dose a decrease of the light output of scintillating ﬁbers of up to 30 % can not be
excluded. Clear ﬁbers seem to be uneﬀected up to 400 krad. No signiﬁcant inﬂuence
of ﬁber coverage and atmosphere during irradiation was found.

∗ corresponding author, phone: +49 33762 77235, Fax: +49 33762 77330,

e-mail: baehr@ifh.de

1 on leave from High Energy Physics Institute, Tbilisi State University, Georgia

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

9 February 2008

1 Introduction

Recently [1]-[3] a ﬁber detector was developed as an alternative solution for
the inner tracker of the HERA-B experiment [4]. With an accelerator cycle of
96 nsec and four events per cycle with a charged multiplicity of about 200 the
detector modules have to work several years under an estimated integral dose
per year in the inner tracker region of about 1 Mrad.

The light produced by particles crossing the scintillating ﬁbers of the detector
is transported by 3 m long light guide ﬁbers to 64 channel multianode photo-
multipliers Hamamatsu R5900-M64 2 available only with bialcali photocath-
odes. Best light output and long term stability were obtained for KURARAY 3
scintillating double clad ﬁbers SCSF-78M and clear double clad ﬁbers from
KURARAY and pol.hi.tech. 4 . The corresponding radiation hardness studies
were performed with high dose rates in 70 MeV proton and 2 MeV electron
beams of the Hahn-Meitner Institute Berlin [1],[3],[5],[6] and photons from a
60Co source [2]. In the ﬁrst case in-situ measurements of the light output even
with spectral resolution were possible.

In the past there were several arguments [7]-[9] that the presence of oxygen
during and after the irradiation may be important for the observed damage.
In this case also the dose rate may inﬂuence the ﬁnal result because diﬀusion
processes are time dependent.

Our results from high dose rates using charged particle beams will be summa-
rized below and compared to new data from low dose rate exposures of the
same materials. The new tests were performed in air and nitrogen atmosphere
with glued and non-glued scintillating ﬁbers and compared with non-irradiated
test samples.

2 Experimental conditions

2.1 Fiber samples

The ﬁber samples for proton and electron irradiation have the same global
structure as shown in Fig. 1. For high rate irradiation 4×4 ﬁbers of 0.48 mm
diameter were glued together resulting in a cross section of about 2×2 mm2.

2 Hamamatsu Photonics K.K., Electron tube division, 3124-5, Shimokanzo, Toky-
ooka Village, Iwatagun, Shizuoka-ken, Japan
3 KURARAY Co.Ltd., Nikonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103, Japan
4 pol.hi.tech., s.r.l., S.P. Turanense, 67061 Carsoli(AQ), Italy

2

The samples for electron low dose rate irradiation consist of a ﬁber arrange-
ment of 1×7 ﬁbers of the same diameter forming a ﬁber road in the later
detector. Coupling pieces are mounted at both ends of the 30 cm long samples
in which the ends of the ﬁbers are inserted, glued and polished. This allows
an optical coupling to light guides or photomultipliers with light losses of less
than 10 %. The ﬁber samples are mechanically stabilized by two brass rods of
3 mm diameter.

For low dose rate electron irradiation there were two types of samples. The
ﬁrst type is fully glued to shield the ﬁbers from the gaseous environment,
whereas the second type is mounted using a minimum of glue in thin strips
near the connectors in order to allow the gaseous atmosphere to have contact
to the ﬁber material.

For the in-situ measurements single ﬁbers were coupled at one or both ends
to glass ﬁbers which transport the light to the corresponding spectrometers
(see Fig. 2).

2.2 Irradiation setup

A schematic view of the irradiation setup in the proton and electron beams
is given in Fig. 3. For electron irradiation the beam was extracted from the
vacuum system through a window of 100 µm thick Aluminium and 40 µm In-
conel. A metallic aperture of 3×12 mm2 was used for beam proﬁle deﬁnition.
In the case of the proton irradiation the beam was extracted through a 7 µm
thick Tantalum foil. The beam size and the emittance angle were limited by
two PMMA (polymethyle methacrylate) apertures. The total range of protons
in ﬁber material is about 39 mm which is checked by the proﬁle of the colour
changes in the PMMA aperture during the irradiation. The spot size and po-
sition was additionally monitored by polyvinylalcohol (PVA) methylene blue
plastic detector foils [10]. The dye is radiation sensitive and its degradation
yield is proportional to the irradiated particle ﬂuence. The degradation of the
dye in the foil has been determined by UV-VIS-spectroscopy. A typical result
of such beam homogeneity control for proton irradiation is depicted in Fig. 4.
The higher the transparency the higher was the irradiation dose in the given
area. At positions 1, 2 a high radiation level with low restriction in the ﬁeld
distribution is registrated. The proﬁle created by the plastic apertures is given
by curve 3 and 4. A low non-structured irradiation level is characterized by
curves 5 and 6.

For the in-situ registration of beam excited scintillation spectra ﬁber optic PC-
plug-in spectrometers (Ocean Optics 5 ) were used. They were placed outdoors

5 Ocean Optics Inc., 380 Main Street, Dunedin, FL34698, USA

3

of the cave in order to suppress the high radiation background using 22 m
long light-guiding glass ﬁbers . A detailed description of the used experimental
setups in both cases can be found in [5].

The proton irradiation was performed quasi point-like at two points along the
sample with a dose of ≥1 Mrad at 20 cm and of 0.1 Mrad at 10 cm respectively
within a few minutes. The dose rate was about 30 Mrad/h. The irradiation
of short areas of the samples gave the possibility to separate the damage of
scintillator and optical matrix.

The same irradiation procedure was applied for in-situ measurements of radi-
ation damage using a corresponding electron beam.

High current irradiations were only carried out under ambient atmosphere
using cooling by a powerful fan. The temperature rise during the irradiation
could be neglected [5].

A new series of tests has been performed irradiating the ﬁber material with
a relatively low dose rate of 2 MeV electrons to approximate the later exper-
imental conditions. A dose of about 1 Mrad was applied during ﬁve periods
within about nine weeks. The particle ﬂux was monitored by a matrix of Fara-
day cups. The distance between scatter foil and sample plane was about 1.5 m.
In this case the samples were kept either in air or in nitrogen atmosphere.

2.3 Measurement procedure

In-situ registration of scintillation spectra ﬁrst described in [11] was performed
for the beam excited regions 1 and 2 (see ﬁg. 2). The spectra were measured
during the whole irradiation time in the ﬁrst irradiated region 1 of ﬁbers and
after that in the second region 2 under inﬂuence of high absorption in the
presumably predamaged region 1 in order to determine the change of the
absorption coeﬃcient during the irradiation. Between irradiation procedure 1
and 2 a preparation time of a few minutes was necessary. The beam excited
scintillation spectrum served in the second case as changeable light source for
absorption measurements in a limited spectral region.

For recovery measurements in the laboratory a few hours after irradiation the
optical excitation was realized by a high pressure Hg-lamp at λ = 365 nm .
In addition to the in-situ measurements which used single ﬁber samples and
UV-excitation for the measurement in the laboratory investigations were done
using multi-ﬁber bundles. The irradiated multi-ﬁber samples (see section 2.1)
were evaluated using a 106Ru source. The ﬁber sample was mounted within a

4

source collimator slit. The light signal was measured using a Philips 6 XP 2020
photomultiplier and analyzed by an Analog-to-digital converter (ADC). The
ADC was triggered by a threefold coincidence of signals coming from a 5 mm
thick plastic scintillator mounted behind the ﬁbers using two Philips XP 1911
photomultipliers for readout and from a second photomultiplier XP 2020 cou-
pled to the second coupling piece of the ﬁber sample. The light output mea-
surement was performed before and after irradiation. In addition the light
output of the non-irradiated scintillator reference samples and light attenua-
tion of the light guide reference samples were regularily measured to minimize
systematic errors.

3 Results

From in-situ observations of proton and electron excited spectra no remark-
able diﬀerence could be found [6]. Consequently, we report here representative
results for both charge carrier excited spectra.
As described in [5], [6] all in-situ measured spectra show a two stage decay
of the scintillating light intensity in dependence on the energy dissipation (or
irradiation time). In Fig.5 a typical degradation process for an electron ex-
cited ﬁber is presented with the wavelength as parameter. At the beginning of
the irradiation a similar time constant for all wavelengths can be observed. A
faster decay appears for higher energy dose values of about 1 Mrad in depen-
dence on diﬀerent wavelengths of emission spectra. The short-wave emission
shows the fastest degradation in time (see also Fig. 2 in [5]).

A recovery of the damaged ﬁbers could be observed already during the in-situ
measurements. A considerable increase in light output was observed several
times during the irradiation procedure after switching oﬀ the beam for only
three minutes (see Fig. 3 in [5]).

Exciting the same ﬁbers by UV-light in the laboratory a few hours after ir-
radiation a long term recovery was measured. After 40 hours a SCSF-78M
ﬁber irradiated to 8.1 Mrad showed 90 % of the light output with respect to
pre-irradiation (Fig.4 in [5]). This process seems however to depend on the
ﬁber material and the integral dose (compare Fig.2 in [6]).

The kind of excitation seems to be of particular importance for the measured
ﬁber light output. This will inﬂuence also the observed recovery after irradi-
ation and may explain the corresponding diﬀerent time constants for in-situ
measurements and UV-excitation.

6 Philips Photonique, Av. Roger Roacier, B.P. 520, F-19106 Brive, France

5

In a real experiment the scintillation light in ﬁbers will be produced by cross-
ing charged particles. Therefore the multi-ﬁber test samples were exposed to
electrons from a Ru-source before and after beam irradiation to measure light
output and transmission. Indeed a diﬀerent behaviour was found. As described
in [1],[3] the strongest damage was observed only about 30 hours after irradi-
ation with a dose of 1 Mrad for both light emission and transparency with a
complete recovery after two days (see Fig. 4 of [3]).

A dose of 1 Mrad, expected for the inner tracker of the HERA-B experiment
within one year, was placed to the above test samples within a few minutes.
This may have inﬂuenced the observed results in an inadmissible way in par-
ticular if oxygen diﬀusion is important for damage and recovery. To be closer
to the experimental conditions the irradiation of scintillator and light guide
samples was performed up to a dose of 1.4 Mrad within 70 days. Half of the
ﬁber samples were covered by glue. The irradiation was done in air and in
nitrogen atmosphere. The results are displayed in Figs. 6 and 7.

Measurements going on for about half a year, using many times the same
samples, are diﬃcult to perform keeping systematical errors small due to some
instability of the setup in time and mechanical damages of the fragile samples.
To minimize those eﬀects, non-irradiated samples were measured every time
in addition. All results are presented as ratios of irradiated to non-irradiated
ﬁbers RS and RL for scintillators and light guides, respectively. The maximum
errors of these ratios have been estimated to be about 30 % including eﬀects
which may arise from sample production.

How the irradiation was going on in time is demonstrated in Fig. 6a. The
corresponding damage and recovery of four ﬁber samples is shown in ﬁg 6b.
No eﬀect could be observed outside the 30 % error band. Neglecting the mea-
surement errors and relying on the pre-irradiation data points some damage
may have happened up to the maximum dose followed by a long term recov-
ery. The damage seems to be smaller for glued ﬁbers in particular in nitrogen
atmosphere. Non-glued ﬁbers seem to recover only partly.

From Fig. 7a it can be seen that clear ﬁbers were only irradiated up to a dose of
400 krad. For all measurements they were coupled to scintillating ﬁbers which
were excited by electrons from a Ru-source. Also here a maximum error of 30 %
has to be kept in mind for the ratio RL of irradiated to totally non-irradiated
(clear plus scintillating) ﬁbers shown in Fig 7b. Neglecting the error band no
damage is seen for the clear ﬁber irradiation itself. However irradiating the
scintillator to more than 1 Mrad caused a decrease of the light output from
a coupled clear ﬁber to more than one half, i.e. more than observed for the
scintillating sample alone. After two weeks complete recovery was found. The
behaviour is the same for KURARAY and pol.hi.tech. clear ﬁbers in air and
nitrogen.

6

4 Summary

Several radiation hardness tests were performed for KURARAY scintillating
ﬁbers SCSF-78M and clear ﬁbers from KURARAY and pol.hi.tech. Using high
current proton and electron beams the irradiation was performed both with
very high and low dose rates.

In-situ observations demonstrated a strong damage of scintillating ﬁbers for
high dose rate exposures. Both light emission and transparency were decreased
down to 20 % for 1 Mrad. Short and long time recovery eﬀects followed the
irradiation.

For low dose rate conditions closer to a later experiment, a 30 % decrease
of scintillating ﬁber light output could not be excluded recovering after three
weeks. No signiﬁcant inﬂuence of the ﬁber coverage and the atmosphere during
irradiation was found.

Clear ﬁbers are apparently not damaged for doses up to 400 krad. Coupled
to irradiated scintillating ﬁbers the eﬀective damage of the system seems to
increase.

The ﬁber irradiation tests were possible only due to the kind support of the
Hahn-Meitner-Institute Berlin. In particular we want to thank the ISL accel-
erator team.

Acknowledgement

References

[1] Aschenauer E.C. et al., Preprint DESY 97-174(1997)

[2] Dreis B., et al., preprint DESY 98-049 (1998)

[3] Aschenauer E.C. et al., NIM A424,(1999) 459

[4] Lohse,T. et al., HERA-B Technical Proposal, DESY-PRC 94/02 (1994)

[5] Klose H.A. et al., NIM B135, 555(1998)

[6] Klose H.A. et al., Proc. Fourth Int. Conf. Radecs 97, 4,461(1998)

[7] Zorn C. et al., Nucl. Phys. B (Proc.Suppl.) 32, 369 (1993)

[8] Busjan W., Thesis, DESY F35D-97-09 (1997)

7

[9] Hamada M. M. et al., NIM A422,(1999) 148

[10] Chung W.H. and Miller A., Nucl.Technol.(Am. Nucl. Soc.) 1
¯

06, 261(1994)

[11] Klose H.A. et al., NIM B116, 235(1996)

8

Figure captions

Fig. 1 : Sketch of a multiﬁber test sample with indication of the irradiation
and measurement positions. The signal is measured via coupling piece S1, the
coupling piece S2 is used for the extraction of a trigger signal.

Fig. 2 : Fiber sample for in-situ measurements with irradiation position and
connections of ﬁbers to spectrometers. LGF: Light guide ﬁber, SP1, SP2: Cou-
pling to spectrometers 1, 2.

Fig. 3 : Irradiation setup of the high dose rate proton and electron irradiation.
The arrows give the positions of plastic detectors for beam proﬁle measure-
ment according to Fig. 4.

Fig. 4 : Beam proﬁle measured using polyvinylalcohol methylene blue plas-
tic detector. The ﬁgures belonging to each curve correspond to the arrows in
Fig. 3 giving the positions of such plastic ﬁlms in the irradiation setup: 1 -
behind the exit window, 2- before the aperture 1, 3 - between aperture 1 and
2, 4- behind aperture 2, 5 - before the Faraday cup, 6 - behind the Faraday cup.

Fig. 5 : In-situ measurement of the emission spectra of a scintillating ﬁber
excited by high dose rate electron irradiation in dependence on the irradiation
time in seconds.

Fig. 6 : a.) Time dependence of irradiation dose for scintillating ﬁbers,
b.) ratio RS of light output from irradiated to non-irradiated scintillating ﬁber
samples in dependence on measurement time with respect to the ﬁrst irradi-
ation.

Fig. 7 : a.) Time dependence of irradiation dose for scintillating ﬁbers and
light guides, b.) ratio RL of light output from irradiated to non-irradiated
clear and scintillating ﬁber samples in dependence of the measurement time
with respect to the ﬁrst irradiation. KL: Light guide ﬁber from KURARAY,
KS: Scintillating ﬁber from KURARAY, PL: Light guide ﬁber from pol.hi.tech.

9

10 cm

20 cm

25 cm

S1

Scintillating Fiber Sample

S2

Irradition:

lowest                             highest

dose                                  dose

Fig. 1. Sketch of a multiﬁber test sample with indication of the irradiation and
measurement positions. The signal is measured via coupling piece S1, the coupling
piece S2 is used for the extraction of a trigger signal.

Fig. 2. Fiber sample for in-situ measurements with irradiation position and con-
nections of ﬁbers to spectrometers. LGF: Light guide ﬁber, SP1, SP2: Coupling to
spectrometers 1, 2.

10

Fig. 3. Irradiation setup of the high dose rate proton and electron irradiation. The
arrows give the positions of plastic detectors for beam proﬁle measurement according
to Fig. 4.

Fig. 4. Beam proﬁle measured using polyvinylalcohol methylene blue plastic detec-
tor. The ﬁgures belonging to each curve correspond to the arrows in Fig. 3 giving
the positions of such plastic ﬁlms in the irradiation setup: 1 - behind the exit win-
dow, 2- before the aperture 1, 3 - between aperture 1 and 2, 4- behind aperture 2,
5 - before the Faraday cup, 6 - behind the Faraday cup.

11

Fig. 5. In-situ measurement of the emission spectra of a scintillating ﬁber excited by
high dose rate electron irradiation in dependence on the irradiation time in seconds.

12

Fig. 6. a.) Time dependence of irradiation dose for scintillating ﬁbers, b.) ratio
RS of light output from irradiated to non-irradiated scintillating ﬁber samples in
dependence on measurement time with respect to the ﬁrst irradiation.

13

Fig. 7. a.) Time dependence of irradiation dose for scintillating ﬁbers and light
guides, b.) ratio RL of light output from irradiated to non-irradiated clear and
scintillating ﬁber samples in dependence of the measurement time with respect to
the ﬁrst irradiation. KL: Light guide ﬁber from KURARAY, KS: Scintillating ﬁber
from KURARAY, PL: Light guide ﬁber from pol.hi.tech.

14

