9
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
0
8
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Events registration in a fast neutrons spectrometer

J. N. Abdurashitov, V. N. Gavrin, A. V. Kalikhov, A. A. Shikhin,
V. E. Yants and O. S. Zaborsky

Institute for Nuclear Research, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow,
Russia

Abstract

The principle of operation, design, registration system and main characteristics of
a fast neutrons spectrometer are described. The spectrometer is intended for direct
measurements of ultra low ﬂuxes of fast neutrons [1]. It is sensitive to neutron ﬂuxes
of 10−7 cm−2s−1 and lower. The detection eﬃciency of fast neutrons with simultaneous
energy measurement is within 0.03–0.09 for neutron energies >0.7 MeV and depends
on the neutron energy and the spectrometer response function.

The neutron spectrometer was designed taking into account requirements for min-
imizing the γ-ray and random coincidence backgrounds. It is a calorimeter based on a
liquid organic scintillator-thermalizer with helium proportional counters of thermalized
neutrons distributed uniformly over the volume. The energy of thermalized neutrons is
transformed into light signals in a scintillation detector. The signals from proportional
counters provide a “neutron label” of an event.

Low-level signal electronics for the spectrometer were designed with signal-to-noise
ratio optimization and full pulse shape analysis required for eﬃcient rejection of back-
ground events. A data acquisition and processing system is based on fast (100 MHz)
two-channel PC/AT interfaced digital oscilloscope. The acquisition software was writ-
ten in the C programming language.

1 Principle of operation and design of the spectrome-

ter

The detection part of the spectrometer (detector) consists of an organic scintillator viewed
by photomultipliers (PMT) and proportional counters with 3He (neutron counters — NC)
distributed uniformly over the scintillator volume. Figure 1 shows a general view of the
detector. Fast neutrons (En >1 MeV) enter the scintillator, are decelerated down to thermal
energy, and diﬀuse in the detector volume until they are either captured in a neutron counter
or captured by scintillator protons or leave the detector. The amplitude of light scintilla-
tions from recoil protons, which are produced during neutron thermalization, is on average
proportional to the initial neutron energy, if the energy losses due to scattering by carbon
and a non-linear dependence of the scintillator light yield on the energy of recoil protons are

1

Figure 1: General view of the detector

neglected. A portion of thermalized neutrons in the neutron counters is captured by 3He
nuclei, which emit protons and tritium nuclei.

To simplify the apparatus structure, signals from all PMTs and counters are multiplexed
into independent channels called “PMT channel” and “NC channel” respectively. A sig-
nal from NC channel triggers the data acquisition system. The full waveforms of events
in the PMT and NC channels are registered independently inside selected time interval be-
fore and after trigger, which are called “prehistory” and “history” accordingly, by means of
two-channel digital oscilloscope. This time interval can be adjusted in the acquisition algo-
rithm over the wide range from 0.2 µs to 2.6 ms and is selected on the basis of calibration
measurements.

There is a certain distribution of time intervals between appearances of a signal from
PMTs and a signal from one of the NCs related with one neutron, which is associated with
speciﬁc characteristic feature of the detector — delay. This delay is conditioned by the mean
lifetime of thermalized neutrons inside the detector volume and is determined mainly by
the detector design. If at least one event occurs in the PMT channel during the acquisition
time interval, it is “labelled” as the signal coinciding with neutron capture in the NC. The
amplitude of the labelled PMT signal is considered as a measure of the initial neutron
energy. This technique for collecting events allows one to signiﬁcantly (by several orders of
magnitude) suppress the natural background of γ-rays.

The detector housing is made of stainless steel. The volume of cylinder tank for scintil-

2

Table 1: Basic performance data of the preampliﬁer and linear summators

Characteristics
Gain (K)
Max. out voltage, V
Load impedance, Ω
Risetime, ns
Bandwidth

Output noise (PA on)
Dynamic range
Power requirements

Preampliﬁer
2.5–5, variable
−2
50
16 (K=5), 6 (K=2.5)
100 Hz – 20 MHz (K=5)
100 Hz – 55 MHz (K=2.5)

Summator NC (PMT)
inverting −1 (−1–5, variable)
+2 (+3.5)
50
9 (3)
100 Hz – 40 (100) MHz

±12 V, ±16 mA

∼3 (≤1) mV, 2Umax
≥500 (3500)
±12 V,+111/−105(+25.5/−22) mA

lator is about 30 l (taking into account the volume of NCs). To enhance light collection, the
walls and bottom of the scintillator tank were coated with a ﬂuoroplastic, and 19 wells for
NCs were coated with aluminium foil. An illuminator made of organic glass was covered by
ﬂuoroplastic disk with windows intended for improving light collection and securing three
PMTs Model 173. PMTs, preampliﬁers, and a summator of PMTs signals were placed under
the light-protecting cover.

CHM-18 neutron counters ﬁlled with a (3He + 4%Ar) mixture at a pressure of 4 atm are
mounted in sealed wells in the interior volume of the tank ﬁlled with the scintillator. The
anode contacts of the counters are terminated under the lower tank plane. The preampliﬁers
of signals from NCs, and the signal summator are placed in the bottom part of the detector
and are also covered with a cap. The Protva NE-213 scintillator used in the detector has the
following characteristics: 0.84 g/cm3 (density); 136 g/kg (hydrogen concentration); 3±0.6
ns (scintillation duration); a light yield of at least 40% of anthracene; and 80◦C (combustion
temperature).

2 Low-level signal electronics

2.1 Formation of the Initial Signals

Signals from the PMTs and NCs are ampliﬁed by the preampliﬁers (PA), are multiplexed in
the linear summators, and are entered into the data acquisition system. The circuit design
of the low-level signal electronics are selected taking into account an optimal signal-to-noise
ratio. Their basic characteristics are listed in the Table 1.

The anode circuit’s capacitance of the PMT Model 173 is ∼20 pF, and the time of electron
collection by the anode is ∼90 ns. The PMT anode load is 1 MΩ. Since the PA bandwidth
ensures a suﬃcient margin with respect to the initial signal spectrum, an exponential pulse
with a duration ∼80 µs and a trailing edge time constant of ∼20 µs forms at its output.

Diﬃcult problem is to provide the necessary signal-to-noise ratio in the NC channel.
Joining signals from 19 counters into a common channel increases the noise at the linear

3

Figure 2: The circuit diagram of a fast low-noise preampliﬁer

summator output by a factor of at least 4.5. To reduce the noise, the main ampliﬁcation of
initial signals is accomplished with the preampliﬁers before their joining. Figure 2 shows
the circuit diagram of a fast low-noise preampliﬁer, which was developed especially for this
purpose. It is used in both channels of the spectrometer: PMT and NC.

2.2 Preampliﬁer

The preampliﬁer has a two-stage common-source-common-emitter circuit with common serial
negative-voltage feedback loop (NFL) and directly coupled stages. Each stage has a local
serial, current NF. The ﬁrst stage is based on a FET with normalized coeﬃcient of the noise
charge and has gain of 2, which also improves the noise characteristics of the PA as a whole.
The third stage of PA is an emitter follower with bootstrapping over C5 to common point of
R9 and R10, which increase PA gain without common NFL 4–5 times. The total gain of PA
with an open NFL is ∼3750. For a closed NFL, the gain is continuously adjusted from 5 to
10, and the minimum amount of feedback is ∼50 dB. The parameters of PA circuit elements
are selected so as to minimize the potential diﬀerence between the Q2 source and Q3 collector
and thus to reduce the eﬀect of parasitic capacitance of NFL elements on the PA speed. Its
dc operating mode and gain are set with a trimmer resistors R5 and R6, respectively. A
protective circuit at the PA input is based on a FET Q1 connected as a diode. The input
impedance is determined by the R2 value and equals 1 MΩ in our case.

An output emitter follower isolates the NFL and load circuits and transmits pulses from
PA to summator through an RG-174 coaxial cable with a 50 Ω characteristic impedance.
Power matching conditions used in the device decrease the ﬁnal gain by a factor of 2 without
an appreciable decrease in the signal-to-noise ratio, but protect the PA output stage from
shorting in the load, improve the linearity, provide the minimal distortions of the signal

4

Figure 3: The circuit diagram of a fast low-noise linear summator (NC)

waveform, and simplify the spectrometer assembly, allowing for optimal wiring of circuits.

2.3 Linear Summators

2.3.1 NC channel

To attain the maximum signal-to-noise ratio, signals from NC preampliﬁers were joined
simultaneously in one stage for all 19 channels by using a fast low-noise linear summator
which electric circuit diagram is shown in Figure 3.

The summator has a complementary cascode circuit with an output emitter follower on
transistors Q2–Q4 with a common parallel voltage NFL. The summator operation is based
on the known principle of adding the input current signals, which are speciﬁed by the weight
resistors R3.1–R3.19, at a small input impedance of the ampliﬁer with a parallel NFL applied.
The input impedance of the cascode circuit is 250 Ω for a collector current of 5 mA and
a typical h21e=50. The ampliﬁer gain with an open NFL is ∼660. The gain with a closed
NFL is set at 2 for each input by using trimmer resistor R13. The amount of the feedback
changes as a function of the number of weight resistors R3 from 330 to 17, thus resulting in
a variation of the ampliﬁer input impedance from 0.8 to 15 Ω, i.e., by a factor of almost 20.
This leads to a dependence of the summator gain on the number of operating inputs, which
is extremely unacceptable, because during spectrometer operation (for example, when per-
forming calibration measurements), PA may be switched oﬀ by switching oﬀ supply voltages
in groups or individually.

To eliminate this dependence, the emitter followers on Q1.1–Q1.19 are included in the
summator circuit. They isolate the weight resistors incorporated in the feedback from the
input circuits. The summator input impedance determined by the R1 resistance value is 50

5

Ω.

The potentials at emitters of input followers and at the Q2 base are almost equal. There-
fore, the voltage drop at the weight resistors is small, allowing for their dc coupling. Nev-
ertheless, due to a large number of summed channels, an additional direct current of ∼0.5
mA appears in the feedback and produces a voltage drop of ∼3 V across resistor R12 and
R13. This factor was taken into consideration when calculating the circuit operation for the
dc. The trimmer resistor R5 sets the Q2 and Q3 collector currents equal to each other.

The emitter follower Q4 included in the common NFL creates an additional pole in the
frequency response of the ampliﬁer, decreasing its upper boundary frequency and increasing
the phase shift at higher frequencies. The frequency response is corrected with a C4 by
proceeding an optimal form of the transient characteristics.

Pulses with an exponential fall time duration of ∼80 µs are formed at the output of the
linear summator of the NC channel. These pulses have front duration determined by the
features of an event in a counter and range from 1 to 6 µs.

2.3.2 PMT channel

The signals from PMT preampliﬁers are joined just as in the NC channel with only one
diﬀerence. PA are placed immediately on the PMTs HV dividers for minimization of parasitic
capacitance in their input circuits and were closed by the light-protecting cover. Therefore,
the trimmer resistors which are placed on the PA printed boards inaccessible for operative
adjustments, and they are used for preliminary adjustments only. Exact gain equalization
of separate PMTs is performed with the help of trimmer weight resistors of linear summator
(which is mounted under the top of the light-protecting cover), which axes are available
through the top of the cover under slot.

An electric circuit diagram of the fast low-noise linear summator is shown in Figure 4.
It was made on the base of well-known scheme of Radeka [2, 3] which was optimized for
power voltages ±12 V. This is inverting ampliﬁer with common parallel voltage NFL. It is
built on the base of cascode circuit Q2–Q3 and output stage with bootstrap on Q4 and Q5.
This choice is conditioned by requirements of more high speed of response and linearity of
the PMT channel, which provides the future possibility of γ-ray background discrimination
in wide dynamic range with using of current pulse waveform from PMT anode.

The ﬁrst stage of the cascode is performed on bipolar transistor Q2 which transconduc-
tance S≃100 mA/V for collector current Ic=2.5 mA (this is optimal mean which is adjusted
by trimmer R5), what exceeds the mean of this parameter for best FETs with factor 5–6.
This approach permitted an easy way to compensate the loss of gain at the expense of low
power voltages of scheme. The gain of ampliﬁer with open NFL is ∼12000. The range of
gain adjustment with closed NFL which is controlled by trimmer weight resistors R3.1–R3.3
is equal 1–5 in this case. The minimum amount of feedback is >60 dB. The basic parameters
of PMT summator are given in the Table I for the gain equal 3.

3 Data acquisition system

6

Figure 4: The circuit diagram of a fast low-noise linear summator (PMT)

3.1 Overview

The third generation of the data acquisition system is described here. The ﬁrst system was
based on slow electronics, a hardware delay line of 80 µs, and a multichannel analyzer used
for data storage and indication. The second acquisition system was previously described in
detail

[1].

A data acquisition system, whose functional diagram is shown in Figure 5, can be
conventionally divided into three parts: the PMT channel, the NC channel and measuring
part which includes fast (100 MHz) two-channel PC/AT interfaced digital oscilloscope (DO),
and several supplementary units.

Negative signals from the anodes of the three PMTs are entered to the inputs of the
preampliﬁers. The suﬃciently high speed of response and a small input capacitance make
it possible to study the feasibility of γ-ray background events discrimination by their wave-
forms. A continuously adjusted PA gain ensures the operation of all three PMTs from a
single high-voltage power supply.

The PMT signals from PA outputs are multiplexed by a fast inverting linear summator
and then ramiﬁed on two directions. One branch entered directly to the input of the ﬁrst
channel of DO. In the other branch, the PMT signals are entered to the input of combined
unit of ampliﬁer and single-channel analyzer (SCA). The positive TTL-speciﬁed signal from
SCA output triggers the DO through an external trigger input.

In the NC channel, a high voltage of positive polarity from a single source is applied
through high-voltage isolating resistors to the anodes of helium counters. The latter generate
signals of negative polarity, which are fed through high-voltage separating capacitors to the
inputs of PAs. The spread of the counters gas ampliﬁcation factor is cancelled by adjusting
the PA gain during calibration. For convenient channel tuning, each of them (similarly to

7

Figure 5: The functional diagram of a data acquisition system

the PMT channel) can be switched oﬀ independently by turning oﬀ the PA supply voltages.
The signals of neutron counters from the PA outputs are multiplexed in a single channel
by using a fast inverting linear summator and subsequently enter directly to the input of the
second channel of DO.

The waveform of events in the NC channel is recorded also and ensures the feasibility of

discrimination α-particles background by means of mathematical analysis methods.

3.2 Digital Oscilloscope

Two-channel digital oscilloscope model LA-n10M5 (Rudnev-Shil’aev Co., Russia) [4] is used
as the base of spectrometer data acquisition system. Its main performance data are listed
in the Table 2.

This unit is a 3/2-sized (103×245 mm2) standard printed board placed in an arbitrary

ISA-bus slot of the PC/AT-compatible computer.

The start of conversion is produced by one of the input analog signals or an external

trigger signal. The synchronization can be performed by edge or level.

An order of internal cyclic RAM operation is following. After the start of conversion
command the data from an ADC is continuously written to the selected part of RAM which
is called “prehistory”. Synchronization pulses are blocked until the volume of prehistory is
not ﬁlled up. After prehistory ﬁlling and triggering by the synchronization pulse the part
of RAM is written with the deduction of prehistory volume. This part of RAM is called
“history”. There is a possibility of switching sample frequency from current value to 50 or

8

Table 2: Main performance data of the digital oscilloscope model LA-n10M5

Number of independent A/D channels
Word length (resolution) of A/D conversion
Sample frequency range ∗

Digitalizing period range ∗

Volume of internal RAM ∗

Input sensitivity ∗
Input impedance
Signal-to-noise ratio
Coeﬃcient of harmonic distortions

∗ — programmable value

2
8 bit (256 digitalizing levels)
3.052 kHz – 50 MHz (two-channel mode)
–100 MHzmax (one-channel mode)
20 ns (two-channel mode) –
10 ns (one-channel mode) – 0.3277 ms
up to 256 kB
(up to 128 kB/channel)
±1V, ±0.5V, ±0.2V or ±0.1V
1 MΩ and 15 pF
47 dB
−51 dB

6.25 MHz after ﬁnishing prehistory records and arrival of synchronization pulse.

The data from oscilloscope RAM can be transmitted into computer memory in the DMA

mode.

The acquisition software is written on C language using Borland C++ compiler. It use all
performance of the unit and operates under DOS command prompt mode in MS Windows-95
operation system.

3.3 Operation Algorithm

As was mentioned above, a certain time delay of the signal from NC relative to its PMT
signal is a characteristic feature of the detector. Therefore, it is important to select correctly
the watching time interval (WTI) for acquisition system. The delay time distribution is of an
exponential type e−t/T , where t is the delay time and T is the mean lifetime of thermalized
neutron in the detector volume. The direct measurement of the delay time distribution of
true neutron events was performed [1] with a Pu-Be source. This distribution corresponds
to the mean life time value T ∼80 µs. The WTI should be selected on the basis of this value.
Its particular value depends on background conditions mainly under which measurements of
the neutron ﬂuxes are performed.

There are two basic operation modes of the acquisition software: Pulse Acquisition Mode

and Spectrum Acquisition Mode.

Pulse Acquisition Mode is usually used for real background measurements. In this mode
acquisition is triggered by signal from NC channel. Value of WTI equal 164 µs is selected
what corresponds to 8 kB/channel of the DO RAM for digitizing period equal 20 ns. There-
fore, one event is occupied about 16 kB of memory. The prehistory volume is programmed
on the value 14/16 parts of WTI, i.e. it is occupied 7 kB of memory or 143 µs of the time
scale. The full waveforms of events in both channels of DO inside WTI are written to the
hard disk of computer with using a binary format of data. The maximal counting rate in this

9

Figure 6: The typical related neutron event

case is about 8 events/sec for on-line computer with 133 MHz Pentium-S processor. There is
a possibility to decrease the space of memory which occupied by an event at the expense of
information about front pulse shape of an event in PMT channel. In this case not all infor-
mation about an event is written. In the NC channel the frame only with dimensions ±512
bytes from the prehistory/history boundary, which includes front pulse shape, amplitude
and the part of slope of an event is written to the hard disk with the digitizing period equal
20 ns. In the PMT channel each ﬁrst, eighth, sixteenth etc. digitizing points only inside
WTI are written. Therefore, this technique allows one to obtain decreasing factor equal 8.
Figure 6 illustrates a typical “picture” of the related neutron event, registered by DO.

Secondly, Spectrum Acquisition Mode, is used for calibration procedures, system oper-
ation stability control and background rate monitoring during acquisition.
In this mode
system is externally triggered by signals from SCA. This performance allows to select the
threshold of acquisition more exactly then in case with using of internal triggering. One-
channel mode with maximal sample frequency equal 100 MHz and 1 kB of DO RAM, what
corresponds to 10 µs of the time scale, are used. The prehistory volume is programmed
on the value 4/16 parts of the time scale. The amplitude and histogram (projection onto
amplitude scale) spectra of events are calculated on-line and are written to the hard disk
of computer with using an ASCII format of data. The maximal counting rate in this case
is about 120 events/s. During background measurements this mode starts automatically on
5 min. after “write-to-disk” command and repeats during this time after each 55 min. of
running in the Pulse Acquisition Mode.

Any alteration of DO set-up (contents of INI ﬁle), switching between acquisition modes
or start of acquisition with “write-to-disk” command is accompanied by automatic on-line
calculation of “base lines” real position. For this purpose DO is switched on short time to
automatic mode of horizontal sweep and minimal value of sample frequency.

10

4 Acknowledgments

We thank G.T. Zatsepin for stimulating interest to the work and useful discussions, also
J.S. Nico and S.V. Girin for careful reading of this article and their critical remarks. We
acknowledge the support of the Russian Foundation of Basic Research also. This research
was made possible in part by grant of RFBR No. 98–02 16962.

References

[1] J. N. Abdurashitov, V. N. Gavrin, G. D. Eﬁmov, A. V. Kalikhov, A. A. Shikhin, and
V. E. Yants. Spectrometer of Fast Neutrons. Instruments and Experimental Techniques,
Vol. 40, No 6, 1997, pp. 741–752. Translated from Pribory i Tekhnika Eksperimenta, No
6, 1997, pp. 5–17.

[2] V. Radeka. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 1974, Vol. NS-21, No 1, pp. 51–70.

[3] V. Radeka. International Symposium on Nuclear Electronics, Versailles, 1968.

[4] Digital oscilloscope model LA-n10M5. Technical Reference and User’s Manual. Moscow,

1997.

11

