9
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
0
1
 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
0
2
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

COMMENT ON A TONOMURA
EXPERIMENT : LOCALITY OF THE
VECTOR POTENTIAL

OLIVIER COSTA DE BEAUREGARD AND GEORGES LOCHAK∗

Abstract

Three predictions for additional tests in a Tonomura experiment: 1,2:
The Fresnel frin-ges displayed outside and inside the geometric shadow of
a toroidal magnet should subsist intact, the ones if the others are masked,
and vice versa ; 3 : Placing the registering ﬁlm just before the magnet and
thus uncovering the entire fringe pattern should display the curved fringes
connecting the outer and inner straight ones. Physicality of the vector po-
tential expressed in the source adhering gauge will thus be unequivocally
proved.

1 An unconventional testable claim

De Broglie has tersely stated [1] that his [2] universal formula

i ≡ µU

i
i − eA

P

i

= ~k

relating the canonical 4-momentum P i of a point charge of charge −e , rest
mass µ, 4-velocity U i, to the 4-frequency ki of the associated wave, selects
uniquely the electromagnetic gauge. The point is : In absence of external elec-
tromagnetic sources, adding to the 4-potential Ai an arbitrary 4-gradient would
entail indeﬁniteness of the 4-frequency -a cardiac arythmy of the electron, so to
speak. This is not observed -and is denied by crystal diﬀraction unequivocally
displaying (in standard notation) the formula

p ≡ mv = ~k

What then of gauge invariance of the Dirac equation? Adding to the canonical
4-momentum operator i~∂i − eAi an arbitrary 4-gradient can be compensated
by substracting this same 4-gradient from the wave function’s phase. All right
-this is like cashing a cheque. An invariance law of a diﬀererential equation
need not subsist in its solutions, which imply integration conditions. What de

∗Fondation LOUIS DE BROGLIE 23 rue MARSOULAN 75012 PARIS

(1)

(2)

1

Broglie means is that in the expression of a free electron’s 4-momentum the
4-potential is identically zero : Ai ≡ 0 in absence of electromagnetic sources.
This is unquestionable.

Corollary 1 Any sort of electron interference experiment performed in pres-
ence of a toroidal magnet displays the curlless vector potential A(r) as expressed
in the source adhering gauge -this being tantamount to a measurement of the
vector potential.

So we claim (a big step forward !) that : A locally observable eﬀect underlies
the A.B. eﬀect.

2 Proof via a Tonomura experiment

Tonomura [3] has combined an ’electron biprism inter-ference’ with an Aharonov-
Bohm one. A very perfect toroidal magnet of trapped ﬂux Φ quantized in h/2e
units [4] placed downstream of a ’biprism’ has its axis z orthogonal to the planes
displaying ’normally’ the Fresnel fringes. A registering ﬁlm, placed ’normally’
after the magnet, displays outside and inside its circular shadow straight Fres-
nel fringes which are either identical to each other or black-to-white exchanged,
depending on the ﬂux Φ being an even or an odd multiple of h/2e. The fact
is that the magnet’s shadow, now termed the black ring, is ’geometric’ style
showing no circular fringes, and thus no explicit A.B. eﬀect. This precludes
any observable interference between the external and internal fringes -which can
be tested.

Obturating the inside of the black ring should not aﬀect in any way the ex-
ternal fringes which, displayed as parallel straight lines, are identical to those
existing in absence of the magnet -because the magnet’s inﬂuence is asymptoti-
cally zero. Slipping transversally the magnet out of the picture will just uncover
the genuine Fresnel fringes. Similarly, for the reasons stated, obturating the out-
side of the black ring should not aﬀect in any way the internal fringes -a very
crucial test of locality !
How the outside and inside fringes are linked together is hidden by the black
ring. Between them exists a phase shift amounting to a multiple of h/e, due
to addition of −eA to the two kinetic momenta mvcombined with obliquity of
the two interfering k vectors vizz the axis z. The hidden curved fringes can be
recovered by placing the registering ﬁlm just before the magnet, thus wiping oﬀ
the black ring. The fringe pattern displayed will not be the genuine Fresnel one,
but one where curved fringes now connect the external and internal straight
Tonomura ones -a very strong proof of local physicality of A ahead of electron
impact !

2

3 Direct mesurement of the vector potential

If the vector potential A is a locally measurable magnitude a precise measure-
ment of a curlless vector potential is possible. Rather than a spatially extended
’electron biprism’ one should then use as interference generator a small diﬀract-
ing crystal.
Performed inside the curlless vector potential A(r) generated by a toroidal mag-
net, crystal diﬀraction will evidence, instead of formula (2), the formula

~k = mv − eA

(3)

yielding a measurement of A expressed in the source adhering gauge.

The maximal and neater eﬀect will obtain if the magnet’s center coincides with
that of the crystal and its axis with that of the gun. Then turning the magnet
around its center will modify the intensity along the circular rings.

4 Resurrection of the potentials ’assassinated’

by Heaviside

Electromagnetic gauge invar-iance states : Forces, linear or angular, depend on
the ﬁelds, not the potentials. All right, this is very true.
But the integrals of forces -over space, energies, or over time, momenta (linear
or angular ; the 6-component angular momentum including the boost) do de-
pend on the potentials. As interaction energies and linear or angular momenta
of bound systems are measurable mag-nitudes the attached potentials also are
-with expressions selected as integration conditions [4].
This is well known but underestimated in the case of Einstein’s energy-mass
equivalence : the electrostatic mass defect of a bound system is part of its total
mass.
By relativistic covariance there follows [4] that action-reaction (linear or an-
gular) also selects the source adhering gauge as an integration condition ; an
example is aﬀorded by the Wheeler-Feynman electrodynamics.
Electromagnetically induced inertia thus emerges as a general concept to be
discussed elswhere.
De Broglie [1] [5] has stated that both the Einstein W = c2m energy-mass and
the Planck W = hν energy-frequency equivalences select the electromagnetic
gauge ; covariant expressions of these statements have been produced [5].

References

1950) p. 45-49.

[1] L. de Broglie, Optique Electronique et Corpusculaire (Hermann, Paris,

[2] L. de Broglie, Annales de Physique 3 (1925) 22 ; see p. 55-56.

[3] A. Tonomura, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 225 (1995) 227.

3

[4] O. Costa de Beauregard and J.M. Vigoureux, Phys. Rev. D 9 (1974) 1626.

[5] O. Costa de Beauregard in Advanced Electrodynamics, T. W. Barrett and
D. M. Grimes eds (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1995) p. 77-104 ; Physics
Essays 10 (1997) 492 and 646 ; Ann. Fond. L. de Broglie 23 (1998) 135.

[6] L. de Broglie, C. R. Ac. Sci. 225 (1947) 163.

4

