FERMI–PUB–00/027–T; EFI–2000–3
Los Alamos archiver: physics/0001061
Submitted to The Physics Teacher
February 2, 2008

Teaching Symmetry in the Introductory
Physics Curriculum

Christopher T. Hill1,2
and
Leon M. Lederman1,3

1Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
P.O. Box 500, Batavia, Illinois, 60510
2The University of Chicago
Enrico Fermi Institute, Chicago, Illinois, 60637
3 The Illinois Math-Science Academy
Aurora, Illinois, USA, 60506-1000

Modern physics is largely deﬁned by fundamental symmetry principles and
N¨oether’s Theorem. Yet these are not taught, or rarely mentioned, to be-
ginning students, thus missing an opportunity to reveal that the subject of
physics is as lively and contemporary as molecular biology, and as beautiful
as the arts. We prescribe a symmetry module to insert into the curriculum,
of a week’s length.

0
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
2
v
1
6
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Introduction

Symmetry is a crucial concept in mathematics, chemistry, and biology.

Its deﬁnition

is also applicable to art, music, architecture and the innumerable patterns designed by
nature, in both animate and inanimate forms. In modern physics, however, symmetry
may be the most crucial concept of all. Fundamental symmetry principles dictate the

basic laws of physics, control stucture of matter, and deﬁne the fundamental forces in
nature.

Some of the most famous mathematicians and physicists had this to say about sym-

metry:

• “I aim at two things: On the one hand to clarify, step by step, the philosophic-
mathematical signiﬁcance of the idea of symmetry and, on the other, to display
the great variety of applications of symmetry in the arts, in inorganic and organic

nature.”

— Hermann Weyl [1].

• “Special relativity emphasizes, in fact is built on, Lorentz symmetry or Lorentz
invariance, which is one of the most crucial concepts in 20th Century Physics.”

— C. N. Yang (Nobel Laureate in Physics) [2].

• “Symmetry is fascinating to the human mind; everyone likes objects or patterns
that are in some way symmetrical.... but we are most interested in the symmetries
that exist in the basic laws themselves.”

— Richard P. Feynman (Nobel Laureate in Physics) [3].

• “I heave the basketball; I know it sails in a parabola, exhibiting perfect symmetry,
which is interrupted by the basket. Its funny, but it is always interrupted by the
basket.”

— Michael Jordan (retired Chicago Bull) [4].

Today we understand that all of the fundamental forces in nature are uniﬁed under

one elegant symmetry principle. We revere the fundamental symmetries of nature and we
have come to intimately appreciate their subtle consequences. As we will see, to succumb
to a crack-pot’s invention requiring us to give up the law of energy conservation would be

to give up the notion of a symmetry principle, that time ﬂows with no change in the laws

1

of physics. Symmetry controls physics in a most profound way, and this was the ultimate
lesson of the 20th century.

Yet, even a sampling of the crucial role of symmetry in physics by beginning students
is completely omitted, not only from the high school curriculum, but in the standard ﬁrst

year college calculus-based physics course. It does not appear in the Standards.

It is possible, nonetheless, to incorporate some of the underlying ideas of symmetry
and its relationship to nature into the beginning courses in physics and mathematics,

at the high school and early college level. They really are not that diﬃcult. When
the elementary courses are spiced with these ideas, they begin to take on some of the
dimensions of a humanities or ﬁne arts study: Symmetry is one of the most beautiful
concepts, and its expression in nature is perhaps the most stunning aspect of our physical
world.

What follows is a description of a high school module that introduces the key ideas

which, in many examples, ties physics to astrophysics, biology and chemistry.
It also
reveals some of the modern thinking in a conversational way. We are experimenting in the

classroom, in Saturday Morning Physics at Fermilab, and elsewhere in the implementation
of this approach.

A lot more material that cannot be presented in this brief article, can be found
at our symmetry website, www.emmynoether.com. We will continually update our
website as our educational experiment in Symmetry proceeds. We encourage you, and
your students, to visit it. And don’t hesitate to send us suggestions, comments, and even

kindly worded complaints.

2 What is Symmetry?

When a group of students is asked to deﬁne “symmetry” the answers they give are gen-

erally all correct. For example, to the question: “what is symmetry?” we hear some of
the following:

• “its like when the sides of an equilateral triangle are all the same, or when the angles

are all the same...”

• “things are in the same proportion to each other... ”

2

• “things that look the same when you see them from diﬀerent points of view ... ”

From the many diverse ways of describing symmetry, one quickly gets to agreement

with the scientists’ deﬁnition:

“Symmetry is an invariance of an object or system to a set of changes (trans-
formations).”

In simpler language, a thing (a system) is said to possess a symmetry if one can make
a change (a transformation) in the system such that, after the change, the thing appears
exactly the same (is invariant) as before. Let us consider some examples.

2.1 Translations in Space

A physical system can simply be moved from one place to another place in space. This is

called a “spatial translation”.

Consider a classroom pointer. Usually it is a wooden stick of a ﬁxed length, about
1 meter. We can translate the pointer freely in space. Do its physical properties change
as we perform this translation? Clearly they do not. The physical material, the atoms,

the arrangement of atoms into molecules, into the ﬁbrous material that is wood, etc., do
not vary in any obvious way when we translate the pointer. This is a symmetry: it is a

statement that the laws of physics themselves are symmetrical under translations of the
system in space. Any equation we write describing the quarks, leptons, atoms, molecules,
stresses and bulk moduli, electrical resistance, etc., of our pointer must itself be invariant
under translation in space.

For example, we can easily write a formula for the “length” of the pointer that is
independent of where the pointer is located in space (we leave this as an exercise, or see

our website). Such a formula contains the information that the length of the pointer,
a physical measure of the pointer, doesn’t change under translations in space. Or, put

another way, the formula is “invariant under spatial translations.” While this would be a
simple example, the (highly nontrivial) assumption is that all correct equations in physics
are translationally invariant! Thus, if we have a physics laboratory in which all kinds
of experiments are carried out and all sorts of laws of nature are discovered and tested,

3

the symmetry dictates that the same laws will be true if the laboratory itself is moved
(translated ) to another location in space.

The implications of this “oh so simply stated” symmetry are profound. It is a state-
ment about the nature of space. If space had at very short distances the structure of,

e.g., a crystal, then moving from a lattice site to a void would change the laws of nature
within the crystal. The hypothesis that space is translationally invariant is equivalent to
the statement that one point in space is equivalent to any other point, i.e. the symmetry
is such that translations of any system or, equivalently, the translation of the coordinate
system, does not change the laws of nature. We emphasize that this is a statement about
space itself; one piece of space is as good as another! We say that space is smooth or ho-
mogeneous (Einstein called it a “continuum”). Equivalently, the laws and the equations

that express these laws are invariant to translations, i.e., possess translational symmetry.

Now, one can get confused in applying translational invariance. Consider an ex-
periment to study the translational symmetry of the electric charge by measuring, e.g.,

acceleration of electrons in a cathode ray tube. If there were, outside of the laboratory, a
huge magnet, then the experimental results would change when the tube is moved around

inside of the lab. This is not, however, a violation of translational symmetry, because we
forgot to include the magnet in the move. If we live in a region of space with intrinsic
magnetic ﬁelds, then we might detect dependence upon position, and the symmetry would

not seem to exist. However, it is our belief that ﬂat space is smooth and homogeneous.
The most profound evidence comes later.

2.2 Translations in Time

The physical world is actually a fabric of events. To describe events we typically use
a 3-dimensional coordinate system for space, but we also need an extra 1-dimensional

coordinate system for time. This is achieved by building a clock. The time on the
clock, together with the 3-dimensional position of something, forms a four coordinate
thing (x, y, z, t), called an “event” (Note: we always assume that the clock is ideally
located at the position of the event, so we don’t get confused about how long it takes
for light to propagate from the face of a distant clock to the location of the event, etc.).

Some examples of events: (i) We can say that there was the event of the ﬁrecracker
explosion at (xf , yf , zf , tf ), (ii) The N.Y. Yankees’ third baseman hits a fast pitch at

4

(xH, yH, zH, tH), (iii) Niel Armstrong’s foot ﬁrst touched the surface of the Moon at the
event (xM , yM , zM , tM ).

Now we have the important symmetry hypothesis of physics: The laws of physics,
and thus all correct equations in physics, are invariant under translations in time. That
is, to all of our fabric of events, such as the events we described above, we can just shift
every time coordinate by an overall common constant. Mathematically, we replace every
time ti for every phsyical event by a new value ti + T . The T ’s cancel in all correct physics
equations; the equations are all time translationally invariant! Time, we believe, is also
smooth and homogeneous.

Indeed, the constancy of the basic parameters of physics, e.g., electric charge, electron

mass, Planck’s constant, the speed of light, etc., over vast distances and times has been
established in astronomical and geological observations to a precision of approaching 10−8
over the entire age of Universe [2]. The laws of physics appear to be constant in time.
The experimental evidence is very strong!

2.3 Rotations

A sphere (or a spherical system, or MJ’s basketball) can be rotated about any axis that
passes through the center of the sphere. The rotation angle can be anything we want, so
let’s take it to be 63o. After this rotation (often called an “operation” or “transformation”)
the appearance of the sphere is not changed. We say that the sphere is “invariant”
under the “transformation” of rotating it about the axis by 63o. Any mathematical
description we use of the sphere will also be unchanged (invariant) under this rotation.
There are an inﬁnite number of symmetry operations that we can perform upon the

sphere. Furthermore, there is no “smallest” nonzero rotation that we can perform; we
can perform “inﬁnitesimal” rotations of the sphere. We say that the symmetry of the

sphere is “continuous”.

Consider again our classroom pointer. We can rotate the pointer freely in space. Do

its physical properties change as we perform this rotation? Clearly they do not. This too
is a symmetry: it is a statement that the laws of physics themselves are symmetrical under
rotations in space. Under rotations in free space the length of our classroom pointer, R,
doesn’t change.

We could actually perform a mathematical rotation about the origin of our coordinate

5

system in which we have written a formula for the length of a pointer. We would ﬁnd
that the formula doesn’t change (just the coordinates, the things the formula acts upon,

do; this isn’t hard to see, and we do it on the website). We say that the length of the
pointer is invariant under rotations. Indeed, it is our ﬁrm belief that the laws of physics,
and thus all correct equations in physics, are invariant under rotations in space . This is,
again, based upon experimental data. It is a statement about the nature of space; space
is said to be isotropic, that is, all directions of space are equivalent.

In summary:

tions in space.

later.

The laws of physics are invariant under spatial and temporal translations, and rota-

Needless to say, there are many additional symmetries, some of which we will discuss

3 Symmetries of the Laws of Physics
and Emmy N¨oether’s Theorem

In 1905, a mathematician named Emmy (Amalie) N¨oether, Fig.(1), proved the following
theorem:

For every continuous symmetry of the laws of physics, there must
exist a conservation law.

For every conservation law, there must exist a continuous symmetry.

Thus, we have a deep and profound connection between a symmetry of the laws of
physics, and the existence of a corresponding conservation law. In presenting N¨oether’s

theorem at this level we usually state it without proof (A fairly simple proof can be given
if the student is familiar with the action principle; it can, however, be motivated with

simple examples, as we do below).

Conservation laws, like the conservation of energy, momentum and angular momen-
tum (these are the most famous), are studied in high school. They are usually presented

as consequences of Newton’s Laws (which is true). We now see from N¨oether’s theorem
that they emerge from symmetry concepts far deeper than Newton’s laws.

6

Now, as we have stated above, it is an experimental fact that the laws of physics are
invariannt under the symmetry of spatial translations. This is a strong statement. What

is the physical consequence of this? Thus comes the amazing theorem of Emmy N¨oether,
which states, in this case:

The conservation law corresponding to space translational symme-

try is the Law of Conservation of Momentum.

So, we learn in senior physics class that the total momentum of an isolated system

remains constant. The ith element of the system has a momentum in Newtonian physics
of the form: ~pi = m~vi and the total momentum is just the sum of all of the elements,

~Ptotal = ~p1 + ~p2 + ... + ~pN

(3.1)

for a system of N elements. N¨oether’s theorem states that ~Ptotal is conserved, i.e., it does
not change in time, no matter how the various particles interact, because the interactions
are determined by laws that don’t depend upon where the whole system is located in

space!

Note that momentum is, and must be, a vector quantity (hence the little arrow,~ ,
over the stuﬀ in the equations). Why? Because momentum is associated with translations
in space, and the directions you can translate (move) a physical system form a vector!

So, if you remember the N¨oether theorem, you won’t forget that momentum is a vector
when taking an SAT test!

Turning it around, the validity of the Law of Conservation of Momentum as an obser-

vational fact, via N¨oether’s theorem, supports the hypothesis that space is homogeneous,
i.e., possessing translational symmetry. The more we verify the law of conservation of

momentum, and it has been tested literally trillions of times in laboratories all over the
world, at all distance scales, the more we verify the idea that space is homogeneous, and
not some kind of crystal lattice!

We have also stated above the laws of physics are invariant under translations in

time. What conservation law then follows by N¨oether’s Theorem? Surprise! It is nothing
less than the law of conservation of energy:

The conservation law corresponding to time translational symmetry
is the Law of Conservation of Energy.

7

Since the constancy of the total energy of a system is extremely well tested experi-

mentally, this tells us that nature’s laws are invariant under time translations.

Here is a cute example of how time invariance and energy conservation are inter-
related. Consider a water tower that can hold a mass M of water and has a height of
H meters. Assume that the gravitational constant, which determines the acceleration of
gravity, is g, on every day of the week, except Tuesday when it is a smaller value g′ < g.
Now, we run water down from the water tower on Monday through a turbine (a fancy
water wheel) generator which converts the potential energy MgH to electrical current
to charge a large storage battery, Fig.(2). We’ll assume 100% eﬃciencies for everything,
because we are physicists. This is Monday’s job. For Tuesday’s job we pump the water
back up to H, using the battery power that we accumulated from Monday’s job to run the
pump. But now the g′ value is smaller than g and the work done is Mg′H, which is now
much less than the energy we got from Monday’s job. This leaves us with M(g − g′)H
extra energy still in the battery, which we can sell to a local power company to live on
until next Monday. This is a perpetual motion machine! It produces energy for us, and we

can convert that to cash. It does not conserve energy because we cooked up false laws of
physics, in this case gravity, that are not time translationally invariant! Hence, we violated

a precept of N¨oether’s Theorem. (Can you come up with similar cute example of violating
momentum conservation by making the laws of physics spatially inhomogeneous?)

We also live in a world where the laws of physics are rotationally invariant:

The conservation law corresponding to rotational symmetry is the
Law of Conservation of Angular Momentum.

Conservation of angular momentum is often demonstrated in lecture by what is usu-

ally called “the 3 dumbbell experiment”. The instructor stands on a rotating table, his
hands outstretched, with a heavy dumbbell in each hand (who is the third dumbbell?),
Fig.(3). He turns slowly, and then brings his hands (and dumbbells) close to his body,

Fig.(4). His rotation speed (angular velocity) speeds up substantially. What is kept con-
stant is the angular momentum, J, the product of I, the moment of inertia, times the
angular velocity ω. By bringing his dumbbells in close to his body, I is decreased. But
J, the angular momentum, must be conserved, so ω must increase. Skaters do this trick
all the time.

8

Atoms, elementary particles, etc., all have angular momentum. The intrinsic angular
momentum of an elementray particle is called spin. In any reaction or collision, the ﬁnal

angular momentum must be equal to the initial angular momentum. Like our planet earth,
particles spin and execute orbits and both motions have associated angular momentum.
Data over the past 70 or so years conﬁrms conservation of this quantity on the macroscopic

scale of people and their machines and on the microscopic scale of particles. And now,
(thanks to Emmy) we learn that these data imply that space is isotropic; All directions

in space are equivalent.

The translational and rotational symmetries of space and time need not have existed.
That they do is the way nature is. These are some of the actual properties of the basic
concepts we use to describe the world: space and time.

4 Beyond

We have described how the fundamental conservation laws of everyday physics follow from
the continuous symmetry properties of space and time. There are, however, many other

conservation laws that are not usually studied in a ﬁrst year physics course. A simple
example is the conservation of electric charge in all reactions. The total electric charge in

an isolated system is a constant in time. For example, processes like:

electron

− → neutrino0 + photon0

(4.2)

(where superscripts denote charges) in which case electric charge could completely disap-
pear, are forbidden. On the other hand, processes like this one do occur:

electron

−

+ proton+ → neutron0 + neutrino0

(4.3)

Since the ﬁnal state is electrically neutral, the negative electric charge of the electron

must be identically equal and opposite to that of the proton to an inﬁnite number of
signiﬁcant ﬁgures. Indeed, we can place a large quantity of Hydrogen gas into a container

and observe to a very high precision that Hydrogen atoms (which are just bound states
of e− + p+) are electrically neutral.

This conservation law, by N¨oether’s Theorem, also arises from a profound symmetry
of nature called “gauge symmetry.” This is an example of an abstract symmetry that

9

does not involve space and time. In the late 20th century we have come to realize that
all of the forces in nature are controlled by such gauge symmetries. Gauge symmetry is

very special, and it actually leads us to the complete theory of electrons and photons,
known as (quantum) electrodynamics, which has been tested to 10−12 precision. This
is the most accurate and precise theory of nature that humans have ever constructed.

Perhaps the most stunning result of the 20th Century has been the understanding that
all known forces in nature are described by gauge symmetries.

Einstein’s Special Theory of Relativity is all about relative motion, and is based

upon a fundamental symmetry principle about motion itself. This is a statement that the
laws of physics must be the same for all observers independent of their state of uniform
motion. This symmetry principle of Relativity can be expressed in a way that shows

that it is a generalization of the concept of a rotation. The time interval between two
events that occur at the same point in space is called the “proper time.” The proper time

can be expressed, like the length of our pointer, in such a way that it is invariant under
motion1 A formula can be written that relates the coordinate systems of two observers
moving relative to one another, in terms of their relative velocity v. The formula is
called a “Lorentz Transformation” and it mixes time and space, much like a rotation in
the xy plane mixes x and y. Like a rotation, it leaves the proper time invariant. Thus
motion is sort-of like a rotation in space and time! Unfortunately, we must send you oﬀ
to a textbook (or our website) on Special Relativity to learn about all of the miraculous

eﬀects that occur as a consequence of this. Relativity is an expansion of our understanding
of the deep and profound symmetries of nature.

Other extremely important symmetries arise at the quantum level. A simple example

is the replacement of one atom, say a Hydrogen atom sitting in a molecule, by another
Hydrogen atom. This is a symmetry because all Hydrogen atoms are exactly the same,
or identical, in all respects. There are no warts or moles or identifying body markings
on Hydrogen atoms, or any other atomic scale particle for that matter, such as electrons,
protons, quarks, etc. The eﬀects of the symmetry associated with exchanging positions or

motions of identical atoms or electrons or quarks, has profound eﬀects upon the structure
of matter, from the internal structure of a nucleus of an atom, to the properties of everyday
1A moving observer sees the two events at diﬀerent points in space; the formula for proper time
involves the spatial separation of the events divided by c, the speed of light; this diﬀers from Newtonian
physics in which the proper time would be independent of the spatial separation of events.

10

materials like metals, insulators and semiconductors, to the external stucture of a neutron
star or white dwarf star. This identical particle symmetry explains nothing less than the

“Periodic Table of the Elements,” i.e., how the motion and distributions of the electrons
are organized within the atoms as we go from Hydrogen to Uranium! All of chemistry is
controlled by the interactions of electromagnetism together with the symmetry of identical

particles.

In a one week long module we can develop these and other important symmetries,
such as mirror symmetry, time reversal symmetry and the symmetry between matter and

anti-matter (we can even explain why antimatter exists, from the symmetry of Relativ-
ity and N¨oether’s theorem!). Conservation laws that are associated with more abstract
symmetries, such as “quark color,” and “supersymmetry,” can also be illustrated and

discussed. Indeed, this leads us to the frontier of theoretical physics, e.g., superstrings,
M-theory, and the deeply disturbing open questions, such as “(why) is the Cosmological

Constant zero?” As we progressively proceed to the deepest foundations of the structure
of matter, energy, space and time, we must be more descriptive for our beginning students,

but we become more thrilled, enchanted and excited by the fundamental symmetries that
control the structure and evolution of our Universe.

Let this provocative conclusion close this very incomplete survey of the role of sym-
metry in physics. Please visit www.emmynoether.com for a much expanded version
of this brief letter.

Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Shea Ferrel for Figures (3) and (4).

11

Bibiliography

1. Symmetry, Hermann Weyl (Princeton Science Library, Reprint edition, Princeton,

2. C. N. Yang, in Proceedings of the First Int’l Symposium on Symmetries in Subatomic
Physics, ed. W-Y. Pauchy Huang, Leonard Kisslingler, v. 32, no. 6-11 (Dec. 1994)
143

3. R. P. Feynman, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, (Addison-Wesley Pub. Co.,

1989).

1963).

4. M. Jordan, private communication.

5. For limits on time dependence of fundamental constants see, e.g., F.W. Dyson, in:
Aspects of Quantum Theory, eds. A. Salam and E.P. Wigner (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge, 1972) 213; in: Current Trends in the the Theory of Fields eds.
J.E. Lannutti and P.K. Williams (American Institute of Physics, New York, 1978)
163. See also, C. T. Hill, P. J. Steinhardt, M. S. Turner Phys.Lett. B252,1990, 343,
and references therein.

6. see, e.g. Women in Mathematics, L.M. Osen, MIT Press (1974) 141.

12

Figure 1: Emmy Noether, pronounced like “mother.” Born, 1882, she practiced at
G¨ottingen where the great mathematicians Hilbert and Klein and the physicists Heisen-
berg and Schr¨oedinger were professors. Fleeing the rise of Naziism, she spent her last
few years in the U.S. at Bryn Mawr and the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton.
She died in 1935 [6]. Emmy N¨oether was one of the greatest mathematicians of the 20th
century.

13

Figure 2: Water is drained through turbine generator on days when the gravitational
acceleration is g′ > g and energy is produced and sold to power company. On days
when gravitational acceleration is g < g′ the water is pumped back up into the tower
at a reduced cost in energy. Hence net energy is available from the system if g is time
dependent.

14

Figure 3: The Professor with dumbells rotates slowly when his arms are outstretched.

Figure 4: Pulling the dumbells close to his body reduces the moment of inertia, but
angular momentum is conserved, hence the Professor rotates faster.

15

