0
0
0
2

 

b
e
F
3

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
0
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Teaching the EPR–Paradox at High School ?

Gesche Pospiech

Institut for Didaktik der Physik

Johann Wolfgang Goethe University Frankfurt

February 2, 2008

Abstract

The discovery of quantum mechanics in the beginning of our century led to a
revolution of physical world view. Modern experiments on the border of the
classical and the quantum regime made possible by new techniques open better
insight and understanding of the quantum world and have impact on new techno-
logical development. Therefore it seems important that students and even pupils
at higher grades become acquainted with the principles of quantum mechanics.
A suitable way seems to be given by treatment of the EPR–gedankenexperiment.

0.1 Introduction

The ﬁrst question to be answered is: why should quantum theory be taught at
school at all? For choosing this topic there are the following three reasons:

1. Quantum theory is the fundamental theory of modern physics. It plays
a signiﬁcant role in nearly all modern developments of physics. Many
recent experiments and research in nanostructures with large applicability
in technology rely on quantum eﬀects.

2. Quantum theory has important philosophical aspects. Many people are
highly interested in interpretation and understanding quantum theory as
shows up in the many popular books about this subject.

3. Pupils at the age from 16+ on are searching for their place in the world.
They are trying to understand the world and are open for philosophical
hints that help them in building their own world view.

But often this highly fascinating subject is avoided at school because of math-
ematical and conceptual diﬃculties. I therefore want to show a possible way
to introduce quantum theory in a manner suitable for interested pupils.
In
this article I concentrate on the mathematical part because here lie some dif-
ﬁculties. For an introduction into the philosophical aspects I have developed
a dialogue between philosophers from diﬀerent times - classical antiquity (Par-
menides), the Enlightenment (Kant) and from our century, published elsewhere,
([Pos98]). The goal of the following is to clarify the main diﬃculties in teaching
the physical basis of quantum theory and how to keep them minor.
Speaking qualitatively about quantum theory in an adequate way is nearly im-
possible in itself since all our concepts and terms have been developed along
everyday experience. Hence our language is well suited to communicate about
concrete physical objects with well determined properties or about psycholog-
ical issues.
In my opinion this last property should be used in dealing with
the interfering and superposing objects of quantum theory that may have more
similarities or associations with pyschological feelings than with concrete balls
or waves occurring in classical physics. In every attempt to talk about quan-
tum theory one has to be aware of this principal diﬃculty already recognized
by Bohr, Heisenberg, Pauli and others.
In the complementary worlds of the
quantum regime and the classical regime we only are at home in the classical
regime. The other regime remains accessible only through sophisticated experi-
ments - even if an experimentalist would call them easy and simple.... One way
out might be to talk in images - but soon one arrives at poor analogies. Hence,
in order to reach more than only a superﬁcial knowledge at least some hints to
the mathematical background of quantum theory must be given. On the other
hand at least in the beginning some themes should be avoided to facilitate the
pupils the understanding of the peculiarities of quantum theory.

1

0.2 What can be done without too many technicalities?

It is nearly impossible to understand quantum theory without considering its
mathematical structure. Nevertheless at school the mathematical apparatus
of quantum mechanics has to be abandoned for the major part. The main
ideas, however, can be presented quite easily with help of the typical quantum
phenomenon “spin” having no classical analogues. Experiments with polarized
photons may help in conveying the essentials. In the following I describe the
reasons for taking spin as the ﬁrst subject in treating quantum theory in more
detail. Furthermore I explain with the example of EPR–gedanken experiment
how to proceed.
Treating the phenomenon “spin” right in the beginning has several advantages:

• Spin lies at the heart of quantum theory. Its properties are used to explain
the diﬀerent statistics, the ﬁne structure of spectra, the splitting of spectra
in external (electrical or magnetic) ﬁelds. Already a spin system consisting
of two particles, i.e.
living in a four–dimensional Hilbert space can no
longer be described classically. This proof is similar to the proof of Bell
inequality, ([Bau]).

• The procedure to describe spin mainly by its structure is typical of quan-
tum theory. Furthermore, the mathematics of spin is quite simple, using
mainly the well–known Pauli– matrices:

σx =(cid:18) 0

1

1

0 (cid:19) ,

σy =(cid:18) 0

−i 0 (cid:19) ,

i

σz =(cid:18) 1

0 −1 (cid:19) .

0

With the help of these quite simple looking matrices, acting on two–
dimensional Hilbert space, the most essential mathematical structures of
quantum theory can be explained and interpreted, see table 1. Some de-
tails are explained in the next section.

• The meaning of Heisenberg uncertainty relation can be explained as prin-
cipal non–existence of ﬁxed values for properties hence of their non–
determination,
[Pos99]. Therefore the danger that the uncertainty is
perceived as measurement mistakes can be drastically diminished. Some
helpful constructions even can be visualized on the blackboard.

• Spin is a phenomenon of special importance in modern experiments reach-
ing from Nuclear Magnetic Resonance used in medical applications to re-
alizations of the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen gedankenexperiment. Its treat-
ment opens the way to a discussion of philosophical aspects of quantum
theory which quickly reaches the main points: the question of reality and
objectivity in nature treated on a mathematical and physical foundation.

2

0.2.1 An Example

As an example I show how the arguments of Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen in
their famous paper [EPR35] can be used to show the power of the mathematical
formalism and - even more important - how the mathematical constructions
can be interpreted in this framework. This allows a bridge to be built from
the mathematical structures over the physical phenomena and connecting to
a philosophical discussion.
Instead of arguing very sophisticated within the
mathematical formalism the main goal should be to uncover the main aspects
of quantum theory and in this way to build a solid fundament from which the
mathematics can be developed further, (see also table 1).
The argumens of EPR can be developed the following way:

Step 1: The mathematical tools

In 1935, the year of the EPR-paper
the mathematical framework has just been settled implying the following main
points:

• The state of a quantum object is given by a state vector ψ containing
all the available information, i.e. a complete description of the physical
properties of the quantum object.

• Each physical quantity is given together with all the possible results of a
measurement of that quantity and corresponding eigenstates, i.e. all the
states a quantum object can attain after a measurement. A mathematical
realization of this concept is given for instance by matrices.

• Arbitrary states can be expressed with aid of the eigenstates of such a

matrix resp. physical quantity.

In a deviation from the original argument of EPR I would advise taking the spin
realized with the above–mentioned Pauli–matrices as a concrete example. The
students can compute the eigenvalus and eigenstates easily from the matrices.
The possible measurement results (eigenvalues) are +1 and −1 together with the
corresponding eigenstates. The ﬁrst expriment showing this property directly
has been the Stern–Gerlach–experiment. Furthermore the Pauli–matrices fulﬁll
the condition crucial for the next step of argument of EPR: they do not have
any eigenstates in common. Hence there always are several possibilities to rep-
resent the spin state of a quantum object, namely with respect to the respective
eigenstates of the diﬀerent matrices correponding to the spin di rections. The
representation of an arbitrary spin state ψ(s) with respect to the eigenstates of
σx would be

ψ(s) = c1  1

√2 ! + c2  1

√2
1

√2 !

√2
− 1

3

Mathematical
term

Physical Interpretation

Example

vector

physical state

operator

physical quantity

ψ =(cid:18) 1
0 (cid:19)
σx =(cid:18) 0

1

1

0 (cid:19)

√2 !,   1
  1

√2
− 1

√2 !

√2
1

=

√2
1

(cid:18) 1
0 (cid:19)
√2"  1
+1 or −1: (cid:16) 1

√2 ! +  1
√2 !#
√2(cid:17) ∗ ∗2 = 1

probability of getting either

√2
− 1

2

eigenvalues
an operator

of

eigenstates of an
operator
(nor-
malized to 1)
vector addition

development
into eigenstates

possible results of measurements +1, −1

physical states with a ﬁxed value
for
the physical quantity in
question
superposition (no ﬁxed value
for
the physical quantity in
question)

representation of arbitrary physi-
cal states with respect to the cor-
responding physical quantity

1

coeﬃcients
(squared)
development

probability of getting the corre-
sponding measurement result

of

4

and with respect to the eigenstates of σz the same state ψ would look like:

ψ(s) = k1(cid:18) 1

0 (cid:19) + k2(cid:18) 0
1 (cid:19)

with diﬀerent coeﬃcients (ci) 6= (ki).
(For a concrete example look at the
table.) This fact perhaps does not matter too much since we always can change
coordinates (here it would be the rotation of a coordinate system by an angle
of 45 degree). But here it means that the spin state of a given system possesses
two diﬀerent representations belonging to the “same piece of reality”(EPR). The
most interesting thing happens in the next step!

Step 2: The experimental setup Two quantum objects, e.g. photons,
are brought into interaction or produced in a single process and hence become
entangled i.e. they share a common “history”. After that they are separated
from each other without any further manipulation, let us say one is brought to
the moon, the second stays on earth.
Because of their common “history” they are described by one common state ψ
which is not just the addition of the states of the single photons. This con-
sideration is central for the whole argument of EPR. The development of the
entangled state of both photons into eigenstates with respect to eigenstates of
σx is given by:

ψ(s1, s2) = ψ1(s1)(cid:18) 1

1 (cid:19) + ψ2(s1)(cid:18) 1

−1 (cid:19)

and with respect to the eigenstates of σz:

ψ(s1, s2) = φ1(s1)(cid:18) 1

0 (cid:19) + φ2(s1)(cid:18) 0
1 (cid:19)

The only diﬀerence to the representations above is that the coeﬃcients now
depend on s1 The meaning of these two representations is that photon 1 is de-
scribed diﬀerently depending on the description chosen for photon 2, namely
ψi(s1) resp. φi(s1). This is called the entanglement of the two photons. There-
fore I would prefer to call the whole system consisting out of these two photons
rather a “diphoton” in order to emphasize that they build one whole (also see
step 5 below).

Step 3: Classical Assumptions Assuming a ﬁxed objective reality and
demanding that physics has to give a complete description of reality Einstein
arrives at a contradiction to the predictions of quantum theory. More precisely,
Einstein assumes:

1. Separability

Classical Physics only knows action between objects in direct contact with

5

each other. With “object” in this sense I also denote e.g. ﬁelds. Hence
if two objects are separated in space, including intermediating ﬁelds, all
future manipulations on them are absolutely independent from each other.
We could summarize this in the sentence: Spatially separated objects also
are physically separated. This is an implicit assumption of EPR that is
not spoken out directly, but is underlying the whole argument as can be
seen in the last paragraph of the famous EPR-paper [EPR35].
“Separability” hence means that the respective descriptions of two spa-
tially separated photons should be totally independent from each other.

2. Physical Reality

Einstein deﬁnes a pragmatic criterion for reality: Every well determined
physical quantity has to have a representation in the theory. The point
herein lies in the question: Which properties are well determined? Einstein
regarded every physical quantity that can be measured as well determined.
But quantum theory deviates in so far from classical physics as not all (in
principle) measurable quantites have well determined properties at the
same instant. They only possess them as a potentiality.

From this view point the diﬀerent descriptions from above (step 2) should not
occur in a “good” physical theory.

Step 4: Quantum Theoretical Outcome We can get information about
the photons only after a measurement. What can possibly happen then? There
are several possibilities (as an example):

1. The spin of photon 2 is measured in x-direction. At the same instant the
spin state of photon 1 is ψ1(s1) or ψ2(s1) according to the result of the
measurement at photon 2.

2. The spin of photon 2 is measured in z-direction. At the same instant the
spin state of photon 1 is φ1(s1) or φ2(s1) according to the result of the
measurement performed on photon 2.

That means that photon 1 immediately “knows” the kind of measurement done
on photon 2 far away as well as its result. Einstein calls this a “spooky action
at a distance”, which may not occur in classical physics.

Step 5:

Interpretation The behaviour of both entangled photons is
strongly connected to each other, they behave in spite of their spatial sepa-
ration as one single quantum object. Therefore I propose to call these both a
“diphoton” which suggests more clearly that there is only one common state of
the whole system, and not an addition of states of separated photons. Further-
more, the outcome of measurements demonstrates that we may not assume that
photon 1 or photon 2 had ﬁxed values for their spin directions before measure-
ment. For this purpose one could use the comfortable Dirac–notation for spin

6

states e.g.: ψ(s1, s2) = |1, 0i − |0, 1i for an entangled spin state instead of the
above used vector–notation. The Dirac–notation has the advantage of showing
only the relative directions of spins of both photons, which is the only property
that is ﬁxed and well determined (in absence of manipulations). The directions
themselves are not determined, they only show up after a measurement. Fixed
values of properties do not exist in general, they only emerge in measurements.
Once this essential point is grasped the way is open for applications.

This access consequently avoids possible pitfalls which in general erschweren
understanding quantum theory.

0.3 Which Themes to Avoid in a First Approach?

From historical reasons, having their roots in the development of quantum the-
ory, most ways of teaching the concepts of quantum physics refer to classical
models. This “procedere” causes principal diﬃculties in understanding. There-
fore every reference to classical concepts should be avoided as far as possible.
The most important points to avoid are:

• Speaking about position and momentum, i.e. about trajectories
If the concepts of position and momentum — well–known from everyday
experience — are used at the very beginning of a course in quantum the-
ory there exists the danger of transferring classical thinking to quantum
theory, although everybody would say: clearly, in quantum theory there
are no trajectories. Conceptual diﬃculties arising from use of the terms
“ position” and “velocity” can be avoided in the simplest manner if these
fundamental classical concepts do not play any role in the beginning of a
course in quantum theory. Then any association of classical ideas might
disappear and students might recognize the philosophical signiﬁcance of
quantum theory far more easily. The most prominent example is the fa-
mous Heisenberg uncertainty relation for position and momentum which
easily is misunderstood in a sense that the uncertainty simply relies on
disturbance by measurement in the usual sense. Instead the uncertainty
relations are kind of measure for distinguishing classical behaviour from
quantum behaviour in that they determine whether two physical quanti-
ties can attain ﬁxed values at the same instant. If two physical quantities
can attain ﬁxed values at the same instant the quantum object in question
behaves “classically”, if not it displays quantum behaviour as e.g. spin.
Hence the role and the implications of the non–existence of ﬁxed values
for some properties at the same instant - as expressed in uncertainty re-
lations - might not be fully appreciated in their revolutionary potential
if one concentrates on “position” and “momentum”. Besides undesired
analogies to Newtonian mechanics the corresponding operators for posi-
tion and momentum and their eigenstates are mathematically far more

7

diﬃcult to handle than the 2 × 2–spin–matrices.

• Speaking about particle–wave–dualism

Waves and particles both are classical concepts, complementary to each
other. One could illustrate their relation by looking at the same object
from diﬀerent sights. E.g. a cylinder standing upright appears completely
diﬀerent from the above (a circle) compared to a look from the side (a rect-
angle). But this observation does not meet the essential point in quantum
theory.
A ﬁrst step to avoid analogy to classical phenomena would be to use the
term “quantum object” instead of wave or particle. Only after the quan-
tum mechanical concepts are ﬁxed there might be a careful use of those
“classical” terms be allowed where unevitable. Perhaps the importance of
using suitable terms may become clear with the example of the double–
slit–experiment. If it is replaced by the so called Taylor–experiment in
which photons display at the same time wave properties - they show in-
terference - as well as particle properties - they arrive at distinct points
on the ﬁlm, the necessity of changing concepts gets far more obvious.

• Speaking about spin as sort of spinning around

One should not give an image of spin. Especially one may not think in
terms of an electron spinning around. The quantum mechanical spin is
simply structure manifesting itself and its behaviour through experiments,
especially in the Stern–Gerlach–experiment which may serve as an intro-
ductory experiment. As shown above the abstract structure of spin can de
introduced to a certain extent, depending on the mathematical capabilities
of students.

Those three points are mentioned here because their avoidance breaks with
the tradition of teaching and speaking about quantum theory. The preceding
sections showed an alternative.

0.4 Conclusion and Perspectives

The recent EPR–experiments are the starting point for all the current develop-
ments concerning the fundamentals of quantum theory as well as technological
utopies in the area of quantum computing and teleportation.
In addition it
widely opens the door to philosophical discussions. In so far the EPR–gedanken
experiment lies at the heart of quantum theory and its interpretation.
The entrance to quantum mechanics with help of the phenomenon spin quickly
gives gifted or interested pupils a possibility of discussing the properties of
quantum objects, the mathematical structures and the interpretation of quan-
tum mechanics on a technically very modest level but nonetheless quite precise.
As the spin inevitably is a purely quantum mechanical phenomenon this opens

8

via the EPR–gedanken–experiment a short way into the crucial points of un-
derstanding concepts as well as philosophical implications of quantum theory
and hence gives the possibility for people to revisit their view of nature, their
Weltbild. I regard this an important contribution to general education.

References

[Bau]

Hellmut Baumg”artel. Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenthe-
orie.
manuscript,
http://www.math.uni-potsdam.de/mp1/vorlesun.htm.

[EPR35] Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky, and Nathan Rosen. Can quantum-
mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete?
Physical Review, 48:696–702, 1935.

[Pos98] Gesche Pospiech.

Vom Atommodell zur Quantenphysik und
zur”uck. In Fachverband Didaktik der Physik Deutsche Physikalische
Gesellschaft, editor, Didaktik der Physik – Beitrge zur 62. Physikerta-
gung Regensburg 1998, pages 178–183, 1998.

[Pos99] Gesche Pospiech. Spukhafte Fernwirkungen in der Quantentheorie?

Physik in der Schule, 37:56–59, 1999.

9

