0
0
0
2

 

b
e
F
5
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
2
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The oscillations in the lossy medium

Korotchenko K.B.

Chair of Theoretical and Experimental Physics,

Tomsk Polytechnical University, Rossia

Abstract

The object of the work : to explore dependence mass point oscillatory
motion parameters in the following cases:

- without resistance (free oscillations);

- the resistance force is proportional to the velocity vector;

- the resistance force is proportional to the velocity squared.

Used equipment: the work have doing on a personal computer. The os-
cillatory motion simulation is carried out by the numerical solution of
system of diﬀerential equations. This equations describe a motion of a
particle under an elastic force action and exterior forces (resistance force)
with initial values and parameters being entered during the dialogue with
the computer.

1 The theoretical part

Let’s begin from the deﬁnition: If some physical quantity F under speciﬁed
physical conditions is described periodic or almost-periodic function of time
one can say that this physical quantity is in oscillatory process or in oscilla-
tions.

As is known, a function F (t) is called periodic if F (t) = F (t + T ).1 At
the oscillatory process the constant T = 2 π/ω is called an oscillation period
and the constant ω is called an oscillation frequency (circular or cyclic).
Obviously T is a time interval by means of that the values of function F (t) are
repeated.

If the physical quantity is in oscillations described by the harmonic function

of time (i.e. function sin(ωt) or cos(ωt)) the oscillations is called harmonic.

Among all oscillatory processes the special interest is represented those which
the man can observe directly without any devices. The most known oscillatory
process having so remarkable property is the oscillatory motion.

According to this, the oscillatory motion of a mass point we will call any
its motion that the all physical quantities describing motion are periodic (or
almost-periodic) functions of time.

The major physical values describing a motion of a mass point are:

- the radius vector of a particle ~r(t), i.e.

its coordinates (we shall remind
the equation of a form ~r = ~r(t) is called the motion equation (or law);

1The deﬁnition almost-periodic functions will be introduced later.

1

- and the vector of the particle acceleration ~a(t).

If we take into account that the vectors of velocity and acceleration are deﬁned
uniquely by the radius vector ~r(t) of a mass point, it is possible to formulate the
following deﬁnition:

any motion of a mass point

at which the radius vector of a particle

is a periodic (or almost periodic) function of time

is called the oscillatory motion

1.1 Free simple harmonic motions

The elementary oscillatory motion of a mass point is the harmonic oscillatory
motion. Thus, according to the deﬁnition of harmonic oscillations, we shall
called by free simple harmonic motion such oscillatory motion, at which the
radius vector of a particle is harmonic function of time. It means, the equation
(the law) motion of a mass point that is in a free harmonic oscillatory motion,
has a form

~r(t) = ~ro sin(ωt + ϕo).

(1)

In eq.(1) the constant Φ = ωt+ ϕo is called by a phase of the oscillatory motion
and its value at t = 0, i.e. ϕo , is called by an epoch angle accordingly. The
constant ~ro is called by an amplitude of the oscillatory motion. From the
equation (1) is obvious that the amplitude is the maximal value of radius vector
the achievable at those point in time when sin(ωt + ϕo) = 1.

Let’s note one important characteristic of the oscillatory motion described
by the equation (1). The vector ~ro is a constant vector, i.e. does not change
neither in magnitude nor in the direction. Therefore the vector ~r(t) can change
only in magnitude (at the expense of function sin(...)), but remains parallel to
the same line. It means that the harmonic oscillatory motion always has only
one degree of freedom. In other words, one coordinate is enough for describing
of a harmonic oscillatory motion. For example, coordinates measured along an
axis OX. So the vector equation (1) can always be replaced by one equation in
the coordinate form

x(t) = xo sin(ωt + ϕo),

(2)

where xo = |~ro| is the module of the vector ~ro.

It is easy to see that the equation (1) is the solution of the diﬀerential equa-

tion

d2~r
dt2 + ω2~r = 0 .

(3)

For this reason the diﬀerential equation (3) is called by the equation of free
simple harmonic motions. So, one can say that

free harmonic oscillatory motion

of a mass point is any motion described by

the equation of free simple harmonic motions (eq.(3))

Classical example of a free harmonic oscillatory motion is the particle motion
with the mass m due to action of quasi-elastic force (i.e. simulative elastic force)

2

~F = −k~r, where k is stiﬀness coeﬃcient. To be convinced of it we shall describe
for such a mass point the dynamical equation (i.e. Newton’s second law)

Taking into account that the acceleration is a second-order derivative of the
particle radius vector, we shall obtain

m~a = −k~r.

(4)

d2~r
dt2 +

k
m

~r = 0 .

(5)

Comparing the obtained equation with the equation of free simple harmonic
motions (3), we can see that the motion a mass point due to action of quasi-
elastic force is really a free harmonic oscillatory motion. And the oscillation
cyclic frequency of a mass point is equal

ω = r k

m

.

(6)

1.2 Damped oscillations

In the previous section we have considered a free harmonic motion and were
convinced that due to action of only elastic force the mass point makes just
such motion.

Let’s consider now motion a mass point due to action of quasi-elastic forces
~F = −k~r in medium under the action of resistance forces. Let, for example, the
resistance force is proportional to a vector of the particle velocity ~Fc = −b~v,
where b is the resistance coeﬃcient. Then the dynamical law (Newton’s second
law) for such the mass point will have a form

m~a = ~F + ~Fc = −k~r − b~v.

(7)

Taking into account that the velocity is a ﬁrst-order derivative and that the
acceleration is a second-order derivative of the particle radius vector, we shall
obtain

d2~r
dt2 +

b
m

d~r
dt

+

~r = 0 .

(8)

k
m

It is easy to be convinced that the obtained equation coincides with the equation
of free simple harmonic motions only at absence of the resistance forces (i.e. at
b = 0 ). The solution of the equation (8) varies from the solution of the equation
(3) as well. The eq.(3) is the equation of free simple harmonic motions. So, the
common solution of the equation (8) will have a form

~r(t) = ~roe−βt sin(ωt + ϕo) ,

(9)

where the following notation for parameters of an oscillatory motion de-
scribed by the equation (8) are conventional

damping factor

oscillation cyclic frequency of the free harmonic os-
cillatory motion (i.e. at absence of the resistance
forces)

oscillation cyclic frequency of the studied harmonic
oscillatory motion

− β =

b
2m

− ωo = r k

m

(10)

− ω = pωo − β 2

3

Let’s note that in these notation the equation (8) will look like

d2~r
dt2 + 2β

d~r
dt

+ ωo~r = 0 .

(11)

As well as in the case of free simple harmonic motions the oscillatory motion
described by the equation (9) has only one degree of freedom. Hence, if
to set the direction of constant vector ~ro parallelly to axis OX of a cartesian
frame, the eq.(9) will have a form

x(t) = xoe−βt sin(ωt + ϕo) ,

(12)

where, as well as in the equation (2), x is the length of a vector ~ro.
In ﬁg.1 the qualitative view of the solution (12) is presented. This ﬁgure demon-
strate that the studied oscillatory motion represents oscillations with amplitude
decreasing in time by exponential law (i.e. described by the function e−βt). Just
for this reason an oscillatory motion described by the equation (11), named as
the damped oscillatory motion. Accordingly, eq.(11) named as the equa-
tion of damped oscillations. So

the damped oscillatory motion

of a mass point

is any motion described by

the equation of damped oscillations (i.e. eq.(11))

Let’s consider more in detail properties of the damped oscillatory motion. First
of all it is obvious that in contrast to the free harmonic oscillatory motion the
radius vector of the mass point in damped oscillations (i.e. expression (9) or
(12)) is not periodic function of time ~r(t) 6= ~r(t + T ). Thus damped oscillations
are not harmonic oscillations.

According to the deﬁnition by H. Bohr (Danish mathematician) the function

f (t) satisfying the requirement

|f (t + T ) − f (t)| < ǫ,

(13)

where ǫ is some positive number is named an almost-periodic function. Ac-
cordingly, T is named an almost-period such function. And the mean value
of an almost-periodic function is always limitary

lim
T →∞

1
T

T

Z

0

f (t)dt < ∞.

(14)

It is easy to be convinced that for x(t) from expression (12)

lim
T →∞

1
T

T

Z

0

x(t)dt = 0.

(15)

Moreover, it always is possible to select such positive number ǫ that the absolute
value of the diﬀerence |x(t + T ) − x(t)| (where T = 2π/ω) will be less than this
number. So the requirement (13) will be satisﬁed.

4

Figure 1: Damped oscillation

Figure 2: Aperiodic oscillation

Hence radius vector of the mass point making the damped oscillations is an
almost-periodic function with almost-period T .

Let’s remind that according to (10) the damped oscillation cyclic frequency

ω of mass point is equal to

2 − β 2.

(16)

ω = pωo

2 > β 2

2 < β 2. At ωo

Obviously the quantity ω has the meaning of oscillation frequency only in the
case ωo
the ω becomes imaginary and, accordingly,
the trigonometrical function sin(ωt) is transformed to the hyperbolic function
sh(ωt). In this case the solution of the damped oscillations equation (11) be-
comes

or in the coordinate notation

~r(t) = ~roe−βtsh(ωt + ϕo) ,

x(t) = xoe−βtsh(ωt + ϕo) ,

(17)

(18)

Such a solution is neither a periodic function no an almost-periodic function.
And, therefore, the motion described by the equation of damped oscillations at
2 > β 2 is not an oscillatory motion. This process is named as aperiodic
ωo
oscillations. The diagram of a function x(t) for an aperiodic process (i.e.
described by eq.(18) at ϕo = 0) is presented on ﬁg.2.

2 The practices for simulation of physical pro-

cesses

Before simulation initiation of physical processes it is necessary to familiar-
ize with blanket rules of operation with the digital computer and simple set of
usual activities used at operation with the Borland software menu.

In this laboratory work there is an opportunity

to get the help information on its problem (and another)

at any moment not quitting the program.

To obtain the help information it is necessary to press the key F 1 .
The set of practices performed by the student at the study of oscillatory

motions are determined by the teacher and can vary over a wide range.

5

Let’s consider practices the realization of which is necessary for understand-
ing of features of the mass point oscillatory motion at presence (and absence)
of resistance forces. According to the object of the laboratory work there should
be two such practices.

2.1 Free simple harmonic motions

In this practice state problem to study an oscillatory motion of a mass point at
absence of resistance force. Namely:

- to make sure that a trajectory of a mass point is the harmonic function;

- to ﬁnd out how the mass point trajectory varies by change of the following

parameters:

- particle mass m and stiﬀness coeﬃcient k in expression for elastic

force (eq. (4))

- initial kinematic parameters of a motion: the mass point coordi-
nates of the origin x(0) = xo sin(ϕo) and its initial velocity v(0) =
xoω cos(ϕo) (they are those parameters, you can change by changing
value of the oscillations epoch angle ϕo);

The practice consists of the following items:

2.1.1

After you entered in the menu and selected necessary laboratory work (i.e. ”The
oscillatory motion”) the title page of this work arises.
Press Enter then the main menu with titles of all practices will arise. By keys
↑ and ↓ it is necessary to select practice ”Simple harmonic Motions” and

press Enter .

2.1.2

You will pass in the ﬁrst dialog box ”Parameters of the system”. In this box
you must set the particle mass and stiﬀness coeﬃcient in SI units2 and write
down those values to table 1.

Let’s note that the ending of input in all dialog boxes is possible by two

paths:

- by pressing the key Enter ;

- by activation of the dialog box button Ok (with the help of the device

M ouse)

2.1.3

In the following dialog box (according to its title ”Epoch angle”) you should
choose an epoch angle ϕo of a mass point oscillatory motion2. Then write down
this value to table 1 and press Enter .

2In the line of the context-sensitive help (bottom line of the display) range of values

is indicated within the bounds of all parameters numerical values, you can change.

6

2.1.4

You will see the diagram representing a trajectory of a free harmonic oscillatory
motion of a mass point with parameters chosen by you3.

2.1.5

You will pass at the next dialog box ”Change of mass”. Enter another value
of the particle mass (in comparison with the value entered in item 2.1.2 i.e.
in the dialog box ”Parameters of the system” ). You will see two diagrams
corresponding to diﬀerent values of the particle mass with unchangeable others
parameters. By pressing any key (according to the message in the bottom line)
you will return to the same dialog box again. Iterate the described activities for
one more value of mass. As a result you will see three diagrams corresponding
to three values of the particle mass is in a simple harmonic motions3.

2.1.6

You will pass at the next dialog box ”Change of K”. Enter another value of
the stiﬀness coeﬃcient k (in comparison with value entered in item 2.1.2 i.e. in
the dialog box ”Parameters of the system” ). You will see two diagrams corre-
sponding to diﬀerent values of the stiﬀness coeﬃcient with unchangeable others
parameters. By pressing any key (according to the message in the bottom line)
you will return to the same dialog box again. Iterate the described activities
for one more stiﬀness coeﬃcient. In result you will see three diagrams corre-
sponding to three values of the stiﬀness coeﬃcient of the quasi-elastic force (by
due to action of this force the mass point is in a simple harmonic motions)3.

2.1.7

You will pass at the next dialog box ”Change of epoch angle”. Enter another
value of the epoch angle (in comparison with value entered in item 2.1.3 i.e. in
the dialog box ”Epoch angle” ). You will see two diagrams corresponding to
diﬀerent values of the epoch angle with unchangeable others parameters. By
pressing any key (according to the message in the bottom line) you will return
to the same dialog box again. Iterate the described activities for one more value
of epoch angle. In result you will see three diagrams corresponding to three
values of the epoch angle of the simple harmonic motions3.

So the ﬁrst practice is ended and you will be returned to the main menu.
Let’s note that after you exit out of the ﬁrst practice you can not enter there
once again. Therefore, if you do not accept results of this practice and you
want to iterate it you should start the program once again.

2.2 Damped oscillations

In this practice state problem to study an oscillatory motion of a mass point
with the resistance force is proportional to a vector of velocity. Namely:

3If the obtained diagrams satisfy the object of the practice (in your opinion) then
sketch these diagrams in yours writing-book and press any key (according to the
message in the bottom line).

7

- to make sure that the trajectory of a mass point is the non harmonic

function, but almost-periodic function;

- to ﬁnd out how the mass point trajectory varies by change of the following

parameters:

- particle mass m, stiﬀness coeﬃcient k in expression for the elastic
force (eq. (4)) and the resistance coeﬃcient b for the resistance force
(eq. (7))

- initial kinematic parameters of a motion: the mass point coordi-
nates of the origin x(0) = xo sin(ϕo) and its initial velocity v(0) =
xoω cos(ϕo) (they are those parameters you can change by changing
value of the oscillations epoch angle ϕo);

The practice consists of the following items:

2.2.1

After you exited out of the ﬁrst practice you will see the main menu with titles
of all practices again. By keys ↑ and ↓ it is necessary to select the practice

”Damped oscillations” and press Enter .

2.2.2

You will pass in the ﬁrst dialog box ”Parameters of the system”. In this box
you must set the particle mass, stiﬀness coeﬃcient and resistance coeﬃcient in
SI units2 and write down those values to table 2.

2.2.3

In the following dialog box (according to its title ”Epoch angle”) you should
choose an epoch angle ϕo of mass point oscillatory motion2. Then write down
this value to table 2 and press Enter .

2.2.4

You will see the diagram representing a trajectory of a damped oscillatory mo-
tion of a mass point with parameters chosen by you3.

2.2.5

You will pass at the next dialog box ”Change of the parameters”. Here you can
change values of two parameters: the particle mass m and resistance coeﬃcient
b.
In contrast to the ﬁrst practice, you can have this box as much as long.
Because after each new diagram (for the next pair of parameters m and b) you
will be returned here. However, as well as in the ﬁrst practice, at the display
draw no more three diagrams. Therefore we recommend to act as follows:

- at ﬁrst draw three diagrams with diﬀerent values of the particle mass m

and the constant resistance coeﬃcient b3;

8

- then draw three diagrams with diﬀerent values of the resistance coeﬃ-

cient b and the constant particle mass m3;

- then select the such underload resistance coeﬃcient bmin (with the con-
stant particle mass m) for which the particle motion will become aperiodic;
write down values m and bmin to table 2;

- iterate operations of the previous item for another two values of the

particle mass m;

- then enter pairwise obtained values of mass m and coeﬃcient bmin (from
table 2) so to obtain all three aperiodic motions on one picture (i.e. in one
frame) and sketch these diagrams in your writing-book;

So the second practice is ended. In order to return to the main menu (if you
have the dialog box ”Change of parameters”) is necessary to press the key Esc
(or make active the dialog box button Exit by the device M ouse).

3 Return4

3.1 Contents of the return

The return should include the following items:

1. Object of work.

2. Summary theoretical part.

3. Practices:

- Free simple harmonic motions.

T A B L E 1
Diagrams x = x(t) with diﬀerent m for all three trajectories in
one frame.
Diagrams x = x(t) with diﬀerent k
one frame.
Diagrams x = x(t) with diﬀerent ϕo
one frame.

for all three trajectories in

for all three trajectories in

- Damped oscillations.

T A B L E 2
Diagrams x = x(t) with diﬀerent m for all three trajectories in
one frame.
Diagrams x = x(t) with diﬀerent b
one frame.
Diagrams x = x(t) with diﬀerent bmin for all three trajectories in
one frame.

for all three trajectories in

4Title page of the return at the laboratory work on physical processes simulation
one should draw up on the same rules that the title page of the return at the laboratory
work is done in chair T&EPh experimental laboratories.

9

4. Conclusion

3.2 Design of the tables.

The tables used in the return should be designed by following ways.

T A B L E 1
Change m Change k Change ϕo

m,
k,
ϕo,

m,
b,
bmin,
k,
ϕo,

T A B L E 2
Change m Change b Change bmin

4 Conclusion

Let’s mark, that this paper is written on the basis of the previous works [1] car-
ried out on chair T&EPh under the author leadership (or direct participation).

References

[1] Korotchenko K.B., Sivov U.A.

[2]

10

