0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
4
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
2
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Revitalization of an undergraduate physics program

John W. Norbury

Physics Department,University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, P.O. Box 413,

Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53201, e-mail: norbury@csd.uwm.edu

G. R. Sudhakaran

Physics Department, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse, La Crosse,

Wisconsin 54601, e-mail: sudhak@physics.uwlax.edu

This article describes the successful revitalization of an undergraduate physics
program. The areas of curriculum development, undergraduate research ex-
periences and advising and retention, to name a few, are emphasized in this
interconnecting and systematic approach whereby each and every eﬀort com-
bines to get results. The program can be used by other physics departments
wishing to improve and expand undergraduate education in physics.

1 Introduction

Undergraduate physics programs in the United States and other countries
seem to be in a period of decline. There are less students taking the physics
major and less students entering graduate study [1]. Some departments are
being closed down and others are under the threat of closure. In such cir-
cumstances demoralization sets in and spirals into every aspect of a program
discouraging faculty and students.

Five years ago the physics department at the University of Wisconsin -
La Crosse had a total of 5 physics majors, 5 faculty and a graduation rate
of about one physics major every two years. The department had received
a poor review and was in danger of being phased out, but instead of taking
this easy option the dean of the college decided instead to hire a new chair in
an attempt to turn the department around. Five years later the department
is one of the best on campus, has received an excellent review and currently
has a total of about 85 physics majors and 7 faculty. The present article
describes how this was achieved. It is hoped that the information presented
here can be used by other physics departments to revitalize their programs.

1

2 Program outline

1. Academic Programs. The ﬁrst thing was to change the academic programs
being oﬀered and re-package them in attractive ways directing students, par-
ents and teachers to expand their typical view of what a physics degree could
do for the student. We still continued the core subjects of modern physics,
mechanics, electrodynamics, quantum mechanics, thermodynamics and op-
tics. We also continued two popular astronomy courses and the introductory
year long sequences of algebra and calculus based physics courses. However
several new courses were added to make the elective list a lot more interest-
ing and useful for the students. Some of the electives added were quantum
optics, electronics, seminar (for credit), research (for credit), computational
physics and advanced computational physics, general relativity and cosmol-
ogy, astrophysics, advanced quantum mechanics and particle physics.

2. Emphases and Concentrations. One of the important additions in at-
tracting new majors was the introduction of a set of emphasis programs that
could be packaged along with course and career information. These included
physics major with business concentration, physics major with astronomy
emphasis, physics major with computational physics emphasis and physics
major with optics emphasis.

The physics major with business concentration basically consisted of a
physics major with a business minor for a total of about 55 credits. Why go
to the trouble of simply re-packaging an already existing product (physics
major and business minor) into a ’new’ product (physics major with business
concentration)? This is an important point and should not be lost. Physics
now needs to be marketed as does any other product, and the department
has to have the products to suggest and then deliver to students. Physics
programs now need to be attractive not only to students, but also to parents
and teachers, who heavily inﬂuence the students. Often these clients sim-
ply don’t think of physics and business as going together, yet most of us in
the ﬁeld know that this is an excellent combination for students wishing to
obtain employment with a bachelors degree. Having a formal program such
as a physics major with business concentration highlights the career oppor-
tunities available to students and simply makes the overall physics program
look a better match in today’s job market. A quick perusal of job sections
in newspapers show marketing/sales in technical areas, computer and tech-
nology skills being needed in the business sector. These are all skills taught

2

in a physics degree (with business concentration).

In order to be able to oﬀer these emphases the department had to add
quite a few courses to the catalog, as mentioned above. The areas of op-
tics, computational physics and astronomy were chosen deliberately. Optics
is very important for industry and is a good area for job seekers. Com-
putational physics is also an excellent area for both job seekers and those
wishing to go to graduate school. Astronomy was chosen simply because so
many students have an interest in this area. It was also important to make
sure that the department had expertise in these areas. Aside from oﬀering
the regular physics major, three areas of emphasis were introduced namely
optics, astronomy and computational physics. The total number of credits
for these three programs was similar to the regular physics major, but the
elective options were eliminated. Instead, the electives were chosen for the
students. For the astronomy emphasis the student was required to take the
core physics courses plus 3 astronomy courses and a research project in as-
tronomy. Similarly for the optics and computational physics emphasis. An
optics experimentalist was hired to help with this. One can easily imag-
ine other departments with diﬀerent areas of expertise developing diﬀerent
emphasis programs. There are many departments that already have an ex-
tensive listing of electives. From the student, parent, teacher point of view
however, the existence of these electives and what they can do is often lost.
It is very worthwhile to package some strong elective programs into emphasis
areas so that it is clear as to what specializations are available to students
and how this relates to the real world task of getting a job.

3. Honors Program. A physics honors program was also introduced, in
which students are required to submit a formal application, maintain a cer-
tain GPA, complete a research project with distinguished performance, give
a seminar and be recommended by two faculty members.

4. Dual degree in physics and engineering. One of the most important
programs introduced was a dual degree program in physics and engineer-
ing. Such programs are starting to gain popularity and are an excellent way
to revitalize an undergraduate physics department. The program introduced
was a collaborative program between our own department and two engineer-
ing schools (University of Wisconsin - Madison and University of Wisconsin
- Milwaukee). An essential feature of this program is that a student is guar-
anteed acceptance into the engineering school upon completion of a set of
physics and other required courses with a speciﬁed grade point average. The

3

students spend 3 years in the department at the University of Wisconsin
- La Crosse studying selected physics courses and then transfer to one of
the engineering schools for 2 years to study an area of engineering. After
the ﬁrst year at the engineering school the student receives a physics degree
from La Crosse and after the second year receives an engineering degree, thus
graduating with two degrees that complement each other. This program has
been extremely attractive to students, parents and teachers. We strongly
recommend such a program to undergraduate physics departments.

5. Laboratory Upgrades. As part of improving the academic programs, a
lot of attention was paid to upgrading the laboratory facilities. During the
past ﬁve years approximately $200,000 in laboratory modernization funds
were spent in upgrades. One cannot expect students ﬁrst and facilities later.
They only come together. The freshman physics labs were completely over-
hauled using computer based ”workshop physics” style laboratories. The
students went from hating lab work to actually enjoying it. In addition the
modern physics lab, optics lab and electronics lab were completely re-done
with a full complement of modern experiments and equipment.

6. Quality Instruction. The quality of instruction in all courses (but es-
pecially the introductory courses) was improved by trying very hard to use
the best instructors. This seems mundane, but is extremely important in
building up a physics program. If the majors have a couple of, or even one,
poor instructor then the program suﬀers tremendously. It is absolutely vital
to have high quality instruction and every eﬀort must be made to make sure
this happens.

7. Undergraduate Research. One of the major factors that lead to high
student satisfaction with our new program was a strong set of research expe-
riences for the undergraduate physics majors. Before we came to the depart-
ment, research was almost non-existent. As an incentive to faculty the chair
allowed supervision of undergraduate research to count for one course for the
faculty member and as an incentive for students we introduced research for
credit that a student could take. Further to this a research experience was
a requirement for each of the 3 emphasis programs described above. Three
out of the six faculty became actively involved in student research projects
immediately. Research was oﬀered in all three areas of experiment, theory
and computation in the areas of optics, condensed matter physics, particle
physics, nuclear physics and astronomy. Several students worked only on
semester-long projects, but the most successful experiences were with stu-

4

dents who would work for two semesters and one summer. The advantage of
this work is many-fold. Fliers to schools, brochures, campus news, depart-
ment annual reports, student and faculty resumes all are enhanced.

Many good undergraduate departments have such an undergraduate re-
search program in place. When talking to administrators about physics we
often emphasize the triad of theory, experiment and computation. When
talking about physics education we emphasize the triad of lecture, labora-
tory and research. It is vitally important for undergraduates to have a good
research experience during their education. It also helps the department at-
mosphere tremendously and is very good to display when giving tours to
students, parents, teachers and administrators.

8. Student Presentations. The research outlined above could be show-
cased to other students or advertised, and so attracted further students.
Students were encouraged and trained to present the results of their work
at department seminars and at conferences such as the Argonne symposium
[2-9] and also at national and international meetings such as the Ameri-
can Astronomical Society and the International Symposium on Molecular
Spectroscopy [10-13]. Many students and faculty published papers together
[14-21]. Faculty beneﬁtted also by being able to place any of the work related
to student research in their promotion ﬁles.

9. Funding for Students. Funding was obtained so that students could
work on research over the summer. This also gave the department the op-
portunity to give students and parents the promise of monetary support and
see the immediate connection between learning physics and monetary gain.
Again any student getting such support was used for real promotional ad-
vantages in the department literature and annual reports.

10. Scholarships and Internships. We went to great eﬀorts to have the
students apply for scholarships and internships. Several students won very
prestigous scholarships (e.g Barry Goldwater scholarship, Council on Under-
graduate Research Felllowship, American Physical Society Summer Fellow-
ship) and this had a strong eﬀect on the motivations of the other students.
Summer interns were also arranged. One of the best programs here is the
‘Research Experiences for Undergraduates’ run by the National Science Foun-
dation. Again a great deal of busy work is involved in arranging scholarships
and interships but the work is certainly worthwhile. It also helps a lot with
recruitment in being able to give examples of the successes of previous stu-
dents.

5

11. Seminar Program for Credit. There are several other elements that
went into building up the physics program. One was the establishment of
a department seminar program. This was speciﬁcally designed to provide a
meeting place for the majors and faculty. We introduced a program where
students could sign up for 1 credit of course work. The requirement was
to attend all the seminars and to either write a report on one of them or
present a seminar. What was interesting about this was that many students
outside of physics also signed up. Many physics majors did not sign up but
attended anyway and the group grew. Speakers included faculty from physics
and other departments, physics majors and outside speakers. The physics
majors would often talk about their research projects and this was a great
way for other students to see what opportunities were available. Students
also talked about their summer internship experiences. Outside speakers
gave talks primarily on research topics, but there were also talks on careers
and engineering programs.

12. Recruitment, Advising, Retention. Recruitment and advising appears
at ﬁrst to be another area that seems to be very mundane. However our
experience is that the role of the undergraduate physics major advisor is
absolutely essential for a successful physics program. The advisor should
be very knowledgeable about the employment situation, salaries, current job
openings, scholarships, internships, summer jobs, tutoring jobs, housing, in-
ternational opportunities, graduate record exam, graduate schools, etc.The
physics advisor needs to be constantly available, always happy and willing
to spend lots of time with the students, have a friendly personality, and do
many other tasks too numerous to mention. Not all faculty ﬁnd all this busy
work palatable, but in our experience it is one of the most important factors
in retaining students once they sign up for the major.

13. Advertising and Brochures. Advertising is another extremely impor-
tant area that needed attention. One can have the best physics program
in the world, but if no one knows about it, then not much is going to hap-
pen. The primary way of advertising was to be in touch with physics high
school teachers and counselors and to let them know of the new programs
that were available with regular mail outs. Teachers were sent information
about actual student work as well as general programs so they could give
this immediately to their own students. Teachers were also invited regularly
to the department seminars and social gatherings. We believe that letting
teachers know about the unique aspects of a physics program is one of the

6

best ways to bring in new majors.

14. Presenting a Plan and Cooperating with Administration. Another as-
pect of building up the physics program was cooperation and interaction with
the university administration. This included not only the deans, provost and
chancellor, but also people in the international oﬃce, the career center, the
counseling center, the aﬃrmative action oﬃce, the library, the computer cen-
ter, etc. It is vitally important to have a good relationship with all of these
areas and to explain your plan and future directions. The dean, vice chancel-
lor and chancellor were especially important. When building up a program
it is essential to obtain ﬁnancial commitments and to have these commit-
ments followed through. Often these groups were invited to the department
seminars or demonstrations or we provided a tour for administration visitors.

15. Department Team Work and Priority Mission. Finally we should men-

tion the obvious, that all of the above cannot be done by one person as every
aspect needs attention. No one idea is a quick ﬁx that will work but a sus-
tained concerted eﬀort is needed over several years. We were very fortunate
to have a few faculty members who really cared about the program and were
willing to work very hard as a team to make it succeed. Once it succeeded
then we moved into maintenance.

REFERENCES

(underlined names refer to students)

[1] P.J. Mulvey, E. Dodge and S. Nicholson, Enrollments and degrees report
R-151.33, (American Institute of Physics, April 1997).

[2] M. Waldsmith and J.W. Norbury, Uranium Beam Lifetimes at RHIC and
LHC, 5th Annual Argonne Symposium for undergraduates in Science, Engi-
neering and Mathematics, Argonne National Lab, (1994).

[3] B. Soller, G. Sudhakaran, and M. Jackson, Far-Infrared Laser Stark Spec-
troscopy of 13CH3OH, 5th Annual Argonne Symposium for Undergraduates
in Science, Engineering & Mathematics, Argonne National Laboratory, 1994.

[4] P. Valentine, G. Sudhakaran, and M. Jackson, Far-Infrared Laser Stark
Spectroscopy of CH3OD, 5th Annual Argonne Symposium for Undergradu-
ates in Science, Engineering & Mathematics, Argonne National Lab, 1994.

7

[5] K.J. Cook, G.R. Sudhakaran, and M. Jackson, Far-Infrared Water Vapor
Laser, 5th Annual Argonne Symposium for Undergraduates in Science, En-
gineering and Mathematics, Argonne National Laboratory, 1994.

[6] J.T. Dobler, G.R. Sudhakaran, and M. Jackson, Stark Spectroscopy using
a Far-Infrared Laser, 7th Annual Argonne Symposium for Undergraduates in
Science, Engineering and Mathematics, Argonne National Laboratory, 1996.

[7] E.J. Gansen, G.R. Sudhakaran and M. Jackson, Far-Infrared Laser Stark
Spectroscopy of P H3, 7th Annual Argonne Symposium for Undergraduates in
Science, Engineering and Mathematics, Argonne National Laboratory, 1996.

[8] Regge Trajectories for Mesons (M. Pruse, J.W. Norbury) 5th Annual Ar-
gonne Symposium for undergraduates in Science, Engineering and Mathe-
matics, Argonne National Laboratory, 1994.

[9] Parameterization of spectral distributions for pion and kaon production
in proton-proton collisions (J. Schneider, J.W. Norbury and F.A. Cucinotta)
5th Annual Argonne Symposium for undergraduates in Science, Engineering
and Mathematics, Argonne National Lab, 1994.

[10] J.P. Schneider, J.W. Norbury and F.A. Cucinotta, Parameterization of
spectral distributions for pion and kaon production from proton-proton colli-
sions, Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society 26, 873 (1994).

[11] M. Jackson, B.J. Soller, G.R. Sudhakaran, R.M. Lees, and I. Mukhopad-
hyay, Far-Infrared Laser Stark Spectroscopy of 13CH3OH, 50th International
Symposium on Molecular Spectroscopy, Ohio State University, 1995.

[12] M. Jackson, G.R. Sudhakaran, and E.J. Gansen, Far-Infrared Laser
Stark Spectroscopy of P H3, 51st International Symposium on Molecular Spec-
troscopy, Ohio State University, 1996.

[13] M. Jackson, G.R. Sudhakaran, and E.J. Gansen, Far-Infrared Laser
Stark Spectroscopy of 13CD3OD, 52nd International Symposium on Molecu-
lar Spectroscopy, Ohio State University, 1997.

8

[14] J.W. Norbury and C.M. Mueller, Cross Section parameterizations for
Cosmic Ray Nuclei II. Double Nucleon Removal, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 90,
115-117 (1994).

[15] R. Wheeler and J.W. Norbury, Higher order corrections to Coulomb ﬁs-
sion, Phys. Rev. C 51, 1566-1567 (1995).

[16] G.R. Sudhakaran, E.K. Coulson, and M. Jackson, Laser Stark Spec-
troscopy of 13CH3F , Int. J. Infrared Millimeter Waves, 16, 1329-1333 (1995).

[17] G.R. Sudhakaran, B.J. Soller, M. Jackson, I. Mukhopadhyay, and R.M.
Lees, Far-Infrared Laser Stark Spectroscopy of CH3OH and 13CH3OH, Int.
J. Infrared Millimeter Waves, 16, 2111-2131 (1995).

[18] M. Jackson, G.R. Sudhakaran, and E.J. Gansen, Far-Infrared Laser
Stark Spectroscopy of 13CD3OD, J. Mol. Spectrosc., 176, 439-441 (1996).

[19] M. Jackson, G.R. Sudhakaran, and E.J. Gansen, Far-Infrared Laser
Stark Spectroscopy of P H3, J. Mol. Spectrosc., 181, 446-451 (1997).

[20] Parameterized spectral distributions for meson production in proton-
proton collisions (J.P. Schneider, J.W. Norbury and F.A. Cucinotta)
NASA Technical Memorandum 4675 (1995).

[21] Parameterization of spectral distributions for pion and kaon production in
proton-proton collisions (J.P. Schneider, J.W. Norbury and F.A. Cucinotta)
Astrophysical Journal Supplement 97 571-574 (1995).

9

