The Physicist’s Guide to the Orchestra

D´epartement de Physique, ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne,

Jean-Marc Bonard

CH-1015 Lausanne EPFL, Switzerland

Email: jean-marc.bonard@epﬂ.ch

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
4
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
5
0
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An experimental study of strings, woodwinds (organ pipe,
ﬂute, clarinet, saxophone and recorder), and the voice was un-
dertaken to illustrate the basic principles of sound production
in music instruments. The setup used is simple and consists
of common laboratory equipment. Although the canonical
examples (standing wave on a string, in an open and closed
pipe) are easily reproduced, they fail to explain the majority
of the measurements. The reasons for these deviations are
outlined and discussed.

INTRODUCTION

Being a clarinet enthusiast, I wanted to share the rich-
ness of music (and the physicist’s way of approaching it)
to engineering students within the frame of their general
physics classes. The basics are reported in nearly every
physics textbook and many details are provided in more
specialized contributions [1–6]. I could however not ﬁnd
a comparison of the waveforms and spectra of diﬀerent
instruments in any of these sources. I therefore measured
and compared this data by myself.

The whole orchestra being too ambitious for a start,
I restricted myself to two instrument families, namely
strings and woodwinds (and the former are given a rather
perfunctory treatment) and included the voice. The
waveform and spectra presented in the ﬁrst part illus-
trate the behavior of standing waves on strings and in
closed and open pipes (variations 1–2), as well as high-
light the basic diﬀerences between the timbre of the in-
struments (variations 3–5). In the second part, we will
note that although the instruments are easy to identify,
variations between models or performers remain hard to
assess (variation 6). Furthermore, the simple models fail
to explain the characteristics of some instruments (vari-
ations 6–8).

THEME

Physicists have been studying the spectrum of musi-
cal instruments at least since the 1940s. The ﬁrst avail-
able methods were based on heterodyne analysis [7] or on
sonographs [1,8]. The development of the Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) algorithm coupled with the apparition
of fast and relatively cheap microprocessors has greatly

1

facilitated the task of the musically inclined physicists.
Quite sophisticated analysers have been realized [9] but
setups based on commercial instruments work just as well
for basic analysis [10,11].

The waveforms have been acquired with the setup pre-
sented in Figure 1. It consists of a condenser microphone
connected directly to a 125 MHz LeCroy9400 digital os-
cilloscope. The spectrum was calculated by the data ac-
quisition program LabView by FFT (this task can be
directly performed on most modern oscilloscopes). On
most ﬁgures, the time axis of the waveforms has been
scaled and aligned for easier comparison. The spectra
are given over 10 or 20 harmonics with ticks correspond-
ing to multiples of the fundamental frequency.

The waveforms and corresponding spectra analyzed
here represent the continuous part of the sound only,
which is only a small part of the character of a note. The
dependence on the type of attack, duration or strength
was not considered, and would be a fascinating study
in itself. It is also clear that a more profound analysis
would require a careful consideration of instrument and
microphone position, as well as a calibration of the room
acoustics and of the microphone response [7]. None of
these points has been taken into account.

FIG. 1. The experimental setup.

VARIATION 1: VIBRATING STRINGS

A string instrument in its simplest form is composed of
a stretched string over a resonance body that transmits
the vibration of the string to the air. Despite the sim-
plicity of the vibrating system string instruments show a
phenomenal diversity of timbre [12]. This arises from the
variety of excitation as the string can be plucked (guitar,
harp, harpsichord), bowed (violin, viola. . . ), or struck
(piano). The resonance body plays also a great role as is
attested by the timbre diﬀerence between a guitar and a
banjo.

When a continuous transverse wave is generated on a
stretched string of length l, a standing wave forms fol-
lowing the superposition of the waves after reﬂection at
the stops. Simple considerations show that the only al-
lowed modes of vibration correspond to wavelengths of
λ = 2l/n where n ≥ 1 [2–5], which forms a harmonic se-
ries [13] (inset of Figure 2). The vibration of a string will
be a superposition of the diﬀerent modes with varying

amplitudes determined by the mode of excitation, time
since the excitation etc.

One of the most simple string instrument, the string
sonometer, is formed of a simple stretched string over
a box-shaped resonance body. Figure 2 shows the sound
produced by a plucked and bowed sonometer tuned to A2
[14] and demonstrates the richness of the sound produced
by a vibrating string as many intense upper harmonics
are detected. During bowing for example, the 5th, 16th
and 23rd harmonics are stronger than the fundamental.
The point and manner of excitation along the string
(what physicists call the initial conditions) inﬂuences de-
cisively the timbre: the spectra displayed in Figure 2 dif-
fer markedly, especially in the higher modes. By pluck-
ing a string, we impose an initial condition such that the
shape of the string is triangular with zero and maximal
displacement at the stops and at the position of the ﬁn-
ger, respectively. The relation between position and in-
tensity of the excited harmonics can be easily predicted
(but is not easy to reproduce experimentally). This re-
lation is not as simple for the bowed string, since the
bow imparts both displacement (a fraction of mm) and
velocity (∼0.5 m/s) [15].

Finally, we always consider that the properties of the
vibrating string are ideal. A real string has however some
stiﬀness, which causes an increase of the frequency of the
higher modes with respect to an ideal string [4]. This can
be detected on Figure 2, especially for the plucked string
(presumably because of the larger displacement). As a
consequence, the harmonics of a string are systematically
sharp, be it for plucked [11], bowed [16] or struck strings
such as in a piano [9,17].

FIG. 2. Waveforms and corresponding spectra of a sonome-
ter (A2, 110 Hz) plucked and bowed at 1/10 of the string
length, with in inset the ﬁrst three vibration modes. The
thick line above the waveforms indicates the period of an os-
cillation.

VARIATION 2: VIBRATING AIR COLUMNS

The principle of wind instruments is a bit more com-
plicated than that of strings. The vibrating medium is
the air inside a pipe that acts as a resonator where a
standing wave can form. The ends of the pipe determine
the boundary conditions. At a closed end, the amplitude
of vibration is zero and the pressure variation is maximal
(the displacement of the air and the resulting variation
of pressure are in anti-phase). Conversely, the pressure
will remain constant at the end of an open pipe and the
standing wave shows a pressure node and a displacement
antinode. This is schematically shown in the insets of
Figure 4.

As a consequence, a complete series of harmonics can
form in a pipe of length l open at both ends with wave-

lengths equal to 2 ·l/n with n ≥ 1. If the pipe is closed at
one end, the wavelength of the fundamental corresponds
to four times the length of the pipe and only the odd har-
monics of wavelengths equal to 4 · l/(2n + 1) with n ≥ 0
are allowed [2–5].

The vibration of the air can be excited by diﬀerent
means. The most simple one is to produce an edge tone
by steering an airjet over an edge [like the top of a bottle
or the edge of the organ ﬂue pipe shown in Figure 3(a)].
The edge forms an obstacle for the jet and generates pe-
riodic vortices at the mouth of the instrument. The vor-
tices produce in turn periodic displacements of the air
molecules. When the edge forms the upper portion of a
pipe, the edge tone is locked by resonance to the modes of
the pipe. The pitch can then only be changed by increas-
ing the frequency of the vortices (i.e., by blowing faster)
to lock the edge tone in a higher mode (which is exactly
how ﬂautists change the register and reach higher octaves
with their instruments). Such an edge excitation acts like
an open end, as the vortices induce air displacement but
no pressure variations.

The other means of excitation in wind instruments in-
volve a mechanical vibration: that of the performer’s lips
for brass instruments or of a reed for woodwinds. Sim-
ilarly to the edge tones, the vibration of the lips or of
the reed is locked to the resonances of the pipe. The
simple reed of the clarinet [see Figure 3(b)] and of the
saxophone, and the double reed of the oboe and bas-
soon, acts actually as a pressure regulator by admitting
periodically air packets into the pipe. A reed is there-
fore equivalent to a closed end as it produces a pressure
antinode.

FIG. 3. Excitation systems for woodwinds: (a) the edge
of a ﬂue organ pipe, and (b) the reed and mouthpiece of a
clarinet.

FIG. 4. Waveform and corresponding spectra of a closed
and open organ ﬂue pipe (B♭3, 235 Hz and B♭4, 470 Hz, re-
spectively). The timescale of the upper waveform has been
divided by two with respect to the lower waveform. The in-
sets show the ﬁrst three vibration modes for the variation of
the pressure.

We can verify the above principles with a square
wooden ﬂue organ pipe of 0.35 m length. The excitation
system is reproduced in Figure 3(a) and acts as an open
end, and the other end can be either closed or open. As
shown on Figure 4, the fundamental of the closed pipe is
found at 235 Hz, which corresponds well to a wavelength
of λ = v/f = 4 · 0.35 = 1.4 m with v = 330 m/s. The
waveform is nearly triangular, and the even harmonics
are far weaker than the odd. The same pipe with its end
open sounds one full octave higher (the wavelength of the
fundamental is shorter by a factor of 2) and displays a
complete series of harmonics.

2

VARIATION 3: TUTTI

VARIATION 4: THE VIOLIN

FIG. 5. Waveform of a violin, recorder, ﬂute, clarinet, sax-
ophone and of the author singing the french vowel “aa” (as in
sat) (A4, 440 Hz for the former and A3, 220 Hz for the latter
three instruments). The timescale of the upper waveforms
has been divided by two with respect to the lower waveforms.

The violin produces a very rich sound with at least
20 strong harmonics and complex waveforms, as was the
case for the string sonometer in Figure 2. The strongest
mode is not the fundamental, but the 7th harmonic in
the case of Figure 6.

FIG. 6. Spectra corresponding to the waveforms of Fig-

VARIATION 5: THE FLUTE

ure 5.

We are now ready to study the behaviour of most
strings and woodwinds. Figures 5 and 6 show the wave-
forms and spectra of six diﬀerent instruments. Table I
also summarizes the characteristics of the woodwinds
studied here. A quick glance shows numerous disparities
between the instruments, and we will try now to under-
stand these timbre variations and their origin in more
detail.

TABLE I. Characteristics of the woodwinds studied in this

work.

instrument
ﬂute
clarinet
saxophone
recorder

bore
cylindrical
cylindrical
conical
cylindrical

excitation
edge
single reed
single reed
edge

As can be seen on Figure 5, woodwinds show simple
waveforms and spectra when compared to string instru-
ments. The ﬂute (ﬂauto traverso) is a textbook exam-
ple of an wind instrument with open ends as the pipe is
(nearly) cylindric over the whole length. The most salient
feature of the ﬂute is the limited number of harmon-
ics (∼7) with an intensity that decreases monotonously
[18,19]. The timbre is also very similar for the ﬁrst two
registers (not shown here).

VARIATION 6 (MENUETTO): THE CLARINET

We have seen that a pipe closed at one end shows only
odd harmonics: the clarinet, with its simple reed and
(nearly) cylindric bore, should be a prototype of such a
pipe.

At ﬁrst sight, this is indeed the case. In the low reg-
ister (Figure 5 for an A3 [21]), the odd harmonics are
clearly the strongest modes. The even harmonics, al-
though present, are strongly attenuated (at least up to
the 6th harmonic). There are other marked diﬀerences
with the ﬂute. First, the sound is far richer in higher har-
monics. Second, the waveform varies considerably with
the pitch as displayed on Figure 7. The contents of higher
harmonics strongly decreases from 20 for the A3, to 9 and
5 for the A4 and A5. The contribution of the even har-
monics becomes also increasingly important. The third
mode remains more intense than the second for the A4,
but this is not the case anymore for A5.

FIG. 7. Waveform and corresponding spectra of a clarinet
(A3, A4, A5 at 220, 440 and 880 Hz, respectively). The
timescale of the second and third waveform have been divided
by two and four with respect to the lower waveform.

The clarinet shows thus a fascinating behavior: it re-
sponds like a pipe closed at one end in the lower reg-
ister but gives a sound with strong even harmonics in
the higher registers. The timbre varies therefore as the
pitch is increased, with a very distinctive sound for each
register. This is due to several facts. First, the bore of
the clarinet is not perfectly cylindric but has tapered and
slightly conical sections [2]. Second, the ﬂared bell, the
constricting mouthpiece [Figure 3(b)] and the toneholes

3

(even if they are closed) perturb signiﬁcantly the stand-
ing waves. Finally, for wavelengths comparable to the
diameter of the toneholes, the sound wave is no longer
reﬂected at the open tonehole but continues to propa-
gate down the pipe. This corresponds a frequency of
∼1500 Hz in typical clarinets [2,20], and the sound will
show increasing amounts of even harmonics with increas-
ing pitch, as found on Figure 7.

Figure 7 leaves out one important feature. The clar-
inet does not change from the ﬁrst to the second regis-
ter by an octave (i.e., by doubling the frequency), but
by a duodecime (tripling the frequency). This feature is
due to the excitation system alone (the reed acts as a
closed end), as can be easily demonstrated by replacing
the mouthpiece of a ﬂute (or of a recorder) with a clarinet
mouthpiece mounted on a section of pipe such that the
overall length of the instrument remains identical. The
instrument sounds a full octave lower and changes reg-
isters in duodecimes, not in octaves. The reverse eﬀect
can be demonstrated by mounting a ﬂute mouthpiece on
a clarinet.

Trio I: timbre quality

It appears from Figure 5 that it is quite easy to rec-
ognize an instrument family by its waveform or spectra.
It would be tantalizing if one could also recognize one
clarinet from another, for example to choose and buy a
good instrument.

Figure 8 shows the spectra of my three clarinets play-
ing the same written note [21], with the same mouth-
piece, reed, embouchure and loudness. The upper curve
correspond to my ﬁrst instrument, a cheap wooden B♭
student model. The two lower curves were obtained with
professional grade B♭ and A clarinets. I can identify each
instrument by playing a few notes from the produced
sound and from muscular sensations in the embouchure
and respiratory apparatus.

At ﬁrst glance, the spectra of the three clarinets are
readily comparable. Closer inspection shows that the
spectra begin to diﬀer from the 10th harmonic on! There
are actually far less variations in relative intensities be-
tween the two B♭ instruments than between the two pro
clarinets. The pro B♭ seems to be slightly richer in har-
monics than the student model. The A has no strong
harmonics beyond the 11th. This leads to the conclusion
that the B♭ and A clarinets are (slightly) diﬀerent in-
struments (many clarinetists will agree with that point).
The measured diﬀerences between two B♭ clarinets re-
main however quite subtle despite the huge and easily
audible diﬀerence in timbre.

FIG. 8. Spectra of the written C4 of a student B♭ and a
professional grade B♭ and A clarinet played with the same
mouthpiece and reed (sounding B♭3, 235 Hz, and A3, 220 Hz,
respectively).

Trio II: tone quality

Is it possible to tell apart a good from a bad tone?
This question is of utmost importance for every musician
to obtain the desired tone quality. Figure 9 shows two
clarinet tones obtained on the same instrument, with the
same mouthpiece and reed. The ﬁrst is a good tone: one
could describe it as fullbodied, agreeable to the ear. The
second is a beginner’s tone: emitted with a closed throat
and weak. The diﬀerence is instantly audible but diﬃcult
to quantify from Figure 9. The variations appear again
in the higher harmonics: the bad tone show no harmonics
beyond the 12th, which is at least ﬁve modes less than
the good tone.

FIG. 9. Spectra of a good and of a bad sound on the clar-

inet (B♭3, 235 Hz).

It is quite astonishing that the quality of the sound
is determined by the presence (or absence) of high har-
monics with amplitudes that are at least 40 dB (a fac-
tor 104) weaker than the fundamental! Musicians are
sensitive to very subtle eﬀects which are diﬃcult to (a)
link to a physically measurable value and (b) to quantify
precisely. Conventional statistics have proven ineﬀective
for classifying the sound quality:
interestingly, eﬀective
solutions based on neural networks have been recently
demonstrated [22].

VARIATION 7: THE SAXOPHONE

Can one predict the spectra of the saxophone, a single
reed instrument with a truncated conical bore, by ex-
trapolation from the previous observations? The sax is a
wind instrument, which would imply a limited number of
harmonics, and a spectra mainly composed of odd har-
monics because of the reed. A short glance at Figures 5
and 6 shows that both predictions are wrong. The even
harmonics are as strong as the odd [23]. The sound re-
mains very rich in harmonics even in the higher registers,
far more than for the clarinet, and the timbre changes
only slightly between the ﬁrst and the second register.
The saxophone does not behave at all like a clarinet!

The main reason is the form of the bore:

in a cone,
the standing waves are not plane but spherical [2,23–25].
This has profound implications for the standing wave pat-
tern [24]. In short, the intensity of a wave travelling down
or up the pipe is in ﬁrst approximation constant along
the pipe, which implies that the amplitude scales with

4

the inverse of the distance to the cone apex. The waves
interfer to form a spherical standing wave with pressure
nodes separated by the usual half-wavelength spacing,
but with an amplitude that varies as the inverse of the
distance to the cone apex. This is true for a closed as
well as an open end [24]. A conical bore shows therefore
a complete harmonic series, be it excited with a reed, the
lips or an edge [25]! It would seem also that the coni-
cal pipe of the saxophone favors the higher harmonics as
compared to the cylindric bore of the clarinet.

VARIATION 8: THE RECORDER

The predictions for the saxophone were wrong, so let’s
try again with another instrument – the recorder for ex-
ample. That should be easy: the bore is nearly cylin-
drical, it is excited by an edge and should therefore be
similar to the open organ ﬂue pipe. I expected a limited
number of harmonics and a full harmonic series. Fig-
ure 5 shows that I was wrong again and this puzzled me
greatly. The alto recorder indeed has a limited number
of harmonics, and a similar timbre in the two registers.
But it shows the spectrum of a closed pipe – the even
harmonics are more suppressed than for the clarinet –
and despite that it changes registers in octaves!

What is the explanation for the odd behaviour of the
recorder? The player generates an airjet by blowing into
a rectangular windcanal, which is then cut by the edge
(see Figure 3). It appears from calculations that the po-
sition of the edge relative to the airjet inﬂuences critically
the intensity of the diﬀerent harmonics [26]. When the
edge cuts the side of the jet, the full harmonic series is
observed. The even harmonics are however completely
absent when the edge is positioned in the center of the
jet, as is the case for most modern recorders (among those
the one I used). This of course does not aﬀect the modes
of resonance of the instrument: the second harmonic can
be excited easily by increasing the speed of the airjet,
which raises the pitch by an octave. It follows also that
I have been very lucky with the open organ ﬂue pipe –
which follows the expected behaviour shown on Figure 4
thanks to a favorable position of the edge with respect
to the airjet [26]!

VARIATION 9: A CAPELLA

We perform frequently with a peculiar and versatile
musical instrument, namely our voice. Few instruments
have such varied expressive possibilities and ability to
change the timbre and loudness. From the point of view
of musical acoustics, the voice is a combination of a string
and a wind instrument. A pipe, the vocal tract, is ex-
cited by the vibration of the vocal cords that generate a
complete harmonic series as is usual for vibrating strings

(see Figure 6). The timbre is however determined by the
shape of the vocal tract that acts as a resonator. De-
pending on the position of the tongue and on the mouth
opening, the position and width of the formants of the
vocal tract (the broad resonances, indicated in Figure 10)
can be varied and some harmonics produced by the vo-
cal cords are favored with respect to others [3,27]. Note
that vocal tract and vocal cords are independent of each
other, which implies that the timbre of the voice will
change with the pitch for a given tract shape as the har-
monics are shifted towards higher frequencies while the
position of the formants remains constant.

The eﬀect of the vocal tract shape is displayed in Fig-
ure 10 for three vowels sung at the same pitch (the for-
mants are also indicated). The tongue is placed closed to
the palate to produce the “ii”: it is nearly sinusoidal with
weak upper harmonics. The ﬁrst formant peaks around
200 Hz and decreases rapidly. The second and third for-
mant around 2000 and 3000 Hz are however easily visible.
The “ou” results from a single formant with a maximum
around 300 Hz and a slowly decreasing tail: the wave-
form is more complex and richer in higher harmonics,
giving a ﬂute-like sound. The “aa” is obtained with an
open tract and is far more complex. The most intense
harmonic is the third because of the relatively high posi-
tion (∼800 Hz) and large width of the ﬁrst formant. The
second and the third formant are as intense as the ﬁrst
and give a signiﬁcant amount of higher harmonics to the
sound.

FIG. 10. Waveform and corresponding spectra of the au-
thor singing an A3 (220 Hz) on three diﬀerent vowels: the
french “ii” (as in this), “ou” (as in shoe) and “aa” (as in sat).
The formants are indicated for each spectrum by a dotted line
in linear scale.

FINALE

We have seen that the physicist’s approach to musical
instruments opens fascinating and complex possibilities.
The classical examples (closed and open pipe, for exam-
ple) are easy to reproduce, but one steps quickly into ter-
ritory uncharted by the classical physics textbook, which
makes the exploration all the more exciting. It remains
also that instruments are easy to identify by their timbre,
but that it is quite diﬃcult to tell two diﬀerent models
from one another and to classify the quality of the pro-
duced sound. It may be even more diﬃcult (not to say
impossible) to examine the quality of an interpretation
and to understand why well-played music touches us so
deeply.

Musical acoustics is a beautiful subject to teach at ev-
ery level. Music appeals to everybody and a lot of stu-
dents play or have played at some stage an instrument:
this makes often for lively demonstrations in front of the

5

class.
It involves both wave mechanics and ﬂuid me-
chanics in quite complex ways, and a simple experimen-
tal setup can oﬀer direct and compelling insights in the
physics of sound production. I hope that this excursion
in the basic physics of musical instruments will motivate
some of the readers to include the subject in their curricu-
lum and that it may provide helpful material for those
who already do.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank heartily the diﬀerent people that either lent
me their instrument or that took some time to come
and play in the lab: Ariane Michellod (ﬂute), S´everine
Michellod (recorders), Stephan Fedrigo (violin – hand-
crafted by the performer!) and Lukas B¨urgi (saxophone).
I am also greatly indebted to Paul Braissant, Bernard Eg-
ger and Yvette Fazan, who maintain and expand an im-
pressive collection of physics demonstration experiments
at EPFL, and who are never put oﬀ by the sometimes
strange requests of physics teachers.

tio between each semitone of 12√2 = 1.059464. The A4 is
deﬁned as the tuning A at 440 Hz, and the index of the
note gives the octave. For further information on scales
and intervalls see, e.g., Ref. [3].

[15] Broomﬁeld J E and Leask M J M 1999 Eur. J. Phys. 20

L3

[16] Halter C and Zuﬀerey J-C 2000 Regard scientiﬁque sur
le monde artistique du son (´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale
de Lausanne)

[17] Fletcher H 1964 J. Ac. Soc. Am. 36 203
[18] Klein W L and Gerritsen H J 1975 Am. J. Phys. 43 736
[19] Smith J R, Henrich N and Wolfe J 1997 Proc. Inst. Acous-

tics 19 315

[20] Benade A H and Kouzoupis S N 1988 J. Ac. Soc. Am.

83 292

[21] The clarinet is a transposing instrument, meaning that a
written A3 will not sound at the pitch an A3. Most of to-
day’s clarinets are either B♭ or A instruments, implying
that a written C sound like a B♭ or an A, respectively.
When not speciﬁed, the pitch given in the text corre-
sponds to the actual sounding pitch.

[22] Fasel I R, Bollacker K D and Ghosh J 1999 in Pro-
ceedings of IJCNN’99 - International Joint Conference
on Neural Networks vol. 3 (Piscataway: IEEE) p 1924
– also accessible at http:// www.ece.utexas.edu/∼fasel/
ICJNN draft/ICJNN Final.pdf
[23] Benade A H and Lutgen S J 1988 J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

83 1900

[24] Ayers R D, Eliason L J and Mahgerefteh D 1985 Am. J.

Phys. 53 528

[1] Leipp E 1975 Acoustique et musique (Paris: Masson)
[2] Benade A H 1976 Fundamentals of musical acoustics

[25] Boutillon X and Valette C 1992 J. Phys. IV C1-2 C1-105
[26] Fletcher N H and Douglas L M 1980 J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

(New York: Dover Publications)

68 767

[3] White H E and White D H 1980 Physics and music

[27] Sundberg J 1982 Scientiﬁc American March 77

(Philadelphia: Sauders College)

[4] Rossing T D 1990 The Science of Sound, second edition

(Reading: Addison-Wesley)

[5] Fletcher N H and Rossing T D 1991 The Physics of Mu-

sical Instruments (Berlin: Springer)

[6] Taylor C 1992 Exploring music (Bristol:

Institute of

Physics Publishing)

[7] Benade A H and Larson C O 1985 J. Ac. Soc. Am. 78

1475

[8] Lalo¨e S and Lalo¨e F 1985 Pour la science Mai 73
[9] Brown J C 1996 J. Ac. Soc. Am. 99 1210

[10] Matsres M F and Miers R E 1997 Am. J. Phys. 65 240
[11] Smedley J E 1998 Am. J. Phys. 66 144
[12] The timbre is usually deﬁned as the quality of tone dis-
tinctive of a particular singing voice or musical instru-
ment, and is essentially determined by the relative inten-
sity of the diﬀerent harmonics [13].

[13] The frequency ratios given by the modes of vibration on
a string are pleasing to the ear and form the basis of
western music (e.g., between the ﬁrst and second mode,
2:1 or an octave; the second and third mode, 3:2 or a
ﬁfth). The series of modes with wavelengths λ = 2l/n and
corresponding freqencies f = v/(2l/n) (where v is the
velocity of the wave) is hence called the harmonic series,
and the term mode and harmonic is used interchangeably.
[14] The names of the notes refer to the tempered scale,
formed of 12 semitones per octave with a frequency ra-

6

This figure "figure1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008053v1

This figure "figure2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008053v1

This figure "figure3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008053v1

This figure "figure4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008053v1

This figure "figure5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008053v1

This figure "figure6.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008053v1

This figure "figure7.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008053v1

This figure "figure8.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008053v1

This figure "figure9.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008053v1

This figure "figure10.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008053v1

