1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Carnot cycle for an oscillator

Jacques Arnaud ∗, Laurent Chusseau †, Fabrice Philippe ‡

20th September 2013

Abstract

Carnot established in 1824 that the eﬃciency of cyclic engines op-
erating between a hot bath at absolute temperature Thot and a cold
bath at temperature Tcold cannot exceed 1−Tcold/Thot. This result im-
plies the existence of an entropy function S(U ) with the property that
d2S/dU 2 ≤ 0, where U denotes the average energy. Linear single-
mode systems alternately in contact with hot and cold baths obey
these principles. A speciﬁc expression of the work done per cycle by
an oscillator is derived from a prescription established by Einstein
in 1906: heat baths may exchange energy with oscillators at angular
frequency ω only by amounts ~ω, where 2π~ denotes the Planck con-
stant. Non-reversible cycles are illustrated. The paper is essentially
self-contained.

∗Mas Liron, F30440 Saint Martial, France
†Centre d’´Electronique et de Micro-opto´electronique de Montpellier, Unit´e Mixte de

Recherche n◦5507 au CNRS, Universit´e Montpellier II, F34095 Montpellier, France

‡D´epartement de Math´ematiques et Informatique Appliqu´ees, Universit´e Paul Val´ery,
F34199 Montpellier, France. Also with LIRMM, 161 rue Ada, F34392 Montpellier, France.

1

1 Introduction

Engines were constructed in the 18th century that converted more or less
eﬃciently heat into mechanical work. No one was apparently able to fabricate
cyclic engines, that is, systems that recover their initial state after a period
of time, that would convert heat from a single bath into useful work. That
this is in fact impossible was raised by Carnot in 1824 to the status of a basic
principle of Physics [1]. Precisely, Carnot established that the eﬃciency of
cyclic engines operating between a hot bath at absolute temperature Thot and
a cold bath at temperature Tcold cannot exceed the value ηC = 1 − Tcold/Thot.
The eﬃciency is deﬁned as the ratio of the work w performed by the system
per cycle and the energy lost by the hot bath per cycle. The limiting value
ηC is reached when the system is reversible, that is, when small temperature
changes would suﬃce to reverse energy ﬂow directions. Reversibility implies
that all mechanical motions are frictionless and that two bodies may be put
into thermal contact only if their temperatures almost coincide. Reversible
transformations are quasi-static, that is, they are close to an equilibrium
state at every instant.

The Carnot conclusion may be partly understood from a waterfall anal-
ogy 1: Consider a reservoir at altitude Thot above a lake as pictured in Fig-
If some water weight Shot ﬂows from the reservoir to the lake the
ure 1.
work done is ThotShot. Consider another reservoir at a lower altitude Tcold.
In order to pump a water weight Scold from the lake to that reservoir a
work TcoldScold must be expanded. The net work performed is therefore
w = ThotShot − TcoldScold. The eﬃciency, deﬁned as the ratio of the work done
w and the upper reservoir energy loss ThotShot is η = 1 − TcoldScold/ThotShot.
This expression coincides with that applicable to heat engines if we suppose
that Scold ≥ Shot. The limiting Carnot eﬃciency quoted above obtains if
1Let us quote from the Carnot book [1] on page 28: “One can compare the heat-driving
power to that of a waterfall. The driving power of a waterfall depends on its height and
on the quantity of liquid. The driving power of the heat depends also on the quantity
of used entropy and on the diﬀerence of temperature of bodies between which is made
the exchange of entropy”. We have here translated calorique by entropy, following the
Zemansky observation [2]: “Carnot used “chaleur” when referring to heat in general. But
when referring to the motive power of heat that is brought about when heat enters at high
temperature and leaves at low temperature, he uses the expression “chute de calorique”,
never “chute de chaleur”. It is the opinion of a few scientists that Carnot had in the back
of his mind the concept of entropy, for which he reserved the term of calorique. This
seems incredible, and yet it is a remarkable circumstance that, if the expression “chute
de calorique” is translated fall of entropy, many of the objections raised against Carnot’s
work [ . . . ] are unfounded”. Our introduction of a lake in Fig. 1 helps clarify the case of
nonreversible cycles.

1

Shot = Scold, that is, if the amount of water lost by the upper reservoir ends
up in the lower one. For a cyclic engine operating with more than two baths
the general statement is that the amount of water in the lake never increases.
The water-fall analogy explains how Carnot was able to get valid expressions
for the eﬃciency of heat engines without knowing that heat is a form of en-
ergy, nor the precise physical signiﬁcance of S. But, of course, heat engines
cannot be modeled by purely mechanical systems. This is reﬂected by the
fact that the condition Scold ≥ Shot imposed above has no justiﬁcation in the
water-fall model. As far as heat engines are concerned, this condition should
be considered an empirically-motivated postulate, which turned out to be of
far-reaching importance in Physics.

The above considerations were reached for systems involving many de-
grees of freedom such as gas-ﬁlled cylinders terminated by movable pistons.
We presently consider systems possessing a single degree of freedom, specif-
ically a single-mode oscillator. The diﬃculty is that small-system temper-
atures cannot always be precisely deﬁned. The conditions under which a
process should be considered reversible needs therefore clariﬁcation. Carnot
cycles involving oscillators were discussed before (see [3], and the references
therein). Small mechanical systems have been experimented upon recently
[4]. The Statistical Mechanical properties of small electronic systems are
discussed, for example, in [5]. But the present treatment based on an early
Einstein prescription has apparently not been presented before. Note that
all the concepts employed in the present paper were available to physicists
in 1906 2.

As it is often pointed out, reversible Carnot cycles are extremely slow.
Furthermore, the forces involved in single-mode oscillators are tiny. Ac-
cordingly the present discussion could be viewed as purely academic. But
rotating-vibrating molecules and biological systems submitted to baths at
diﬀerent temperatures may retrieve energy through Carnot cycles. This pos-
sible application will however not be considered in detail here.

Basic Thermodynamics relations are recalled in Section 2 and applied in
Section 3 to linear oscillators. It is shown in Section 4 that the Carnot result
amounts to asserting that the oscillator heat capacity C ≡ ∂U(ω, T )/∂T is
positive. The speciﬁc form of the energy function U(ω, T ), where ω denotes
the oscillator angular frequency, is derived in Section 5 from the Einstein
prescription ruling bath-oscillator energy exchanges. Explicit expressions for
the work done by the system per cycle are illustrated in Section 6. The
conclusion is in Section 7.

2This observation does not apply of course to advanced results such as those cited in

[3] that are not restricted to slow processes.

2

The Boltzmann factor kB, set equal to unity for brevity, is restored in
numerical applications, Section 5. The angular frequency ω is called “fre-
quency”, the Planck constant divided by 2π, ~, is called “Planck constant”,
and the action divided by 2π, namely U/ω, is called “action”, for short.

2 Thermodynamics relations

Before discussing the particular case of linear oscillators it is worthwhile
recalling relevant relations of Thermodynamics. The ﬁrst law of Thermody-
namics asserts that heat should be treated as any other kind of energy in
writing the conservation law: ∆U = W + Q, where ∆U denotes the system
energy increment, W the work done on the system, and Q the amount of
heat received by the system 3.

Two seemingly independent entities were introduced in the previous sec-
tion, namely the temperature T , for which we have a pretty good feeling, and
the entropy S, which was rather mysterious at the time of Carnot and Clau-
sius. The signiﬁcance of S has been clariﬁed by Bolztmann, who related S to
the number W of microscopic states of the system, namely S = ln(W). The
Quantum theory later enabled physicists to ascribe an unambiguous meaning
to W.

Let us go back to classical Thermodynamics and suppose that the en-
tropy S of a constant-volume system is some monotonically increasing func-
tion S(U) of the energy U, and deﬁne the temperature reciprocal by β ≡
1/T = dS/dU. We observe that whenever an amount of heat Q is added
to the system, the system energy increases by ∆U = Q according to the
ﬁrst law of Thermodynamics, since a constant-volume system does not per-
form work (W =0). The system entropy S gets therefore incremented by βQ
provided that Q be small compared with U. The latter conclusion follows
from a ﬁrst-order power-series expansion of the function S(U) with respect
to its argument. Heat baths being arbitrarily large their temperatures do
not vary signiﬁcantly when some energy is added or removed. Furthermore,
the relation ∆Sbath = βQ holds for any ﬁnite value of Q added to the bath.
When a cyclic engine receives in succession an amount of heat Q1 from
a bath at temperature reciprocal β1, an amount of heat Q2 from a bath at
temperature reciprocal β2, and so on up to a temperature reciprocal βn, and
back to β1, reasonings presented for example in [6], involving auxiliary re-
versible engines operating between the baths i = 1, 2 . . . , n and an auxiliary
3The third law of Thermodynamics asserting that the entropy vanishes at T = 0 will

be employed for the sake of deﬁniteness, but that law is not essential here.

3

bath, show that

β1 Q1 + β2 Q2 + . . . + βn Qn ≤ 0,

(1)

with the equality sign applying to reversible cycles only. The inequality in
(1) amounts to stating that the total bath entropy never decreases. This
is equivalent to the statement made in the introductory section that in the
water-fall analogy the amount of water in the lake never increases.

When a constant-volume system of energy U is put into contact with
a bath at temperature reciprocal β it goes to equilibrium and eventually
acquires an energy Uequ deﬁned by the condition that its temperature re-
ciprocal (dS/dU)U =Uequ = β. Since the law of energy conservation implies
that an amount of heat Q = Uequ − U has been removed from the bath, the
bath has lost an entropy βQ = β(Uequ − U). The system entropy increment
S(Uequ) − S(U), on the other hand, may not be less than that value in order
that the total system+bath entropy does not decrease.
It is not diﬃcult
to see that this condition is implemented by requiring that the system en-
tropy function S(U), where U denotes the average system energy, be such
that d2S/dU 2 ≤ 0 for any value of U, or, equivalently, that the system heat
capacity C ≡ dU/dT be positive. This condition will be recovered directly
from the expression of the Carnot eﬃciency in Section 3 for the case where
the system is a linear oscillator.

More generally, a system is characterized by an entropy state function
S(ω, U), where ω denotes a parameter, perhaps the system volume, and U
the average energy. Asserting that S is a state function means that S depends
only on the state of the system, speciﬁed by the parameters ω and U. The
temperature reciprocal now reads

β ≡

=

1
T

∂S(ω, U)
∂U

.

(2)

Let some general relations of Thermodynamics be recalled. The elemen-
tary mechanical work done on the system is denoted by dW = f dω, where f
denotes a generalized force. If ω represents the volume of a gas-ﬁlled enclo-
sure, −f represents the gas pressure. If ω represents an oscillator frequency,
f represents the oscillator action, as we later show. Mechanical considera-
tions often enable one to evaluate the generalized force exerted on the system
as some function f (ω, U) of ω and energy U. Considering U as a function of
ω and temperature reciprocal β, we may also view f as a function of ω and
β according to f (ω, β) ≡ f (ω, U(ω, β)).

The fact that the entropy S is a state function restricts admissible func-
tions U(ω, β). Indeed, according to the deﬁnition of the entropy increment

4

dS = β dQ, the law of energy conservation dQ = dU − dW , and the fact that
the elementary work done on the system dW = f dω, we have

dS = β dQ

= β(dU − f dω)

∂U
∂β

∂U
∂ω

= β

dβ + β(

− f ) dω.

(3)

Because S is a state function and dS in (3) a total diﬀerential, the derivative
with respect to ω of the term that multiplies dβ must be equal to the deriva-
tive with respect to β of the term that multiplies dω. After simpliﬁcation,
we obtain

∂U
∂ω

=

∂(βf )
∂β

.

(4)

(5)

One can show that this equation implies that there exists a function F (ω, β)
called the free energy such that

U =

∂(βF )
∂β

,

f =

∂F
∂ω

.

The above relations clearly satisfy (4). The second equation in (5) tells us
that when the temperature is held constant, that is, when the system is in
contact with a heat bath, the increment of free energy F when ω varies from
ω1 to ω2 is the integral from ω1 to ω2 of f dω, and thus represents the work
done on the system.

In terms of the free energy the entropy reads

S = β(U − F ),

(6)

as one may verify by diﬀerentiating S, using (5), and comparing with the
expression in (3).

3 Linear oscillators

Let the system be an inductance-capacitance L − C circuit resonating at
angular frequency ω, as shown in Figs. 2a and 2b. The electrical charges
on the capacitor plates oscillate sinusoidally in the course of time, but the
two plates always attract each others. It follows from the Coulomb law that
the average force F = U/2a, where U denotes the resonator energy and a
If a is incremented by da slowly so that
the capacitor plates separation.

5

the oscillation remains almost sinusoidal, the work done on the oscillator is
dW = F da = U da/2a. On the other hand, it follows from the well-known
resonance condition L C ω2 = 1 and the fact that C ∝ 1/a, where ∝ denotes
proportionality, that 2 dω/ω = da/a. The elementary work done on the
system may therefore be written as dW = (U/ω) dω ≡ f dω, where we have
introduced the generalized force f from its deﬁnition. Thus f = U/ω. This
notation is the one employed before in [7] to treat multimode optical cavities.
When the system is isolated, i.e., not in contact with a heat bath, we have
dQ = 0 and thus dU = dW . According to the previous expression of dW the
oscillator energy gets incremented by dU = (U/ω) dω. It follows that when
the resonant frequency of an isolated oscillator varies slowly, the ratio U/ω,
called “action”, does not vary signiﬁcantly. The process presently considered
is said to be adiabatic 4. In other words, the generalized force f = U/ω is
constant in adiabatic processes.

Replacing U in (4) by ωf , we obtain after simpliﬁcation

ω

∂f
∂ω

= β

∂f
∂β

,

(7)

a relation that entails that f is a function of ln(ω)+ln(β) = ln(βω) only. This
is essentially the displacement law discovered by Wien in 1893 [8]: blackbody
spectra scale in frequency in proportion to temperature 5.

4Literally the word “adiabatic” means that heat “does not go through”. Now-a-days,

this word has also the connotation that the process is slow.

5The oscillator energy U is equal to ωf (βω), where f (x) is a function of a single variable
to be later speciﬁed. The blackbody radiation spectral density is obtained by multiplying
U by the electromagnetic mode density. A mode count readily shows that the latter
is in the case of a large-volume cavity proportional to ω2. Thus the radiation spectral
density is proportional to ω3f (ω/T ). If T is multiplied by some constant a, the spectrum
therefore needs only be rescaled frequency-wise by the same factor a. Provided the integral
converges, the total black-body radiation energy is proportional to the 4th power of T . This
is the celebrated Stefan-Boltzmann law. Historically, the Wien displacement law obtained
through quite a diﬀerent route. First, Kirchhoﬀ in 1860 established that the radiation
energy density u ≡ Utotal/V in a cavity of large volume V is a function of temperature T
only. Maxwell proved that the pressure exerted by a plane wave on a perfectly reﬂecting
mirror is equal to the wave energy density u, a result which, incidentally, holds for any
isotropic non-dispersive wave. (For a treatment of blackbody radiation in dispersive and
anisotropic media see, for instance, [9]). If we take into account the fact that the direction
of the incident wave is randomly and uniformly distributed, the radiation pressure reads
in three dimensions: P = u/3. Boltzmann employed the laws of Thermodynamics and
established that u ∝ T 4. This conclusion readily follows from (4) of the present paper with
the substitutions: ω → V , f → −P = −u(T )/3. Finally, Wien in 1893 observed that the
light reﬂected from a slowly moving piston is frequency shifted, and enforced conditions for
the radiation spectrum to be at equilibrium. The Wien reasoning is notoriously diﬃcult.
The present single-mode resonator treatment is much simpler.

6

Since f is a function of βω only, the free energy deﬁned in (5) may be

written as

F (ω, β) =

ω

f (ω′, β) dω′

Z

= T φ(βω),

with φ(x) ≡

x

f (x′) dx′,

(8)

Z

where we have introduced the function of a single variable φ(x). The entropy
deﬁned in (6) may be written as

S(ω, β) = s(βω),

s(x) ≡ x f (x) − φ(x).

(9)

Let us now consider in succession the adiabatic and isothermal processes.
If the frequency of an isolated oscillator with energy U is changed slowly from
ω1 to ω2, the work done on the oscillator is equal to the energy increment

Wadiabatic =

U − U,

ω2
ω1

(10)

where we have used the fact established earlier that oscillator energies are
proportional to frequency.

Let us now suppose that the frequency of an oscillator in contact with a
bath at temperature T is changed slowly from ω1 to ω2. According to (8)
and (5), the work done on the system is

Wisothermal = F (ω2, β) − F (ω1, β)

= T [φ(βω2) − φ(βω1)] .

(11)

The amount of heat Q supplied by the bath to the oscillator is equal to
the energy increment from some initial value U of the oscillator energy to the
ﬁnal equilibrium value Uβ = ω2f (βω2), minus the work done on the oscillator
according to (11). Thus 6

Q = ω2f (βω2) − U − T [φ(βω2) − φ(βω1)] .

(12)

6When a system separates from a heat bath its energy E is not always the same. E is
a random variable obeying some probability law, as we will see in more detail later. So far
only its average value U has been considered because the average energy delivered per cycle
does not depend on the higher moments of E. This follows from the linear dependence of
the quantities we are interested in on E. Szilard in 1925 pointed out that “exploitation of
the ﬂuctuation phenomena will not lead to the construction of a perpetual mobile of the
second kind”, that is, of a cyclic engine violating the second law of Thermodynamics [12].
This observation leads to further constraints on acceptable physical laws.

7

4 Carnot cycle for an oscillator

We now apply the above general formulas to a cycle. Let ω1 denote the
frequency of the oscillator when it separates from the hot bath at temperature
reciprocal βhot. The oscillator energy is initially ω1f (βhotω1). When the
frequency is changed from ω1 to ω2 the oscillator energy becomes Ucold =
ω2f (βhotω1). The oscillator is then put in contact with the cold bath at
temperature reciprocal βcold, and its frequency changed from ω2 to ω3. The
amount of heat delivered by the cold bath (usually a negative quantity) is,
following the general expression in (12),

Qcold = ω3f (βcoldω3) − ω2f (βhotω1) − Tcold [φ(βcoldω3) − φ(βcoldω2)] .

(13)

Next, the oscillator is separated from the cold bath and its frequency changed
from ω3 to ω4. The energy becomes Uhot = ω4f (βcoldω3). Finally, the res-
onator is put in contact with the hot bath and the frequency carried back to
the initial value ω1. The amount of heat delivered by the hot bath is given
by an expression similar to the previous one, namely

Qhot = ω1f (βhotω1) − ω4f (βcoldω3) − Thot[φ(βhotω1) − φ(βhotω4)].

(14)

After rearranging we ﬁnd that the entropy Scold received by the cold bath
and the entropy Shot delivered by the hot bath may be written, respectively,
as

Scold ≡ −

= s(b, a) − s(u),

Shot ≡

= s(a) − s(v, u),

Qcold
Tcold

Qhot
Thot

and

where we have deﬁned

a ≡ βhotω1,

b ≡ βcoldω2,

u ≡ βcoldω3,

v ≡ βhotω4,

(17)

and introduced a function of two variables

Note that the function s(x, y) is unaﬀected by the addition of a constant
to f , and that s(x) ≡ s(x, x) is the entropy function introduced in (9). It

s(x, y) ≡ x f (y) − φ(x)

≡ x f (y) −

x

f (x′) dx′.

Z

8

(15)

(16)

(18)

is convenient to select the integration constant in (18) such that s = 0 at
T = 0, that is in the limit x, y → ∞. We observe further that

s(y, x) − s(x) = (y − x)f (x) −

f (t) dt ≥ 0,

(19)

y

x
Z

if f is a decreasing function of its argument. In that case the expressions in
(15), (16) tell us that Scold ≥ Shot.
The work delivered per cycle is

w ≡ −W = Qhot + Qcold

= Thot [s(a) − s(v, u)] + Tcold [s(u) − s(b, a)] .

(20)

The eﬃciency, as given in the introductory section, is

η =

w
Qhot

= 1 +

= 1 −

Qcold
Qhot
TcoldScold
ThotShot

.

Tcold
Thot

=

=

ω2
ω1

ω3
ω4

(21)

(22)

The expressions of Scold and Shot are given in (15) and (16) for linear oscilla-
tors.

The above result shows that the Carnot eﬃciency is attained when a = b

and u = v, that is, when the reversibility condition

holds. The result in (19) readily shows that the factor that multiplies
Tcold/Thot in (21) is greater than unity, and the eﬃciency is at most equal
to the Carnot eﬃciency, if the oscillator action f is a decreasing function of
x or, equivalently, if the energy U is an increasing function of temperature
T for some constant ω value. In other words, the constant-parameter heat
capacity C ≡ ∂U/∂T must be a positive quantity. Note that in the present
paper U represents the average system energy when it is in contact with a
bath at temperature T . The system temperature is left undeﬁned. However,
in the special case of linear oscillators a temperature may be deﬁned, which
turns out to be equal to the bath temperature T .

Explicit expressions for the oscillator action f (x) and the work done per

cycle are given in the next section.

9

5 Bath-oscillator interaction

Consider a system in thermal contact with a heat bath. A general con-
cept of Statistical Mechanics is that the probability that a particular sys-
tem state occurs is proportional to the corresponding bath statistical weight
Wbath ≡ exp[Sbath(Ubath)]. As was assumed earlier, the bath entropy Sbath
increases monotonically as a function of the bath energy Ubath and the bath
temperature reciprocal β ≡ dSbath/dUbath. If Erem denotes some energy re-
moved from the bath as a result of the system-bath interaction, the proba-
bility mentioned above is proportional to exp(−βErem). This follows from a
Taylor series expansion of Sbath(Ubath) with respect to its argument.

The classical Boltzmann theory supposes that any amount of energy may
be exchanged between the bath and the system, that is, to within an unim-
portant constant, Erem = E. The probability density that the system energy
be E is therefore

Pc(E) ∝

exp(−βE)
0
(

if E ≥ 0,
if E < 0.

(23)

A detailed discussion can be found, e.g., in [10]. It follows from that probabil-
ity law that the average oscillator energy U ≡ E = T , and that variance(E) ≡
E2 − E

= T 2.

2

The relation U = T , however, is unacceptable because it would necessarily
lead to inﬁnite blackbody radiation energy if the Maxwell electromagnetic
Indeed, the Maxwell theory applied to a cavity
theory is to be upheld.
having perfectly conducting walls predicts that there is an inﬁnite number of
modes. If the average energy T is ascribed to each one of these modes, the
total energy is clearly inﬁnite. This observation, made near the end of the
19th century, caused a major crisis in Physics [11].

The correct expression of U may be derived from a prescription introduced
by Einstein in 1906. We quote: “During absorption and emission the energy
of a resonator changes discontinuously by an integral multiple of ~ω” [13].
In other words, matter may exchange energy with an oscillator at frequency
ω only by units of ~ω. It follows that Erem = ~ωm, where m ≡ ⌊E/~ω⌋
denotes the greatest integer not larger than E/~ω 7.

7In modern terms, the Einstein prescription follows from the fact that when a quantized
bath is submitted to some classical oscillator ﬁeld at frequency ω only bath states separated
in energy by ~ω get signiﬁcantly perturbed. The law of energy conservation is enforced
by supposing that the oscillator is driven by the bath electrical-current expectation value.
In a Quantum-Optics treatment, the average oscillator energy U obtains by treating the
oscillator as a quantized harmonic oscillator, whose energy may only take the discrete

10

Let for a moment an energy unit be selected such that ~ω = 1, for
brevity. The probability density P (E) that the oscillator energy be E is
then proportional to exp(−βm) = qm if we set: q ≡ exp(−1/T ). Thus

P (E) =

(1 − q) qm if E ≥ 0,
if E < 0,
0
(

(24)

with m ≡ ⌊E⌋ and where the term 1 − q normalizes P (E) to unity.

After a straightforward integration, the moments of E are found to be

Er ≡

ErP (E) dE

∞

0
Z

∞

m+1

= (1 − q)

Erqm dE

= (1 − q)

(m + 1)r+1 − mr+1
r + 1

qm.

(25)

m

m=0 Z
X

m=0,1...
X

We obtain in particular

U = E = (1 − q)

(m +

)qm

1
2

m=0,1...
X

=

1
2

1 + q
1 − q
1
12 T

= T +

+ O(

1
T 3 ).

This expression shows that in the large T limit U tends to the classical value
T , an observation made by Einstein and Stern in 1913. From the expression of
= q/(1−q)2+1/12 = T 2+O(1/T 2)
Er we also obtain: variance(E) ≡ E2−E
that tends to the classical value T 2 in the large T limit. The same behavior
of the energy ﬂuctuation is obtained in [14].

2

If we restore the factor ~ω and redeﬁne q as exp(−β~ω) the average

oscillator energy given in (26) reads

U(ω, β) =

1 + q
1 − q

~ω
2
~ω
2

=

+

~ω
exp(β~ω) − 1

.

values Em = (m + 1/2)~ω with probabilities exp(−βEm). The expression for the average
oscillator energy is the same as the one obtained here, but the energy variance does not
tend exactly to the classical result T 2 in the large T limit.

11

(26)

(27)

Since x ≡ βω it follows that

f (x) =

U
ω
~

2

=

+

~
exp(~x) − 1

.

Let us note that f and ~ have the dimension of action (‘energy’ × ‘time’),
while x has the dimension of an action reciprocal, so that ~x is dimensionless.
Because f is a decreasing function of x, the condition established earlier that
the eﬃciency may not exceed the Carnot eﬃciency is fulﬁlled. It is of interest
to note that the function f (x) obeys the simple diﬀerential equation

(28)

(29)

df
dx

+ f 2 =

2

.

~

2

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

The classical expression f (x) = 1/x, equivalent to U = T , is a solution of
the above equation with the right-hand-side set equal to zero.

We also obtain after integration

s(x, y) =

~x
exp(~y) − 1

− ln [1 − exp(−~x)] .

(30)

When this result is introduced in the previous expressions for w and η, ex-
plicit forms follow.

The oscillator entropy S(ω, β) = s(βω), where as before s(x) ≡ s(x, x). It
is convenient to express S in terms of the average number m ≡ (U/~ω) − 1/2
of light quanta according to

S(ω, U) = (1 + m) ln(1 + m) − m ln(m).

(31)

It follows easily from this form that the oscillator temperature reciprocal
βoscillator ≡ ∂S/∂U coincides with the bath temperature β.

In the classical limit: T → ∞, we obtain s(x) = − ln(x) + constant. It
follows that for reversible classical cycles the work performed per cycle reads

w = kB(Thot − Tcold) ln

(32)

ω3
ω1

Thot
Tcold (cid:19)

,

(cid:18)

where the Boltzmann factor has been restored. At room temperature the
classical approximation is a valid one if the oscillator frequencies are sub-
stantially smaller than about 10 THz. For example, for N = 1/kB ≈ 1023
independent oscillators, Thot = 1200 K, Tcold = 300 K, and ω1 = 2ω3, the
work done per cycle w = 900 ln(2) J ≈ 620 J.

12

6 Illustrations of the work done and the eﬃ-

ciency

Let us evaluate explicitly the work done and the eﬃciency of oscillators al-
ternately in contact with a hot bath at temperature Thot = 1 and a cold bath
at temperature Tcold = 1/4. We consider in Fig. 2 the case where ω1 = 1,
ω2 = 1/4, ω4 = 2 and ω3 = c/2, where c is kept as a parameter. When c = 1,
the system is reversible and the cycle in the temperature-versus-entropy di-
agram in Fig. 2a is rectangular.

The case of an irreversible cycle with c = 2 is shown in Fig. 2b. Note
the temperature-entropy jump, shown by a dashed line, when the oscillator
is put in contact with the hot bath. Figure 3a shows how the work done
w and the eﬃciency η vary as a function of the parameter c deﬁned above.
The Carnot eﬃciency ηC = 3/4 is reached for c = 1. For larger c-values the
energy extracted per cycle increases but the eﬃciency is somewhat reduced.
A case of interest is when the resonator frequency is a constant ω1 when
the resonator is in contact with the hot bath and a constant ω2 when it is in
contact with the cold bath, in which case a = u and b = v. In that situation,
the hot and cold baths may be modeled as large collections of oscillators
at frequencies ω1 and ω2, respectively. Supposing again that Thot = 1 and
Tcold = 1/4, we ﬁnd from previous expressions that the energy extracted per
cycle is maximum when ω1 = 1/2 and ω2 = 1/4. For these parameter values
the eﬃciency is η = 1/2, that is, substantially less than the Carnot eﬃciency
ηC = 3/4. The variations of the work done and the eﬃciency as functions of
the parameter a are shown in Fig. 3b.

7 Conclusion and generalizations

We have shown that heat engines whose system is a single-mode linear oscilla-
tor follow the Carnot theory. Explicit expressions for the work performed per
cycle and the eﬃciency were obtained on the basis of an early (1906) Einstein
prescription. We have illustrated reversible and non-reversible cycles.

The theory may be generalized to multimode oscillators by adding up
mode contributions. Consider in particular a non-dispersive transmission
line terminated by a movable short-circuit, a conﬁguration resembling the
classical gas-ﬁlled cylinder with a piston. Because the resonant frequencies
change in proportion to one another when the length of the transmission
line is modiﬁed, a temperature may be deﬁned at every step of the adiabatic
process and the Carnot eﬃciency may be attained. This is not the case for
a dispersive transmission line such as a waveguide. Slow length changes cre-

13

ate an average distribution among the modes that cannot be described by a
temperature. The practical consequence is that the Carnot eﬃciency cannot
be reached even under idealized conditions. The situation treated by Boltz-
mann mentioned earlier is applicable to extremely large irregularly-shaped
cavities. When the number of modes having signiﬁcant energy is moderate,
it is necessary to consider each mode separately as suggested above.

Note that the force f depends on the term ~ω/2 in the expression of the
mode average energy. Since the number of modes in a cavity with perfectly
reﬂecting walls is inﬁnite, the total energy is inﬁnite. But a simple spatial
discretization procedure suﬃces to obtain a ﬁnite expression of the force [15].
If we are only interested in the average work done over a full cycle, the term
~ω/2 may be suppressed, as we have seen, and no divergences occur. But
this term has been found of practical importance in a recent experimental
study of some small mechanisms [4].

Recent interesting generalizations take into a ﬁnite interaction time ∆t
between the oscillator and the baths. In that case there is a departure of
the work done from the change in free energy, which is inversely proportional
to ∆t. The process of detaching the oscillator from the bath has also been
studied [3].

8 Acknowledgments

The authors wish to express their thanks to E. Clot and J.C. Giuntini for a
critical reading of the manuscript.

References

[1] N.S. Carnot, R´eﬂexions sur la puissance motrice du feu (An english

translation may be found in: Dover Publ. Inc. New-York, 1960).

[2] M.W. Zemansky “Carnot cycle”, in: Encyclopedia of Physics (VCH

Publ., New-York, 1990), p. 119.

[3] K. Sekimoto, F. Takagi and T. Hondou, “Carnot’s cycle for small sys-
tems: irreversibility and cost of operation”, Phys. Rev. E, 62, 7759-7768
(2000).

[4] F.M. Serry, D. Wallister and G.J. Maclay “The role of the Casimir eﬀect
in the static deﬂection and striction of membrane strips in microelectro-
mechanical systems”, J. of Applied Phys. 84 (5), 2501-2506 (1998).

14

[5] J. Arnaud, L. Chusseau and F. Philippe, “Fluorescence from a few elec-

trons”, Phys. Rev. B 62, 13482-13489 (2000).

[6] E. Fermi, Thermodynamics (Dover Publ. Inc., New-York, 1956).

[7] D.C. Cole “Thermodynamics of blackbody radiation via Classical
Physics for arbitrarily-shaped cavities with perfectly reﬂecting walls”,
Foundations of Physics 30 (11), 1849-1867 (2000).

[8] W. Wien “Eine neue beziehung der strahlung schwarzer korper zum

zweiten hauptsatz der warmetheorie”, Berl. Ber. 55-62 (1893).

[9] J. Arnaud, Beam and Fiber Optics (Acad. Press, New-York, 1976), pp.

42 and 251.

1980).

[10] C. Kittel and H. Kroemer, Thermal Physics (Freeman, San Francisco,

[11] T.S. Kuhn, Black-body theory and the quantum discontinuity, 1894-

1912 (Univ. of Chicago press, Chicago, 1987).

[12] L. Szilard “On the extension of phenomenological Thermodynamics to

ﬂuctuation phenomena”, Zeits. Physik 32, 753 (1925).

[13] Translated from: A. Einstein “Zur theorie der Lichterzeugung und
Lichtabsorption”, Ann. der Phys. 20, 199-206 (1906), with a modernized
notation.

[14] M. Revzen, R. Opher, M. Opher and A. Mann, “Casimir entropy”, J.
Phys. A: Math. Gen. 30 (1997) 7783-7789. See particularly Eq. (20).

[15] J.H. Cooke “Casimir force on a loaded string”, Amer. J. of Phys. 66,

569-572 (1998).

15

Figure 1: Water-fall picture of Carnot cycles for a system alternately in
contact with hot and cold baths, pictured as reservoirs at altitudes Thot and
Tcold, respectively, above a lake.
If the cycle is reversible, the amount of
water ﬂowing from the upper reservoir to the lake is equal to the amount of
water pumped from the lake to the lower reservoir. In that case the Carnot
eﬃciency may be attained.

16

Figure 2: An L − C single-mode oscillator is shown. The ﬁgure shows cycles
in the temperature versus entropy diagram for the case where Thot = 1 and
Tcold = 1/4. (a) Reversible cycle, c=1. (b) Non-reversible cycle, c=2.

17

Figure 3: Work done per cycle and eﬃciency for Thot = 1 and Tcold = 1/4
(a) as functions of the parameter c. The Carnot eﬃciency is attained when
c = 1. (b) The oscillator frequency is kept constant when in contact with
either bath. The parameter a is deﬁned in the text.

18

