1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
9
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Exploring closed-loop feedback control
using experiments in optics

K. A. Jensen, R. J. Larson, and S. D. Bergeson∗
Department of Physics and Astronomy,
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602

E. F. McCormack†
Department of Physics,
Bryn Mawr College, 101 N. Merion Ave., Bryn Mawr, PA 19010-2899

February 2, 2008

Abstract

We present two experiments in closed-loop feedback con-
trol. In the ﬁrst experiment, students control the pointing
angle of a laser to “lock” the laser onto a “target.” In the
second, students stabilize the pathlength diﬀerence in two
arms of a Michelson interferometer. These experiments are
appropriate for electronics and optics laboratory classes for
junior and senior level students.

1

Introduction

Feedback control systems are all around us. Cruise control,
climate control, temperature regulation in engines, pres-
sure control in industrial steam systems, power supply cur-
rent and voltage regulators, frequency controllers and many
other systems use feedback control. Our own bodies use this
kind of control to stand and walk, to watch a passing object,
and to regulate body temperature.

Your home or oﬃce climate-control system, for example,
uses feedback to maintain an inside temperature of 23 oC
(your set point). On a cold morning, the heater turns on.
When the temperature rises above the set point, the heater
turns oﬀ and the room gradually cools. Eventually the tem-
perature falls below the set point, and the heater turns on
again.

This particular kind of automatic feedback control is rel-
atively crude. It falls into the class of “proportional con-
trollers,” where the feedback signal is proportional to the
error signal. In this example, the temperature is not main-
tained exactly at the set point, but oscillates within a small
range around it. As long as the oscillation is not too great,
the temperature feels constant, and the control system is
adequate.

∗scott.bergeson@byu.edu
†emccorma@brynmawr.edu

1

However, many applications require tighter regulation,
and the feedback systems become more complicated. Better
regulation requires detailed information about the response
time of the system to a given input, the size and frequency
content of the perturbing signals, and the necessary regula-
tion tolerances for the system.

Several textbooks describe generalized approaches for im-
plementing feedback control (see, for example, [1]). These
treatments typically use mathematical models, diﬀerential
equations, Laplace transforms, complex algebra, and com-
puter simulations to design the optimum feedback system
with the proper gain, roll-oﬀ frequency, and phase margin.
The strength of these treatments is that they can be applied
to all kinds of systems, from tiny voltage control circuits to
large manufacturing operations and complex delivery sys-
tems.

For many students, these powerful and generalized treat-
ments of feedback control are diﬃcult to penetrate. Some-
how the simple physical picture of stabilizing your system
output is lost in mathematical models and in the jargon of
the discipline.

This paper is an attempt to provide a few simple hands-
on illustrations of feedback control in a laboratory setting.
In it we walk the reader through two brief and relatively
inexpensive implementations of feedback control. The pre-
sentation is fairly conceptual. It does not include a math-
ematical model of the systems. Also missing is a detailed
discussion of system stability and the associated methods of
modeling, measuring, and implementing high stability con-
trol systems. However, we do point out departure points in
the discussion where interested readers can ﬁnd more infor-
mation in the literature. In our opinion, this introductory
presentation gives students (and instructors) an intuitive
introduction to the basic concepts of feedback control.

+

_

Vin

(a)

Motor 

Detector 1 

Vout

+

_

Detector 2 

Amplifier

u

y

+

_

x

(b)

G

H

Figure 1: Block diagram of the laser tracker experiment.
(a) Detailed diagram. An input voltage (Vin) drives the
motor. The diﬀerence of the two detector signals is the
output voltage (Vout), or in our case, the error signal. This
error signal is ampliﬁed and added to the input voltage
to change the pointing of the laser. (b) Traditional block
diagram. The system input is x, and the output is y. The
function G represents the transfer from voltage in to voltage
out, sometimes called the forward gain of the system. The
function H is the feedback gain.

2 Laser Tracking Device

Our ﬁrst feedback control example is a laser tracker—a
generic control system. With variations in the pointing de-
vice and the detector, the same basic idea is used for missile
tracking systems and telescope pointing stabilization.
In
this lab, students build an automatic pointing system that
keeps a laser pointing at the center of a “target.”

The block diagram in Figure 1 outlines the major por-
tions of the experiment. We mount the small key-chain
laser-pointer directly on the shaft of a DC motor. The
detector is a two-segment photodetector that our students
build, as described below.

In Figure 1a, the voltage Vin at the motor changes the
laser’s pointing angle. If the laser points at the center of
the target, the signal out from the two detectors is identical.
The diﬀerence of the two detector signals, Vout, is zero. If
the laser points a little to the right, Vout is negative (say);
and if the laser points a little to the left, Vout is positive.
The voltage Vout is ampliﬁed and added into the input signal
to move the laser back toward the center of the target. This
is the essence of closed-loop feedback control: the system
output is sampled and compared to the desired output; and
the system input is changed in such a way as to bring the
system output closer to the desired output.

A more traditional block diagram, typical of those used
in feedback-control analysis, is shown in Figure 1b. In the
Figure, G represents the “forward gain” or open loop trans-

2

fer function that converts the input voltage into the output
voltage. For small angular variations about the center of the
target, the voltage output y is linearly proportional to the
angular error, and passes through zero at zero angular er-
ror. (In other words, the system is linear and homogeneous
in a mathematical sense.) The output y is ampliﬁed by the
block H and subtracted from the input x. The variables x,
y, and u are related by the equations

Solving the above equations, the input and output for the
system are related by the equation

y = Gu
u = x − Hy.

y =

G
1 + GH (cid:19)

(cid:18)

x.

(1)

(2)

(3)

The term inside the parentheses is called the closed-loop
transfer function for the system.

In the typical case where GH ≫ 1, the closed loop trans-
fer function is y ≈ Gx/GH = x/H. So for large values of
the feedback gain H, the output (Vout in the laser tracker
experiment) goes to zero, meaning that the laser points ex-
actly at the center of the target.

This analysis demonstrates that tight regulation of the
output requires very high feedback gain. Of course there
are practical problems with high feedback gain, depending
on the particular system under study. For example, in me-
chanical systems when the feedback gain is high, the system
responds quickly to perturbations. But if the gain is too
high, the electronics can overdrive the motors, and damage
gears or shafts.

There is another problem with very high feedback gain.
In the above analysis we implicitly assume that the sys-
tem can respond instantaneously to the correction signal.
If there is a time delay between when the error signal is
measured and when it is corrected, either because of me-
chanical or electrical limitations, then too large a feedback
gain can send the system into oscillation.

In a more sophisticated analysis of the system, the for-
ward gain G and the feedback gain H are both functions
of frequency. The frequency-dependent gains and their as-
sociated phase shifts can be measured by driving the sys-
tem with sinusoidally varying inputs of diﬀerent frequen-
cies, then comparing the input and output. With gain and
phase shift information, students can model their transfer
functions as either high-pass, low-pass, or band-pass ﬁlters.
Equation 2 becomes a diﬀerential equation. The poles and
zeros of the equation, which can be found using Laplace
transforms and associated mathematical analysis, indicate
natural resonances in the system. Obviously, the poles can
cause problems unless the feedback gain is suﬃciently low
at those frequencies. It is possible to suppress the inﬂuence
of the poles in G by adding zeros in H at those frequencies.

1.00

1.00

0.063

A

3.00

B

+15V

0.125

0.125

0.75

0.125

Figure 2: Drawing of our detector. Students machine this
out of a single piece of aluminum. The phototransistors
are mounted in the small holes in the back of the detector.
The dimension A can be as small as conveniently possible.
The dimension B should be sized to your detector. The
dimensions are given in inches. A frosted glass microscope
slide is epoxied to the front to disperse the light in the
detector.

For more information, the reader is referred to the literature
[1].

2.1 Some Machining

There are, of course, several possible implementations of
this experiment. In our class, an introduction to the ma-
chine shop is an important segment, and this project is a
nice way to do it. We build our own target, which is a two-
segment photo-detector. Our target could be replaced by a
split photodiode, such as sold by Hamamatsu, UDT, or any
number of other manufacturers.

Figure 2 is a drawing of our detector—an aluminum box
three inches long, one inch wide, and one inch deep. The
box is hollowed out so it looks roughly like a square-ish ca-
noe. A thin aluminum plate running the short way across
the middle of the box divides the detector into nearly square
right and left chambers of equal size. The box is hollowed
out of a single piece of aluminum. We epoxy two photo-
transistors through holes on the bottom of the box, one in
each chamber near the dividing plate. Actually, the divid-
ing plate is probably superﬂuous, but it is conceptually nice
to have the two detectors physically separated.

We epoxy a sand-blasted microscope slide to the top of
the detector, the rough side facing out. The slide diﬀuses
the laser light in the detection chambers, making it possible
to detect the laser using the phototransistor when the laser
is not pointing directly at the transistor.
It also serves
the important safety role of eliminating specular reﬂections
from the detector.

+15V

Q1

Q1

1k

1k

20k

20k

20k

_
U1
+

20k

20k

20k

20k

_
U2
+

10k

to motor

+15V

10k

-15V

Figure 3: Schematic diagram for laser tracker control cir-
cuit. Q1 = phototransistor (MR370), U1 = operational am-
pliﬁer (AD823AN), U2 = high-current op-amp (LM6171).

The laser pointer is mounted on the shaft of 12V DC
motor, using a small aluminum block machined by the stu-
dents. Our motor turns too quickly even at the lowest oper-
ating voltage, so we step the rotation speed down 10x with
a pair of gears. The motor is not ideal for tight control
because of a hysteresis problem. The rotation speed is pro-
portional to the drive voltage until the voltage drops below
2V, when the motor abruptly stops. The motor does not
turn again until the drive voltage drops below -2V, when
it starts rotating in the other direction.
In spite of this,
feedback control still works to keep the laser pointing at
the center of the detector with a small oﬀset error.

2.2 Electronics

Figure 3 is a schematic diagram for the electronics used in
this experiment. As shown, the phototransistor collector
is wired to +15V. The base is unwired, and the emitter is
connected to ground through a 1 kΩ resistor. The current
emitted by the phototransistor is linearly proportional to
the incident light intensity. The 1 kΩ resistor converts that
to a voltage. The value of this resistor is chosen to keep the
current emitted by the phototransistor below the maximum
current rating for the device.

The output of U1 is the diﬀerence in the voltages out
from the two phototransistors. In our setup, U1 is a stan-
dard operational ampliﬁer that can source only 10 to 20 mA
of current. Because our motor draws 120 mA, we use U2
(the LM6171) as a high-current buﬀer. Also shown in the
schematic diagram is a variable voltage going into U2. This
is intended to provide some control of the laser pointing an-
gle when the system is not locked [2]. There is a “capture
range” for the feedback circuit: the laser needs to point near
the middle of the target in order for the control to work.
This extra control of the laser-pointing direction allows the

3

)

V

(
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

 
r
o
r
r

E

8

4

0

−4

−8

−10

0
Angle (degrees)

10

Figure 4: Error signal from our laser tracker. Even though
it is not quite symmetric, due to the diﬀerent sensitivities
of our two detectors, it is roughly dispersion-shaped. Near
the center, the error signal is linear, and passes through
zero volts at zero pointing error.

students to move the laser into the capture range.

The output of U1 is called the “error signal,” the signal
that indicates how far from the center of the detector the
laser points, and which direction (left or right). In the jar-
gon of feedback control, the ampliﬁer U2 is called the “con-
troller.” In the present case, our controller has only propor-
tional gain. Other kinds of feedback controllers use integral
gain or diﬀerential gain or combinations of the three.

An error signal generated in our setup is shown in Figure
4. This is the output from U2 (the controller) as the motor
sweeps the laser across the face of our detector. Notice that
when the laser points directly to the center of the detector,
the error signal is zero, making the system homogeneous in
the mathematical sense. Also notice that the slope of the
error signal is approximately linear, and has a value near
2 Volts/degree. The output of U2 goes directly to the DC
motor through a 120 Ohm, 2 Watt resistor. This resistor is
chosen to prevent overdriving U2, which at 15 V can source
only 0.13 A.

2.3 Putting it Together

we remove the wire that shorts out the feedback detector
on U2. Assuming that your detectors are working properly,
and that none of your op-amps has burned out, one of four
things happens.

1. Nothing. If the feedback gain is not large enough, the
error signal will not be large enough to make the motor
move. So, assuming that everything else is working
correctly, try increasing the feedback gain, i.e., increase
the value of the feedback resistor on U2.

2. The laser swings oﬀ in the wrong direction. Be careful
about this. Stray laser beams can pose a safety prob-
lem. It means that your error signal has the wrong po-
larity. The easiest way to ﬁx this problem is to change
the inputs on U1. So instead of connecting the right-
hand detector to the inverting input and the lefthand
connector to the non-inverting input, switch them. You
can also achieve the same thing by turning your detec-
tor over so that left is now right, and vice versa.

3. The laser-pointing angle oscillates back and forth. The
feedback gain is too high. Try reducing the gain by
using a smaller feedback resistor on U2. Actually, it is
interesting to see this behavior. You can induce it by
replacing U2’s feedback resistor with a 0.1 µF capaci-
tor. Try it.

4. It works: the laser angle quickly changes to cause the
laser to point to the center of the detector. When you
get to this point, it is fun to ﬁnd out how good your
locking system really is. Move the target and watch
the laser follow it. Move it fast and slow and watch
what happens. Find out how close the laser has to
be to the center of the target during the initial setup
in order to lock the laser to the target. Change the
gain (larger and smaller feedback resistors on U2) to
see how it aﬀects the stability and speed of response of
the lock.

3 A Stabilizing Circuit for a
Michelson Interferometer

Now you are ready to put the system together. To make
the laser lock onto the target, you ﬁrst need to get the laser
pointing in approximately the right place with the feedback
system disabled. Typically, we do this by ﬁrst shorting out
the feedback resistor on U2 (see Figure 3) with a wire, and
then turning on the laser pointer and moving the detector
so that the laser is centered on it. With the feedback resis-
tor on U2 shorted, the motor should be stationary with no
voltage driving it. (The Gain of U2 is proportional to the
value of the feedback resistance. If that resistance is zero,
the gain of U2 is also zero, meaning zero output voltage.)

When the detector is approximately in the right place,

With the rudiments of feedback control in hand, your stu-
dents may wish to try a more advanced application. A
few advanced projects, such as frequency stabilizing a laser
diode [3] or a He-Ne laser [4] and intensity stabilizing an
LED [5], are described in the literature. In this section we
describe stabilizing a Michelson interferometer.

Probably the Michelson interferometer is familiar to all
readers [6]. It is shown schematically in Figure 5a. Light
enters the interferometer at a beam splitter. Part of the
wave is transmitted through the beamsplitter, and part is
reﬂected. Each of these beams is retroreﬂected by a mir-
ror back to the beam splitter. During the round-trip from

4

Mirror

(b)

Beamsplitter

Mirror

Image on screen

(a)

Input

Lens

Screen

20k

Left

20k

Right

1.2M

_
+

20k

1.2M

_
+

20k

1k

20k

1k

1k

20k

1k

Difference 

Integrator 

20k

20k

_
+

20k

20k

1M

5pF

_
+

1k

to PZT

Figure 5: Optical layout for a Michelson interferometer.

the beamsplitter to the mirror and back to the beamsplit-
ter, each beam accrues a phase relative to the input beam.
If the round-trip distance is diﬀerent for the two beams,
they also accrue a phase relative to each other. When the
two beams are recombined on the beamsplitter, this relative
phase can produce constructive or destructive interference,
making the output bright or dark.

In the standard arrangement, the output of the interfer-
ometer is projected onto a screen by a lens. The output
is a concentric set of rings, alternately bright and dark, as
shown in Figure 5b. When one of the retroreﬂecting mir-
rors moves either toward or away from the beamsplitter,
the rings will either collapse into or expand outward from
the center of the pattern. If your mirrors vibrate, or if there
are air currents in the room, the ring position will ﬂuctuate
on the screen. It is this ring position on the screen that we
want to control.

Controlling the ring position is quite similar to controlling
the laser-pointing angle.
It requires a small two-segment
photo-detector, with an active area roughly equal to the
width of one of the bright rings. The analysis of the locking
circuit is identical to the laser pointer. The detector has a
“left” and a “right.” The diﬀerence of the signals from the
left and right sides of the detector indicate the position of
the bright and dark fringe relative to the center of the detec-
tor. This diﬀerence is ampliﬁed and fed to a piezoelectric
(PZT) crystal, which translates one of the retroreﬂecting
mirrors in the right direction to move the edge of one ring
to the center of the detector.

Our detector for this lab was a quadrant photodetector
(Hamamatsu S1557). We mounted the detector onto a PC
board and combined the four quadrants into two pairs, so
that the detector output had only a “left” and “right” sig-
nal. The electronics are shown schematically in Figure 6.
The laser intensity on the photodetector is much smaller in
this lab exercise than in the laser pointer experiment. Ac-
cordingly, the summing ampliﬁers provide some gain (50x).

Figure 6: Schematic diagram of the electronics used to sta-
bilize a Michelson interferometer. The op-amps are all the
familiar 741’s.

The values you use in your setting will depend on the in-
tensity of the laser, the eﬃciency of your detector, and so
forth.

The diﬀerence signal is generated by taking the diﬀer-
ence between the left and right segments of the detector
with a diﬀerence ampliﬁer, as shown in Figure 6. The feed-
back ampliﬁer follows the diﬀerence ampliﬁer, with either
integral gain (shown in the diagram) or proportional gain.
Not shown in the diagram is an optional oﬀset circuit
and high-voltage ampliﬁer. Our PZT crystal (Thorlabs
AE0203D04) expands at roughly 0.08 µm/V, and has a
maximum voltage rating of 150 V. It is intended to op-
erate with a positive bias voltage. Reversing the voltage on
the device shortens its lifetime, but the device can tolerate
In our experiment, we drive
moderate negative voltages.
the PZT only to ±10V. In an optimized circuit, the output
would be shifted from ±10V to range from 0V to 20V, and
then ampliﬁed to range from 0V to 150V. However, these
last steps make the laboratory exercise somewhat more in-
volved, and don’t signiﬁcantly increase the student’s under-
standing of closed-loop feedback control.

As before, the students place the detector in roughly the
right position with the feedback gain set to zero (i.e., the
switch across the capacitor in Figure 6 closed), and then
open the switch to engage the “lock” to the fringe. As with
most labs, the students’ ﬁrst attempt at locking probably
won’t work. The list of things to check are roughly the same
as those for the laser pointer, and the reader is referred to
the list above.

The goal is to have the error signal driving the PZT range
over 10 Volts as the detector traverses one ring. If it does
not, the feedback gain in the diﬀerence ampliﬁer may need
to be increased. In Figure 6 the diﬀerence ampliﬁer gain is
unity. Try increasing this gain by increasing the 20 k-ohm

5

feedback resistor. Conversely, if the gain is too high, the
output of the integrator will saturate at the supply voltage.
The 1M-ohm resistor in parallel with the capacitor between
the negative input and the output of the integrator is used
to keep the integrator from saturating due to inherent oﬀset
currents in the 741s. If the circuit refuses to lock, this may
mean that the error signal going to the PZT has the wrong
polarity. As with the laser pointer, the easiest way to ﬁx this
problem is to reverse the inputs to the diﬀerence ampliﬁer
or to turn the detector over, so left is now right and vice
versa.

When the lock works, students can move the detector and
watch the fringe pattern change. As the detector moves
toward the center of the fringe pattern, the fringes will also
collapse toward the center. When the detector moves away
from the center of the fringe pattern, the fringe pattern will
also expand away from the center. Of course, the PZT can
only expand roughly one µm with these voltages, so this
eﬀect can be observed only over a relatively limited range.
The switch can be momentarily closed to reset the signal
to the PZT to zero in order to continue locking to the same
edge as the detector is moved further.

4 Acknowledgements

EFM would like to thank M. Noel for his help with the
Michelson interferometer experiment. This work is sup-
ported in part by a grant from the Research Corporation
and from the National Science Foundation under Grants
No. PHY-9985027 and PHY-9623569.

References

[1] R. C. Dorf, Modern Control Systems, (Addison-Wesley,

Menlo Park, 1998).

[2] When a system output is tightly regulated to a desired
output, the system is said to be “locked” to the output.

[3] R. A. Boyd, J. L. Bliss, and K. G. Libbrecht, “Teach-
ing physics with 670 nm diode lasers−experiments with
Fabry-Perot cavities,” Am. J. Phys. 64, 1109-1116
(1996).

[4] K.J. Jones and J.S. Strait, Optics and Spectroscopy Un-
dergraduate Laboratory Resource Book (Optical Society
of America, Washington, D.C. 1993), pp.7-13.

[5] L. Sliwczynski and M. Lipinski, “Circuit uses sim-
ple LED for near-IR light,” EDN Magazine, Issue 18,
1998. This is also available at http://www.ednmag.com/-
ednmag/archive.asp by following the link to the Septem-
ber 1, 1998 issue.

[6] E. Hecht and A. Zajac, Optics, (Addison-Wesley, Menlo

Park, 1974).

6

