Direction dependency of extraordinary refraction index

Faculty of Education, University of Ljubljana, Kardeljeva pl.16, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia

Joˇzef Stefan Institute, Jamova 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia

Mojca ˇCepiˇc

(February 2, 2008)

Abstract

A simple experiment is presented that enables qualitative and quantitative

measurement of the extraordinary refractive index direction dependency in an

uniaxial nematic liquid crystal. Three liquid crystaline cells were designed in

which elongated molecules of nematic liquid crystal align in directions which

enable to observe the variation of extraordinary refractive index as a function

of the direction of light.

1
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
8
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

The most common experiment to demonstrate birefringence is the observation of doubled
objects through the calcite crystal1. When a polarizer is placed behind the crystal or in
front of it, one of the pictures dissapears if the polarizer direction coincides with one of
the polarizability tensor eigenvectors. Although the doubling of pictures is persuasive for an
educated physicist, an extensive explanation is needed for students to whom the phenomenon
is presented for the ﬁrst time.

Another experiment which demonstrates the splitting of the light beam into two perpen-
dicularly polarized beams with diﬀerent phase velocities uses a large birefringent crystal,
thick enough that after the transmition of the incident nonpolarized beam, two separated
beams can be observed as two light spots on a distant screen. Changing the direction of the
incident light by rotating the sample, the direction dependency of the extraordinary refrac-
tion index in uniaxial crystals as well as the direction dependency of both indeces in biaxial
crystals can be observed. Unfortunately, the accuracy of the quantitative measurements of
both indeces is poor, since only a slight nonparallelism of the sample surfaces can results in
huge changes of the transmitted light direction2. The easiest accesible crystals are biaxial
( e.g. quarz), which additionally complicates the comparison of the results with theoretical
predictions.

In this paper a simple experiment is presented in which liquid crystal in the optically
uniaxial nematic phase is used as a birefringent material. The experiment enables demon-
stration of the extraordinary refraction index direction dependency. In the undergraduate
lab the experiment can also be used for accurate measurements of the extraordinary index in
diﬀerent directions. The characteristic experimental data is presented in the present paper.
Nematic liquid crystals are composed of elongated molecules with orientationally ordered
long molecular axes. Due to the rapid molecular rotations around long molecular axis,
the system is optically uniaxial. The orientational correlation length perpendicular to the
molecular long axes extends to 500 µm in nematic liquid crystals3, therefore the well ordered
samples have to be thinner than that. Since elongated molecules have a larger polarizability
along the long molecular axis than perpendicular to it, the direction of the optical axis for a
liquid crystal in a cell is known from the preparation of the glass coating. In thin samples,
spatial separation of the ordinary and extraordinary beam can be obtained by the prismatic
eﬀect4.

In order to study the direction dependency of the extraordinary refraction index, three
diﬀerent wedge cells shown in Fig.1 were designed. The cells were approximately 1 cm long
and half of the cm wide. The 200 µm thick foil was inserted and glued between the glasses in
one of the narrower sides, while the other narrow side of the cell was glued directly together
forming the wedge. Two of the cells had polymide coating rubbed along the wedge of the
cell or perpendicular to it (Fig. 1 a,b). The third cell had a polymer coating which aligned
long molecular axes perpendicular to the glass (Fig. 1c). To avoid a long description of
molecular orientations in diﬀerent cells, let us call the cell with molecular axes oriented
along the wedge (Fig. 1a) the transverse cell, the cell with long axes oriented along the
longer side of the cell (Fig. 1b) the longitudinal cell and the cell with molecular long axes
perpendicular to the glass (Fig. 1c) the perpendicular cell. The names should remind the
reader of the orientations of the long molecular axes and consequently of the direction of
the extraordinary polarization and the optical axes. The cells were ﬁlled with the liquid
crystal5 heated above the transition temperature from the nematic to the isotropic phase.

2

The capilary eﬀect was used to ﬁll the cell.

The phase velocity of light in the direction in an angle θ with the optical axis of an

uniaxial crystal like a nematic liquid crystal is given by6

ve(θ)2 = v2

o cos2 θ + v2

e,0 sin2 θ.

Here ve is the phase velocity of light with the extraordinary polarization i.e. with the electric
ﬁeld oscillating in the incident plane. The phase velocity ve,o is the smallest phase velocity
of the extraordinary polarized light in a negative birefringent uniaxial liquid crystal, when
the light direction is perpendicular to the optical axis i.e. θ = 90◦. The ordinary phase
velocity vo
is direction independent. Both refractive indeces can be obtained from the
general deﬁnition of a refractive index as a ratio between the phase velocity of light in
vacuum and the phase velocity in a transparent material:

(1)

(2)

ne(θ)2 =

e,0 n2
n2
o
n2
e,0 cos2 θ + n2

o sin2 θ

where refraction indeces are marked with the same subscripts as the corresponding phase
velocities. The light polarized in the incident plane therefore refracts diﬀerently that the
light polarized perpendicular to the incident plane. The direction of the extraordinary light
in the birefringent material therefore depends on the orientation of the optical axis as well
as the incident angle.

The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 2. The wedge cell is ﬁxed into the holder
and it is put on the rotatable table with longer side parallel to the table surface. A laser
pointer is used as a source of the nonpolarized light beam. In addition to the low price,
it is a nonpolarized quasi
laser pointer has another advantage over the He-Ne lasers, i.e.
monocromatic light source. The dispersion of both refractive indeces is quite common in
liquid crystals and the experimental study with a monochromatic light avoids this problem.
The direction of the incident light is always in the incident plane perpendicular to the
wedge. When passing through the wedge cell the nonpolarized incident beam splits into
two perpendicularly polarized beams. After the transmition both beams have diﬀerent
directions due to the prismatic eﬀect of the wedge and after a few tenths of a meter they
become separated in space. On a distant screen two light dots appear (Fig. 2). We measure
the position of the dots relative to the position of the direct beam dot, when light does not
pass through the cell. Changing the incident direction of light by rotating the table, the
position of dots changes and enable the calculation of both indeces.

In the transverse cell none of the indeces changes with the direction of light as long as
the incident plane is parallel to the long side of the cell (Fig. 1a - below). We can calculate
both of them from the Snell’s law.

sin α
sin βe

= ne,0

and

= no.

sin α
sin βo

(3)

In the expression (3) the angle α is the controlled incident angle and βo, βe are the refraction
angles of the ordinary and the extraordinary polarized light. Both refraction angles are
obtained from the direction of refracted light γo and γe (see Fig. 3), which can be calculated
from the positions of the light dots on the screen (xo and xe), the distance l between the cell

3

and the screen and the wedge angle δ (Fig.2) expressed in radians which is approximatelly
d/h (Fig.1 a). Using the identity

(4)

(5)

(6)

the refracted beam direction β is found from

sin α
sin β

=

sin(γ ∓ δ)
β ∓ δ

= n

tan β =

δ sin α
sin γ ± sin α

.

In the expressions (4,5) the upper sign in ∓, ± stands for the beam direction given in Fig.
3 by solid line and the opposite sign stands for angles in the opposite direction (dashed line
- Fig. 3) . The angle δ of the wedge cells is small (≈ 1◦) therefore sin δ ≈ δ, expressed in
radians, and cos δ ≈ 1. With the known direction β, the value of the refraction index is
given by the ﬁrst part of Eq. (4). Expressions (4) and (5) are general expressions which
can be used to obtain the refraction index when light passes through the thin wedge sample
of any, not necessary birefringent, material and allows for evaluation of both, ordinary and
extraordinary refraction indeces.

When light passes the transverse cell the oscillating electric ﬁeld has always one com-
ponent parallel to the long molecular axes and the other perpendicular to it. Both indeces
are independent of the incident direction as seen in Fig 1a below. The cell can be used
to demonstrate the splitting of the beam, to show the polarization of the ordinary and ex-
traordinary beam and to make a quantitative measurement of the maximum value of the
extraordinary refraction index and the value of the ordinary refraction index. In adition,
measurements of the dependence of both refractive indeces on the incident angle, although
they are constant, provide an estimation of the experimental accuracy.

In the perpendicular cell, the optical axes is perpendicular to the glass plate and the

refraction angle βe is equal to θ (Fig. 1b - below):

sin α
sin βe

= ne(βe) = ne(θ)

where ne is calculated from Eq. (4) and (5). When the incident light is perpendicular to
the cell, the electric ﬁeld is perpendicular to the long molecular axis so the light direction
coincides with optical axis and the beam splitting does not occur. But as soon as the
incident light is not perpendicular to the cell, there is a component of the electric ﬁeld along
the long molecular axis and consequently the value of the extraordinary index changes from
the value of the ordinary index (Fig 1b below). When we rotate the cell, the beam splits
and the single spots splits into two, demonstrating that the indeces are not equal anymore.
From the measurements of the dot positions the behaviour of the extraordinary refractive
index close to the optical axis can be calculated.

In the parallel cell, the optical axes is parallel to the glass and the refraction angle

βe = π

2 − θ. The extraordinary refractive index is therefore given by:

= ne(βe) = ne(θ).

(7)

sin α
sin βe

=

sin α
2 − θ)

sin( π

4

The last of the three cells can be used to study the direction dependency of the extraordi-
nary index when the diﬀerence of both indeces is close to the largest value. When incident
direction of light is varied, the extraordinary index decreases, since the component of the os-
cilating electric ﬁeld along the long molecular axis decreases (Fig. 1c below). Unfortunately,
to show the decrease in the index, the evaluation of both indeces from the measurement of
the dot positions is necessary.

There are few limitations in these three experiments which have to be considered. Al-
though light with ordinary and extraordinary polarization can propagate in any direction,
experimentally we are limited with the refraction of the incident light, since the light source
is outside of the birefringent material. In the presented situation the ordinary beam direc-
tion was theoretically limited (for the light parallel to the cell surface) to 26◦ for no = 1.5
and to 22◦ for the extreme value of ne,0 = 1.76 in the geometry of the parallel cell. The cell
size and the cell holder aditionally limit the incident angle to the values of less than 50◦.
In Fig. 4 we show the combined results of the extraordinary index measurements in the
paralell and the perpendicular cell and compare them to the theoretical expression (1).

To conclude, the experimental setup which enables a detailed study of the light behavior
in an uniaxial birefringent material, is presented. In order to study the direction dependency
of the extraordinary refraction index, three diﬀerent liquid crystaline cells were designed.
The transverse cell enables a demonstration of the splitting of a nonpolarized beam into
the ordinary and the extraordinary beam. Their polarization can be shown of the extreme
value for the extraordinary refraction index as well as the value of the ordinary refractions
index can be measured. The transverse cell can also be used to estimate the measurement
accuracy. The perpendicular cell enables the demonstration of the direction dependecy of
the extraordinary index, as well as its measurement, when the value is close to the value of
ordinary refraction index. The parallel cell can be used for the quantitave measurement of
the extraordinary index direction dependency close to its largest value.

The author is gratefull to Miha ˇSkarabot for producing the wedge cells, to Ludwik
Kowalsky for many stimulating discussions, to Martina ˇSubic for the control set of measure-
ments and to Nataˇsa Vaupotiˇc for many helpfull comments during the preparation of the
manuscript.

1E. Hecht, Optics, 3rd ed. ( Addison Wesley Longman, 1998), p. 333.
2L. Kowalsky, private communications.
3P. G. de Gennes and J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid Crystals, 2nd ed., (Oxford Science
Publications, 1995), p.98.
4D. K. Shenoy, ”Measurements of Liquid Crystal Refractive Indices”, Am. J. Phys. 62,
858-859 (1994).
5Nematic liquid crystals with appropriate properties are commercially available by Merck.
6M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, 6th ed., (Pergamon Press, 1993), p.680.

5

FIGURES

FIG. 1. a) In the parallel cell molecular long axes are oriented along the wedge. If the incident
plane is parallel to the longer side of the cell, the two indeces do not change with the light direction
(below). b) In the perpendicular cell molecular long axes are oriented perpendicularly to the
cell glass. The extraordinary index increases with the increasing incident angle (below). c) In
the longitudinal cell molecular long axes are oriented parallel to the longer side of the cell. The
extraordinary index decreases from its maximum value with growing incident angle.

FIG. 2. Schematic presentation of the experimental setup.

FIG. 3. Geometry of the experiment. The light incident on the cell with the incident angle α,
refracts in the material by an angle β. The second incident angle is β − δ for the positive α (solid
line) and β + δ for the negative α (dashed line). The light refracts again by an angle γ.

FIG. 4. The extraordinary refraction index at the angle θ close to 0 measured in the perpen-
dicular cell and at θ close to π/2 measured in the longitudinal cell. The theoretical direction
dependence for ne,0 = 1.76 and no = 1.5 is given for a comparison. For experiments the nematic
liquid crystal E8 was used. Both indeces ne,0 and no were measured in the parallel cell.

6

