1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Modernizing Newton, to work at any speed

P. Fraundorf
UM-StL Physics and Astronomy, St Louis MO 63121
(Dated: November 16, 2012)

Modiﬁcation of three ideas underlying Newton’s original world view, with only minor changes
in context, might oﬀer two advantages to introductory physics students. First, the students will
experience less cognitive dissonance when they encounter relativistic eﬀects. Secondly, the map-
based Newtonian tools that they spend so much time learning about can be extended to high
speeds, non-inertial frames, and even (locally, of course) to curved-spacetime.

I.

INTRODUCTION

II. MISCONCEPTION ONE

Relativistic environment dwellers in the earth’s gravi-
tational well often experience time diﬀerently than space.
Practical challenges for them thus begin and end in
frame-speciﬁc terms1, even if coordinate-free insights
help visualize the symmetry of the problem2. Hence prac-
tical problem solvers, in such environments, can beneﬁt
from Newton-like laws [with units] based in their own
frame of reference, which model nature over as wide a
range of (location and velocity) conditions as possible3.

Just as the ﬂuid ﬂow tools we oﬀer to introductory stu-
dents today may not apply under supersonic conditions,
so the tools for thinking about motion fail in fundamen-
tal ways at relativistic speeds and in curved spacetime.
We discuss here ways to hedge our bets with the tools
to describe motion – looking at the pros and cons of
some changes in emphasis that can minimize the pain
of deeper understanding later. These changes might also
open the door to wider application of Newtonian tools,
particularly to the world of high speeds. For example,
few children know that relativity enhances their options
for long range travel in one lifetime, instead of limit-
ing their travel to places within 100 light years of their
place of birth. Likewise, describing the world land speed
record for particle acceleration in terms of “map distance
per unit traveler time” could augment public interest in
accelerators were particle speeds expressed in units of
lightyears per traveler year, the current record (e.g. for
50 GeV electrons) being on the order of 105.

Access to improved tools can be facilitated by avoid-
ing three assumptions implicit in the classical Newtonian
worldview: (i) global time, (ii) frame-invariant dynamics,
and (iii) limitation to inertial frames. These assumptions,
now considered to be incorrect, generate cognitive disso-
nance when one later considers either high speed motion
or modern views of gravity. Their elimination does not
require major changes. It further facilitates the extension
of familiar Newtonian tools to problems involving acceler-
ation at high speeds, and (with help from the equivalence
principle) to arbitrary coordinate systems as well.

Time is the same for everyone. This is the implicit
assumption of “global time”, against which most spoken
languages have little built in protection.

A. The Speciﬁed-Clock Fix

Make a habit of specifying the clock used to measure
time t, as well as the coordinate system yardsticks used
to measure position x. With time speciﬁed as measured
on map-clocks (i.e. a set of synchronized clocks con-
nected to the yardsticks with respect to which distance is
measured), the usual kinematic equations of introductory
physics need not be changed, even if their precise mean-
ing (at least in the case of equations describing relative
motion) is diﬀerent.

B. Consequences of Speciﬁed-Clocks

When t represents time on “map-clocks”, the usual
deﬁnitions of velocity and acceleration (as derivatives
of map-position with respect to t) deﬁne what rela-
tivists sometimes call “coordinate” velocity and acceler-
ation, respectively2. These deﬁnitions are useful at any
speed, although they become less global when spacetime
is curved. If the integrals of constant acceleration, like
∆v = a∆t and ∆(v2) = 2a∆x, represent relations be-
tween map-time and map-position, they follow simply
from these deﬁnitions and hence are also good at any
speed. The caveat, of course, is that holding coordinate
acceleration ﬁnite and constant is physically awkward at
high speeds, and impossible to do forever. This dimin-
ishes the usefulness of these equations in the high speed
case4, but not their correctness. Thus being speciﬁc
about clocks yields classical deﬁnitions of velocity and
acceleration, plus familiar equations of constant coordi-
nate acceleration, that work even at relativistic speeds.
The kinematical equations for relative motion (e.g.
x′ = x + vot and its time derivatives) now refer only to
yardsticks and clocks in a single reference frame. Hence
they only tell us about “map-frame” observations. While
they are correct in these terms, they only predict prime-
frame perspectives at low speed. Since multiple inertial

frames are a challenge in and of themselves5, leaving stu-
dents with this approximation may be the best choice in
an introductory course. As we show below, much can
be done from the perspective of a single inertial frame
to gain quantitative insight into motion at high speeds.
Hence exact position, velocity, and acceleration trans-
forms from the metric equation (like relativistic velocity
addition and the Lorentz transform) are perhaps better
left for later. With these above changes, subtly modiﬁed
introductory courses become natural venues for removing
the implicit assumption of “global-time” from the way in
which our brains are wired.

The conceptual distinction between stationary and
moving clocks further opens the door for students to
discover, and apply, Minkowski’s spacetime version of
Pythagoras’ theorem6 (c∆τ )2 = (c∆t)2 − (∆x)2, i.e. the
metric equation, as an equation for time τ on traveler
clocks in context of coordinates referenced to a single
map frame7. Lightspeed c here acts simply as a space-
time constant that connects traditional units for distance
and time. The metric equation connects (i) traveler and
map time intervals, (ii) coordinate velocity, v ≡ dx/dt,
with proper velocity8, w ≡ dx/dτ , and (iii) special to
general relativity as well.

One consequence of such an introduction to clock be-
havior at high speed, for example, is that an upper limit
on coordinate velocity v may appear more natural to stu-
dents since it follows from the lack of any such limit on
proper velocity w. One would hardly expect this latter
quantity (map distance traveled per unit traveler time)
to exceed inﬁnity for a real world traveler. The distinc-
tion between traveler and map time also yields a natural
deﬁnition for Einstein’s gamma factor γ ≡ dt/dτ . The
metric equation allows one to derive the familiar expres-
sion for this “speed of map time per unit time on the
clocks of a given traveler” in terms of coordinate veloc-
ity, namely γ = 1/p1 − (v/c)2 = w/v.

Rather than simply “being told” the metric equa-
tion and ways to use it, students might beneﬁt from
time spent ﬁrst pondering how to explain data on trav-
eler/map time diﬀerences, in the spirit of Piaget and
modeling workshop9.
In that case an airtrack thought
experiment, with adjustable kinetic energy source (e.g.
a spring) and two gliders that stick on collision, is ad-
equate to give students data for experimental discovery
(in their own terms) of phenomena underlying the metric
equation as well as relativistic expressions for the kinetic
energy, K = (γ − 1)mc2, and momentum, p = mw, of a
traveler of mass m.10 A particular student’s exploration
might for example uncover, instead of the metric equa-
tion, the mathematically equivalent relation that holds
constant the sum of squares of their “coordinate speeds”
through space (dx/dt) and time (cdτ /dt).

The downside of specifying clocks, of course, is that
global time is more deeply-rooted and simpler than clock-
speciﬁc time. For example, tradition shows that treating
magnetism and gravity as add-ons to a world with no
relativistic eﬀects is possible. On the other hand, our

present understanding of both has it’s origins in the met-
ric equation, and these are very down-to-earth phenom-
ena indeed.

2

III. MISCONCEPTION TWO

Coordinate acceleration and force are frame-invariant.
Informal polls at one state11 and one national12 AAPT
meeting suggest that physics teachers often presume that
the rate of change of conserved quantities (energy as well
as momentum) is frame-invariant, even though the ex-
pression for power as a product of force and velocity
makes this clearly incorrect at even the lowest speed.

A. The Subjective-Dynamics Fix

Address the issue of frame invariance when dynami-
cal quantities are ﬁrst introduced. Point out that the
value of the conserved dynamical quantities momentum
and energy, along with their time derivatives force and
power, depends on the frame of reference (even though
force is nearly frame-independent at low speeds). Like-
wise, note that coordinate acceleration a = dv/dt is not
necessarily the acceleration felt in the proper frame of
a traveler. The former is impossible to hold ﬁnite and
constant indeﬁnitely, while proper acceleration α is both
frame-invariant and possible to hold constant13. This is
what Newton had guessed (incorrectly) to be the case for
coordinate acceleration, by a perfectly reasonable appli-
cation of Occam’s razor given the observational data that
he had to work with at the time14,15.

Quantifying these accelerations at arbitrary speed is
simple in the unidirectional case16, where α = γ3a. An
invariant proper force Fo = mα may also be deﬁned
in this context17. Quantifying the conserved dynamical
quantities further requires relativistic expressions for mo-
mentum p = mw and energy E = γmc2. Their deriva-
tives with respect to map-time then become the famil-
iar net frame-variant force ΣF = mdw/dt and power
dE/dt = ΣF • v.

These quantities most directly represent the way that
momentum and energy associated with a traveling ob-
ject is changing, from the perspective of a map-frame
observer. Proper-time derivatives of momentum and en-
ergy are of course easier to transform from frame to frame
(they form a 4-vector), but they also represent a per-
spective intermediate between that of the map-frame ob-
server and the traveling object. The focus here is on
local implementation of the insights in terms of map-
frame observer and traveling-object experiences. Hence
references here to coordinate-free insights that underlie
the conclusions (e.g. to the four-vector nature of certain
quantities) are for instructor reference, but of limited use
to students wanting a sense of anyspeed motion only in
concrete terms.

Perhaps coincidentally in the unidirectional motion
case, the net frame-variant force ΣF and the proper force
Fo are equal. In ﬂat (3+1D) space-time, proper acceler-
ation and proper force behave like a 3-component scalar
(i.e. no time component) within the “local space-time
coordinate system” of an accelerated object2, while the
corresponding frame-variant forces diﬀer and may be ac-
companied by frame-variant energy changes. The poten-
tials that give rise to such frame-variant forces can have
electrostatic) and space-like (e.g.
both time-like (e.g.
magnetic) components6.
In curved space-time and/or
rotating coordinate systems, the proper acceleration and
proper force retains it’s three-component form only from
instant to instant, within the traveling object’s “proper
reference frame”2.

B. Consequences of Subjective-Dynamics

To begin with, students are alerted to the fact that rel-
ativity makes many quantities more dependent on one’s
choice of reference frame. For some of these quanti-
ties (time increments, object length, mass18, traveler
velocity19, and acceleration17) there is a “minimally vari-
ant” or proper form which can simplify discussion across
frames.

Recognizing the distinction between coordinate and
proper acceleration, students also gain (from the met-
ric equation) simple 1D equations for describing constant
proper acceleration. In terms of coordinate integrals like
those for constant coordinate acceleration above, there
are three equations instead of two20 because the met-
ric equation relates three coordinates: map-time t, map-
position x, and traveler-time τ . The integrals are ∆w =
α∆t, c2∆γ = α∆x, and c∆η = α∆τ where the “hyper-
bolic velocity angle”17 or rapidity η ≡ arctanh(v/c). One
can also give students a set of map-based Newton-like
laws good in (3+1)D ﬂat spacetime, with only a modest
amount of added complication21.

One downside of discussing the fact that observed
forces depend on one’s frame of motion (in ﬂat space-
time) and one’s location (in curved spacetime) is the
elegant simplicity (and for most engineers, the elegant
practicality as well) of “global” force and acceleration
in the Newtonian worldview. Prose breaking this news
to students in context may appropriately, therefore, re-
quire a long period of experimentation and reﬁnement,
and even then remain a corollary rather than a pillar of
introductory dynamics.

IV. MISCONCEPTION THREE

Newton’s laws work only in unaccelerated frames. This
misconception is often echoed in classes whose ﬁrst exam-
ple of a force is the aﬃne connection force2 gravity, which
like centrifugal force arises only if one chooses a “locally
non-inertial” coordinate system. Of course this would

3

be ﬁne for historical reasons, if the equivalence principle
hadn’t elegantly shown that Newton’s laws work locally
in any frame22. This is potentially motivational news for
those ﬁrst struggling to understand how Newton’s laws
work, and perhaps worth sharing from the start.

A. The Equivalence Fix

Show examples of the way that Newton-like laws work
locally in any frame, when one includes “geometric”
(aﬃne connection) forces (e.g.
centrifugal or gravity)
that act on every ounce of one’s being. Geometric forces
also have the property that they may be made to van-
ish at any point in space and time, by choosing a “lo-
cally inertial” coordinate system. Non-local eﬀects, like
tides and coriolis forces, of course may not be possible to
eliminate2.

Example 1: On traveling around a curve of radius r
in a car at speed v, note that a weight suspended by a
string from the rear view mirror accelerates away from
the center of the turn. In the non-inertial frame of the
moving car, this is instinctively seen as the consequence
of a “centrifugal force”. A more careful look shows that
this force seems to act on every ounce of the object’s
being. For example, the resulting acceleration is to ﬁrst
order independent of object mass (equal to v2/r), and
it does not push or pull just on one side or the other.
If an
Secondly, the explanation is only useful locally.
object is allowed to travel too far under this geometric
force (e.g. more than 30 cm when going around a 30
m radius curve) complications arise in it’s motion not
expected from a simple radially-outward force. Finally,
note that this force vanishes if one observes events from
the “locally-inertial” frame of a pedestrian standing by
the side of the road. Free objects in the car are simply
trying to move in a straight line in the absence of any
force at all.

Example 2: When standing near the surface of the
earth, note that when you drop an object, it falls. This
is instinctively seen as a “gravity force”. On closer in-
spection, this force acts on every ounce of an object’s
being in that it gives rise to an acceleration (g) that is
independent of mass. No single part of the object seems
to be pulled or pushed preferentially. Note also that this
force vanishes if one observes events from the “locally-
inertial” frame of a person falling with the object. To it’s
falling companion, the object is simply trying to move in
a straight line, in the absence of any force at all.

Denying the usefulness or reality of either of these
forces denies the utility of the equivalence principle itself.
The question is not if these forces exist. One’s sense of
being forced to the side of vehicles as they round curves is
as real as one’s sense of being forced to the ground when
a chair leg breaks. Rather, we might better be asking:
What is the range of positions and times over which such
“geometric forces” can be seen to govern motion in their
non-inertial setting, while remaining consistent with a set

of Newton-like rules.

B. Consequences of Equivalence

Students are readied for simple equations that compare
centrifugal and centripetal perspectives on travel around
curves2, and electrostatic and gravitational point sources
with regard to their relativistic (e.g. magnetic and cur-
vature) eﬀects21. They also gain “geodesic frame” (e.g.
satellite) and “shell-frame” (e.g. earth) based Newton-
like equations of motion at any speed, around objects of
any mass. This is relevant to global positioning system
applications which are forced to recognize the subjectiv-
ity of earth-based NIST clocks23, and extreme environ-
ments like those discussed in Taylor and Wheeler’s most
recent text24.

Disadvantages of discussing the local validity of New-
ton’s laws, as distinct from their correctness only in un-
accelerated frames, are at least twofold. To begin with,
the concept of “local validity” is rather sophisticated.
Admittedly we have many concrete examples, like the
local validity of the uniform gravitational ﬁeld approxi-
mation at the earth’s surface, and it’s inability to deal
with less local phenomena such as orbits and lunar tides.
A deeper problem is the diﬃculty of explaining what an
inertial frame is, if stationary frames (e.g. sitting down
on a stationary earth) can be non-inertial. It is simpler
(or at least more traditional) to introduce inertial frames
by referring to their uniform motion relative to some in-

ertial standard, rather than by referring to the absence
of a felt “geometric” acceleration acting on every ounce
of mass in one’s corner of the world.

4

V. CONCLUSIONS

Measurement of time and mass in meters provides rel-
ativistic insight into global symmetries, and the relation
between 4-vectors in coordinate-independent form. How-
ever, frame-speciﬁc Newton-like laws with separate units
for length, time and mass are perhaps still crucial to the
inhabitants of any particular world, as an interface to
local physical processes.

We point out some advantages of the fact that New-
ton’s laws, written in context of a map-frame of choice,
have considerable potential beyond their classical ap-
plications. By avoiding the implicit assumptions of (i)
global time, (ii) frame-invariant dynamics, and (iii) lim-
itation to inertial frames, introductory students can be
better prepared for an intuitive understanding of rela-
tivistic environments, as well as for getting the most out
of the laws themselves.

Acknowledgments

Several decades of energetic work by E. F. Taylor, on
pedagogically-informed content-modernization, has of-
fered key inspiration.

1 J. S. Bell, How to teach special relativity, in The speak-
able and unspeakable in quantum mechanics (Cambridge
University Press, 1987).

2 C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne, and J. A. Wheeler, Gravita-

tion (W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1973).

3 N. Ashby, Relativity in the future of engineering, IEEE

Trans. on Inst. and Meas. 34(4), 505-514 (1994).

4 A. P. French, Special relativity, The M.I.T. Introductory

Physics Series (W. W. Norton, New York, 1968).

5 R. E. Scherr, P. S. Schaﬀer, and S. Vokos, Student un-
derstanding of time in special relativity: simultaneity and
reference frames, Phys. Educ. Res. - Am. J. Phys. Suppl.
69(7), S24 (2001).

6 H. Minkowski, in The principle of relativity - A collec-
tion, edited by translated by W. Perrett and G. B. J. with
annotations by A. Sommerfeld (Methuen and Company,
London, 1923), delivered at the 80th Assembly of German
Natural Scientists and Physicians in Cologne - 1908.

7 E. F. Taylor, The boundaries of nature, special and gen-
eral relativity and quantum mechanics: A second course
in physics, Am. J. Phys. 66, 369-376 (1998), the Oersted
Medal lecture.

8 Sears and Brehme, Introduction to the theory of relativity

(Addison-Wesley, New York, 1968).

9 D. Hestenes, Modeling games in the Newtonian world, Am.

J. Phys. 60, 732-748 (1992).

(2001), physics/0109030.

11 (1997), the Illinois State AAPT Fall Meeting in Godfrey

IL.

12 (1998), the AAPT Winter Meeting in New Orleans.
13 C. Lagoute and E. Davoust, The interstellar traveler, Am.

J. Phys. 63, 221-227 (1995).

14 I. Newton, Mathematical principles of natural philosophy -
1686 (U. California Press, Berkeley, 1946), translated by
Motte in 1729, revised by Cajori in 1946.

15 S. Chandrasekhar, Newton’s Principia for the common

reader (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1995).

16 A. J. Mallinckrodt, What happens when at > c? (1999),
presented at the Summer 1999 AAPT meeting in San An-
tonio, Texas.

17 E. Taylor and J. A. Wheeler, Spacetime physics (W. H.
Freeman, San Francisco, 1963), 1st ed., contains some ma-
terial not found in the 2nd edition.

18 C. G. Adler, Does mass really depend on velocity, dad?,

Am. J. Phys. 55, 739-743 (1987).

19 W. A. Shurcliﬀ, Special relativity: The central ideas (1996),

19 Appleton St, Cambridge MA 02138.

20 P. Fraundorf, Teaching Newton with anticipation... (1998),

physics/9710013.

21 P. Fraundorf, Some minimally-variant map-based rules of

motion at any speed (1998), physics/9704018.

22 A. Einstein, The meaning of relativity (Princeton Univ.

10 P. Fraundorf, An experience model for anyspeed motion

Press, Princeton, NJ, 1950), 3rd ed.

23 N. Ashby, in Gravitation and Relativity at the turn of the
Millenium, edited by N. Dadhich and J. V. Narlikar (Inter-
University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Pune
India, 1998), pp. 231–258.

24 E. Taylor and J. A. Wheeler, Exploring black holes (Addi-

son Wesley Longman, 2001), 1st ed.

5

