2
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
0
1
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Complexity: An Introduction

Rajesh R. Parwani1

University Scholars Programme,
National University of Singapore,
Singapore.

28 January 2002

Abstract

This article summarises a Web-book on “Complexity” that was
developed to introduce undergraduate students to interesting complex
systems in the biological, physical and social sciences, and the common
tools, principles and concepts used for their study.

1 Overview

I use the word Complexity to refer to the study of complex systems,
of which there is no uniformly accepted deﬁnition because, well, they are
complex. Roughly speaking, one says that a system is complex if it consists
of many interacting components (sub-units) and if it exhibits behaviour that
is interesting but at the same time not an obvious consequence of the known
interaction among the sub-units.

That sounds very vague, especially the use of words like ”interesting”
and ”obvious”, but it reﬂects an evolutionary perspective. For example, a
hundred years ago one might have described the study of how a substance
changes under heat (phase transitions) as a diﬃcult and interesting problem
that required one to deal with systems with a large number of interacting
components (atoms). However by now very powerful tools, such as thermo-
dynamics and statistical mechancis, have been developed to deal with such

1Email: parwani@nus.edu.sg

1

equilibrium systems leading to impressive quantitative agreement between
theory and experiment. Though such systems are not commonly referred to
as complex, they still provide valuable examples and concepts that have been
used in complexity studies.

Current interest has shifted to dynamical systems that are (generally)
out-of-equilibrium and thus highly non-linear. Such sytems actually form
the bulk of natural phenomena but for which the theoretical tools are as
yet poorly developed. Some examples of such complex systems or
phenomena are: The economy, the stock-market, the weather, ant
colonies, earthquakes, traﬃc jams, living organisms, ecosystems,
turbulence, epidemics, the immune system, river networks, land-
slides, zebra stripes, sea-shell patterns, and heartbeats.

There is no single ”Theory of Complexity”, and it is unlikely that there
will ever be one. Rather one hopes that apparently diﬀerent complex systems
can be grouped according to some common features that they have, so that
intuition and insight gained in studying one can be transferred to another.
Thus one of the main aims of complexity studies is to develop concepts,
principles and tools that allow one to describe features common to varied
complex systems. This leads to exciting interdisciplinary studies because
it turns out that ideas developed to handle complex systems in the physical
sciences have relevance also for systems in the biological and social sciences,
and vice versa!

What are some of the characteristics of complex systems? One often
quoted concept is that of emergence, which refers to the appearance of
laws, patterns or order through the cooperative eﬀects of the sub-units of a
complex system. Thus the emergent phenomena or laws are not an intrinsic
property of the sub-units but rather something that is a property of the
system as a whole. Simple examples are those of ”temperature” and the
”gas laws”: At the individual microscopic level, none of those make any
sense, but they are features of a large system. More sophisticated examples
are of ”intelligence” and ”conciousness” – where do they come from ?

Sometimes one sees the phrase ”the whole is more than the sum of its
parts”, as a deﬁnition of emergence. This again reﬂects the non-linearity
of the system, whereby the output is not proportional to the input, small
changes can give rise to large eﬀects, and the non-obvious results that can
be produced in a large system.

It is important to realise that the universe consists of many hierarchial
levels of complexity linked to each other. Each level has its own emergent

2

patterns and laws: As one goes down from galaxies, solar-systems, planets,
ecosystems, organisms, organs, cells, and atoms to quarks, diﬀerent eﬀective
laws emerge. However these laws would not be useful if there was not some
degree of universality, that is, one hopes that at each level of complexity
the same laws apply to varied systems rather than each following its own
tune. It is the apparent universality of the laws of physics, for example, that
makes the world comprehensible and gives us faith in its ultimate simplicity.
For example, at the atomic level weird quantum mechanics rules, but larger
systems are well described according to Newtonian laws, while engineers often
use empirical rules, and so do the social scientists.

It appears that nature has chosen to be economical (or is that an illusion
on our part?), so that the branching of trees or the air-passages in our lungs,
the shape of coastlines or clouds, the form of cauliﬂower or a mountain range,
can be described by fractal geometry: Such shapes are self-similar over a
wide range of scales, thus implying scale-invariance, whose hallmark is the
appearance of ”power-laws”. In an equilibrium system scale-invariance nat-
urally appears at the critical point of a second-order phase transition,
such as that between the liquid and vapour phases of water. However nat-
ural systems are out-of-equilibrium and the common appearance of fractals
and power-laws in such systems is not as well understaood. Self-organised
criticality is the idea that many out-of-equilibrium systems naturally or-
ganise themselves, without external tuning or prodding, into a state which is
at the threshold between complete disorder and complete order: That is, the
system arranges itself into a critical state, and so displays scale-invariance
and power-laws.

Living systems are the most complex examples one can think of and it
is remarkable how such systems tend in their development towards greater
order, organisation and complexity, in contrast to the arrow of time dic-
tated by the Second Law of Thermodynamics. Of course there is no
conﬂict as the increase in disorder and entropy required by the Second Law
refers to closed equilibrium systems. Living systems are neither closed nor
in equilibrium, but rather use an inﬂow of energy to drive processes that
increase their order (thus decreasing their entropy), and dissipate heat and
other waste products that lead to an overall increase in entropy of the uni-
verse. One can say that organisms are dissipative structures, and have a
tendency towards self-organisation and pattern formation.

Ant-colonies are classic examples of self-organisation. Without a leader
(the queen is actually an egg-laying machine) orchestrating everything, and

3

without any of the ants having taken a course in engineering or social sci-
ence, each ant seems to do its own thing, following a few simple rules that
determines its interaction with its environment or its ant-mates. Yet, an
incredibly complex and organised society emerges from such an interaction
of the many ants. Ant-colonies display remarkable adaptation to changing
circumstances, using both feedback mechanisms and parallel analysis of
options.
In recent years social and computer scientists have taken a keen
interest in studying ant colony behaviour in order to help solve problems in
their own ﬁelds.

Not all systems in nature appear organised or have some pattern to them.
Indeed many seem disorderly or ruled by random events. However some of
that randomness might only be on the surface. Chaos refers to the prop-
erty of some non-linear dynamical systems whereby they become extremely
sensitive to initial conditions and display long-term aperiodic behaviour that
seems unpredictable. Though chaotic behaviour might appear essentially
random, there is actually hidden order, apparent only in ”phase-space” rather
in ordinary space. Furthermore, many chaotic systems show universality in
their approach to chaos, giving one some predictive power. Thus discovering
that some random-like events are actually chaotic means one has uncovered a
simple determinstic basis for the system and so enabled its understandability.
Often one encounters debates between reductionism and holism. Re-
ductionists like to get right down to the bottom, meaning they are interested
in the basic sub-units that make up the whole and believe that that is where
all that is of interest lies, the whole itself being just a complicated and un-
interesting consequence of the fundamental laws applied to a large system.
In short, knowing the microscopic explains all to the extreme reductionist.
Particle physicist are such, and in more recent times some molecular biolo-
gists involved with genomics are another example. While it is undoubtedly
true that knowledge of the microcomponents of a system and the basic in-
teractions among those is essential for us to progress, it is also a fact that
such knowledge by itself is insuﬃcient to predict all the diversity and novelty
that can arise in a large system. (Take for example the task of predicting su-
perconductivity from Schrodinger’s equation – it is a problem that required
much eﬀort after the fact–one knew what to look for. Similarly knowing the
whole genome code is not going to predict for us every feature of an organism
or a society).

The problem of precisely deducing the whole (of a large system) from its
parts is at least two-fold. Firstly it is a computational problem. Problems

4

with a large number of degrees of freedom are too complicated for exact
solutions, and for systems far from equilibrium, as complex systems are,
they are also not solvable by the probabilistic averaging methods used for
equilibrium systems. In recent years the growth of computer power at low
cost has produced the ﬁrst tool that allows large systems to be simulated
or solved numerically. However this brings the second problem: Often one
does not have full knowledge of the fundamental dynamics, or the initial
conditions, or the problem is still too complicated to be handled directly
even by computers.

Often what is required is some guesswork or intuition to reduce the actual
problem to a simpler model which can then be tested on a computer. Com-
puter simulations of simpliﬁed models let one test assumptions quickly, and
when the results appear similar to the real world one can take it as plausible
validity of the model and the assumptions. Qualitative similarities of course
do not constitute a proof, because other models with diﬀerent assumptions
might give similar results, but at least the insight gained helps one to make
further guesses and tests in a particular direction rather than being lost in a
mess of detail. In fact one of the most important lessons computer simula-
tions have taught us is that a large system with very simple local rules can
give rise to collective behaviour of great complexity and variety, showing on
the one hand that complex phenomena need not require complicated rules,
but at the same time reminding us how diﬃcult it is (without computers) to
deduce the emergent behaviour from the sub-units and their interactions.

Thus studying the whole is as interesting as studying its parts, as novel
structures and emergent laws arise at each level of complexity. The condensed
matter physicist studying superconductivity is not going to be replaced by
the string theorist, and neither is the ecologist going to be become obsolete
because of the molecular geneticist. Explaining dynamic patterns, order and
emergent laws of a complex system by understanding the organising princi-
ples among the sub-units is what might be called holism, the counterpoint
to reductionism.

2 Examples

Let us brieﬂy look at examples to illustrate some of the points above. These
are just apetisers, details are in the main course [1].

5

2.1 Schooling of Fish

Try out the applet at Ref.[9]. Does it not look like a very realistic simulation
of ﬁsh swimming? The motion of each individual ﬁsh is not scripted right
from the beginning but rather each individual follows just three simple local
rules: cohesion, alignment and separation. Each of the rules is sensible from
the biological perspective and so the model is plausible. What is remarkable
of course is how the realistic and complicated collective behaviour emerges
from the few simple local rules. There is no leader and none of the individuals
has a global plan or perspective, (the motion is not orchestrated from the
beginning).

This example is an example of self-organisation. Other examples are the
herding behaviour of humans, say for example in the stock-market, and the
alignment of magnetic spins to form a ferromagnet. Many such examples are
studied in [1].

2.2 Bacterial Colonies

Look at the picture of a bacterial colony. It shows a branching structure,
which has the property that if one zooms into any region, that part looks
similar to the whole. The bacterial colony is an example of a random fractal.
Exact fractals appear the same at diﬀerent magniﬁcation scales while random
fractals appear only statistically similar at diﬀerent magniﬁcation scales.

Fractals are ubiquitous in Nature. Another example is the branching
network of air-passages in the human lung. The advantages of such a struc-
ture are an increase in surface to volume ratio which maximises functional
eﬃciency while minimising material and space costs.

The word ”fractal” itself means more than just self-similarity at diﬀerent

scales. It also implies a fractal dimension.

2.3 Forest Fires

Look at the ﬁgures which show the number of ﬁres as a function of the area
burnt, in diﬀerent regions of the United States of America and Australia. On
a log-log plot one sees that the data is well approximated by straight lines,
meaning that the number of ﬁres as a function of area is a power law:

N ∝ A−α

6

(1)

with α ∼ 1.3 − 1.5. It is important to note that the straight line ﬁts are
for a wide range of the data (one can always ﬁt a straight line to a small
range), and for diﬀerent geographical regions. This suggests a universality in
the phenomena that requires a explanation.

Power laws are observed in many other natural phenomena such as earth-
quakes and solar ﬂare activity. It has been suggested that these phenomena
are examples of self-organised criticality, that is, the systems are attracted
to a state which is between that of total order and total disorder. The word
”critical” is borrowed from well-studied thermal equilibrium systems that
undergo second-order phase transitions at critical points and display power
laws. However in the case of forest ﬁres (or earthquakes etc.), the systems
are far from equilibrium and the power-law behaviour, that is criticality, does
not require ﬁne-tuning — it is self-organised.

Given the complexity fo the actual systems, it is impossible at present
to study those systems from ﬁrst principles. Rather one studies simpliﬁed
models to check whether power-laws emerge naturally.

Power laws imply a self-similarity at diﬀerent scales, so it is natural to
suppose that self-organised criticality might be the common dynamical mech-
anism behind the wide occurence of fractal structures in nature.

Power laws also appear in social contexts, for example the frequency of

occurence of words in a literary text, and the magnitude of wars.

2.4 The Double Pendulum

Most people are familiar with the simple pendulum: A small heavy object
suspended at the end of a thin light string and set into oscillation. For
small oscillations (and in the absence of air friction) the motion is that of a
”harmonic oscillator”: That is, periodic motion with a period proportional
to the sqaure-root of the length of the pendulum.

For larger oscillations, the motion of the simple pendulum is still periodic
but no longer given by a simple formula. Indeed, for large oscillations the
equations governing the motion fo the pendulum are non-linear in contrast
to the linear equations for small oscillations. However while the equations
are nonlinear, the motion is still regular and predictable.

A double pendulum consists of two simple pendulums in tandem: One
attaches a single pendulum to the end of another! The equations of otion
are again non-linear for large oscillations but now the motion becomes quite
irregular and very sensitive to the initial conditions. This kind of behaviour

7

is the hallmark of chaos. See the simulation of the double pendulum in the
references.

Chaos occurs in many nonlinear systems and it implies that even systems
with a few degrees of freedom, and hence naively simple, can show com-
plicated behaviour which is essentially unpredictable on long time scales.
However chaos is very diﬀerent from randomness: The former arises in per-
fectly deterministic systems while the later is intrinsically nondeterministic,
and the distinction between the two at the practical level can be seen by
looking at the ”phase space” of the system, as we shall see later.

2.5 The Leopard Spots

How did the spots on a leopard, the stripes of the zebra or tiger, or the
patterns on sea-shells, form? Is there some simpel general framework which
can explain these beautiful patterns? Yes, these patterns are called Turing
structures, named after the Bristish mathematician who came up with a
model to explain such structures.

Some chemical systems, when maintained far from equilibrium display
oscillatory behaviour. When the chemical waves of such a reaction are al-
lowed to diﬀuse through a medium at diﬀerent rates andthe resulting pattern
stabilised, one obtains Turing structures.

Many other interesting far from equilibrium systems show cyclical be-

haviour.

3 Summary

The aim of the Complexity course in Ref.[1] is two fold:

(1) To provide the student with a relatively gentle introduction to the
concepts mentioned above so that they can continue on their own in greater
depth.

(2) To broaden the students horizons by introducing to them the interdis-
ciplinary nature of complex systems studies, which exempliﬁes in a concrete
sense the often quoted ”unity of knowledge”.

As in all popular ﬁelds, one often ﬁnds in descriptions of ”Complexity”
misleading or hyped statements, and metaphorical deviations. So some cau-

8

tion and cynicism is required in ﬁltering the raw data from a search, especially
over the Internet.

In conclusion, explore the Web-book [1], the links and exercises therein,

and hope for some enlightenment.

4 References

1. Complexity: A Web-book at http://staﬀ.science.nus.edu.sg/∼parwani/complexity.html

2. The dreams of reason : the computer and the rise of the sciences of

complexity, by Heinz R. Pagels.

3. The Quark and The Jaguar, by M. Gell-Mann.

4. Web of Life, by F. Capra

5. How Nature Works, by P. Bak

6. The Self-Made Tapestry, by P. Ball

7. The Computational Beauty of Nature, by G. Flake

8. Butterﬂy Economics, by P. Omerod

9. A Fish schooling applet at

http://www.codepuppies.com/∼steve/aqua.html

10. The double pendulum applet at

http://www.maths.tcd.ie/∼plynch/SwingingSpring/doublependulum.html

9

