2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
7
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Education Curricula of the Regional Centres for Space Science and
Technology Education (Aﬃliated to the United Nations)

Hans J. Haubold

Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs, United Nations, Vienna International Centre,
P.O. Box 500, 1400 Vienna, Austria (hans.haubold@unvienna.org)

ABSTRACT: Since 1988, the United Nations, through the Programme on
Space Applications, is supporting the establishment and operation of regional
Centres for Space Science and Technology Education in Africa, Asia and the
Paciﬁc, Latin America and the Caribbean, and Western Asia. Simultaneously,
education curricula have been developed for remote sensing and geographic in-
formation system, satellite communications, satellite meteorology and global
climate, and space and atmospheric science. The paper reviews brieﬂy these
developments and highlights the most recent updated education curricula in
the four disciplines that are made available in 2002, in the six oﬃcial languages
of the United Nations, for implementation at the regional Centres and beyond.

Space science and technology education can be pursued at the elementary,
secondary and university levels. In space faring nations, National Science Edu-
cation Standards for space science and technology have been applied to science
curricula at those levels (National Research Council, 1996). Such an innovation
has not taken place in many developing nations, partly because the beneﬁts
of space science and technology have not been appreciated enough and partly
because the facilities and resources for teaching science and technology at edu-
cational institutions are not yet well developed. Education in space science and
technology in developed nations has become highly interactive; the World Wide
Web and other information technologies have become useful tools in education
programmes at all levels.

The incorporation of elements of space science and technology into university-
level science curricula can serve a dual purpose for developed and developing
nations (Daniel, 2002). It can enable nations to take advantage of the beneﬁts
inherent in the new technologies, which, in many cases, are spin-oﬀs from space
science and technology. It can also revitalize the educational system, introduce
the concepts of high technology in a non-esoteric fashion and help create na-
tional capacities in science and technology in general. In that regard, Pyenson
and Sheets-Pyenson (1999) emphasized in their recent work entitled ’Servants
of Nature’ that:

“Both geographical decentralization and interdisciplinary innovation have be-
come watchwords in academic science. Electronic information processing to
some extent obviates the necessity for a scientist or scholar to reside at an
ancient college of learning. Universities everywhere have adapted to new socioe-
conomic conditions by expanding curricula. They have always responded in this

way, although never as quickly as their critics would like. Measured and delib-
erate innovation is one of academia’s heavy burdens. It is also a great strength.
Emerging ﬁelds of knowledge become new scientiﬁc disciplines only after they
have found a secure place in universities. We look to universities for an au-
thoritative word about the latest innovations. New scientiﬁc ideas emerge in a
variety of settings, but they become the common heritage of humanity only when
processed by an institution for advanced instruction like the modern university.”

There are many challenges in the teaching of science at university level, both
in developing and developed nations, but the challenges are of a higher magni-
tude in developing nations. The general problem confronting science education
is the inability of students to see or experience the phenomena being taught,
which often leads to an inability to learn basic principles and to see the relation-
ship between two or more concepts and their practical relevance to problems
in real life. Added to those problems is a lack of skills in the relevant aspects
of mathematics and physics and in problem-solving strategies. There are also
language problems in nations in which science is not taught in the national lan-
guage(s). Over the years, developed nations have overcome most of the basic
problems, except perhaps a psychological problem, namely that students may
consider science to be a diﬃcult subject. In developing nations, however, basic
problems linger, exacerbated by the fact that there are not enough academically
and professionally well-trained teachers.

The General Assembly of the United Nations, in its resolution 45/72 of 11
December 1990, endorsed the recommendation of the Working Group of the
Whole of the Scientiﬁc and Technical Subcommittee, as endorsed by the Com-
mittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, that the United Nations should lead,
with the active support of its specialized agencies and other international orga-
nizations, an international eﬀort to establish regional centres for space science
and technology education in existing national/regional educational institutions
in the developing nations.1

The General Assembly of the United Nations, in its resolution 50/27 of 6
December 1995, also endorsed the recommendation of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that those centres be established on the basis of
aﬃliation to the United Nations as early as possible and that such aﬃliation
would provide the centres with the necessary recognition and would strengthen
the possibilities of attracting donors and of establishing academic relationships
with national and international space-related institutions.2

Regional centres have been established in India for Asia and the Paciﬁc3,
1UN Document A/AC.105/456, annex II, para. 4 (n), Report of the Scientiﬁc and Technical
Subcommittee on the Work of its Twenty-Seventh Session, 12 March 1990, United Nations,
New York.

2UN Document A/RES/50/27, paragraph 30, International Cooperation in the Peaceful

Uses of Outer Space, 5 February 1996, United Nations, New York.

3See web site of the regional Centre for Asia and the Paciﬁc at http://www.cssteap.org/.

in Morocco and Nigeria for Africa, in Brazil and Mexico for Latin America
and the Caribbean, and in Jordan for Western Asia, under the auspices of the
Programme on Space Applications, implemented by the Oﬃce for Outer Space
Aﬀairs.4 The objective of the centres is to enhance the capabilities of Member
States, at the regional and international levels, in various disciplines of space
science and technology that can advance their scientiﬁc, economic, and social
development. Each of the centres provides postgraduate education, research,
and application programmes with emphasis on (i) remote sensing and geographic
information system, (ii) satellite communications, (iii) satellite meteorology and
global climate, and (iv) space and atmospheric science for university educators
and research and application scientists. Since 1996, all centres are implementing
nine-month postgraduate courses in the four areas based on model curricula that
emanated from the United Nations Meeting of Experts on the Development of
Education Curricula for the Regional Centres for Space Science and Technology
Education, held in Granada, Spain, in 1995. Since 1995, the curricula5 have
been reviewed at regional and international educational meetings.

The Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space (UNISPACE III, 1999), recommended that collaboration should
be established between the regional centres and other national, regional and
international organizations to strengthen components of their education cur-
ricula.6 In its resolution 54/68 of 6 December 1999, the General Assembly of
the United Nations endorsed the resolution of UNISPACE III entitled ”The
Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space and Human Development”, in
which action was recommended to ensure sustainable funding mechanisms for
the regional centres.7

The Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs of the Secretariat of the United Nations
organized, in cooperation with the European Space Agency, a second United
Nations Expert Meeting on the Regional Centres for Space Science and Tech-
nology Education: Status and Future Development in Frascati, Italy, in 2001.8
The Meeting reviewed the status of establishment and operation of the regional
centres with a view to enhancing cooperation between the centres. However,
the main objective of the Meeting was to review and update the curricula at
4UN Document A/AC.105/749, Regional Centres for Space Science and Technology Edu-

cation (aﬃliated to the United Nations), 27 December 2000, United Nations, Vienna.

5UN Document A/AC.105/649, Centres for Space Science and Technology Education: Ed-
ucation Curricula, United Nations, Vienna; the document is also available in English and
French at http://www.oosa.unvienna.org/SAP/centres/centres.htm.

6Report of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, Vienna, 9-30 July 1999 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.00.I.3), chap.
II, sect. G, para. 220; the document is also available at http://www.oosa.unvienna.org/.

7Ibid., chap. I, resolution 1, para. 1 (e) (ii). The Declaration is also available on the home

page of the Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs (http://www.oosa.unvienna.org).

8UN Document A/AC.105/782, Regional Centres for Space Science and Technology Edu-

cation (aﬃliated to the United Nations), 14 March 2002, United Nations, Vienna.

the university level and across cultures in the four areas. The Meeting con-
sidered that education varied signiﬁcantly between nations and even between
institutions within the same country which led to diﬀerences in space science
and technology education curricula in terms of course content and modes of
presentation. The Meeting noted that the model curricula9 had contributed to
resolving such problems.

The Meeting updated the four education curricula and drew up course syl-
labuses that diﬀer from most of those available in literature and on the World
Wide Web. They are based on physics, mathematics and engineering as taught
in many universities around the world. They are not tailored to any speciﬁc
space-related project or mission that may have been or will be executed by any
speciﬁc institution. The curricula are available, in the six oﬃcial languages
(Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, Spanish) of the United Nations, on
request, as United Nations documents.10

LIST OF REFERENCES

Daniel, R.R. (ed.) (2002). Concepts in Space Science, Universities Press, Orient
Longman, Hyderabad, India.
National Research Council (1996). National Science Education Standards, Na-
tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Pyenson, L. and Sheets-Pyenson, S. (1999). Servants of Nature: A History of
Scientiﬁc Institution, Enterprises, and Sensibilities, W. W. Norton and Com-
pany, New York.

9UN Document A/AC.105/649, Centres for Space Science and Technology Education: Ed-
ucation Curricula, United Nations, Vienna; the document is also available in English and
French at http://www.oosa.unvienna.org/SAP/centres/centres.htm.

10UN Documents A/AC.105/L.238

climate),
A/AC.105/L.239 (satellite communications), A/AC.105/L.240 (space and atmospheric sci-
ence), and A/AC.105/L.241 (remote sensing and geographic information system).

(satellite meteorology

global

and

