2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Nobel Prize in Physics 2002 for the observation of cosmic neutrinos

Centre for Theoretical Studies, Indian Institute of Science

B. Ananthanarayan

Bangalore 560 012, India

Abstract

A brief description of the work for which the ﬁrst half of the Nobel prize for physics for the year 2002 is

presented.

The ﬁrst half of the Nobel Prize in physics for 2002 has been shared by Raymond Davis, Jr. and

Masatoshi Koshiba for their observations of cosmic neutrinos. On two earlier occasions, Nobel prizes have

been awarded for discovery of neutrinos from controlled experiments:

in 1988 to Leon M. Lederman, Melvin

Schwartz and Jack Steinberger for the discovery of the muon type neutrino and the neutrino beam method,

and in 1995 to Frederick Reines for the discovery of the electron type neutrino (discovered jointly with the

by then deceased Clyde L. Cowan, Jr.), who shared the prize with Martin Perl for his discovery of the tau

lepton. Neutrinos are particles that participate only in the weak interactions, apart from participating in the

gravitational interactions. The existence of the electron type neutrino was postuled in 1930 by Wolfgang Pauli

in order to account for energy and angular momentum conservation in nuclear beta decay. They do not carry

electric charge and the so-called color charge of the strong interactions. With the discovery of the muon in the

’40’s and the tau lepton in the ’70’s, heavier cousins of the electron, the electron type neutrino found cousins

in the muon type and tau type neutrinos.

The name of Ray Davis is a legendary one and is associated with the “solar neutrinos” which

he observed through decades of painstaking observations in a deep underground experiment located in the

Homestake Mine, in South Dakota, USA. As the name suggests, the neutrinos that he sought to observe

are those that are produced in copious numbers in the sun during the many processes that power it. An

extraordinarily large number of low-energy neutrinos are produced which are produced in the core and travel

outwards practically unhindered, due to the very small interaction cross-section of these weakly inteacting

particles.

In order to have observable events induced by this small cross-section, despite the large ﬂux of

neutrinos at the distance of 1 astronomial unit (distance between the earth and the sun), one must have a very

large number of targets. Davis’ achievement was to construct such an experiment: the targets were the nuclei

of chlorine atoms present in a common cleaning liquid, tetrachloroethylene, which he stored in a large tank

in the underground experiment, and the products of the neutrino capture by the nuclei of the chlorine atoms

were a radioactive isotope of the nobel gas argon. The idea of using chlorine nuclei as targets was due to the

Italian born Soviet physicist Bruno Pontecorvo and was realized ingeneously by the experiment of Davis. It

must be noted, however, that the number of reaction products in the over 615 tonnes of ﬂuid that were exposed

to the solar neutrinos, during a run of a month was of the order of 20 argon atoms. The ingenuity of Davis was

to devise a technique to ﬂush out these argon atoms. He used a method by which the tank was ﬂushed with

helium, another noble gas. He was able to demonstrate the eﬃcacy of this method to actually collect the argon

atoms so produced. He thus established that solar neutrinos in fact exist, the ﬁrst experimental demonstration

of the prediction from the models of the sun. The “solar neutrino problem” however, was that the numbers of

as a factor of a third or a fourth. Through dedicated experiments, he was able to show that none of the argon

atoms produced were being lost during the procedure of extraction, and that the problem was to stay for many

decades.

The existence of the solar neutrino problem was conﬁrmed by the experiment Kamiokande, located

in the Mozumi mine in Kamioka-cho, Gifu, in Japan (Kamiokande: Kamioka Nucleon Decay Experiment) and

with which the person sharing the prize with Davis, M. Koshiba is identiﬁed. The experiment was established to

search for nucleon decay, predicted by grand uniﬁed theories of the fundamental interactions. The experiment

proved to be versatile enough to serve as a “neutrino telescope.” The experiment uses the principle that neutrinos

coming from cosmic sources when entering a large tank of water would interact with the electrons in the water
and scatter elastically oﬀ the electrons. These ultra-relativistic electrons emit characteristic ˇCerenkov radiation

which is detected by photomultiplier tubes on the periphery of the container of the water. At Kamiokande,

3000 tonnes of water were surrounded with 1000 photomultiplier tubes. Unlike the Davis experiment, the

measurements here were “real time” and also had information of the direction from which the observed neutrino

was coming. These experiments were able to spectacularly conﬁrm the existence of the solar neutrino problem.

Another unexpected and brilliant observation of the Kamiokande experiment was that of 11 neutrino events in

the year 1987 associated with the collapse of the neutrino-sphere of the supernova 1987A. The supernova which

exploded in the Large Magellenic cloud, one of the two companions of the Milky Way galaxy, was also observed

optically and in other regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, and its light curve was carefully monitored. This

was the ﬁrst ever supernova to be explored in this remarkable manner. The standard picture of the supernova

explosion requires that a signiﬁcant fraction of the energy transport out of the supernova be in the form of

that transported by neutrinos in a spectacular burst. The event rates calculated for Kamiokande proved to

be in agreement with what was observed. Supernova neutrinos were also observed by the experiments IMB

(Irvine-Michigan-Brookhaven) and the Baksan mine experiments, which conﬁrmed that the neutrinos observed

by Kamiokande were indeed supernova neutrinos.

The direct observation of the neutrino oscillations by the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory has re-

cently resolved the solar neutrino problem in favor of a particle physics scenario whereby the electron type

neutrino that is produced at the core of the sun has a ﬁnite probability of oscillating into a muon or tau type

neutrino. Furthermore, no modiﬁcation of the standard solar model based on which the ﬂuxes of neutrinos are

calculated is necessary (see article in Resonance, Vol. 7, No. 10, pp. 79 (2002)).

The award of the Nobel prize to Davis is one that would do the prize proud. During the 30 or

years of the running of his experiment, around 2000 argon atoms were collected! At age 87, he stands as an

example of the rare dedication and perseverence that is required to make a truly outstanding contribution to

science. A chemist by training, Davis is Professor Emeritus at the University of Pennsylvania.

The award to Koshiba is no less deserving; the courage to design outstanding and brilliant ex-

periments to search for the unusual and to prove the versatility of experiments. At the age of 76, Koshiba is

Professor Emeritus at the University of Tokyo.

For recent articles in Resonance of related interested, see

1. B. Ananthanarayan and Ritesh K. Singh, Vol. 7, No. 10, pp. 79 (2002).

2. S. M. Chitre, Resonance, Vol. 7, No. 8, pp. 67 (2002).

