2
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
2
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

QCD and Natural Philosophy

Frank Wilczek
Center for Theoretical Physics

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Cambridge, MA 02139-4307

MIT-CTP # 3328

Plenary talk at TH2002, Paris, July 2002

Abstract

QCD sheds considerable light on several of the most basic features of the natural
world including the origin of mass, the feebleness of gravity, the extent to which
the properties of matter can be determined conceptually, the possible utility
of the anthropic principle, and the metatheoretic notions of eﬀectiveness and
computability. I discuss these applications here.

Contemporary academic or unnatural philosophy is characterized by extreme insis-

tence on purity of abstract thought. A joke will illustrate the point.

A man walks into a bar, takes a seat on the next-to-last stool, and spends the
evening chatting up the empty stool next to him, being charming and ﬂirtatious, as if
there were a beautiful woman in that empty seat. The next night, same story. And the
next night, same story again. Finally the bartender can’t take it any more. She asks,
“Why do you keep talking to that empty stool as if there were a beautiful woman in
it?”

The man answers, “I’m a philosopher. Hume taught us that it’s logically possible
that a beautiful woman will suddenly materialize on that stool, and no one has ever
refuted him. If one does appear, then obviously I’ll seem very clever indeed, and I’ll
have the inside track with her.”

“That’s ridiculous,” says the bartender, who happens to be a physicist. “Plenty of
very attractive women come to this bar all the time. You’re reasonably presentable,
and extremely articulate; if you applied your charm on one of them, you might suc-
ceed.”

“I thought about trying that,” he replies, “but I couldn’t prove it would work.”

2

Frank Wilczek

In this vein, there are a lot of very attractive questions that working physicists
normally abandon to the philosophers, or to quasi-scientists who speculate in reck-
less disregard of the facts, just because the questions are broad and qualitative. We
shouldn’t. I’d like in this talk to take a stab at a few such questions. These are ques-
tions for which a physical theory ﬁrmly established only relatively recently, quantum
chromodynamics or QCD, aﬀords us considerable new insight. I will not waste words
introducing the technical content of QCD, nor defending its validity, as this back-
ground information is readily available in many places [1].

1 What is the Origin of Mass?

1.1 Framing the Question

That a question makes grammatical sense does not guarantee that it is answerable, or
even coherent. In that spirit, let us begin with a critical examination of the question
posed in this Section: What is the origin of mass?

In classical mechanics mass appears as a primary concept. It was a very great
step for the founders of classical mechanics to isolate the scientiﬁc concept of mass.
In Newton’s laws of motion, mass appears as an irreducible, intrinsic property of
matter, which relates its manifest response (acceleration) to an abstract cause (force).
An object without mass would not know how to move. It would not know, from one
moment to the next, where in space it was supposed to be. It would be, in a very strong
sense, unphysical. Also in Newton’s law of gravity, the mass of an object governs the
strength of the force it exerts. One cannot build up an object that gravitates out of
material that does not. Thus it is diﬃcult to imagine, in the Newtonian framework,
what could possibly constitute an “origin of mass”. In that framework, mass just is
what it is.

Later developments in physics make the concept of mass seem less irreducible. The
undermining process started in earnest with the theories of relativity. The famous
equation E = mc2 of special relativity theory, written that way, betrays the prejudice
that we should express energy in terms of mass. But we can also read it as m = E/c2,
which suggests the possibility of explaining mass in terms of energy. In general rela-
tivity the response of matter to gravity is independent of mass (equivalence principle),
while space-time curvature is generated directly by energy-momentum, according to
8πGN /c2. Mass appears as a contributing factor to
Rµν −
≡
energy-momentum, but it has no uniquely privileged status.

1
2gµνR = κTµν, with κ

At an abstract level, mass appears as a label for irreducible representations of
the Poincar´e group. Since representations with m
= 0 appear in tensor products of
m = 0 representations, it is possible, at least kinematically, to build massive particles
as composites of massless particles, or of massless particles and ﬁelds.

6
QCD and Natural Philosophy

3

1.1.1 Lorentz’s Dream

At a much more concrete level, the question of the origin of mass virtually forced
itself upon physicists’ attention in connection with the development of electron the-
ory. Electrons generate electromagnetic ﬁelds; these ﬁelds have energy and therefore
inertia. Indeed, a classical point-electron is surrounded by an electric ﬁeld varying
as e/r2. The energy in this ﬁeld is inﬁnite, due to a divergent contribution around
r
0. It was a dream of Lorentz (pursued in evolved forms by many others, including
Poincar´e, Dirac, Wheeler, and Feynman), to account for the electron’s mass entirely
in terms of its electromagnetic ﬁelds by using a more reﬁned picture of electrons.
Lorentz hoped that in a correct model of electrons they would emerge as extended
objects, and that the energy in the Coulomb ﬁeld would come out ﬁnite, and account
for all (or most) of the inertia of electrons.

→

Later progress in the quantum theory of electrons rendered this program moot
by showing that the charge of an electron, and therefore of course its associated
electric ﬁeld, is intrinsically smeared out by quantum ﬂuctuations in its position.
Indeed, due to the uncertainty principle the picture of electrons as ideal point-particles
certainly breaks down for distances r . ~/mc, the Compton radius. At momenta
p & ~/r, the velocity p/m formally becomes of order c, and one cannot regard the
electron as a static point source. If we cut oﬀ the simple electrostatic calculation at
the Compton radius, we ﬁnd an electromagnetic contribution to the electron mass
of order δm
1/137 is the ﬁne structure constant. In
≈
this sense the easily identiﬁable and intuitive electromagnetic contribution to the
mass, which Lorentz hoped to build upon, is small. To go further, we cannot avoid
considering relativity and quantum mechanics together. That means quantum ﬁeld
theory.

αm, where α = e2/4π~c

∼

1.1.2 Its Debacle

In quantum electrodynamics itself, the whole issue of the electromagnetic contribution
to the electron mass becomes quite dodgy, due to renormalization.

Quantum electrodynamics does not exist nonperturbatively. One can regulate and
renormalize order-by-order in perturbation theory, but there are strong arguments
that the series does not converge, or even represent the asymptotic expansion of a
satisfactory theory. In a renormalization group analysis, this is because the eﬀective
coupling blows up logarithmically at short distances, and one cannot remove the
cutoﬀ. In a lattice regularization, one could not achieve a Lorentz-invariant limit.1
1Actually this blow-up, the famous Landau pole, arises from extrapolating the perturbative result
beyond its range of validity. What one can deduce simply and rigorously is that the eﬀective coupling
does not become small at short distances: QED is not asymptotically free. If there is a ﬁxed point
at ﬁnite coupling, it may be possible to construct a relativistically invariant limiting theory. But
even if such a theory were to exist, its physical relevance would be quite dubious, since we know

4

Frank Wilczek

So one cannot strictly separate the issue of electromagnetic mass from the unknown
physics which ultimately regularizes the short-distance singularities of QED.

If we regard QED as an eﬀective theory, essentially by leaving in an energy cutoﬀ
Λ, corresponding to a distance cutoﬀ ~c/Λ, we get a contribution to the mass at short
distances going as δm
αm log(Λ/m). Quantum mechanics has changed the power-
law divergence into a logarithm. As a result, δm is a fractionally small contribution
to the total mass, at least for sub-Planckian Λ (i.e., Λ . 1019 GeV). We know that
QED ceases to be a complete description of physics, or even a well-isolated theory,
far below such energies.

∝

In any case, since the mass renormalization is multiplicative, an electron ﬁeld whose
bare quanta have bare mass is zero produces physics quanta with physical mass zero.
Indeed, the massless version of QED has enhanced symmetry – chiral symmetry –
which is not destroyed by (perturbative) renormalization.

In short, very little seems to survive from Lorentz’s original dream. I’ve described
this ﬁasco in some detail, since it provides an instructive background to contrast with
our upcoming considerations.

1.1.3 Upping the Ante

Quantum ﬁeld theory changes how we view the question of the origin of mass dramat-
ically. As we have seen, it quashes hope for a simple classical mechanistic explanation.
At a more profound level, however, quantum ﬁeld theory makes the question of
the origin of mass seem both better posed and more crucial. Very few such theories
are known to exist nonperturbatively in four space-time dimensions. Even if we relax
our standards to include renormalizable quantum ﬁeld theories, i.e. those which are
reasonably self-contained as eﬀective ﬁeld theories, we ﬁnd a very restricted set. Such
theories, unless they contain many ﬁelds and few symmetries, allow few continuous
parameters. Among those few, parameters specifying bare masses of the quanta fea-
ture prominently. So massless theories are even more tightly constrained, and bring
us closer to the ideal of a parameter-free, purely conceptual description of Nature.

Moreover, theories often acquire enhanced symmetry when mass parameters vanish.
In such cases masslessness is “natural”, in the sense that it can be stated as an abstract
structural property of the theory, namely its enhanced symmetry. To the extent we
feel a more symmetric theory is more beautiful, the massless theories are singled
out as more beautiful. These features of naturalness and beauty, which motivate
massless theories, survive even if one is not committed to the technical requirement
of renormalizability.

that there’s much more to physics than electrodynamics at distances so short that the logarithms
matter.

QCD and Natural Philosophy

5

1.2 Most of the Answer: QCD Lite

Enough of generalities! I want now to describe some very speciﬁc, and I think quite
beautiful, insights into the origin of mass in the real world. We will construct –
following Nature – mass without mass, using only c and ~.

1.2.1 Introducing QCD Lite

My central points are most easily made with reference to a slight idealization of QCD
I call, for reasons that will be obvious, QCD Lite. It is a nonabelian gauge theory
based on the gauge group SU(3) coupled to two triplets and two antitriplets of left-
handed fermions, all with zero mass. Of course I have in mind that the gauge group
represents color, and that one set of triplet and antitriplet will be identiﬁed with the
quark ﬁelds uL, uR and the other with dL, dR.

Upon demanding renormalizability,2 this theory appears to contain precisely one
parameter, the coupling g. It is, in units with ~ = c = 1, a pure number. I’m ignoring
the θ parameter, which has no physical content here, since it can be absorbed into
the deﬁnition of the quark ﬁelds. Mass terms for the gluons are forbidden by gauge
SU(2)R ﬂavor
invariance. Mass terms for the quarks are forbidden by chiral SU(2)L ×
symmetry.

1.2.2 Running Coupling; Dimensional Transmutation

The coupling constant g that appears in the Lagrangian of QCD Lite, like the cor-
responding constant e in QED, is a dimensionless number (in units with ~ = c = 1).
g2/4π. But the real situation, when we
Likewise for the ﬁne-structure constant αs ≡
take into account the eﬀect of quantum mechanics, is quite diﬀerent. Empty space
is a medium, full of virtual particles, and responds dynamically to charges placed
within it. It can be polarized, and the polarization clouds surrounding test charges
can shield (screen) or enhance (antiscreen) their strength. In other words, quantum-
mechanically the measured strength of the coupling depends on the distance scale,
αs(Q). This
or equivalently the (inverse) energy scale, at which it is measured: αs →
is a central feature of QCD Lite, and of course of QCD itself. These theories predict
that the eﬀective coupling gets small at large Q, or equivalently at short distance.

This behavior displays itself in a remarkably direct and tangible form in the ﬁnal
states of electron-positron annihilation. Hadrons emerging from high-energy electron-
positron annihilation organize themselves into collimated jets. Usually there are two
jets, but occasionally three. The theoretical interpretation is profound but, given
asymptotic freedom, straightforward. The primary products emerging from the anni-
hilation are a quark and an antiquark. They emit soft – that is, low energy-momentum
2Or, in physical terms, the existence of a relativistically invariant limiting theory. Or alternatively,

radical decoupling from an unspeciﬁed, gratuitous high-energy cutoﬀ.

6

Frank Wilczek

– radiation copiously, but only rarely hard radiation. That’s a restatement, in momen-
tum space, of asymptotic freedom. The soft radiation materializes as many particles,
but these particles inherit their direction of ﬂow from the quark or antiquark, and
therefore constitute a jet. In the relatively rare case that there is hard radiation, that
is to say, emission of an energetic gluon, the gluon induces its own independent jet.
All this can be made completely quantitative. There are precise predictions for the
ratio of three- to two-jet events, the rare occurrence of four (or more) jet events, how
these ratios change with energy, angular dependence, and so forth. The observations
agree with these predictions. Thus they provide overwhelming, direct evidence for the
most basic elements of the theory, that is the quark-gluon and gluon-gluon couplings.
Because the coupling runs, we can, within any given version of QCD Lite, measure
any given numerical value a = αs(Q), simply by choosing an appropriate Q. It ap-
peared, classically, that we had an inﬁnite number of diﬀerent versions of QCD Lite,
with diﬀerent values of the coupling parameter. In reality the only diﬀerence among
all these theories, after they are quantized, is the unit they choose for measuring mass.
All dimensionless physical parameters, and in particular all mass ratios, are uniquely
determined. We can trade the dimensionless parameter g for the unit of mass. This
is the phenomenon of dimensional transmutation.

Of course the value of the overall energy scale makes a big diﬀerence when we come
to couple QCD Lite, or of course QCD, to the rest of physics. Gravity, for example,
cares very much about the absolute value of masses. But within QCD Lite itself, if
we compute any dimensionless quantity whatsoever we will obtain a unique answer,
independent of any choice of coupling parameter. Thus, properly understood, the
value of the QCD coupling constant does not so much govern QCD itself – within its
own domain, QCD is unique – but rather how QCD ﬁts in with the rest of physics.

1.2.3 Physical Mass Spectrum – QCD Lite and Reality

Now let us consider more concretely how these dynamical phenomena lead us to a
nontrivial hadron spectrum. Looking at the classical equations of QCD, one would
expect an attractive force between quarks that varies with the distance as g2/4πr2,
where g is the coupling constant. This result is modiﬁed, however, by the eﬀects
of quantum ﬂuctuations. As we have just discussed, the omnipresent evanescence of
virtual particles renders empty space into a dynamical medium, whose response alters
the force law. The antiscreening eﬀect of virtual color gluons (asymptotic freedom),
enhances the strength of the attraction, by a factor which grows with the distance.
This eﬀect can be captured by deﬁning an eﬀective coupling, g(r), that grows with
distance.

The attractive interaction among quarks wants to bind them together; but the po-
tential energy to be gained by bringing quarks together must be weighed against its
cost in kinetic energy. In a more familiar application, just this sort of competition
between Coulomb attraction and localization energy is responsible for the stability

QCD and Natural Philosophy

7

and ﬁnite size of atoms. Here quantum-mechanical uncertainty implies that quark
wave-functions localized in space must contain a substantial admixture of high mo-
mentum components. For a relativistic particle, this translates directly into energy. If
the attraction followed Coulomb’s law, with a small coupling, the energetic price for
staying localized would always outweigh the proﬁt from attraction, and the quarks
would not form a bound state. Indeed, the kinetic energy ~c/r beats the potential
energy g2/4πr. But the running coupling of QCD grows with distance, and that tips
the balance. The quarks ﬁnally get reined in, at distances where αs(r) becomes large.
We need not rely on heuristic pictures, or wishful thinking, to speculate about the
mass spectrum of QCD Lite. It has been calculated by direct numerical integration of
the fundamental equations, using the techniques of lattice gauge theory.3 The results
bear a remarkable qualitative and semiquantitative resemblance to the observed spec-
trum of nonstrange hadrons, generally at the 10% level, comfortably within known
sources of error due to ﬁnite size, statistics, etc. – and (anticipating) small quark
masses. Of course, in line with our preceding discussion, the overall scale of hadron
masses is not determined by the theory. But all mass ratios are predicted, with no
free parameters, as of course are the resonance quantum numbers.

QCD Lite is not the real world, of course. So although in QCD Lite we get mass
without mass in the strict sense, to assess how much real-world mass arises this way we
need to assess how good an approximation QCD Lite is to reality, quantitatively. We
can do this by adjusting the nonzero values of mu and md to make the spectrum best
ﬁt reality, and then seeing how much they contributed to the ﬁt.4 Unlike charges in
QED, masses in QCD are soft perturbations, and we can calculate a meaningful ﬁnite
diﬀerence between the spectra of these two theories. There is also a well-developed
alternative approach to estimating the contribution of quark masses by exploiting the
phenomenology of chiral symmetry breaking. Either way, one ﬁnds that the quark
masses contribute at most a few per cent to the masses of protons and neutrons.

Protons and neutrons, in turn, contribute more than 99% of the mass of ordinary
matter. So QCD Lite provides, for our purpose, an excellent description of reality.
The origin of the bulk of the mass of ordinary matter is well accounted for, in a theory
based on pure concepts and using no mass parameters – indeed, no mass unit – at
all!

3There are signiﬁcant technical issues around realizing chiral symmetry in numerical work in-
volving discretization on a lattice. Recent theoretical work appears to have resolved the conceptual
issues, but the numerical work does not yet fully reﬂect this progress. To avoid a fussy presentation
I’ve oversimpliﬁed by passing over these issues, which do not aﬀect my main point.

4Again, there are signiﬁcant technical issues here, especially regarding the role of the strange

quark. Fortunately, the uncertainties are numerically small.

8

Frank Wilczek

1.2.4 Comparing with the Old Dream

While our ﬁnal result fulﬁlls the fantasy of Lorentz’s dream, the details and the
mechanism whereby it is achieved are quite diﬀerent from what he imagined.

Obviously we are speaking of hadrons, not electrons, and of QCD, not classical
electrodynamics. The deepest diﬀerence, however, concerns the source and location
of the energy whereby m = E/c2 is realized. In Lorentz’s dream, the energy was
self-energy, close to the location of the point particle. In QCD Lite the self-mass
vanishes. Paradoxically, there is a sense in which the self-energy of a quark5 is inﬁnite
(conﬁnement), but this is due to the spatial extent of its color ﬁeld, which has a
tail extending to inﬁnity, not to any short-distance singularity. To make physical
hadrons, quarks and gluons must be brought together in such a way that the total color
vanishes. Then there is no inﬁnite tail of color ﬂux. The diﬀerent tails of the individual
quarks and gluons have annulled one another. But at ﬁnite distances the cancellation
is incomplete, because Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle imposes an energetic cost for
keeping color charges precisely localized together. The bulk of the mass of the hadrons
comes from the residues of these long tails, not from singularities near point-like color
charges.

1.2.5 Comparing with the Old Debacle

It is instructive to review, point by point, how the obstructions that quantum ﬁeld
theory appeared to pose for the “Origin of Mass” or “Mass without Mass” program
are resolved in QCD.

First of all QCD does exist even nonperturbatively, so the issues connected with

renormalization can be analyzed consistently down to rock bottom.

Second, the massless theory is “natural” in the technical sense deﬁned above. It
displays enhanced symmetry. The gluons have no mass parameter because there is
no such parameter consistent with local gauge symmetry. For quarks, there is an
SU(2)R symmetry, expanded from the vectorial SU(2)L+R,
additional chiral SU(2)L ×
when they massless.

Third, these symmetries, which guarantee zero bare mass for the bare quanta, do
not forbid nonzero mass for physical quanta. The gauge symmetry acts trivially on
the physical quanta (conﬁnement). The chiral symmetry is spontaneously broken: it
is a property of the underlying equations but not of their stable solution (i.e., of their
physical realization). Spontaneously broken chiral symmetry predicts the existence of
massless collective modes, the Nambu-Goldstone bosons – pions – along with many of
their properties; but it does not forbid mass for the other hadrons – protons, neutrons,
etc.

5Inﬁnite self-energy does not conﬂict with zero mass. E = mc2 describes the energy of a particle
of mass m when it is at rest; but of course, as we know from photons, there can also be energy in
massless particles, which cannot be brought to rest.

QCD and Natural Philosophy

9

Fourth, the realistic theory, with small nonzero quark masses, is a soft perturba-
tion of the massless theory. It does not require that we make any alteration in the
renormalization procedure. Thus it is commensurable with the massless theory. We
can compare them unambiguously and quantitatively.

Fifth, and ﬁnally, this quantitative comparison shows that the nonzero quark masses
in Nature contribute only a small fraction to the masses of protons and neutrons. The
chiral symmetry of the massless theory is approximately valid in reality, and is the
basis of a very useful phenomenology. The mass ratios of hadrons computed in the
idealized massless theory are very nearly the same as in reality (apart, of course, from
the pions).

1.3

(Many) Remaining Issues

While the dynamical energy of massless QCD accounts for the bulk of mass in ordinary
matter, it is far from providing the only source of mass in Nature.

×

Mass terms for quarks and charged leptons appear to violate the electroweak gauge
symmetry SU(2)
U(1). But gauge symmetry cannot be violated in the fundamental
equations – that would lead to ghosts and/or nonunitarity, and prevent construction
of a sensible quantum theory. So these masses must, in a sense, have their “origin”
in spontaneous symmetry breaking. That is accomplished, in the Standard Model, by
having a nonsinglet Higgs ﬁeld acquire a vacuum expectation value. Why this value
is so small, compared to the Planck scale, is one aspect of what is usually called
the hierarchy problem. Why the couplings of this ﬁeld are so disparate – especially,
what is particularly crucial to the structure of physical reality, why its dimensionless
couplings to e, u, d are so tiny (in the range 10−5to10−6) – is an aspect of what is
usually called the ﬂavor problem.

Then there are separate problems for generating masses of supersymmetric particles
(soft breaking parameters, µ term), for generating the mass of cosmological ‘dark
matter’ (this might be included in the previous item!), for generating neutrino masses,
and now apparently for generating the mass density of empty space (cosmological
term).

Obviously, many big questions about the origin of mass remain. But I think we’ve
answered a major one, the one that is most important quantitatively for ordinary
matter, beautifully and convincingly.

2 Why is Gravity Feeble?

Gravity dominates the large-scale structure of the Universe, but only by default.
Matter arranges itself to cancel electromagnetism, and the strong and weak forces
are intrinsically short-ranged. At a more fundamental level, gravity is extravagantly

10

Frank Wilczek

feeble. Acting between protons, gravitational attraction is about 10−36 times weaker
than electrical repulsion. Where does this outlandish disparity from? What does it
mean?

Feynman wrote

There’s a certain irrationality to any work on [quantum] gravitation, so
it’s hard to explain why you do any of it .... It is therefore clear that the
problem we working on is not the correct problem; the correct problem is
What determines the size of gravitation?

I want to argue that in modern physics it is natural to view the problem of why
gravity is extravagantly feeble in a new way – upside-down and through a distorting
lens compared to its superﬁcial appearance. When viewed this way, it comes to seem
much less enigmatic.

First let me quantify the problem. The mass of ordinary matter is dominated by
protons (and neutrons), and the force of gravity is proportional to (mass)2. From
Newton’s constant, the proton mass, and fundamental constants we can form the
pure dimensionless number

where GN is Newton’s constant, mp is the proton mass, ~ is Planck’s constant, and c
is the speed of light. Substituting the measured values, we obtain

X = GN m2

p/~c

X

6

10−39 .

≈

×
This is what we mean, quantitatively, when we say that gravity is extravagantly feeble.
We can interpret X directly in physical terms, too. Since the proton’s geometrical
size R is roughly the same as its Compton radius ~/mpc, the gravitational binding
Xmpc2. So X is the fractional contribution
energy of a proton is roughly GN m2
of gravitational binding energy to the proton’s rest mass!

p/R

≈

2.0.1 Planck’s Hypothesis

An ultimate goal of physical theory is to explain the world purely conceptually, with
no parameters at all. Superﬁcially, this idea seems to run afoul of dimensional analysis
– concepts don’t have units, but physical quantities do!

There is a sensible version of this goal, however, that is rapidly becoming con-
ventional wisdom, despite falling well short of scientiﬁc knowledge. Soon after he
introduced his constant ~, in the course of a phenomenological ﬁt to the black-body
radiation spectrum, Planck pointed out the possibility of building a system of units
based on the three fundamental constants ~, c, GN . Indeed, from these three we can
construct a unit of mass (~c/GN )1/2, a unit of of length (~GN /c3)1/2, and a unit of
time (~GN /c5)1/2 – what we now call the Planck mass, length, and time respectively.

QCD and Natural Philosophy

11

Planck’s proposal for a system of units based on fundamental physical constants
was, when it was made, rather thinly rooted in physics. But by now there are profound
reasons to regard c, ~ and G as conversion factors rather than numerical parameters.
In the special theory of relativity there are symmetries relating space and time – and
c serves as a conversion factor between the units in which space-intervals and time-
intervals are measured. In quantum theory, the energy of a state is proportional to
the frequency of its oscillations – and ~ is the conversion factor. Thus c and ~ appear
directly as measures in the basic laws of these two great theories. Finally, in general
relativity theory space-time curvature is proportional to the density of energy – and
GN (actually GN /c4) is the conversion factor.

If we want to adopt Planck’s astonishing hypothesis that we must build up physics
solely from these three conversion factors, then the enigma of X’s smallness looks
quite diﬀerent. We see that the question it poses is not“Why is gravity so feeble?” but
rather “Why is the proton’s mass so small?” For according to Planck’s hypothesis, in
natural (Planck) units the strength of gravity simply is what it is, a primary quantity.
So it can only be the proton’s mass that provides the tiny number √X.

2.0.2 Running in Place

That’s a provocative and fruitful way to invert the question, because we now have a
quite deep understanding of the origin of the proton’s mass, as I’ve reviewed above.
The proton mass is determined, according to the dynamics I’ve described, by the
distance at which the running QCD coupling becomes strong. Let’s call this the QCD-
distance. Our question, “Why is the proton mass so small?” has been transformed
into the question, “Why is the QCD-distance much larger than the Planck length?”
To close our circle of ideas, we need to explain how it is that, if only the Planck length
is truly fundamental, such a vastly diﬀerent length arises naturally.

This last elucidation, profound and beautiful, is worthy of the problem. It has to do
with how the coupling runs, in detail. When the QCD coupling is weak, “running” is
actually a bit of a misnomer. Rather, the coupling creeps along like a wounded snail.
We can in fact calculate the behavior precisely, following the rules of quantum ﬁeld
theory, and even test it experimentally, as I mentioned before. The inverse coupling
varies logarithmically with distance. So if we want to evolve an even moderately small
coupling into a coupling of order unity, we must let it run between length-scales whose
ratio is exponentially large. So if the QCD coupling is even moderately small at the
Planck length it will reach unity only at a much larger distance.

Numerically, what we predict is that αs(lPl.) at the Planck length is roughly a third
to a fourth of what it is observed to be at 10−15 cm; that is, αs(lPl.)
1/30. We
cannot measure αs(lPl.) directly, of course, but there are good independent reasons,
having to do with the uniﬁcation of couplings, to believe that this value holds in
reality. It is amusing to note that in terms of the coupling itself, what we require

≈

12

Frank Wilczek

≈

is gs(lPl.)
1/2! From this modest and seemingly innocuous numerical hypothesis,
which involves neither really big numbers nor speculative dynamics beyond what is
supported by hard experimental evidence, we have produced a logical explanation of
the tiny value of X.

3 The Reduction of Matter

The reductionist program, roughly speaking, is to build up the description of Nature
from a few laws that govern the behavior of elementary entities, and that can’t be
derived from anything simpler. This deﬁnition is loose at both ends.

On the output side, because in the course of our investigations we ﬁnd that there
are important facts about Nature that we have to give up on predicting. These are
what we – after the fact! – come to call contingencies. Three historically important
examples of diﬀerent sorts are the number of planets in the Solar System, the precise
moment that a radioactive nucleus will decay, or what the weather will be in Boston
a year from today. In each of these cases, the scientiﬁc community at ﬁrst believed
that prediction would be possible. And in each case, it was a major advance to realize
that there are good fundamental reasons why it is not possible.

On the input side, because it is diﬃcult – perhaps impossible – ever to prove the

non-existence of simpler principles. I’ll revisit this aspect at the end of the lecture.

Nevertheless, and despite its horrible name, the reductionist program has been and
continues to be both inspiring and astoundingly successful. Instead of trying to reﬁne
an arbitrary a priori deﬁnition of this program, it is more edifying to discuss its best
fruits. For beyond question they do succeed to an astonishing extent in “reducing”
matter to a few powerful abstract principles and a small number of parameters.

It is most instructive to build up to our most complete reduction of matter from
some intermediate models that are extremely important and useful in their own right.

3.1 Structural Chemistry

The ﬁrst such model is obtained by regarding both nuclear masses and the speed of
light as eﬀectively inﬁnite. We then have the theory of nonrelativistic electrons in
e
the presence of highly localized, static sources of positive charge, in multiples of
,
|
where e is the electron charge. We compute the energy as a function of the positions of
the source charges, using the Schr¨odinger equation. Local minima deﬁne molecules,
and we can compute their wavefunctions. This model gives a good approximation
for the vast subject of structural chemistry.6 Its only continuous parameters are ~, e,
and the electron mass me. Since ~ can be considered as a conversion factor, and
6There is an additional ﬁne point, that we must specify some symmetry rules to take account of

|

quantum statistics for identical nuclei.

QCD and Natural Philosophy

13

the Bohr radius ~2/me2 just sets the overall length scale, this is essentially a one-
parameter theory. Indeed, since one cannot manufacture a dimensionless quantity out
of ~, e, me, the remaining parameter is really a conversion factor too. Thus we have a
zero-parameter theory of structural chemistry!

A more accurate version – QED with sources – recognizes c

and brings in real
and virtual photons. Now there is a pure number in the game, namely of course the
ﬁne structure constant e2/4π~c. Regarding ~ and c as conversion factors, and taking
into account that ~/mec can be used to deﬁne the overall length scale, we arrive at a
very accurate one-parameter theory of structural chemistry and photochemistry.

∞

=

3.2 Matter

The shortcoming of this theory, of course, is that the matter doesn’t move (except by
radiative transitions). The theory is missing vibrational and rotational levels, not to
mention reactions, diﬀusion, etc.

To allow motion, we must put in ﬁnite values for the nuclear masses. In doing this,
we open ourselves up to many, many more input parameters. At a minimum we need
the masses of the diﬀerent nuclei and isotopes, and for accuracy in details we need
their spins and magnetic moments, etc. At this level, all of them must be taken from
experiment. There are several hundreds of parameters. Nevertheless, because they
are highly overconstrained by hundreds of thousands of measurements, the resulting
theory is extremely useful. It is the foundation of practical quantum chemistry.

The next step in reduction is the one supplied by QCD. QCD assures us that
all the nuclear parameters can be calculated crudely – perhaps at the 10% level –
using QCD Lite. To do this, we need only one parameter beyond ~ and c, as I’ve
already discussed. That parameter can be taken as the coupling gs, normalized at
some appropriate energy scale (say 105mec2), or equivalently the energy scale ΛQCD,
which is roughly speaking the scale at which the coupling becomes large. To do a
more accurate job, we also need to introduce the light quark masses mu, md.

Our faith in QCD is not based primarily on its practical ability to reproduce nuclear
parameters. The best quantitative tests of the theory come from an entirely diﬀer-
ent domain of behavior, scattering at ultra-high energy, where the quark and gluon
degrees of freedom and their couplings are clearly revealed. We rely on the success-
ful outcome of these tests, and (so far) rather crude results from massive numerical
calculations of proton structure and the hadron spectrum for empirical support. This
support is highly leveraged by the theory’s being rigidly principled. It embodies the
basic principles of relativity, quantum mechanics, and gauge symmetry. Only a few
parameters appear in the most general consistent embodiment of these principles.
They are just the ones we use!7

7There is also the notorious θ parameter, a can of worms I don’t want to dive into just now.

6
14

Frank Wilczek

So in practice the “reduction” we oﬀer the chemists, or for that matter the nuclear

physicists, is not of much use to them. But it is there, as a matter of principle.

At this point our best available reduction of ordinary matter is in place. A fun-
damental theory that we believe oﬀers an extremely complete and accurate set of
equations the structure and behavior of matter in ordinary circumstances, with a
very liberal deﬁnition of “ordinary”, requires the parameters ~, c, e, me, ΛQCD, mu, md.
Among these ~ and c can be regarded as conversion factors, mu and md are relatively
minor players, and one combination just sets an overall length scale. Thus we have a
rough reduction of matter involving two parameters, and an accurate one involving
four. Not bad!

3.3 Astrophysics

In astrophysics, as opposed to condensed matter physics, chemistry, and biology,
gravity and the weak interactions play important roles. Their intrinsic weakness is
compensated by the availability of vast amounts of matter and vast amounts of time,
respectively. To treat these additional interactions we must introduce two additional
parameters, the Newton constant GN and the Fermi constant GF . Altogether, then,
we now have ~, c, e, me, ΛQCD, mu, md, GN , GF . Referring back to our discussion of
Planck’s hypothesis, we are inclined to regard ~, c and GN as conversion factors. Also,
we derive both e and ΛQCD from the value of the uniﬁed coupling at the Planck scale.
So we are left with this “reasonable” number (guniﬁed
1/2) and four “unreasonable”
numbers: me, mu, md, and GF , expressed in Planck units.

≈

The absurd smallness of these numbers, and of the dimensionless ratio8 me(GF /~c)− 1
2 ,
deﬁne important unmet challenges for theoretical physics. They are salient aspects of
what are called the hierarchy and ﬂavor problems, respectively.

Though wonderful challenges remain, the success of the reductionist program is
already most impressive. An accurate description of matter, including astrophysics,
is built up from a few abstract principles and ﬁve parameters.

3.4 Cosmology and Quantitative Anthropics

Having come this far it would be inhuman not to take the discussion to its logical
climax in cosmology. That brings in many unsettled questions that go far beyond the
scope of this lecture. I’ll restrict myself to a very brief discussion of a few issues closely
tied to the foregoing considerations. I’ll assume as given the emerging “standard
model of cosmology”, based on small perturbations around a spatially ﬂat Friedmann-
Robertson-Walker model.

8It is important to note that the dimensionless form of this ratio does not involve GN . Its absurd

smallness is not an artifact of Planck units.

QCD and Natural Philosophy

15

To specify quantitatively the standard model of cosmology we must add a few more
parameters to our world-model. These include at least the baryon number density ρb,
the dark matter density ρd, the overall amplitude A of a scale-invariant spectrum
of primordial ﬂuctuations (assumed adiabatic and Gaussian), and the cosmological
term Λ. Further work may uncover the need for additional parameters, for example
if the Universe is not quite ﬂat, or if the spectrum of perturbations is not quite scale-
invariant, but for now the four I mentioned appear to form an adequate, minimal set.
If we accept that cosmology is “reduced” to general principles and four continuous
parameters, beyond the ones we use to describe matter and astrophysics, the question
arises how far this achievement fulﬁlls the reductionist program. I think that most
physicists do not feel entirely satisﬁed with it. That is because the parameters in cos-
mology, given in this way, do not appear directly in the description of the behavior of
simple fundamental entities. Rather they appear as the description of average prop-
erties of macroscopic (very macroscopic!) agglomerations. We would like to calculate
these parameters in terms of diﬀerent ones more related to the fundamental laws of
physics of the early Universe. There are rough ideas about how we might do this in
the cases of ρb (B and CP violation) and ρd (axion and/or lightest supersymmetric
particle production), even rougher ideas in the case of A (inﬂationary potentials), and
various tenuous speculations regarding Λ. There is a very good chance, I think, that
the constitution of the dark matter will detected experimentally in the near future.
Then we’ll have a much better chance to understand at least ρd properly!

Taken this far the status of the reductionist program in cosmology, though much
less fully developed, is not very diﬀerent in character from the preceding discussions
of matter and astrophysics. But there are speciﬁcally cosmological issues, too.

Although it is usually passed over in silence, I think it is very important philo-
sophically, and deserves to be emphasized, that our standard cosmology is radically
modest in its predictive ambitions. It consigns almost everything about the world as
we ﬁnd it to contingency. That includes not only the aforementioned question of the
number of planets in the Solar System, but more generally every speciﬁc fact about
every speciﬁc object or group of objects in the Universe, apart from a few large-scale
statistical regularities. Indeed, speciﬁc structures are supposed to evolve from the
primordial perturbations, and these are only characterized statistically. In inﬂation-
ary models these perturbations arise as quantum ﬂuctuations, and their essentially
statistical character is a consequence of the laws of quantum mechanics.

This unavoidably suggests the question whether we might ﬁnd ourselves forced to
become even more radically modest.9 Let us suppose for the sake of argument the
best possible case, that we had in hand the fundamental equations of physics. Some
of my colleagues think they do, or soon will. Even then we have to face the question of
what principle determines the solution of these equations that describes the observed
Universe. Let me again suppose for the sake of argument the best possible case, that

9A few outliers hope to move back the other way. One can only wish them luck!

16

Frank Wilczek

there is some principle that singles out a unique acceptable solution. Even then there
is a question we have to face: If the solution is inhomogeneous, what determines our
location within it?

Essentially inhomogeneous solutions of fundamental equations are by no means a
contrived or remote possibility. They are at the heart of all the brane-world construc-
tions that have received much attention recently; they are characteristic of eternal
inﬂation models; they arise very naturally in axion physics and its generalizations [1].
On a less cosmic scale, closer to home, they are what we see all around us – and of
course, each of us is a highly structured inhomogeneity.

The standard cosmological model is yet another case, and supplies an especially
clear parable. As we have just discussed, the laws of reductionist physics do not
suﬃce to tell us about the speciﬁc properties of the Sun, or of Earth. Indeed, there
are many roughly similar but signiﬁcantly diﬀerent stars and planets elsewhere in the
same Universe. On the other hand, we can aspire to a rational, and even to some
extent quantitative, “derivation” of the parameters of the Sun and Earth based on
fundamental laws, if we deﬁne them not by pointing to them as speciﬁc objects – that
obviates any derivation – but rather by characterizing broad aspects of their behavior.
In principle any behavior will do, but possibly the most important and certainly the
most discussed is their role in supporting the existence of intelligent observers, the
so-called anthropic principle. There are many peculiarities of the Sun and Earth that
can be explained this way. A crude example is that the mass of the Sun could not be
much bigger or much smaller than it actually is because it would burn out too fast
or not radiate suﬃcient energy, respectively.

Now if the Universe as we now know it constitutes, like the Solar System, an
inhomogeneity within some larger structure, what might be a sign of it?10 If the
parameters of fundamental physics crucial to life – just the ones we’ve been discussing!
– vary from place to place, and most places are uninhabitable, there would be a
signature to expect. We should expect to ﬁnd that some of these parameters appear
very peculiar – highly nongeneric – from the point of view of fundamental theory, and
that relatively small changes in their values would preclude the existence of intelligent
observers. Weinberg has made a case that the value of the cosmological term Λ ﬁts
md)/ΛQCD and several other
this description; and I’m inclined to think that (mu −
combinations of the small number of ingredients in our reduced description of matter
and astrophysics do too. A fascinating set of questions is suggested here, that deserves
careful attention [2].

10Of course, to make it interesting I’m assuming that we can’t actually look beyond, due to the

vastness of the homogeneous region we’re in, or the limitations of our probes.

QCD and Natural Philosophy

17

4 Metatheory

QCD is unique among physical theories in its combination of logical closure and
empirical success. So it is appropriate to consider it from the outside, as an object of
metatheory.

4.1 The Unreasonable Eﬀectiveness of QCD

There is a sense in which QCD is better than it has to be. It is not a complete theory
of the world. Even within the standard model quarks have additional interactions,
beyond QCD, that become signiﬁcant – indeed, problematic – at short distances. So
there is no logical requirement that QCD, extrapolated on its own down to inﬁnitely
short distances, should exist as a fully consistent relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory.
But it does. Is this just a happy coincidence, or does it point to something deeper?
(Candidate idea: There must be fully consistent quantum ﬁeld theories, because such
theories are the ultimate description of Nature. A few years ago this might have been
string-blasphemy; now it might be acceptable as duality.)

Although it’s somewhat oﬀ the point, I’ll take the opportunity to mention that this
over-eﬀectiveness reminds me of another apparently quite unrelated case, the cosmic
censorship hypothesis in general relativity. We know that classical general relativity
is not a complete theory, and there’s no logical reason why it should hide its defects
from view. Yet in many cases, and perhaps generically, it does seem that singularities
get hidden behind horizons.

4.2 The Unreasonable Ineﬀectiveness of QCD

There some aspects of QCD I ﬁnd deeply troubling – though I’m not sure if I should!
I ﬁnd it disturbing that it takes vast computer resources, and careful limiting pro-
cedures, to simulate the mass and properties of a proton with decent accuracy. And
for real-time dynamics, like scattering, the situation appears pretty hopeless. Nature,
of course, gets such results fast and eﬀortlessly. But how, if not through some kind of
computation, or a process we can mimic by computation?

Does this suggest that there are much more powerful forms of computation that we
might aspire to tap into? Does it connect to the emerging theory of quantum com-
puters? These musings suggest some concrete challenges: Could a quantum computer
calculate QCD processes eﬃciently? Could it defeat the sign problem, that plagues all
existing algorithms with dynamical fermions? Could it do real-time dynamics, which
is beyond the reach of existing, essentially Euclidean, methods?

Or, failing all that, does it suggest some limitation to the universality of computa-

tion?

18

Frank Wilczek

Deeply related to this is another thing I ﬁnd disturbing. If you go to a serious
mathematics book and study the rigorous construction of the real number system, you
will ﬁnd it is quite hard work and cumbersome. QCD, and for that matter the great
bulk of physics starting with classical Newtonian mechanics, has been built on this
foundation. In practice, it functions quite smoothly. It would be satisfying, though,
to have a “more reduced” description, based on more primitive, essentially discrete
structures. Fredkin and recently Wolfram have speculated at length along these lines.
I don’t think they’ve got very far, and the diﬃculties facing such a program are
immense. But it’s an interesting issue.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported in part by funds provided by the U.S. Department of En-
ergy (D.O.E.) under cooperative research agreement #DF-FC02-94ER40818. I’d like
to thank the organizers for putting together a varied and fascinating program, and
bringing it all to Paris. And I’d like speciﬁcally to thank Dominique Schiﬀ for encour-
aging me to give a “philosophical” talk, which I had fun doing. She shouldn’t be held
responsible for my excesses, though.

References

[1] The material in Sections 1 and 2 largely overlaps corresponding parts of my
contribution Four Big Questions with Pretty Good Answers to the Heisenberg
centennial symposium, hep-ph/0201222, with some changes and additions. Also,
the generalized axion cosmology alluded to in Section 3 is discussed there in
much more detail.

[2] For some relevant discussion, and an extensive set of references, see C. Hogan,

Reviews of Modern Physics 72 1149-1161 (2000).

