3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
7
0
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ex-nihilo II: Examination Syllabi and
the Sequencing of Cosmology Education

Department of Physics, University of Durham, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK.

E-mail: K.A.Pimbblet@durham.ac.uk

Kevin A. Pimbblet

John C. Newman

St. Leonard’s RCVA Technology College, North End, Durham, DH1 4NG, UK.

Abstract

Cosmology education has become an integral part of modern physics courses. Directed by National

Curricula, major UK examination boards have developed syllabi that contain explicit statements

about the model of the Big Bang and the strong observational evidence that supports it. This work

examines the similarities and diﬀerences in these speciﬁcations, addresses when cosmology could be

taught within a physics course, what should be included in this teaching and in what sequence it

should be taught at diﬀerent levels.

1 Introduction

Contained within the frameworks of UK National Curricula, the model of the Big Bang is a requisite

part of modern day physics teaching (see Pimbblet 2002 for a fuller discussion). For example, the

English National Curriculum states that pupils should be taught about some ideas used to explain

the origin and evolution of the Universe. Building upon these curricula, the major examination

boards in the UK incorporate statements about Universal origins in their syllabi (see Appendix A).

There is, however, little guidance about when to teach cosmology (both within a physics course

and at what point in schooling), what topics and issues to cover and in what order to teach them.

This plan of this work is as follows. We examine what topics are required to be taught, ﬁrstly at

G.C.S.E. level and then at A-level. Within each of these areas, we deﬁne the sequence of topics to

be taught. Finally we address when cosmology should be taught within any given physics course.

1

2 Cosmology in science courses for 14-16 year olds

All of the G.C.S.E. speciﬁcations (Appendix A) require an understanding of the Hubble relation.
In some cases this is explicit in the form of v = Hd, in others, it is implicitly suggested via

a qualitative relationship between recession velocity and distance (Hubble and Humason 1931).

Given that the Hubble relation represents one of the major cornerstones of evidence in favour of an

evolving Universe, this is of little surprise.

Many of the examination syllabi, however, delve little further into cosmology education than

Hubble’s relation. It is of credit to EdExcel that its course goes into a little more depth. Firstly,

there is the topic of the future evolution of the Universe. Depending on the amount of mass and

energy that the Universe possesses, one of several fates may befall it. If the Universe has enough

matter, then it may cease expanding and start to contract back under gravitational force. This

would result in a Big Crunch scenario. Conversely, with very little matter contents, the Universe

would simply go on expanding forever. The ﬁgure of merit that determines which fate awaits the

Universe is known as the critical density and represents a quantity of matter that is just suﬃcient to

cease the Universal expansion. Modern observations display a trend in favour of the latter scenario

(Perlmutter et al 1999). Further, the inﬂationary scenario (e.g. Guth 2000) provides a theoretical

backdrop for constraining the critical density to be very close to one (i.e. the Universe just manages

to avoid collapsing back in on itself).

Related to this topic is the issue of dark matter. It is thought that much of the matter in the

Universe has not been (and probably cannot be) observed directly (e.g. Peebles 1993). Therefore,

the so-called cold dark matter (e.g. Governato, Ghigna & Moore 2001; Colberg et al 2000) will add

a signiﬁcant amount of matter to the content of the Universe and hence will inﬂuence its future

evolution (see above).

The ﬁnal topic that appears in some G.C.S.E. course speciﬁcations is the cosmic microwave

background radiation, arguably one of the most important astronomical discoveries of the twentieth

century (Penzias and Wilson 1965). If interpreted as highly redshifted radiation from the Big Bang,

it provides unrivalled evidence for an evolving Universe that was once extremely hot- several billion

Kelvin (see Pimbblet 2002 for further discussion of this point).

Interestingly, the G.C.S.E. EdExcel syllabus also makes explicit reference to the Steady State

theory of the Universe. It is easy, perhaps, to forget that the Big Bang theory was at one time

just one of many competing theories (see Ellis 1987 for a review of alternative cosmologies). In the

2

ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, Hoyle and collaborators proposed the rival steady state theory.

In simple terms, the steady state theory describes a Universe that is homogeneous, isotropic and

isochronal. That is to say, almost the same as the Big Bang model apart from that it appears

identical no matter what point in time it is viewed at (i.e. has no deﬁnite beginning). Whilst it can

explain an expanding Universe, steady state predicts that there must also be a continuous creation

of matter: something that has never sat well with the astronomy community. The fall from grace

for steady state came with the discovery of the cosmic microwave background (Penzias and Wilson

1965; see above), which only the Big Bang model provides a compelling, natural explanation for.

Therefore, within any G.C.S.E. course, we advise teachers to commence cosmology with a review

of some of the observational evidence in favour of the evolutionary Big Bang model: the Hubble

relation and the cosmic microwave background radiation. This can then readily be underscored

with a discussion of the future evolution of the Universe. Finally a whole class discussion about

other cosmological theories, including steady state, can take place (Pimbblet 2002).

3 Cosmology in advanced pre-university courses

The A-level speciﬁcations (Appendix A) broadly follow the same pattern as the G.C.S.E. ones.

They concentrate on the observational foundations of the evolving Big Bang theory (see above) but

also touch on other topics.

For example, in the OCR speciﬁcation is Olbers paradox. Named after Wilhelm Olbers (1758-

1840), the paradox is an old astrophysical issue (see Jaki 1969 for an authoritative summary of pre-

twentieth century work). Simply put, the paradox asks why the night sky is so dark? If the Universe

is of an inﬁnite age and the stars that it contains are distributed evenly (i.e. homogeneous and

isotropic), it is fairly straight forward to conclude that the night sky should be equal in brightness

to the Sun (e.g. Tipler 1988). Olbers own resolution to this paradox was to conceive of invisible

interstellar dust absorbing the light. Yet, this explanation is insuﬃcient: the amount of dust

required would obscure the Sun during the day! Work that followed demonstrated that in order for
the night sky to appear luminous, the Universe must possess an age of 1023 years. Therefore, the

assumption of an inﬁnite age for the Universe is invalid. Yet, authors also overlooked two important

factors for some time: stars have ﬁnite ages (hence they burn out) and special relativity (hence each

photon of light that arrives carries less energy than when it was emitted). Whilst Harrison (1987)

shows that the dominant factor is the ﬁnite ages of stars, both eﬀects contribute in the same way:

3

to make the sky darker and thus resolve the paradox.

One major part of cosmology that is conspicuous by its absence from A-level is the abundance

of the elements that results from nucleosynthesis (e.g. Burles, Nollett and Turner 2001). In simple

terms, Big Bang nucleosynthesis explains why there is an abundance of light elements in compar-

ison to heavier elements. As such, it provides cosmologists with a very good method of testing

the quantitative predictions of Big Bang theory (Krauss and Romanelli 1990). We advocate that

teachers include nucleosynthesis in any advanced level course as, taken in combination with the

Hubble relation and the cosmic microwave background radiation, they make the Big Bang theory

appear highly watertight.

Finally, although not on any examination syllabus examined, there are further pieces of observa-

tional evidence pointing towards an evolving (and hence non-steady state) Universe. Such evidence

should only be taught to high ability classes when time permits. For example, the Butcher-Oemler

eﬀect (Butcher and Oemler 1984) shows a recent, strong evolution within the stellar populations of

galaxies. At a diluted level, this eﬀect demonstrates that the fraction of blue, star-forming (young)

galaxies within clusters of galaxies increases with increasing redshift (and hence with decreasing

time since the Big Bang). Thus, clusters of galaxies that are further away are less evolved and

younger than those located nearby.

Therefore, any advanced level course should broadly follow the sequence outlined for G.C.S.E.

courses. We advise teachers to build upon the observational evidence in favour of the Big Bang

theory: the Hubble relation, cosmic microwave background radiation and include nucleosynthesis.

Olbers paradox can potentially be slotted in after this, or at the end of teaching about stellar

evolution. As time permits, other bits of evidence such as the Butcher-Oemler eﬀect can also be

included as evidence in favour of the Big Bang. The sequence would then follow the G.C.S.E.

outline again: the future evolution of the Universe and a guided class discussion about alternative

cosmologies.

4 Sequencing cosmology education

Having outlined what topics to teach and in which order to teach them in, we now turn to the

question of when cosmology should be taught within a given physics speciﬁcation.

Astrophysics as a discrete unit of teaching typically comes last within any G.C.S.E. or A-level

scheme of work. Since the topic requires a synthesis of prior knowledge from many parts of a

4

syllabus, this is of little surprise. The downside is, of course, that teaching astrophysics as the last

subject will probably not leave suﬃcient time for it. Attempting to teach this topic earlier, say

at the beginning of the ﬁnal year of a course, may prove productive, especially given its timeless

popularity (e.g. Toscano 2002). Instead of being a synthesis for other topics, astrophysics can readily

be turned into a springboard for them. Thus we advocate teaching astrophysics in the middle of a

physics course, after some groundwork in classical physics such as forces has been taught.

Within astrophysics, cosmology nearly always comes last. The reason for this primarily ap-

pears that astrophysics is taught lengthwise as a bottom-up subject: starting oﬀ with Earth-bound

phenomena and working up in scale through the Solar System to the Universe as a whole. The

bottom-up method is, however, a sound premise because it institutes in pupils a sense of Universal

size.

Finally, throughout our discussion about what topics to include in cosmology (see above), we

have emphasized an observational approach. This has been done for two reasons. Firstly, any

successful cosmological theory (such as the Big Bang) must be able to explain the observations.

Secondly, it is predicted that such an observational approach will help to deal with many miscon-

ceptions that pupils hold about cosmology (Pimbblet 2002; Prather, Slater and Oﬀerdahl 2002).

This work has discussed what sequence cosmology should be taught in (within both the 14-16 year

old age range and in pre-university courses), what topics to include and at what point in schooling

5 Conclusions

it should be taught.

We have suggested that:

1. Astrophysics as a discrete unit should be taught in the middle of a course once suﬃcient

grounding in classical physics (e.g. forces) is completed. It can then be used as a springboard

into other topics (e.g. light).

2. Cosmology should be the last subject within an astrophysics unit.

3. Cosmology education should be built upon the observational foundations that support the Big

Bang theory (Hubbles relation and the cosmic microwave background radiation at G.C.S.E.

with the addition of nucleosynthesis at A- level). Any successful cosmology must, after-all,

be able to explain such observations.

5

4. Both Olbers paradox and the Butcher-Oemler eﬀect broadly support the case for an evolving

Universe and can be taught as necessary and desired.

5. A discussion about the future evolution of the Universe and other cosmologies (Pimbblet 2002)

This work follows Pimbblet (2002) and is the second paper in a series examining aspects of

should then follow.

cosmology education.

Acknowledgements

KAP and JCN thank the staﬀ and students of St.Leonard’s RCVA technology college, Durham.

References

Burles S, Nollett K M and Turner M S 2001 Astrophys. J. 552 L1

Butcher H and Oemler A 1984 Astrophys. J. 285 426

Colberg J M et al 2000 Monthly Not. R. Astron. Soc. 319 209

Ellis G F R 1987 A. Rev. Astr. Astrophys. 22 157

Einstein A 1950 The Principle of Relativity London: Metheun

Governato F, Ghigna S and Moore B 2001 in Astrophysical Ages and Times Scales, ASP Conference

Series 245 469

Guth A H 2000 Phys. Rep. 333 555

Harrison E 1987 Darkness at Night Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA

Hubble E and Humason M L 1931 Astrophys. J. 74 43

Jaki S L 1969 The Paradox of Olbers Paradox Herdr & Herder, New York

Krauss L M and Romanelli P 1990 Astrophys. J. 358 47

Moore G S M 1992 Progress of Theoretical Phys. 87 525

Peebles P J E 1993 Principals of Physical Cosmology Princeton Series in Physics, Princeton Uni-

versity Press, NJ

Penzias A A and Wilson R W 1965 Astrophys. J. 142 419

Perlmutter S et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 517 586

Pimbblet K A 2002 Phys. Educ. 37 512

6

Prather E E, Slater T F and Oﬀerdahl E G 2002 Astron. Educ. Rev. Issue 2 (see aer.noao.edu)

Thomas O 2002 Phys. Educ. 37 492

Tipler F J 1988 Quart. J. R. Astron. Soc. 29 313

Toscano M 2002 Phys. Educ. 37 464

Appendix A

We provide in Table 1 a brief survey of examination syllabi from the major examination boards in

England, Northern Ireland and Wales. Scotland has been excluded from this survey simply because

its examination structure is diﬀerent from that of the other Kingdoms. Although limited in scope

to UK examination boards, the content of non-UK physics course speciﬁcations, where a statement

is made about cosmology, are broadly similar in nature. Readers from outside the UK, however,

may be surprised at the knowledge expected of students for G.C.S.E. level (age 14- 16) and A-level

(age 16-19), especially given an already heavily loaded teaching schedule (c.f. geophysics; Thomas

2002). Additionally, we note in passing that cosmology education is typically only given to students

who are expected to achieve the higher grades (C or above at G.C.S.E. level) and is usually not

required in foundation level G.C.S.E. physics courses.
Table 1. These are the results from surveying the major examination boards syllabi for cosmology

education content. Each syllabus is analysed for content and this is presented in the categories column. A

letter H denotes reference to Hubbles relation, either implicitly or explicitly; µ indicates reference to the

cosmic microwave background radiation; Ω indicates reference to the future evolution of the Universe; DM

shows explicit reference to dark matter whilst Olbers denotes reference to Olbers paradox.

7

Categories

Examination board, Exemplar

type and year.

statement

CCEA G.C.S.E.

Describe the Big Bang model for

physics (2004)

the creation of the Universe

AQA G.C.S.E.

This suggests that the whole Universe

physics (2003)

is expanding and that it might have

started, billions of years ago, from

one place with a huge explosion (Big Bang)

EdExcel G.C.S.E.

Describe the Big Bang theory of

astronomy (2003)

the origin of the Universe and consider

H, µ,

Ω, DM

other theories such as the steady state theory

Explain how the future evolution of the

Universe depends on the amount of mass present.

OCR G.C.S.E.

Interpret given information about

H, Ω

physics (2003)

developments in ideas on the origin

of the Universe

WJEC G.C.S.E.

Understand that these ideas support

physics (2003)

a model of an expanding Universe

which originated approximately 12

billion years ago with the Big Bang.

AQA A-Level

(Hubbles law) Qualitative treatment

physics (2003)

of Big Bang theory

H

H

H

H

OCR A-level

Describe qualitatively the evolution of

physics (2003)

the Universe from 0.01s after the

H, µ,

Ω, Olbers

Big Bang to the present

Of signiﬁcant note, the exemplar G.C.S.E. statement from AQA suggests that the Universe started

from one place. This is a common misconception. From Einsteins ﬁeld equations of general relativity
(e.g. Einstein 1950), it is known that Gµν = 8πGc−4Tµν. For a ﬂat space-time, the Gµν components

will vanish. They will also vanish for an absence of matter and pressure. The startling bottom

line is that space-time is generated by matter itself. Therefore, to say that the Universe started

from one place is simply wrong: with no matter, there could not have been any place, anywhere, to

deﬁne! Thus it is gratifying to see that AQA have deleted the phrase from one place for their 2004

8

G.C.S.E. syllabus.

9

