3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PHYSICAL SCIENCE
A revitalization of the traditional course
by avatars of Hollywood in the physics classroom

Costas Efthimiou and Ralph Llewellyn
Department of Physics
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816

1 Public Attitudes and Understanding of Science

It has been well-documented [1] that most Americans have very little understanding
of science, are unable to distinguish between science and psuedoscience, and have no
clear concept of the role of science in their daily lives. While about 90 percent if those
surveyed by the National Science Foundation (NSF) since 1979 report being interested
in science and more than 80 percent (in 2001) believe that federal government should
ﬁnance scientiﬁc research, about 50 percent do not know that Earth takes one year to go
around the sun, electrons are smaller than atoms, and early humans did not live at the
same time as dinosaurs. Statistics concerning Americans lack of knowledge of such things
receive frequent media attention.

Answering the question “Who is responsible? ” is not an easy task since many factors,
including social and economic conditions, have a direct impact on the science literacy of
the public. However, scientists strongly believe that the media—ironically, exactly those
that raise concern about the limited science literacy of the public—and, in particular, the
entertainment industry, are at least partially responsible and are a signiﬁcant source of
the public’s misunderstanding and faulty knowledge of science. Unfortunately, the public
who watch television shows and ﬁlms with pseudoscientiﬁc or paraphysical themes does
not always interpret them simply as entertainment based in pure ﬁction. Due to the lack
of critical thinking skills, many people tend to perceive the events depicted as real or
within the reaches of science. This unchallenged manner in which the entertainment in-
dustry portrays pseudoscientiﬁc and paraphysical phenomena should excite great concern
in the scientiﬁc community. Not only does it amplify the public’s scientiﬁc illiteracy, but
also puts at risk the public’s attitude towards science, raising the possibility that future
inﬂuential ﬁgures in our society could inadvertently cause serious damage to mainstream
physics simply through ignorance and misunderstanding.

The authors have embarked on an ambitious project to help improve public under-
standing of the basic principles of physical science. This paper reports the results of the
initial phase of the program, which was begun with several large groups of non-science
majors enrolled in the general education physical science course at the University of Cen-
tral Florida (UCF), a course with a counterpart in nearly every college and university
(and many high schools) in the nation.

1

2 On Our Course

2.1 The Course in Brief

At UCF the course is 3 semester-hours and is taken by about 3000 students annually. It
has an independent 1 semester-hour laboratory elected by about 20 percent of those in
the course. At this stage the lab is not a part of the project. During the academic year
the class is taught in sections of 300 to 450 students; in the summer the class sections are
limited to 90 enrollees. All sections are taught in multimedia-equipped classrooms.

In the authors’ sections, we teach the key concepts from all areas of physics, not only
the standard core of classical physics that is presently physical science, but go beyond
to introduce students to the captivating discoveries of relativity, quantum mechanics,
astronomy, and cosmology. Augmenting the traditional lectures and live demonstrations,
our new “weapon” in this eﬀort to improve scientiﬁc literacy is the ﬁlms themselves, often
the same ones that perpetuate the incorrect understanding of science held by the students.
Using a medium that is familiar to and universally enjoyed by the students, we employ
short (5 to 8 minutes) clips from many ﬁlms as the basis for discussions and calculations for
the very broad range of topics covered in the course, including some decidedly non-typical
topics, such as time travel, extraterrestrial civilizations, and black holes.

2.2 The Goals of the Course

Our goals for the course are these:

1. To motivate students to think critically about science information presented in ﬁlms.

2. To help students learn to distinguish between physical laws and pseudo-science.

3. To encourage students to understand how science works and how any widely ac-

cepted theory has been veriﬁed using the scientiﬁc method.

4. To help students learn where the borderline between tested and untested physics

ideas lies.

2.3 Other Similar Attempts

In years past forerunners of our approach have been tried in a few places with varying
degrees of success. The most notable case is that of Professor L. Dubeck of Temple
Universiy [2, 3]. Dubeck has used science ﬁction ﬁlms to teach scientiﬁc ideas to non-
science majors. A real pioneer in this approach, but well ahead of his time, his course
did not attract the attention it deserved. We only discovered it while in the process
of developing our course for the Summer of 2002. His approach is qualitatively; on the
contrary, our approach is mostly quantitative, although qualitative arguments are often
given for various scenes. Moreover, we have made use of a broad array of genres, not just
science ﬁction ﬁlms.

2

Other eﬀorts have focused at the high school level [16, 17, 18]. In particular, Dennis
has recently advertised his success in an article published in Physics Teacher [17] about
teaching mechanics with the aid of ﬁlms. Motivated by this success, Dennis has published
a book1 [18] with the hope of helping other teachers use ﬁlms in their courses, too. Our
approach carries many similarities in philosophy with that of Dennis; however, our course,
taught at a college level is more advanced and covers by far more topics than mechanics.
A serious challenge in each case has been to keep the course up-to-date—for example,
this seems to be the most serious problem with the books [2, 3] as expressed by the
students. This challenge we think our approach and careful planning will meet.

3 On Our Use of Films

The course syllabus outlines the topics to be covered during the term and also includes
a schedule of ﬁlms to be viewed as homework by the students. Each ﬁlm contains scenes
concerned with one or more (usually more) of the topics. For example, listed below are
the ﬁlms and topics used during the initial phase of the project:

1. Speed 2 [4]: speed and acceleration, collisions.

2. Armageddon [5]: momentum, energy, comets and asteroids.

3. Eraser [6]: momentum, free fall, electromagnetic radiation.

4. 2001: A Space Odyssey [7]: centripetal and centrifugal force, artiﬁcial gravity, zero

5. The Abyss [8]: hydrostatic and atmospheric pressure, eﬀects of pressure on humans

gravity.

and objects.

6. Independence Day [9]: potential energy, conservation of energy, pressure, tidal forces.

7. Tango and Cash [10]: momentum, electricity, physiological eﬀects on humans.

8. Frequency [11]: magnetism, motion of particles in magnetic ﬁelds, Aurora Borealis,

solar wind, wormholes, time travel.

9. Contact [12]: relativity, space travel, wormholes, life beyond Earth, Drake’s formula.

The ﬁlms assigned, about one per week, are popular ones available on DVDs or videotapes
from stores or, in many cases, libraries2. Films are viewed at home as homework prior to
discussion of the related topics in class; as mentioned, only short clips are used in class.
We found that viewing the homework ﬁlms quickly became occasions for student group
or family pizza parties! This helped alleviate a potential problem of having enough copies

1We are grateful to C. Dennis for sending us review copies of his book.
2The UCF library currently owns 10 DVDs from each movie used in the course.

3

Figure 1: The main nine ﬁlms that were used in the initial phase of the course at UCF.
Clips from several other Hollywood movies are shown to students, as well as clips from
scientiﬁc documentaries and IMAX ﬁlms. However, the additional ﬁlms are not required
to be pre-viewed at home.

of each ﬁlm locally available. Suﬃcient available copies turned out not to be a problem
as the numerous video stores tend to have many copies of the ﬁlms we use.

In class integrated with the lecture, PowerPoint slides and demonstrations, we focus on
analyzing the topic of the day using clips from ﬁlms that have examples of that principle.
For example, students might watch The Abyss. Then in class, using a couple of clips
from the ﬁlm to “set the scene”, we discuss pressure in a ﬂuid as a function of depth,
how deep an object (e.g., a person or submarine) can descend, and the propagation of
sound in water. Following that discussion, a physics single-concept ﬁlm may be shown to
illustrate what the movie got right and what it got wrong. After class, the instructor’s
analysis of each clip is placed on the course web site so that students may review the

4

discussion and calculations. An additional advantage of this approach is that the ﬁlms
we use can be varied each term to incorporate new releases and to focus attention on
particular concepts. Below is an example of how we use particular clips from Armageddon
in discussions of asteroids, momentum conservation and energy.

EXAMPLE: In Armageddon [5] an asteroid of the size of Texas is on a collision course with
Earth. In Chapter 7: Training Begins of Armageddon, the ﬂight plan of NASA and the method
for the destruction of the asteroid are described (see segment from 43:04 to 45:34): the team must
land on the asteroid, drill a hole, plant a nuclear bomb, and then detonate it before the ‘zero
barrier’. If the detonation happens after the ‘zero barrier’, then the asteroid fragments will collide
with Earth. This segment is discussed twice in class, once when the concepts of momentum are
presented (paragraph 1 below), and once when the concepts of energy are presented (paragraphs
3 and 4 below). In the second case, the calculation ends with an evaluation on the feasibility of
the plan. Prior to the second time, another quick clip (Chapter 4: NYC Hit Hard, segment from
10:20 to 11:40) is shown in class which motivates a discussion on asteroids and the calculation
of the mass of the asteroid seen in the ﬁlm (paragraph 2 below). These discussions are repeated
here in order to demonstrate our methods.

Figure 2: Armageddon NASA simulations show that the successful detonation of the bomb
before the zero barrier will result in splitting the asteroid in two fragments that will be
deﬂected away from Earth.

Figure 3: NASA simulations show that detonation of the bomb after the zero barrier will
result in splitting the asteroid in two fragments that will not be deﬂected enough to avoid
collision with Earth.

5

§1. Momentum Conservation: Following the NASA simulation and to simplify the anal-
ysis, we assume that the asteroid splits in exactly two fragments. Moreover, we assume that
the detonation of the nuclear bomb will force the two fragments to deﬂect perpendicular to
the direction of the original motion at speeds that depend on the size of the bomb. (We shall
indicate the direction of motion as x-direction and the perpendicular direction as y-direction.)
The two fragments will still continue to move towards Earth with the 22, 500 mi/h speed of the
asteroid. This is guaranteed by momentum conservation. The relation of the fragment speeds
in the y-direction is also determined by momentum conservation. Assuming that the two frag-
ments have equal mass, they will acquire equal speeds in the y-direction, such that the total
momentum along this direction maintains the value zero that it had before the detonation.

§2. Mass of the asteroid: For a quantitative calculation on the Armageddon NASA plan,
we shall need the mass of the asteroid. In the movie we are told that the asteroid is of the size of
Texas. The area of Texas is 691, 027km2 [19]. Assuming that Texas is a square, this would give
a length of 831.3km for the side of the square. This gives an average length. In reality, Texas
is stretching 1, 244Km from east to west and 1, 289km from north to south [19]. To be on the
conservative side, we will adopt the average size 831.3km for our calculations. Even so, only one
known asteroid is of such size; the largest asteroid, Ceres, has a diameter of about 940km. In
fact only two dozen asteroids have diameters 200km or greater. Even if we assemble all known
asteroids to a unique big asteroid, its diameter will be no more than 1, 500km and its mass less
than 1/10 that of Earth’s moon [20]. However, to give the director the beneﬁt of doubt, we shall
accept the existence of an asteroid of the size given on collision course with Earth.

If the asteroid is a cube, its volume is 5.7 × 108km3. If it is a sphere, then its volume is
18 × 108km3. Large asteroids have spherical shape; smaller asteroids have irregular shapes [20].
However, let’s assume that the volume of the asteroid in the ﬁlm is somewhere in between the
two values given above, say 10 × 108km3 = 1018m3.

Overall, about 15 percent of all asteroids are silicate (i.e. composed of rocky material),
75 percent are carbonaceous (i.e. contain carbon), and 10 percent are other types (such as
those containing large fractions of iron). Stony asteroids look very much like terrestrial rocks.
So, we might assume that the density of the asteroid is approximately equal to that of Earth:
5500kg/m3. However, we know from observations that asteroid Ida has a density of 2200–
2900kg/m3 and asteroid Mathilde has a density of about 1400kg/m3. This especially low den-
sity of Mathilde might be due to a porous interior [20]. To be conservative, we shall assume
a density of 2000kg/m3 for the ﬁlm asteroid. In other words, ever cubic meter of the asteroid
would have a mass of 2000kg. The total mass of the movie asteroid would be 2000 × 1018kg
or 2 × 1021kg. We have assumed that, after the detonation of the nuclear bomb, the asteroid
breaks in two pieces which have equal mass. This means that each piece would have a mass of
1021kg.

§3. Energy of nuclear weapons:In the ﬁlm a nuclear bomb is used to split the asteroid.
The explosive TNT has become the standard means for showing the disastrous power of nuclear
weapons. In particular, one ton (t) of TNT releases

9
4.2 × 10

Joules

6

of energy. Yet, one ton is a small quantity of TNT to describe modern bombs; kilotons (kt) or
megatons (Mt) of TNT are units more appropriate:

The Hiroshima bomb was equivalent to 12kt of TNT or

1kt = 1000 t ,

1M t = 1, 000, 000 t .

13

5 × 10

Joules.

8.4 × 10

Joules.

16

A modern nuclear bomb is equivalent to 20M t of TNT. This is equal to 1667 Hiroshima bombs
and releases about

Today the nations which have such weapons no longer spend eﬀort to increase the destructive
power of nuclear bombs as it is already immense. Instead, they focus on reducing the size of the
weapons.

§4. Deﬂection of the fragments: Returning to the movie, let’s assume that the nuclear
bomb that was carried to the asteroid was equivalent to 100,000 Hiroshima bombs. For the
reasons we have already explained, this is a really generous assumption in favor of the director.
As always, we want to be nice to him. Upon detonation, the energy released will be

Part of this energy will be used to break the asteroid into two pieces. However, once more, we
will be generous to the director and we will ignore this fact, even though the energy needed to
do so is signiﬁcant. Therefore, we will assume that all the energy becomes kinetic energy of the
two fragments; each fragment will be given an amount of

18

5 × 10

Joules.

2.5 × 10

Joules.

18

Moreover, as stated above, we assume that all energy becomes kinetic energy associated with
motion in the y-direction and no amount is spent to push the fragments in the x-direction.

Knowing the mass of each fragment and the kinetic energy of its motion in the y-direction,

we can ﬁnd the speed of the fragment in this direction:

KE =

m v

2 ⇒ v =

1
2

2 KE
m

.

r

If we substitute the numbers and do the calculation we ﬁnd that

m
s
Therefore, each fragment moves in the y-direction 7
7200s, the time to reach Earth, each fragment will move

v = 0.07

.

100 m (or 7cm) every second. In two hours or

Now compare this with the radius of the Earth:

7
100

m
s

× 7200s = 504 m.

6, 500km = 6, 500, 000m

7

which is how far each fragment must move in the y-direction in order to just miss the solid Earth
(but it would still go through the atmosphere and release a lot of energy).

So we see that applying momentum conservation and reasonable (and generous!) assump-
tions about the size of the nuclear bomb used, there is no way that this plan would save Earth.
The two fragments of the asteroid would be barely few city blocks apart when they collided
with Earth. Such proposals appear in the press from time to time, but now the students learnt
how to critically analyze such suggestions made by well-meaning, but scientiﬁcally, illiterate
contemporaries.

The above discussion, besides the explicitly made assumptions, ignores the gravitational
attraction of the two fragments that will decrease further the deﬂection, the tidal eﬀects on
Earth, and the perturbation introduced by the asteroid in the motion of the Earth-moon system.
These eﬀects are discussed further in class, partly qualitatively and partly quantitatively.

As is obvious from our example, the quantitative analyses we use are often more
sophisticated than what is expected from Physical Science students. However, we have
discovered that, since the analysis is strongly correlated to the ﬁlm, no complaints are
generated. A similar attempt to solve such a problem in the traditional course would
generate many unpleasant feelings and would make the course very unpopular.

Besides the ﬁlms required to be previewed by the students at home, the instructors
make use of clips from various other movies, IMAX ﬁlms, and scientiﬁc documentaries.
For example, a clip from Deep Impact is used to demonstrate the tsunamis after a collision
of a comet with Earth, clips from the IMAX ﬁlm Mission to Mir [13] is shown in order to
illustrate life under “zero gravity” conditions, and clips from the PBS documentary Life
Beyond Earth [14] are shown to discuss our quest for life in the Universe.

4 Student Response and Performance Results

So, how do the students perceive the course? The instructors made use in class of an
electronic personal response system whereby each student could respond immediately
to questions posted by the instructors, their responses being automatically recorded and
tabulated by an in-class computer. This system, besides its pedagogical value, was used to
obtain data on the student’s feelings and reactions on the course and to record attendance.
The results for several course-evaluation questions are shown in Tables 1 through 4.

Besides the data collected by the personal response system, students have expressed
strong support through the standard end-of-term course evaluations and through —
unsolicited— comments in their term papers.

Of course, even if the students embrace a new idea enthusiastically, it does not mean
that their performance will be better than their performance in the traditional course
(where the majority of them really struggle). The eﬀect needs to documented. In Table
5, we list the performance of UCF Physical Science students in two almost identical
classes, one taught in the traditional way and one taught using movies. The important
parameters in both classes are identical: the classes have the same size, they were taught
by the same instructor (C.E.) who used similar PowerPoint lectures, same demonstrations,

8

strongly agree
38.16%

SUMMER 2002
agree
disagree
52.63% 5.26%

strongly disagree
3.95%

strongly agree
28.06%

agree
48.98%

no opinion disagree
3.57%

13.27%

strongly disagree
6.12%

FALL 2002

Table 1: Data on the question “The ﬁlms were well-chosen to include a broad range of
science ideas”.

strongly agree
28.95%

SUMMER 2002
agree
disagree
60.52% 9.21%

strongly disagree
1.32%

strongly agree
19.72%

agree
53.99%

no opinion disagree
6.10%

17.37%

strongly disagree
2.82%

FALL 2002

Table 2: Data on the question “The topics selected from the movies for physics analysis
were interesting”.

strongly agree
77.92%

SUMMER 2002
disagree
agree
10.39% 9.09%

strongly disagree
2.60%

strongly agree
56.88%

agree
26.61%

no opinion disagree
4.13%

6.88%

strongly disagree
5.50%

FALL 2002

Table 3: Data on the question “The instructors should develop this course further since
it is more interesting than the standard physical science course”.

gave similar exams. The classes were even taught in the same auditorium. The classes also
covered similar material with the same textbook [21] required in the traditional class and
recommended in the Physics in Films class. The Physics in Films class used in addition
a supplement [2]. The material of the Physics in Films class was almost identical. There
were some diﬀerences in order to make the content of the course more exciting: a few
topics of the traditional syllabus were omitted and they were substituted by topics that
captivate the imagination of the students. Topics that were covered in the traditional
course but omitted in the Physics in Films course were the extensive treatment of heat

9

strongly agree
66.24%

SUMMER 2002
agree
disagree
27.27% 5.19%

strongly disagree
1.30%

strongly agree
48.64%

agree
30.91%

no opinion disagree
4.55%

7.72%

strongly disagree
8.18%

FALL 2002

Table 4: Data on the question “I would recommend to my friends that they take this
course”.

and temperature and extensive discussion of elements and the periodic table. Instead,
topics from astronomy (comets and asteroids, life and intelligent life beyond Earth), as
well as some topics from modern science were added (elements of special and general
relativity, space and time travel).

FALL 2001: traditional Physical Science, 295 students

average
standard deviation

TEST 1 TEST 2 TEST 3 FINAL
59.44
11.67

49.34
13.22

58.18
15.88

65.33
16.09

FALL 2002: Physics in Films, 292 students

average
standard deviation

TEST 1 TEST 2 TEST 3 FINAL
72.82
12.84

74.92
14.36

75.68
14.08

67.68
16.92

Table 5: Data on similar exams from two Physical Science classes of identical size taught
by the same instructor. The material of the two classes was almost identical.
(See
discussion in article.) Exams are normalized to a maximum of 100 points. The diﬀerences
are both dramatic and signiﬁcant.

5 On the Drawing Board

The authors are currently writing a physical science textbook that incorporates the physics
in ﬁlms concept. It will be complete with an instructors CD containing analysis notes
for every scene used in the book to discuss concepts in physical science and a tutorial
on making your own analysis of scenes from favorite or new movies.
In addition to
physics, this approach to teaching basic concepts at the non-major introductory level can
be applied in many other disciplines. Table 6 lists several possibilities with examples of
ﬁlms containing pertinent scenes.

10

Films
Discipline
Armageddon, Contact, Deep Impact, ...
Astronomy
Biology
Planet of the Apes, Spiderman, ...
Mathematics Contact, Pay It Forward, Pi, A Beautiful Mind, ...

Table 6: Use of ﬁlms in other disciplines. We have listed three other areas besides Physics.
However, the possibilities are really unlimited: Archaeology, Chemistry, Computer Sci-
ence, Engineering, Forensic Science, History, Law, Philosophy, etc.

References

[1] Science & Engineering Indicators 2002, http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind02.

[2] L.W. Dubeck, S.E. Moshier, J.E. Boss, Fantastic Voyages:

learning science

through science ﬁctions ﬁlms, Springer 1994.

[3] L.W. Dubeck, S.E. Moshier, J.E. Boss, Science in Cinema: teaching science fact

through science ﬁctions ﬁlms, Teachers College 1988.

[4] Speed2, Widescreen DVD, 20th Century Fox 1998.

[5] Armageddon, Widescreen DVD, Touchstone Pictures 1997.

[6] Eraser, DVD, Warner Bros. 1996.

[7] 2001: A Space Odyssey, Widescreen DVD, Warner Bros. 2001.

[8] The Abyss, Special Edition DVD, 20th Century Fox 2002.

[9] Independence Day, Widescreen DVD, 20th Century Fox 2002.

[10] Tango & Cash, DVD, Warner Bros. 1997.

[11] Frequency, Platinum Series DVD, New Line 2001.

[12] Contact, Widescreen DVD, Warner Bros. 1997.

[13] Mission to Mir, IMAX DVD, Warner Bros. 1997.

[14] Life Beyond Earth, PBS DVD, Warner Bros. 2000.

[15] Deep Impact, Widescreen DVD, Paramount 1998.

[16] T. Rogers, personal communication.

[17] C.M. Dennis, Jr, Start Using “Hollywood Physics” in your Classroom, Physics

Teacher 40 (2002) 420.

11

[18] C.M. Dennis, Jr, Hollywood Physics: Mechanics, Fidget Publications 2001.

[19] Grolier, Encyclopedia of Knowledge.

[20] E. Chaisson, S. McMillan, Astrnomy: A Beginner’s Guide to the Universe, Pentice

Hall 2001.

[21] J. Bolemon, The Physics Around You, McGraw-Hill 2001.

12

