3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
9
0
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Visualizing the Mass and Width Spectrum of Unstable
Particles

N.L. Harshman
Formerly: Department of Physics and Astronomy
Rice University
Houston, TX
Currently: Department of Computer Science, Audio Technology and Physics
American University
Washington, DC

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Several graphical representations of the mass and width spectrum of unstable
subatomic particles are presented. Such plots are useful tools for introducing
students to the particle zoo and provide students an alternate way to organize
conceptually what can seem like an overwhelming amount of data. In particular,
such graphs highlight phenomenological features of unstable particles character-
istic of diﬀerent energy and time scales.

1 Introduction

When confronting the vast array of subatomic particles detected and created in particle
physics experiments, new students (and old researchers) may become overwhelmed with the

1

volume of descriptive information. The purpose of this note is to present a visual tool to
supplement other schemes used to organize the diversity of unstable particles. The idea is
simple: what does a plot of width versus mass of subatomic particles look like and what
information does it convey about the kinematics and dynamics of these particles? I hope
that instructors of particle physics may ﬁnd it useful when introducing new visitors to the
particle zoo and that practitioners may ﬁnd an alternate perspective stimulating.

The most useful feature of these graphs is not that they summarize information about
the spectrum or structure of unstable particles, but that they highlight the distinctions
between the phenomenological signatures of unstable particles at diﬀerent energy and time
scales. These graphs provide a natural way of grouping together particles, not by their
physical content, but by how they are produced, how they decay, and how their characteristic
parameters are measured. This alternate taxonomy distinguishes three classes of unstable
particles: decaying states, which decay via the weak interaction and whose exponential decay
rate can be measured, resonance states, which decay primarily through the strong interaction
and are measured as features in the cross section, and a middle class of “platypus” states,
whose instability parameters require more subtle measurements to determine. Also, these
graphs can be used to call attention to how the limitations and prejudices of past experiments
aﬀect what is known about the mass and width spectrum of particles.

2 Which Unstable Particles?

Figure 1 depicts the mass M and width Γ of 139 unstable particles, with mass plotted
logarithmically on the horizontal axis and width plotted logarithmically vertically. The
shape of each plotted point indicates the type of particle it is (gauge boson, e.g.) and for
the hadrons the style (black, gray, or hollow) indicates some information about the quark
content.

The data for the 139 unstable particles come from the 2002 edition of The Review of Par-
ticle Physics [1], and in particular the list of well-known, reasonably well-measured unstable
particles from the “Summary Tables of Particle Properties” therein. Not every particle in
the “Summary Table” has been included; only those particles found in the ﬁle [2] that the
Particle Data Group tabulates, of the mass and width data, for use in Monte Carlo event
generators and detector simulators. For unstable particles whose lifetimes τ are quoted in
the Review [1] and not their widths, the width values in the Monte Carlo ﬁle are found using
the Weisskopf-Wigner relation Γ = ~/τ (more will be said about this later).

The list of particles from the Monte Carlo ﬁle [2] has been modiﬁed and applied in the

following way in Fig. 1 and subsequent ﬁgures:

1. The stable particles, the proton, electron, photon and neutrinos, are excluded.

2

2. The nearly-stable neutron is neglected for reasons of scale.

3. The Monte Carlo ﬁle includes some particles for which only an upper bound of the
width has been measured. They have been excluded. Examples include some light
unﬂavored meson resonances like the f0(980), other meson resonances such as the D∗±
s
and χb0(1P ), and a few baryon resonances like the Σc(2520)+.

4. The top quark, not truly an independent particle like the others in the list, is not

included.

5. The symbol plotted for a particle also represents its antiparticle, except for the neutral
L are plotted instead of the ﬂavor

K-mesons. For these, the mass eigenstates K 0
eigenstates K 0 and ¯K 0.

S and K 0

6. A single symbol is plotted for all diﬀerent charge-species of a baryon unless diﬀerent
masses for diﬀerent charges have been measured. For example, each point representing
a ∆ baryon represents all four charge species {++, +, 0, −} corresponding to quark
contents {uuu, uud, udd, ddd}.

Then what unstable particles are included? The weak gauge bosons W and Z are at the
high energy extreme and the muon is at the low energy extreme. The other unstable lepton,
the tau, is in the middle, along with a host of hadrons made up of ﬁve out of the six quarks:
up, down, strange, charm and bottom. While the gauge bosons and leptons are to our best
knowledge structureless; the hadrons are composite. Subsequent references to particles refer
just to this set of well-established, well-measured unstable particles, and therefore should not
be taken to refer to all possible particles that have or have not been observed or theorized.
Looking at Figure 1, it may be tempting to ask if there is a functional dependence of
the width on the mass. In principle the widths of unstable particles are calculable from the
masses of the quarks and leptons and other Standard Model parameters, although in practice
such calculations are diﬃcult or impossible, especially for hadrons. For the purposes of this
article, the width and mass are considered independent phenomenological parameters to be
determined from experiment.

Figure 1 does make apparent the general trend of increasing width with increasing mass,
which is explained by phase space eﬀects. The decay rate is roughly proportional to the
phase space of the decay products and the more massive the unstable particle, the more
decay channels are available.

To better elucidate the properties of the scattered distribution in Figure 1, several other
partitions or sections of the data are included below. Figure 2 plots the masses of the 139
in rank order from the least massive to
unstable particles in order of increasing mass, i.e.

3

the most massive. Figure 3 is similar, except it plots them in rank order of increasing width.
Figure 4 plots the unitless ratio of width to mass in increasing order. These diﬀerent graphs
give further clues about the structure of the mass and width spectrum and how to identify
phenomenologically-similar groups of unstable particles.

3 Mass Spectrum

A striking feature of Figure 1 is that while the widths run over a range of 18 orders of mag-
nitude, the masses are constrained within three decades, with most of them between 1 GeV
and 10 GeV. This fact says more about the types of experiments that have been performed
than about the “essential nature” of the mass spectrum. Far more particle searches have
focussed on this energy range for a variety of historical and practical reasons.

Another perspective on the mass spectrum can be gained from Figure 2. Qualitatively,
gaps in the plot indicate how quark composition aﬀects (and eﬀects) the mass spectrum of
hadrons. For example, at the low end, twelve of the ﬁrst thirteen points are mesons consisting
of the three light quarks: up, down and strange. The non-meson among the thirteen is the
muon, the lightest unstable particle, which historically was mistaken for a meson. The twelve
mesons have masses less than the lightest (undepicted) baryons, the proton and neutron at
about 940 MeV. There is a gap between the ﬁrst three points, which represent the muon,
π0 and π±, and the next set, which include the lightest mesons composed of strange quarks,
the K ±, K 0

S, K 0

L and η.

At the high end of the mass spectrum, except for the gauge bosons, the points are
dominated by hadrons containing heavy quarks. The lightest hadron containing a charm
quark, the D0, is eighty-ﬁfth on the list with a mass of 1865 MeV and the lightest hadrons
containing a bottom quark are the B-mesons B± and B0 with ranks of 127 and 128 and
masses of 5279 MeV. Similar to the strange quark mass threshold jump seen at the lower
energies, here there are slight jumps at 117, the lightest particle with two charm quarks ηc,
at 127, the lightest particle with one bottom quark B±, and at 132, the lightest particle with
two bottom quarks Υ(1S).

The fact that above number 109 all points represent hadrons containing charm or bottom
quarks does not mean that unstable particles containing only light quarks are not found in
this mass range. It only indicates that such resonances have not been the focus of experi-
mental searches in that energy range. Also, at such high energies production of light mesons
is so copious that wide, light-meson resonances get lost in the background.

Finally, the true heavy-weights, the gauge bosons, with masses near 100 GeV, stand alone
at the far sides of Figure 1 and Figure 2. Their isolation is again an artifact of experimental
particle physics history, not of some fundamental nature of the mass spectrum of particles.

4

To make precise measurements of these particles entailed building experiments with far more
energy and at a far greater cost. To better explore the physics at this scale and to search
for potentially heavier particles such as the Higgs boson will require the next generation of
particle accelerators.

4 Width Spectrum

Unlike the mass spectrum, the width spectrum (i.e., the plot of the widths of the 139 unstable
particles in increasing order) depicted in Figure 3 is not as dependent on the energy scales
of experiments that have been performed. Figure 3 spans many decades of the width, and
even the most massive particles can have very small or very large widths. For example, the
Λb baryon, with mass and width (5.62 GeV, 5.36 × 10−13 GeV), has a mass rank of 130 out of
139, but a width rank of 15. It is considered unlikely that we will discover any more stable
or extremely long-lived subatomic particles, so future discoveries will likely either ﬁt into
this graph or, perhaps for new ultra-massive particles like the Higgs boson, be appended to
the end, beyond the gauge bosons. Therefore the shape of this graph is unlikely to change
much as unstable particles are added, whereas new particle discoveries will probably smooth
out the high energy, quark-mass threshold gaps in the mass spectrum Figure 2.

Looking at Figure 3, it seems natural to roughly break the graph into three parts: particles
with widths Γ < 10−8 MeV, 10−5 MeV < Γ < 10 MeV, and Γ > 10 MeV. This division
becomes even more sensible when Figure 4, which lists the particles in order of the width-
to-mass ratio Γ/M, is considered. The ﬁrst 40 particles in both Figures 3 and 4 have nearly
the same order; only after that is there a substantial reshuﬄing.
In Figure 4 a heuristic
division between nearly the same three classes of particles could be made at Γ/M < 10−10,
10−8 < Γ/M < 10−2.5 and Γ/M > 10−2.5.

4.1 First Class: Decaying States

The interesting thing about these classes is that they have physical signiﬁcance. In Figure 1,
this ﬁrst class of particles is the arc of leptons, mesons and baryons along the lower part of
the graph. From the point of view of fundamental interactions, what these particles have in
common is that they decay via the weak interaction, and consequently they are long-lived.
Long-lived is of course a relative term, but widths Γ < 10−8 MeV correspond to lifetimes
τ > 10−14 s.
In terms of phenomenology, that means for particles in this ﬁrst class the
exponential decay rate can be measured directly. This measurement involves ﬁnding the
distance traveled between the production location and the decay vertex. This information,
combined with kinematic information of mass, momentum, energy and/or speed, can be

5

used to ﬁnd the time-of-ﬂight in the rest frame of the particle. A histogram of all the
time-of-ﬂights for a certain particle type can be ﬁt to an exponential to get the lifetime.

Long life makes this ﬁrst class seem like the most “particle-like” of all the unstable
particles. In many calculations they can be approximated as stable because they are stable
with respect to the much shorter time scales dictated by the strong and electromagnetic
interactions. Their width/mass ratios Γ/M are so small that any mass uncertainty can be
neglected in kinematic calculations.

4.2 Third Class: Resonances

In contrast, particles in the third class have widths Γ > 10 MeV, corresponding to particles
with lifetimes τ < 10−22, and to a width-to-mass ratio Γ/M greater than a part in a thou-
sand. Because of this mass uncertainty, they can be produced in experiments with energies
substantially lower or higher than their central (quoted) mass value. This class of parti-
cles decays primarily through strong interactions and the vast lifetime diﬀerence separating
them from the ﬁrst class is attributable to the strength of the strong interaction and the
massiveness of the weak gauge bosons.

It may seem unjustiﬁed to consider these short-lived unstable particles as the same kind
of object as long-lived unstable particles, so vast are the diﬀerences in their instability pa-
rameters. The distinction between these two classes is sometimes codiﬁed in the language
of particle physics: the long-lived particles are called decaying states and the short-lived are
called resonances. This distinction arises because of the diﬀerent ways that decaying states
and resonances are observed experimentally.

Particle resonances are detected as rapid variations (usually peaks) in the cross section.
As the center-of-mass energy of a collision is scanned over some range, there may appear an
enhancement of the elastic cross section or the cross section into a particular set of inelastic
channels. After extracting the background and accounting for uncertainties in the prepara-
tion and detection apparatuses and other eﬀects (such as radiative corrections), the resonant
cross section σR as a function of center-of-mass energy (or center-of-mass energy squared s)
can be extracted. This process can become more complicated if there are multiple resonances
in the same energy region, interfering resonances, or background-resonance interference.

Neglecting these complications, the resonance cross section σR (or resonance lineshape or
linewidth) can be ﬁt to a theoretical function and the mass and width extracted. Typically,
the function used is the Breit-Wigner or Lorentzian function, which can be parameterized
in terms of mass and width as

σ(s) ∝

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

1
s − (M − iΓ/2)2

2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

,

6

(1)

or by several other parameterizations. This functional form for the resonance lineshape can
be derived by associating the resonance to a pole in the scattering S-matrix [3, 4]. Alter-
nate functions exist; for example, in perturbative quantum ﬁeld theory, the on-mass shell
renormalization scheme leads to a diﬀerent deﬁnition for mass and width (for a discussion
of this as applied to the Z-boson, see [5]). For some resonances, such as the ∆ baryons,
the Review [1] cites values for mass and width corresponding to both the Breit-Wigner and
perturbation theory deﬁnitions.

To measure the resonance cross section accurately and to extract a value for mass and
width, whichever function and parameterization are used, requires experimental energy reso-
lution precise enough to trace out the lineshape. Practically, this means the energy resolution
should be smaller than the ratio Γ/M for that particular resonance. As a result, the line-
shapes of particles in the ﬁrst class, with Γ/M < 10−10, cannot be measured in this way.
Measurements of width and lifetime are physically very distinct processes that apply to
phenomena at very diﬀerent energy scales.

The width and lifetime of a particle are related theoretically by the Weisskopf-Wigner
formula τ = ~/Γ, which was originally proposed in the context of atomic electronic line-
shapes [6]. This relation is considered so standard as to appear to be a deﬁnition or identity
or direct consequence of the uncertainty principle, but to the best knowledge of this au-
thor, this relationship has never been veriﬁed experimentally in the regime of subatomic
physics [7]. The Wigner-Weisskopf relation between the width and decay rate or inverse
lifetime Γ/~ is derived as an approximation in non-relativistic scattering in many textbooks
(for example [3, 11]), and can be proven identically in the non-relativistic and relativistic
case for the mathematical object called a Gamow vector [12].

4.3 Middle Class: Troublemakers
The middle class of particles on the chart, with widths roughly between 10−5 MeV < Γ < 10
MeV and width-to-mass ratios 10−8 < Γ/M < 10−2.5, are awkwardly placed from an exper-
imental point of view. Their lifetimes are so short that direct measurement of exponential
decay is extremely diﬃcult or impossible; their widths are so narrow that few experiments
have the energy resolution to accurately trace their lineshape. While the middle class is eas-
ily distinguishable from the decaying states in Figure 1, they blend into the bottom of the
resonance states. There is no clear gap characteristic of the diﬀerence in strength between
electromagnetically- and strongly-decaying states.

Physically, what do states in this middle class have in common? Some of these states
have substantial branching ratios into electromagnetic decay channels like the π0 and Σ0
and do not decay via the strong interaction. Some, like the D∗(2020)± are barely above
the energy threshold of for their primary decay channels and their decays are therefore

7

phase-space suppressed. All the mesons in this class (except the D∗(2020)±) are unﬂavored,
i.e. composed of quarks and antiquarks of the same ﬂavor (or superpositions of same-ﬂavor
quark/antiquark pairs) and are not energetic enough to decay into strongly-favored channels.
Neither decaying states nor resonances by the deﬁnitions described above, how are the
widths of these states measured? Below, the experimental determinations of some of these
particles’ widths are described to give a ﬂavor for some of the other tools at the disposal of
particle physicists.

• With a lifetime of (8.4±0.6)×10−17 s, the exponential decay rate of the π0 is very hard
to measure. The π0 decays almost exclusively into a pair of photons via the electromag-
netic interaction. A precision experiment by Atherton, et al. [13], ﬁt an exponential to
three data points extracted from the distance between the production and the decay of
the π0 into two photons. The measurement agrees (within error) with another method
used to measure widths and lifetimes: the Primakoﬀ eﬀect [14]. Bombarding heavy
nuclei with gamma rays, an interaction between the incoming photon and a virtual
photon can produce the π0; this process is called photo-production. One can measure
the cross section for this process and relate it theoretically via the transition amplitude
to the partial width or decay rate Γ2γ for the process π0 → γγ. From this, the total
width is determined by dividing the partial width Γ2γ by the independently-measurable
branching ratio B2γ into the two photon decay channel, i.e., Γ = Γ2γ/B2γ.

• The Primakoﬀ eﬀect has also been used to measure the lifetime of the Σ0 baryon as

(7.4 ± 0.7) × 10−20 s. The Σ0 decays almost exclusively to Λγ.

• For the c¯c resonances J/ψ and ψ(2S) and the b¯b resonances Υ(1S), Υ(2S) and Υ(3S)
the partial width Γee is extracted from the integrated cross section, for example, in the
elastic process e+e− → J/ψ → e+e−. Then the ratio of the elastic cross section to the
total cross section independently provides the branching ratio Bee. The total width
(as above) is Γ = Γee/Bee.

• Both the above method and the Primakoﬀ eﬀect have been applied to the η meson

giving consistent results and a value for the width of Γ = 1.18 ± 0.11 keV.

• Finally, the D∗

0(2010)±, with a width of Γ = 96 ± 4 ± 22 keV, has a mass just above the
threshold for its main decay channels D0π± and D±π0. Its width cannot be measured
directly, but can be extracted from ﬁtting to simulations of the the energy distribution
of decay products [15].

8

5 Summary and Further Considerations

The mass-width spectrum in Figure 1 does not reveal as much information about unstable
particles as Hertzsprung-Russell diagrams reveal about stellar composition and evolution [16].
These graphs do not contribute to ﬁnding a perturbative, renormalizable, elegant theory for
predicting masses and widths of hadrons based on standard model parameters. Nonethe-
less, Figure 1 and subsequent partitions of it do show some structures that correspond to
signiﬁcant phenomenological features. As a result, I think these graphs provide an excellent
tool (or at least a starting point) for instructing students of particle physics about a host of
physical phenomena and experimental procedures. A partial list of these features or ideas
would include:

• Relative strengths of the fundamental interactions.

• Connection of the transition amplitude and scattering matrix to measurable quantities.

• Experimental measurement of exponential decay.

• Resonance production and decay.

• Cross section measurements.

• Phase space dependence of width and decay rate.

Additionally, not just the viewing of these graphs, but the production of these kinds
of plots would be an excellent exercise for students, undergraduate or graduate. While
familiarizing themselves with the particle zoo, they could also practice using graphing and
data management software. As an example of other kinds of plots possible, Fig. 5 depicts
the width versus mass of just the mesons on a linear scale.

Finally, visualizing the mass and width spectrum of unstable particles with such graphs
makes the task of conceptually organizing the physical data of hundreds of unstable par-
ticles a little easier. It provides an alternate way to group them into phenomenologically-
meaningful families, complimenting standard organization schemes according to ﬂavor and/or
quark content. Many physicists have some biological, taxonomical part of their brains to
which I hope these graphs appeal.

9

References

(2002).

[1] K. Hagiwara et al., “The Review of Particle Physics,” Phys. Rev. D 66, 010001 1-974

[2] http://pdg.lbl.gov/rpp/mcdata/mass_width_02.mc

[3] For example, see M. L. Goldberger, K. M. Watson, Collision Theory (Wiley, New York,

1964), chap. 8.

[4] See also, Arno Bohm, “Quantum Mechanics: Foundations and Applications,” (Springer,

New York, 1994), 3rd ed., chap. 18.

[5] Arno R. Bohm and N.L. Harshman, “On the mass and width of the Z-boson and other

relativistic resonances,” Nucl. Phys. B 581, 91-115 (2000).

[6] V. Weisskopf and E. P. Wigner, “Berechnung der nat¨urlichen Linienbreite auf Grund
der Diracsichen Licht theorie,” Z. f. Physik 63, 54-73 (1930) and “Uber die nat¨urlich
Linienbreite in der Strahlung des harmonischen Oszillators,” 65, 18-27 (1930).

[7] The Wigner-Weisskopf relation has been veriﬁed some time ago for some nuclear unsta-
ble states [8,9] using the M¨ossbauer eﬀect to achieve the required energy resolution and
more recently for one atomic unstable state [10] using ultra-cold atoms for the same
purpose.

[8] For example, see H. Frauenfelder, The M¨ossbauer Eﬀect (W.A. Benjamin, New York,

1962), pp. 50-51.

[9] P.A. DeYong, P.L. Jolivette, and N. Rouze, “Experimental veriﬁcation of the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle—an advanced undergraduate laboratory,” Am. J. Phys. 61 (6),
560-563 (1993).

[10] U. Volz, M. Majerus, H. Liebel, A. Schmitt, and H. Schmoranzer, “Precision Lifetime
Measurements on NaI 3p2P1/2 and 3p2P 3/2 by Beam-Gas-Laser Spectroscopy,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 76, 2862-2865 (1996); C.W. Oates, K.R. Vogel, and J.L. Hall, “High Precision
Linewidth Measurement of Laser-Cooled Atoms: Resolution of the Na 3p2P3/2 Lifetime
Discrepancy,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2866-2869 (1996).

[11] For a more elementary discussion than that in [3] based on time-dependent perturbation
theory, see Eugen Merzbacher, Quantum Mechanics (Wiley, New York, 1970), 2nd
ed., chap. 18, which includes the quotation “To obtain nonreversing transitions and a

10

progressive depletion of the initial state it is essential that the discrete initial state be
coupled to a very large number of states with similar frequencies. However, the fact
remains that the exponential decay law, for which we have so much empirical support
in radioactive processes, is not a rigorous consequence of quantum mechanics but the
result of somewhat delicate approximations,” pp. 484-485.

[12] Gamow was the ﬁrst to use eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian with complex energy
for a heuristic description of unstable states in G. Gamow, “Zur Quantentheorie der
Atomkernes,” Z. Phys. 51, 204-218 (1928). For a modern non-relativistic treatment,
see chap. 21 of [4]; for a relativistic discussion, see [5]; also, A. Bohm, N.L. Harshman
and H. Walther, “Relating the Lorentzian and exponential: Fermi’s approximation, the
Fourier transform, and causality,” Phys. Rev. A 66, 012107 1-11 (2002).

[13] H.W. Atherton et al., “Direct measurement of the lifetime of the neutral pion,” Phys.

Lett. 15B, 81-84 (1985).

[14] H. Primakoﬀ, “Photo-production of neutral mesons in nuclear electric ﬁelds and the

mean life of the neutral meson,” Phys. Rev. 81, 899 (1951).

[15] A. Anastassov et al. (CLEO Collaboration), “First measurement of Γ(D∗+) and preci-

sion measurement of mD∗+ − mD0,” Phys. Rev. D 65, 032003 1-11 (2002).

[16] M. Zeilik, S. A. Gregory, E. v. P. Smith, Introductory Astronomy and Astrophysics,

Third Edition, (Harcourt Brace Javanovich, Fort Worth, 1992), p. 249-267.

11

Fig. 1. Log-log plot of Mass/MeV versus Width/MeV. Choice of 139 unstable particles
plotted described in text. Key: hollow circles—gauge bosons; black stars—leptons; black
triangles—light unﬂavored mesons; gray triangles—strange mesons; hollow triangles—ﬂavored
charmed mesons (including charmed-strange mesons); black diamonds—unﬂavored charmed
(c¯c) mesons; gray diamonds—ﬂavored bottom mesons (including bottom-strange and bottom-
charmed mesons); hollow diamonds—unﬂavored bottom (b¯b) mesons; black squares—N
and ∆ baryons; gray squares—strange baryons (including Λ, Σ, Ξ and Ω baryons); hol-
low squares—charmed and bottom baryons.

12

Fig. 2. Log-linear plot of Mass/MeV versus particle rank in order of increasing mass (out of
139 selected particles). Key is same as in Fig. 1.

13

Fig. 3. Log-linear plot of Width/MeV versus particle rank in order of increasing width (out
of 139 selected particles). Key is same as in Fig. 1.

14

Fig. 4. Log-linear plot of width-to-mass ratio Γ/M versus rank in order of increasing width-
to-mass ratio (out of 139 selected particles). Key is same as in Fig. 1.

15

Fig. 5. Linear plot of width versus mass of unstable mesons. Key: black diamonds—light,
unﬂavored mesons, black stars—strange mesons; black triangles—charm-ﬂavored mesons
(including charmed/strange-ﬂavored mesons); hollow triangles—c¯c-mesons; black squares—
bottom-ﬂavored mesons (including bottom/strange- and bottom/charmed-ﬂavored mesons);
hollow squares—b¯b-mesons.

16

