3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
1
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Classroom computer animations of
relativistic objects

Leo Brewin
School of Mathematical Sciences
Monash University
Australia

26-July-2003

Abstract

This is a short note to announce the availability of some movies
that may be useful in classroom discussions on the photographic ap-
pearance of objects moving at relativistic speeds. The images are
based on special relativity with no account taken of (other than to
ignore) the eﬀects of doppler shifts, intensity shifts or gravitational
eﬀects.

Motivation

First encounters with Special Relativity can be quite daunting for many
students: time dilation, length contraction, twin paradoxes and the like all
tend to send their minds into a state of neural meltdown. This is not a
favorable outcome. But they do respond well to colour and movement – in
particular to computer simulations of special relativistic eﬀects such as the
apparent change in shape, as revealed by a photograph, of an object moving
close to the speed of light. I have made a series of movies for a number of
common situations using a (slightly) modiﬁed version of the standard ray-
tracing package, POV-Ray(tm) 3.5. Though there is nothing new in this, I
have found it to be a useful teaching tool. I have put the movies and other
material on the web at this address

http://www.maths.monash.edu.au/∼leo/relativity/sr-photography

The ﬁrst point that must be stressed before taking the students through
these movies is that the process of taking a photograph in Special Relativity

1

is fundamentally diﬀerent from what we normally call making an observation.
Photography entails the collection of photons by one person at one instant in
time (in the camera’s frame) while an observation is the detection of a single
event. Furthermore, an observer (or a frame) is the inﬁnite arena in which
all possible events can be detected.

I found the material in these movies suﬃcient to occupy approximately two
one hour tutorials. The students can be asked to study the movies and then
to explain, both in mathematical and descriptive terms, why the images are
as they are. In doing so they will have to have a ﬁrm understanding of the
principle of relativity and of relativistic aberration. My aim was to get the
students to formulate a simple principle that would help them predict how
an object’s shape might appear when photographed at relativistic speeds.

I have not included the eﬀects of redshift nor the changes in intensity. I was
interested only in the apparent change in the shape rather than changes in
colour and brightness (perhaps at later time, any volunteers?).

The changes to the POV-Ray(tm) package were quite simple. I added a few
routines to allow Lorentz transformations between the camera and object
frames. The camera was allowed to move relative to all other objects in
the scene. All of the photons were created in the rest frame of the camera.
These were then Lorentz transformed into the scene frame at which point
the normal POV-Ray(tm) routines takeover. This idea has been used before
(see for example the code by Andrew Howard andrbh@cs.mu.oz.au though
I believe there are errors in his Lorentz routines).

I have included the movies and the modiﬁed POV-Ray(tm) source at the
above website. Note, as part of the POV-Ray(tm) licence I am required to
declare that my modiﬁcations do not form part of the oﬃcial POV-Ray(tm)
release and that I take full responsibility for all alterations. Furthermore,
if you wish to use this version you must read and accept the legal condi-
tions as set out in povlegal.doc (the latest version of which can be found at
http://www.povray.org/povlegal.html)

Forward motion - The Triﬃd Nebula

Here are two (computer generated) images (Fig1a.jpg, Fig1b.jpg) of the Trif-
ﬁd Nebula. Both were taken with identical cameras. The only diﬀerence is
that one of the images was taken in a frame moving at β = 0.75 towards the
Nebula. The images were taken at the instant the two cameras passed each
other. Which image is which? Compare this with the familiar images from
Startrek when the warp drive is engaged.

2

Figure 1a

Figure 1b

3

Forward motion - The TARDIS

Here are another two stills (Fig2a.jpg, Fig2b.jpg), this time of a cube (Dr
Who’s TARDIS = Time and Relative Dimensions in Space) moving directly
towards the observer. The cubes appear to bulge outwards. Why? They also
appear to be smaller (or are they further away?). Why?

Figure 2a

Figure 2b

4

Transverse motion - The Albert Einstein Steam Railway

Here are two images of a train moving across the line of sight of a single
observer. The top image (Fig3a.jpg) is of a train moving at β = 0.05 while
the lower (Fig3b.jpg) image has β = 0.95.

The students should be able to explain why speed of the train appears to
slow down as it moves from left to right. The train also appears to shorten
in length as it moves left to right. Why? The train also appears to rotate,
but that is harder to explain (bonus marks?)

Figure 3a

Figure 3b

5

This figure "Fig1a.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0307145v1

This figure "Fig1b.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0307145v1

This figure "Fig2a.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0307145v1

This figure "Fig2b.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0307145v1

This figure "Fig3a.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0307145v1

This figure "Fig3b.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0307145v1

