Biopolymer Elasticity

Supurna Sinha

Raman Research Institute, Bangalore 560080,India

Abstract

In recent years molecular elasticity has emerged as an active area of research:

there are experiments that probe mechanical properties of single biomolecules

such as DNA and Actin, with a view to understanding the role of elasticity

of these polymers in biological processes such as transcription and protein-

induced DNA bending. Single molecule elasticity has thus emerged as an area

where there is a rich cross-fertilization of ideas between biologists, chemists

and theoretical physicists. In this article we present a perspective on this ﬁeld

of research.

3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
8
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Polymers of diﬀerent ﬂexibilities are vital to life. Some polymers are as stiﬀ as needles,

others are as ﬂexible as thread and still others are like twine, neither too stiﬀ nor too ﬂoppy.

The cytoskeletal structure of the cell, which gives rigidity to the cell, consists of semiﬂexible

polymers - like Actin, Microtubules and intermediate ﬁlaments. The polymer which carries

the genetic code, the DNA, is a semiﬂexible polymer (See Box 1). A typical human DNA in

a cell is about a meter long and it is rather amazing that such a long molecule is packed into

a cell nucleus of the size of a few microns. This eﬃcient packaging is a mystery and raises

questions about the elasticity of DNA. DNA also assumes various diﬀerent forms depending

on the function it needs to perform - for instance, it is unwound during replication so that

the genetic code can be accessed and copied. At other times the DNA assumes a supercoiled

conﬁguration which protects and preserves the genetic code intact till it is needed. Such

conformationally distinct conﬁgurations are also dictated by its elasticity.

Single Molecule Experiments:

Experimental studies of biopolymer molecules such as DNA have traditionally been lim-

ited to samples containing large numbers of molecules. This made it hard to probe the elastic

properties of individual biopolymers which are of vital importance to biological processes

such as protein-induced DNA bending. It is only quite recently, due to advances in technol-

ogy that single molecule studies became feasible. It is now possible to design experiments

in which single molecules are pulled, stretched and twisted to measure elastic properties. In

a typical single molecule experiment, one considers a polymer molecule suspended between

a ﬁxed surface and a force sensor of some kind (See Fig. 1). The force sensor is a bead in

a laser trap or a ﬂexible cantilever of an atomic force microscope and the molecule under

consideration can range from a DNA in a simple random coil conﬁguration to a globular

protein in a unique three-dimensionally folded form. For instance, one can study the “equa-

tion of state” of a semiﬂexible polymer by measuring its extension as a function of applied

force. One can also tag the ends with ﬂuorescent dye and determine the distribution of end-

to-end distances. We learn a lot from such experimental studies about biologically relevant

2

mechanical properties of these polymers.

Such single molecule micromanipulation studies have opened up a vast area of cross-

fertilization of ideas between biologists, chemists and theoretical physicists. Results of single

molecule experiments have posed challenges to theoretical physicists who have combined

ideas from statistical mechanics, quantum mechanics, diﬀerential geometry and topology to

get a proper understanding of the ﬁeld (See Box 2).

Force-Extension Curves: Experiment And Theory

Carlos Bustamante and his colleagues directly measured the elasticity of a single DNA

molecule by attaching one end of the molecule to a glass slide and the other end to a micron

size magnetic bead. A stretching force was applied to the DNA molecule by applying a

magnetic ﬁeld gradient and the corresponding extension was measured by observing the

position of the bead under an optical microscope. The mechanical response of such a system

was thus probed in the form of a force-extension curve.

The experimental curves were compared ﬁrst against the simplest theory available for a

polymer- the freely jointed chain (FJC) in which the polymer is viewed as a chain of rigid

rods connected by revolving pivots. While the experimental curves agreed well with the

FJC model at low forces, the comparison showed considerable discrepancies between theory

and experimental curves in the intermediate and large force regime. This pointed towards

a deﬁciency in the theory which was subsequently remedied by Marko and Siggia who used

the Worm Like Chain (WLC) model. In the WLC model one takes into consideration the

bending energy (E = 1

2A R L

0 dsκ2 with A = LpkBT the bending modulus) proportional to

the square of the curvature κ of the space curve representing the polymer of contour length

L kept at a temperature T . The WLC model provided excellent quantitative agreement

with the experimental force-extension curves (See Fig. 2). This pointed to the fact that a

DNA molecule needs to be viewed as a semiﬂexible (partly ﬂexible and partly stiﬀ) polymer

rather than a completely ﬂexible one.

Twisting Single Molecules:

3

In the experiments of Strick and collaborators the ends of a single molecule of double

stranded DNA are attached to a glass plate and a magnetic bead. Magnetic ﬁelds are used

to control the orientation of the bead and magnetic ﬁeld gradients to apply forces on the

bead. By such techniques the molecule is stretched and twisted and the extension of the

molecule is monitored by the location of the bead. A typical experimental run measures

the extension of the molecule as a result of the applied twist and force. These experiments

are important to understanding the role of twist elasticity in biological processes like DNA

replication.

In laboratory and biological conditions the thermal ﬂuctuations of the DNA molecule

are important and it is necessary to take these into account to understand the experiments

of Strick et al. To determine the response of a DNA molecule to twist and stretch one has

to calculate its partition function: sum over all possible conﬁgurations of the molecule with

Boltzmann weight exp[−E/kT ]. As Strick et al remark that is a tall order, not likely to

be ﬁlled anytime soon. Computer simulations of the system are possible and have been

done. These simulations, which incorporate realistic features like self-avoidance, agree well

with laboratory experiments and can be viewed in two ways. From the point of view of

a laboratory experimenter they are like theoretical models. From a theorist’s standpoint

simulations can be viewed as controlled experiments. The main theoretical diﬃculty is the

incorporation of self-avoidance, which is present in a real DNA molecule: the conformation

of the molecule must never intersect itself. Such a constraint is virtually impossible to handle

theoretically, and one is forced to resort to simpler models. Nevertheless, researchers have

attempted to model such a system by incorporating a twist term in the energy functional

and trying to explain the results of the experiments . Although the agreement with the

experimental curves is good there are some issues related to self-avoidance of the polymer

which are still poorly understood and one needs to introduce an adjustable cutoﬀ parameter

to ﬁt the experimental curves. The signiﬁcance of this cutoﬀ parameter is not entirely clear

and there are open issues yet to be understood.

Finite Size Eﬀects in Single Molecule Experiments

4

In the past, experiments on biopolymers were conﬁned to studying their bulk properties,

which involved probing large numbers of molecules. The results of these experiments could

be analyzed by using the traditional tools of thermodynamics. However, when one micro-

manipulates single polymer molecules the usual rules of thermodynamics applicable to bulk

systems no longer hold. Single molecule experiments thus provide physicists with a concrete

testing ground for understanding some of the fundamental ideas of statistical mechanics. In

particular, ﬂuctuations about the mean value of a variable play an important role due to

the ﬁnite extent of the molecule. For instance, it turns out, that an experiment in which

the distance between the ends of a polymer molecule is ﬁxed (an isometric setup) and the

tension ﬂuctuates yields a diﬀerent “equation of state” from one in which the tension be-

tween the ends is held ﬁxed (an isotensional setup) and the end-to-end distance ﬂuctuates.

This asymmetry can be traced to large ﬂuctuations about the mean value of the force or

the extension, depending on the experimental setup. These ﬂuctuations vanish only in the

thermodynamic limit of very long polymers. A similar eﬀect is seen in experiments involving

twisting DNA molecules. If the DNA is short enough, experiments with a ﬁxed torque and

a ﬂuctuating twist give a diﬀerent Torque-Twist Relation from those with a ﬁxed twist and

Equilibrium and Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics: A Connection

We will now come to an interesting connection between equilibrium and nonequilibrium

statistical mechanics which has emerged in the past few years and its relevance to single

a ﬂuctuating torque.

molecule experiments.

In recent years Jarzinsky has proved a remarkable equality relating work done in a se-

ries of ﬁnite time, nonequilibrium measurements and the equilibrium free energy diﬀerence

between two given conﬁgurations of a system. What is most remarkable is, unlike linear

response and the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem (See Box 3) which relate equilibrium sta-

tistical mechanics to nonequilibrium processes close to equilibrium, this relation is valid

arbitrarily far from equilibrium.

Let us consider a ﬁnite classical system that depends on an external parameter λ. Let

5

the system come to equilibrium with a reservoir at a temperature T . If we now switch the

external parameter from an initial value λ = 0 to a ﬁnal value λ = 1 inﬁnitely slowly then

the work W∞ done on the system is given by:

W∞ = ∆F = F1 − F0

where Fλ is the Free energy of the system at a temperature T at a ﬁxed value λ. Let us

now consider switching the parameter λ at a ﬁnite rate. In such a situation the system is no

longer in quasistatic equilibrium with the reservoir at every stage. The work done in such a

case depends on the microscopic initial conditions of the system and the reservoir. One now

needs to consider an ensemble of such switching measurements and the total work done is

no longer equal to the free energy diﬀerence but always exceeds it.

It turns out, however, that a remarkable equality still holds connecting the work done

in such a process and the diﬀerence between the initial and ﬁnal values of the free energy.

The equality, known as Jarzynski’s equality is given by: exp(−βW ) = exp(−β∆F ). The

overbar on the left pertains to an ensemble average over all possible ﬁnite time measurement

realizations.

Recently Liphardt and collaborators have tested the validity of this remarkable equality

via single molecule experimental measurements. They tested the equality by comparing

work done in reversible and irreversible unfolding of a single RNA molecule.

Small beads were attached at the ends of a single RNA molecule. The bead at one end

was held in an optical trap. By measuring the displacement δ of the bead in the trap and

the stiﬀness constant k of the trap, the force F = kδ on the molecule was measured. The

bead at the other end was held by a micropipette and attached to a piezoelectric device

which enabled the position of the bead to be controlled by varying the voltage. The position

z of the second bead relative to a given reference point was used to measure the extent of

unfolding of the molecule. The work W done was measured by integrating the product of

the force and the displacement and plotted as a function of the extension z.

The experiment was repeated at varying rates of pull. There were essentially two classes

6

of measurements: quasistatic, near equilibrium measurements where the work done was re-

versible and given by the free energy diﬀerence between the two end values of the control

parameter. The other class consisted of measurements carried out at faster rates of pull

(truly nonequilibrium situation) where the molecule does not have time to equilibriate dur-

ing pulling. The experimenters took an average over all possible realizations of the nonequi-

librium measurements and evaluated the quantity exp(−βW ) and compared it against its

equilibrium counterpart exp(−β∆F ) and found good agreement within experimental error

corroborating Jarzynski’s equality.

Concluding Remarks:

In this article we have tried to give a perspective on the growing and exciting area of

biopolymer elasticity where there has been a merging of ideas between biologists, chemists

and theoretical physicists. On one hand, elasticity experiments on biopolymers triggered by

a need to understand its role in complex biological processes such as transcription and gene

regulation have inspired physicists to come up with models that capture the essence of the

problem and at the same time give quantitative explanations for force-extension and twist-

extension measurements. On the other hand, predictions made by theoretical physicists have

suggested new experiments. Computer simulations have played a two fold role: they have

provided researchers with results of “controlled experiments” which are ideal for theoretical

model building. At the same time, the results of the simulations when tested against real

experiments enable experimenters to identify the key factors which control the experimental

results. Apart from biological relevance, biopolymer elasticity experiments have provided

a testing ground for theoretical physicists for deeper issues related to connection between

equilibrium and nonequilibrium statistical mechanics.

BOX I: Mean Square End-To-End Separation Of A Randomly Lying Cord

Typical chromosomal DNA molecules are long (contour length L ≈ 50mm) and when

viewed under a microscope look like random coils and the statistics of their ensemble of

equilibrium conﬁgurations is like that of a random walk. The mean square distance between

7

the ends of a molecule grows in proportion to its contour length L:

< R2 >= 2LpL.

The constant Lp is the persistence length which is the length over which the DNA molecule

can be considered to be approximately straight.

In general, for a semiﬂexible polymer, the mean square separation between its ends

predicted by the most popular theoretical model of biopolymer elasticity, the Worm Like

Chain model is:

< R2 >= 2L2

p[L/Lp + e−L/Lp − 1]

which in the limit of L/Lp >> 1 as for a DNA, goes as

In the other limit, that is, for a stiﬀ biopolymer like an Actin ﬁlament the mean square

separation between ends grows ballistically with the contour length

< R2 >= 2LpL.

< R2 >∼ L2

.

There is an experiment that one can do using a fairly low-tech setup to check the statis-

tics of end-to-end separation of polymers. This ‘scaled up’ experiment tells us that the

statistics of separation between the ends of a cord is the same as one gets for a semiﬂexible

polymer. The original experiment due to Lemons and Lipscombe (See Suggested Reading

List) consisted of taking some short (≈ 0.1m) and some long (≈ 0.8m) segments of a bungee

cord of length (= 0.8m) and persistence length (≈ 0.25m). To mimic the eﬀect of random-

ization, the cord was dropped onto the ﬂoor from a height of 2m. Positions were marked

oﬀ on the cord corresponding to diﬀerent segment lengths L. After dropping the cord, the

distance R of separation between the L = 0 end and one of these marks was measured and

for each such segment length the procedure was repeated about 40 times. < R2 > was then

plotted against L and the results agreed well with the theoretical expression

< R2 >= 2L2

p[L/Lp + e−L/Lp − 1].

8

The persistence length or the rigidity parameter Lp was determined from the ﬁt of the data

against the theoretically predicted form.

BOX 2: Link=Twist+Writhe

DNA can form a closed loop. Since it is a double stranded helix, the linking number Lk

or the number of times one strand wraps around the other is ﬁxed. In 1971 Fuller noticed

an interesting connection: the linking number Lk of a closed ribbon can be decomposed into

the “Writhe” W r of its backbone plus a locally determined “Twist”T w :

Lk = T w + W r.

Link Lk counts the number of times that one strand winds around the other. It is an integer

and clearly a topological quantity and does not change unless you cut and paste the strands.

Writhe W r is a nonlocal quantity which measures the wandering of the tangent vector to the

polymer backbone and it depends only on the central curve or the backbone of the ribbon

representing the polymer. Twist T w is a local quantity that measures the integrated angular

velocity of a strand about the backbone of the polymer. Both T w and W r can change so

as to keep Lk unchanged. Fuller noticed this relation in the context of a question related to

supercoiled double stranded DNA rings raised by J. Vinograd, a molecular biologist. This

is an example where molecular biology has stimulated a mathematical line of enquiry.

BOX 3: Fluctuation-Dissipation Theorem

When you turn on a radio you can sometimes hear a noise which can be traced to the

irregular motion of electrons. Nyquist was the ﬁrst to recognize the connection between such

thermal noise and the impedance of a resistor across which an irregular voltage diﬀerence

is induced due to thermal motion of the electrons. One sees a similar connection in the

context of Brownian motion ( See S. Ramaswamy’s article mentioned in the Suggested

Reading List). The generalized theorem relating the ﬂuctuations of a physical variable of a

system in equilibrium to dissipative processes in the system subjected to an external force

driving it slightly away from equilibrium, is called, the Fluctuation-Dissipation Theorem.

The Fluctuation-Dissipation Theorem works in the linear response regime in which the

9

response of a system to an external stimulus is directly proportional to the strength of the

stimulus.

Suggested Reading:

1. F. B. Fuller, Biophysical Journal 68, 815 (1971).

2. M. Doi and S. F. Edwards, The Theory of Polymer Dynamics, (Clarendon, Oxford,

1992).

3. J.Marko and E.D.Siggia, Macromolecules 28, 8759(1995).

4. T. R. Strick et al, Science 271, 1835 (1996).

5. C. Bouchiat et al, Biophysical Journal 76, 409 (1999).

6. C. Bustamante et al, Current Opinion in Structural Biology 10, 279 (2000).

7. S. Ramaswamy, Resonance 5, 16 (2000).

8. D. S. Lemons and T. C. Lipscombe, Am. J. Phys 70, 570 (2002).

9. J. Liphardt et al, Science 296, 1832 (2002).

10. D. Keller, D. Swigon and C. Bustamante, Biophysical Journal 84, 733 (2003).

FIGURES
OPTICAL
TRAP

DNA

STAGE

FIG. 1. Schematic Experimental Setup for a Typical Force Extension Measurement.

10

F

X

FIG. 2. Schematic Sketch Of A Typical Force(F)-Extension(X) Curve

11

