3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
1
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The rules of coherence and other habits

M. R. C. Solis
Theoretical Physics Group
National Institute of Physics
University of the Philippines,
Diliman,Quezon City
1101 PHILIPPINES
e-mail: msolis@nip.upd.edu.ph

Teachers and students alike have often wondered
why some people are more succesful at mathematics
and physics than others. It is tempting to believe that
some people are just smarter than others. It is a ﬂat-
tering explanation, if you happen to be among the
succesful people, while at the same time oﬀering con-
solation for other people, e.g. “I just don’t have a
mathematical mind”.

I believe though, that there is another explanation.
People good at math and physics are succesful not
because they’re smarter than the rest of us (although
being a bit smarter than the rest of us does help!).
Rather, the explanation is found in the habits that
they’ve developed.

It is unfortunate that these habits aren’t often
taught to freshmen because they stand to beneﬁt
most.
It is hoped that some eﬀort be made in
physics departments to promote these habits. Oxford
and Cambridge University provide booklets explain-
ing these points to their freshmen mathematics ma-
jors. Something similar might be done for freshmen
physics majors.

To explain these habits, I shall concentrate on how
to apply these habits to the study of mathematics.
This article contains some observations on mathemat-
ically successful people as well as some of the tricks
that I have learned while grappling with the mate-
rial. This article doesn’t contain any new mathemat-
ics; instead, it is intended to help you learn how to do
mathematics.1

1 The Rules of Coherence

In this section, we will learn how to write down so-
lutions. This is an important skill, because continued
practice of the rules of coherence forces you to seek

1The methods suggested here are also useful in physics!

the clearest explanation. Furthermore, a clear expla-
nation is easier to remember than a complicated one.
The rules of coherence also help you write papers
that you intend to submit for publication. By follow-
ing these rules, you may go a long way towards making
the reading of your work a pleasurable experience.

• Math is prose. This means mathematics (at
least, as used by the physicist) is a language as
well as a means towards getting the answers we
want. Since it is a language, we must make an
eﬀort to integrate it carefully with our ordinary
English prose, or whatever language we are using.
For example, “using the angle addition formulae
for cosines

cos(x+y) = cosxcosy − sinxsiny
cos(x-y) = cosxcosy + sinxsiny

(1)

(2)

we may easily derive the formula...”

This is an important rule that most students seem
to forget whenever they have to pass solutions to
assigned problem sets. What they submit is usu-
ally a stream of equations without signposts for
the poor reader (in this case, the instructor) as to
how they got which from what. Symbols are left
undeﬁned, assumptions and theorems used are
not explicitly stated, etc. Is it any wonder that
the instructor therefore descends like an avenging
angel on their work, trailing red ink in his wake?

• Fisher’s rule This rule is named after one of
the teachers of N. David Mermin.
It is simply
stated: Number all equations. We do this to make
our solutions clear. Instead of referring to “the
ﬁrst equation in the introduction,” we instead say
something like “from the angle addition formulae
for cosines (2).”

1

There is a variant of Fisher’s rule, called Occam’s
rule, which Mermin calls a heresy: Number all
equations you think you might want to refer to. I
do not recommend it. For example, what happens
if you wish to add another equation, or what if
you eventually want to cite an equation that you
left unnumbered? You would have to go through
the painful process of renumbering by hand. This
is okay if your work is a mere three pages, but it is
a nightmare if you wish to ﬁx a two hundred-page
manuscript.

• The Good Samaritan Rule A good Samari-
tan is someone who helps people in distress, and
nothing is more distressing than the appearance
of “from equation (3.3.10)”, an equation found in
chapter3, when you are working on something in,
say, chapter 17.
It is annoying especially when
you’re reading something as massive as MTW2,
and you have to ﬂip through ﬁve hundred pages
just to ﬁgure out what the equation is all about.

Thus, Mermin proposed the Good Samaritan
rule: Add explanatory text. For example, when
citing an equation, introduce it with a descriptive
phrase as well as an equation number.

You might ask, “Why bother with the good
samaritan rule at all?”. After all, you might
think, you understand your solution. It may be
so today, but what if you had to read your solu-
tion three years from now? (See “ﬁle your work”)
The good samaritan rule exists so that you will
be able to understand your solution, say, twenty
years from now.

The good samaritan rule is also useful when
you’re writing computer programs. It isn’t hard
to add explanatory text (comments!)
to com-
puter programs. Comments make the job of un-
derstanding your code easier for other people and
yourself.

• Cite your sources. This rule is about honesty.
If your pal helped you work out a diﬃcult math-
ematical problem, acknowledge his or her help.
If your formula came from Arfken or from Whit-
taker and Watson, say so and include the page
(and equation number), edition, etc.

Aside from honesty, citing sources is especially
useful if you want to recheck your work. Sources
aren’t infallible. Reproducing previously done
work adds to the length of our soultions. Citing
2Gravitation by Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler (a classic

General Relativity text )

sources is a convenient way of avoiding having to
redo what might be a long calculation. 3

The rules of coherence boils down to a simple ques-
tion: can my solution serve as supplementary lecture
notes? If yes, then the rules of coherence are satisﬁed.
If no, you need to rework your solution until it satisﬁes
the rules of coherence.4

2 Other habits

useful habits.

Aside from the rules of coherence, there are other

• File your work. It is part of the fallen state of
man that he forgets. If you spent a week think-
ing about a problem, and you were asked about
it three years later, wouldn’t it be frustrating to
ﬁnd out that you have absolutely forgotten how to
solve the problem? If you had it on ﬁle, re-reading
your work could save you what might have been
another week of thinking.

There is no guarantee that the solutions you sub-
mit will be returned to you. Therefore, always
make two copies of your solution– one for your-
self, and another for your instructor. This isn’t
diﬃcult today, for ours is the age of the photo-
copying machine.

This is how I ﬁle my work. I have folders with
labels for the various things that interest me. As
soon as I have solved something, I produce a neat
write-up and ﬁle it in the relevant folder. I make
sure that I write down when I solved it, and if the
problem was really tough, I also include wrong
attacks on the problem, as well as the length of
time (days, weeks, months, or even years) I spent
on it. You might have your own ﬁling system. If
so, use the ﬁling system that is most convenient
for you. So long as you ﬁle whatever it is that
you worked on.

• Study ahead. This is something that I dis-
covered after carefully watching the ur-Geek in
the theoretical physics group. Before taking a
graduate-level quantum mechanics course, this
guy sat through a year of lectures (as an under-
grad!) and worked on a sizable number of prob-
lems. Is it any wonder he aced the class?

3Although it doesn’t remove the burden of making sure that

the source we used is indeed reliable!

4This statement of the rules of coherence is due to N. David

Mermin, unpublished lecture notes.

References
[1] N. David Mermin “What’s Wrong With These
Equations” Physics Today October 1989 pp 9-10

• Solve as many problems as you can. The
only way to test your understanding of the mate-
rial in the lectures or in your book is by working
on the problems. I am of course, assuming that
you follow the other rules as well. The aforemen-
tioned rules help keep you honest.
It is almost
impossible to fool yourself if you conscientiously
follow Fisher, the Good Samaritan, etc. If there
are gaps in your understanding, you will eventu-
ally reach a point where you cannot justify the
steps you made. When you ﬁnd yourself unable
to explain the origins of an equation, it means you
have to do some more reading and thinking.

• Talk to other people. One of the best ways
of learning is by talking it over with a friend, a
colleague, or a professor. Try to explain the idea
you’ve learned to other people.
It is very easy
to fool oneself. Other people provide feedback by
asking questions and making you clarify things.

Incidentally, the rules of coherence and the other
habits might provide an explanation for the Feynman
eﬀect. As everyone knows, Feynman is legendary for
his deep understanding of physics. Based on second-
hand reports 5, Feynman had an extensive ﬁling syste.
Feynman even preserved his Far Rockaway notebooks,
the ones he used as a high school student to teach him-
self trigonometry and calculus! By ﬁling his work, he
had an enormous storehouse of previous work, just
waiting for an opportunity to be used in other areas
of his research.
3 Final Words

In this article, we have examined some helpful
habits. There are others, of course. Based on an infor-
mal survey these habits aren’t as widespread among
undergraduate physicists. This is a pity, because we
have a lot to gain from these habits.

Physics and mathematics are diﬃcult enough with-
out the aditional burden of bad habits.
It is hoped
that by explaining these habits to our students, and
encouraging the adoption of these habits, they will end
up with a deeper understanding of mathematics and
physics.
Acknowledgements

The author wishes to thank the members of the GR
study group: A. Alarcon, B. A. Rara, G. M. Sardane,
M. S. A. Sereno, and R. R. D. J. Sol. He also wishes to
thank N. D. Mermin and E. F. Taylor for reading the
manuscript, and for their comments and suggestions.

5James Gleick, Genius: The Life and Science of Richard

Feynman , Vintage Books; Reprint edition (November 1993)

