3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fundamental units: physics and metrology

L.B. Okun

ITEP, Moscow, 117218, Russia, E-mail: okun@heron.itep.ru

Abstract. The problem of fundamental units is discussed in the context of achieve-
ments of both theoretical physics and modern metrology. On one hand, due to fasci-
nating accuracy of atomic clocks, the traditional macroscopic standards of metrology
(second, metre, kilogram) are giving way to standards based on fundamental units
of nature: velocity of light c and quantum of action h. On the other hand, the poor
precision of gravitational constant G, which is widely believed to deﬁne the “cube of
theories” and the units of the future “theory of everything”, does not allow to use G as
a fundamental dimensional constant in metrology. The electromagnetic units in SI are
actually based on concepts of prerelativistic classical electrodynamics such as ether,
electric permitivity and magnetic permeability of vacuum. Concluding remarks are de-
voted to terminological confusion which accompanies the progress in basic physics and
metrology.

1 Introduction

The problem of fundamental units has many facets, three of which seem to be
most important: theoretical, experimental and technological. At present they
are inseparable. Theory, the so called Standard Model, formulates basic physi-
cal laws and mathematical methods of their application. Theoretical laws were
established and continue to be established and tested on the basis of ingenious
experiments and astronomical observations of higher and higher accuracy for an
expanding space of parameters.

Precision experiments and observations, in their turn, are unthinkable with-
out modern high technologies, including lasers and computers. These technolo-
gies are indissolubly connected with metrology – creation, perfection and uniﬁ-
cation of standards of physical units, while metrology is widely using the results
of such theories as quantum mechanics, relativity theory, electrodynamics, con-
densed matter theory etc. Thus the circle is closed.

The situation is additionally complicated by the fact that the Standard Model
is not a complete theory. It has many unsolved problems. Perhaps the most
burning is the problem of existence of fundamental scalar particles (higgses),
responsible for the masses of all fundamental particles (from the heaviest one –
t-quark to the lightest of the three neutrinos). We still do not understand the role
of the three families of leptons and quarks. It would be too naive to think that
their only justiﬁcation is CP-violation. We still lack a successful theory unifying
electroweak and strong interactions. The hypothesis of existence of moderately
violated supersymmetry – symmetry between fundamental bosons and fermions

2

L.B. Okun

is still not conﬁrmed by experiments. Mathematical constructs of the type of
superstrings and M-theory which in the beginning were considered as attempts
to unify quantum gravity with electroweak and strong interaction, as time goes
by, withdraw into a separate ﬁeld of mathematics, whose practioneers do not
promise any applications to the real physical world. The situation might become
drastically diﬀerent if manifestations of extra space dimensions are discovered;
in particular if laws of gravity turned out to change at TeV scale.

Sections 2-6 are devoted to the history of units based on c, h, G. Sections
7-9 deal with the units based on c, h, e and precision frequency measurements.
Section 10 compares the Gaussian units and SI units. It is argued that while the
latter are more convenient for practical purposes, the former allow to better un-
derstand the basic notions of modern physics. Therefore the use of both systems
of units should be allowed in physics textbooks. Section 11 contains concluding
remarks.

2 Fundamental parameters and units

The essence of theoretical physics is expressed by dimensionless equations for
dimensionless quantities. However one cannot do experimental physics (and to
teach physics) without dimensional quantities and dimensional units.

In what follows we shall refer to dimensionless fundamental constants such
as e2/¯hc, or me/mp as fundamental parameters (here e is the electron charge,
¯h is the reduced quantum of action (¯h = h/2π) and of angular momentum, c
– velocity of light in vacuum, me and mp are masses of electron and proton
respectively).

In the absence of established terminology we shall refer to dimensional fun-
damental constants as fundamental units. Examples of units: c (for velocity),
¯h (for action and angular momentum). According to our deﬁnition G is also a
fundamental unit (though indirectly).

3 Planck units

When in 1899-1900 Planck discovered h [1], he used this discovery to introduce
universal units, which at present are written in the form

lP = ¯h/mP c , tP = ¯h/mP c

, mP = (¯hc/G)

2

1/2

,

where G is Newton’s gravitational constant.

Planck derived his units by using dimensional order of magnitude relations:

c =

lP
tP

,

Gm2
P
lP

2

= mP c

,

tP = ¯h .

Gm2
P
lP

(1)

(2)

He was inspired by the idea that his units are universal (contrary to “hand-
crafted” earthbound ordinary units – meter, second, gram): they are the same
at any far away corner of the universe.

Fundamental units: physics and metrology

3

Planck also considered as universal the Planck temperature TP = mP c2/k.
10−5

But Boltzman’s k is not a universal unit, it is a conversion factor: k = 8.6
eV/K (hint: ¯hω/kT ).

·

4 c, h, G – units

From the point of view of the future “theory of everything” it is natural to use
c, h, G as fundamental dimensional constants.

In 1928 Gamov, Ivanenko and Landau [2] considered the theory “of the world
as whole” in terms of dimensional fundamental constant c, h, G. In 1928 Lan-
dau was 20 years old, Gamow and Ivanenko – 24 (see Figs. 1,2). They had
written the paper “World Constants and Limiting Transitions” (see Fig. 3) as
a humorous birthday present to their friend, a young lady. None of them ever
referred this paper in their subsequent publications. But the ideas of the paper
were fundamental. In 1936 Bronstein [3] worked at a theory in which all three
constants are ﬁnite. It was one of the ﬁrst papers on relativistic quantum gravity.
In 1967 ideas of refs. [2,3] were presented in the form of a cube (see Figs. 4,5)
by Zelmanov [4]. Later on it was further developed by others [5,6].

The vertices of this cube represent nonrelativistic mechanics (NM), nonrela-
tivistic gravity (NG), nonrelativistic quantum mechanics (QM), special relativity
(SR), quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT), general relativity (GR) and ﬁnally relativistic
quantum gravity (QGR) or theory of everything (TOE).

The cube, made of units, is “endowed” with dimensionless parameters like
α, αs, mixing angles, mass ratios, etc. Their values are expected to follow from
TOE. Similar to the cube is “dimensional pyramid” (Kuchar [9], Sanchez [10])
with 4 vertices and 4 planes, Fig. 4.

Note that Einstein tried to build a uniﬁed theory of electricity and gravity
(“TOE”) in the left-hand vertical plane of the cube, without Quantum Mechan-
ics, without ¯h.

Planck units allow one to deal in the equations of TOE only with dimension-
less functions of dimensionless variables and dimensionless parameters of the
type α = e2/¯hc or me/mp. Conceptually Planck units are excellent, but practi-
cally they have serious shortcomings, caused by G, the same G which allows to
bring gravitation and cosmology into the realm of quantum phenomena. Thus
the source of strength at the same time turns out to be a source of weakness.

5 Planck units are impractical

The obvious shortcoming of Planck units is that they diﬀer by many orders of
magnitude from atomic units commonly used in physics. Their values are natural
for the early universe and TOE, but not for mundane physics:

lP = 10

−35 m , tP = 10

−43 s , EP = mP c2 = 1019 GeV .

The energy which corresponds to the Planck mass is unattainable by accel-
erators even of the remotest future. (Note, however, that it is only a few orders

4

L.B. Okun

of magnitude larger than the grand uniﬁcation scale of electroweak and strong
interactions.) The Planck units of length and time are vanishingly small com-
pared with atomic units. Of course the huge powers of ten are not frightful by
themselves. As is well known, atomic units also diﬀer by many orders of magni-
tude from SI units, which does not prevent atomic standards to be the base of
modern metrology.

Much more essential is another shortcoming of Planck units, which stems
from the fact that G is known with rather poor accuracy (of order of 10−3, by
ﬁve – four orders worse than those of c and h, and by 12 orders worse than
the precision of atomic clocks). Thus it is impossible to use the Planck units as
standards in modern precision physics and technology.

6 Units of Stoney

The use by Planck of G as a basis for deﬁning the unit of mass was caused by ab-
sence at the beginning of the 20th century of another natural, not “handcrafted”,
candidate for the unit of mass. In that respect Planck’s universal units resemble
the universal units suggested 30 years earlier by Irish physicist Stoney (1826 -
1910), secretary of Irish Royal Society (see Figs. 7,8). By studying electrolysis,
he was the ﬁrst who measured the value of elementary charge e and introduced
into physics the term “electron” for the carrier of this charge (in modern termi-
nology it is ion). From e, c, G Stoney [9] constructed in 1870 - 1880 universal
units with dimensions of length, time and mass:

lS = e√G/c2 , tS = e√G/c3 , mS = e/√G ,

(3)

which he derived from dimensional equations:

c = lS/tS , e2 = Gm2

S , e2/lS = mSc2 .

Let us note that units of Stoney are only by a factor √α smaller than those

of Planck.

Stoney’s units look “tailored” for Einstein’s uniﬁed theory. Constants e, c, G
contain the gist of classical electrodynamics and gravity. There is no ¯h in them.
Comparison with c, ¯h, G shows that ¯h is brought into Stoney’s set of constants
“through the back door of α”. Therefore e, c, G do not form a cube of theories
with its limiting transitions considered by Gamov, Ivanenko and Landau [2].

7 Atomic clocks and c

During the 20th century the situation with standard of mass (time, length) has
changed drastically. The fundamental identity of elementary particles and hence
of atoms produced many candidates for standard of mass, known with much,
much better precision than G. Thus, from the point of view of dimensions the
necessity to use G disappeared. However from the point of view of unifying
physics the Planck units became even more attractive.

Fundamental units: physics and metrology

5

Let us now look at two other fundamental constants: c and h.
Let us start from c and the frequencies of light and radio waves. In the second
half of the 20th century physicists learned how to measure them in a digital way
by counting the number of crests. This raised the accuracy of atomic (Cesium-
133) clocks (ﬁrst suggested by I. Rabi in 1945) to the level of 1 second in 300
106 years: LPTF,
years (NBS, 1955). (Now this has become 1 second in 20
NIST, PTB.) But even the ﬁrst ﬁgure was suﬃcient for the introduction into SI
of an atomic unit of a second (in 1967):

·

“1 s = 9 192 631 770 periods of radiation in transition between levels of

hyperﬁne splitting of the atomic ground state of Cs-133”.

This, together with the independence of the velocity of light on its frequency,
impelled Bay et al. [10] to suggest, instead of unit of length (meter), to use as
the basic unit the unit of velocity, namely the velocity of light c. In 1983 the
deﬁnition

c = 299 792 458 m/s

(4)

was introduced in SI. The traditional standard of length gave way to the new
standard based on the value of the velocity c. This velocity is deﬁned as a
number without uncertainty. Further improvements of experiments which mea-
sured c would mean further improvement of the realization of the meter. An
international report “Practical realization of the deﬁnition of the metre, includ-
ing recommended radiations of other optical frequency standards” (2001) was
published by T. Quinn in 2003 [11]. (Note that both spellings “metre” and “me-
ter” are used in the literature, the former in metrology, while the latter one in
physics.)

Further progress in accuracy of atomic clocks is connected with passing from

microwave to optical frequencies [12,13].

8 Towards kilogram based on h

Thus metrology made two momentous steps in the direction of fundamental
physics: the place of macroscopic clocks and ruler (the famous rod at BIMP, in
Sevre, near Paris) became occupied by the velocity of light and by atoms of Cs-
133. There remains now only one macroscopic standard – the kilogram at Sevre.
The prospect of expressing it through the quantum of action h is connected with
precision measurements in atomic and condensed matter physics. There are many
promising quantities which are good candidates for such measurements. I shall
touch upon only one project which is connected with two outstanding discoveries
in condensed matter physics: the Josephson eﬀect [14] (Nobel Prize 1973) and
the von Klitzing eﬀect [15] (Nobel Prize 1985).

Josephson theoretically predicted the existence of a supercurrent and its
remarkable properties. A supercurrent is a current of Cooper pairs tunneling
through an insulator separating two superconductors. A supercurrent can exist
without external voltage. An external voltage V creates an alternating super-
current of frequency ν. The steps in V are given by the relation:

V (n) = νn/KJ ,

(5)

6

L.B. Okun

where n is an integer, while the coeﬃcient KJ is universal and is called the
Josephson constant. It is reproduced in various experiments with unprecedented
accuracy and is determined only by the ratio of fundamental constants:

KJ = 2e/h .

(6)

The eﬀect, discovered by von Klitzing, is called the quantum Hall eﬀect. This
eﬀect shows that there exists in Nature a universal electric resistance, one which
can be expressed in terms of fundamental constants.

As is well known, the ordinary Hall eﬀect occurs in a solid conductor (or
semiconductor) with density of current j in a magnetic ﬁeld H which produce
an electric ﬁeld E (with voltage VH ) orthogonal both to j and H.

The quantum Hall eﬀect was discovered in a two-dimensional electron system
separating two parts of a silicon ﬁeld transistor at very low temperature (< 4
14 Tesla). It was established that the Hall
K) and very strong magnetic ﬁeld (
resistance

∼

where I is the total current, has quantum jumps:

RH = VH /I ,

RH (n) =

RK
n

,

RK = h/e2 .

h = 4K

−2
J R

−1
K .

V I/v = mg ,

where n is an integer, while RK is the von Klitzing constant:

It is obvious that

This permits measurement of h using macroscopic apparatus. A special two-
story-high watt balance compared electrical and mechanical forces:

where m is the measured mass of a body, g – local gravitational acceleration, V
– the voltage in a coil moving with a vertical velocity v in a magnetic ﬁeld, while
I is the current in the same coil, this time ﬁxed in the same magnetic ﬁeld. By
calibrating V and V /I through the Josephson and von Klitzing eﬀects Williams
et al. [16] succeeded in connecting h and the kilogram within uncertainty 8.7
10−8.

·

It is hoped that in the not too distant future this accuracy might be improved
by an order of magnitude, which would allow to use the watt balance for gauging
the standards of mass and thus get rid of the Sevres kilogram and to deﬁne the
value of h. As a result the value of h would have no uncertainties in the same way
as it occurred with c. Thus fundamental units of nature c and h would become
fundamental SI units of metrology.

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

9 Kilogram as frequency νK

Fundamental units: physics and metrology

7

Another deﬁnition of the kilogram has been suggested [17] on the basis of equa-
tions

E = hν ,

E = mc

:

2

(12)

(13)

“The kilogram is the mass of a body at rest whose equivalent energy equals
1049
the energy of collection of photons whose frequencies sum to 13.5639274
hertz”.

×

This deﬁnition should be taken with a grain of salt. The combined use of
equations (12) and (13) implies that a photon of frequency ν has mass hν/c2.
This implication persists in spite of the words “equivalent energy”. The words
“the mass of the body at rest” imply that mass is not Lorentz invariant, but
depends on the velocity of a reference frame. It would be proper to replace
equation (13) by

E0 = mc2 ,

(14)

where E0 is the rest energy (see e.g. ref. [18]). But then it would take some ad-
ditional considerations in order to deﬁne the frequency νK corresponding to one
kilogram. In particular massive atoms emitting and absorbing photons should
be taken into account. From practical point of view the measurement of “fre-
quencies sum” of order 1050 hertz is by eight orders of magnitude more diﬃcult
than that of the Planck frequency νP = 1/tP .

10 Electromagnetism and Relativity

Electromagnetism – the kinship of electricity and magnetism, discovered in 1820
by Oersted, rather soon became the foundation of Amp´ere’s electrodynamics.
The development of the latter by Faraday and other outstanding physicists cul-
minated in 1873 in the Treatise of Maxwell [19] who linked electric currents
with electric and magnetic ﬁelds and with the properties of light. None of these
great physicists knew the genuine nature of the phenomena. Maxwell considered
vacuum ﬁlled with ether; the carriers of charges were unknown to him. The elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld was described by four vector quantities: electric ﬁeld E, electric
induction (or displacement) D, magnetic ﬁeld H, and magnetic induction (or ﬂux
density) B.

On the basis of these notions practical units (such as volt, ampere, coulomb,
joule) were introduced by International Electrical Congresses in 1880s. The elec-
tric permitivity ε0 and magnetic permeability µ0 ascribed by Maxwell to the
ether were accepted by the community of engineers and physicists: D = ε0E,
B = µ0H. In the middle of the 20th century these practical units became the
basis of the Syst`em International d’Unit´es (SI).

The end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century were marked by great
successes in understanding and applying classical electrodynamics. On practical

8

L.B. Okun

side it was the use of electric currents in industry, transport and radio commu-
nications. On theoretical side it was uniﬁcation of electrodynamics, optics and
mechanics in the framework of special relativity [20].

−

According to special relativity, the 4-radius vector is xi = (ct, r) (i = 0, 1, 2, 3),
the 4-momentum vector is pi = (E/c, p), the 4-potential of electromagnetic
ﬁeld Ai = (ϕ, A), the density of the 4-current ji = (cρ, j), where j = ρv, and
ra), e is electric charge. (The current ji is consistent with the deﬁni-
ρ = eδ(r
tions of pi and Ai, due to an appropriate coeﬃcient c in front of ρ. The source of
the ﬁeld, the charge, is pointlike. Otherwise there appears a problem of the ﬁeld
inside the ﬁnite-size cloud of charge.) The upper index i of a 4-vector indicates
a contravariant 4-vector; a lower index i indicates covariant 4-vector, its space
components have minus sign. Raising or lowering of indices is done with the
diagonal metric tensors gik or gik respectively.

The 3-vectors E and H are components of the 4-tensor of electromagnetic

Fik =

∂Ak
∂xi −

∂Ai
∂xk .

The tensors Fik and F ik can be represented by matrices:

Fik =

0 E1 E2 E3
H3 H2
E 0
H1
0
E2 H3
0
H2 H1
E3

−

−







−







−
−
−

F ik =

E1

0
−
E 0
E2 H3
E3

E2
E3
−
−
H3 H2
−
H1
0
−
0
H2 H1













,

,

−
respectively, or in a condensed form:

This 4-tensor is obviously antisymmetric. From the deﬁnition of Fik it follows

that dimensions of E and H are the same: [E] = [H].

The ﬁeld equations have the form in Gaussian units:

Fik = (E, H) ,

F ik = (

E, H) .

−

˜F ik
∂xk = 0 ,

∂F ik
∂xk =

4π
c

−

ji

.

˜F ik = εiklmFlm ,

ﬁeld

and

Here

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

where εiklm is fully antisymmetric tensor (ε0123 = +1).

Fundamental units: physics and metrology

9

The equation describing the motion of charge in the electromagnetic ﬁeld is

given by

where

dp
dt

= eE +

[vH] ,

e
c

v =

pc2
E

.

(23)

(24)

Note that according to special relativity there is no ether, ε0

1, and
the strength of magnetic ﬁeld in vacuum H has the same dimension as that of
E, the identity of ε0
1 immediately follows from the fact that the same
e determines the action of the charge on the ﬁeld and of the ﬁeld on the charge.
(See expression for the action in ref. [21], eq. (27.6).) Thus, there is no need
to consider B and D in the case of vacuum. In classical electrodynamics they
appear only in the continuous media due to polarization of the latter [22].

µ0

µ0

≡

≡

≡

≡

In a number of classical monographs and textbooks on classical electrody-
namics E and H are consistently used for description of electric and magnetic
ﬁelds in vacuum with ε0
1 ([20], [21], [23], [24], [25]). Their authors use
Gaussian or Heaviside-Lorentz (with 1/4π in Coulomb law) units.

µ0

≡

≡

Many other authors use B instead of H, sometimes calling B magnetic ﬁeld
and sometimes – magnetic induction in vacuum [26]. Most of them use the SI
10−7HA−2,
units, according to which ε0 and µ0 are dimensional: µ0 = 4π
ε0µ0 = c2, where H is henry, while A – ampere. The classical electromagnetic
ﬁelds in vacuum are described by four physical quantities D, H and E, B, all
four of them having diﬀerent dimensions at variance with the spirit of special
relativity.1 In that respect vacuum is similar to a material body. The SI units
are very convenient for engineers, but not for theorists in particle physics.

·

In fact, theorists are not less responsible than metrologists for the gap be-
tween deductive basis of modern physics and mainly prerelativistic inductive
basis of modern metrology. A good example is the 1935 article [27] by A. Som-
merfeld and his book “Electrodynamics” based on lectures given in 1933-34 [28].
His argument against absolute system (that is based on units of time, length
and mass) was the presence in it of fractional exponents (for instance from
Coulomb law the dimension of charge is g1/2 cm3/2s−1). This argument was not
very compelling in the 1930s and is even less so today. His argument against
Gaussian or Heaviside-Lorentz system was based on inductive, prerelativistic
view on electromagnetism. Though he was not quite happy2 with the new clumsy
expression for ﬁne structure constant α introduced by him before the World War
I, he kept insisting on MKSA units and against Gaussian units. His authority
was not the least in the decision to legally enforce after World War II the SI as
the obligatory system of units for all textbooks in physics.
1 Sometimes one can hear that the identity ε0 ≡ µ0 ≡ 1 is similar to putting c = 1,
when using c as a unit of velocity. However this similarity is superﬁcial. In the
framework of special relativity one can use any unit for velocity (for instance, m/s).
But the dimensions and values of ε0 and µ0 are ﬁxed in SI.

2 “What is especially painful for me is that the ﬁne structure constant is no more

e2/¯hc, but e2/4πε0¯hc”. Z. Phys. 36 (1935) 818.

10

L.B. Okun

Coming back to classical electrodynamics let us note that it is not a perfect
theory: it has serious problems at short distances. To a large part these problems
are solved by quantum electrodynamics (QED). Therefore the latter should be
used as a foundation of a system of electromagnetic units. By the way, QED is
used to extract the most accurate value of α from the precision measurements
of the magnetic moment of electron.

In the framework of QED α is not a constant but a function of momentum
transfer due to polarization of vacuum. Let us stress that this polarization has
nothing to do with purely classical non-unit values of ε0 and µ0.

11 Concluding remarks

Mutually fruitful “crossing” of fundamental physics and metrology gives numer-
ous practical applications. One of them should be specially mentioned: the use
of general relativity in global positoning system [29,30].

Remarkable achievements of metrology are not always accompanied by elabo-
ration of adequate terminology. Here we will mention only a few of widely spread
delusions.

The choice of c as a unit of velocity leads many authors to the false conclusion
that c should be excluded from the set of fundamental units. They insist that
c = 1, because c in units of c is equal 1. (The same refers to h in units of
h.) But number 1 is not a unit of measurement, because such units are always
dimensional. Equations c, h = 1 are simply wide spread jargon. Some authors go
even further by identifying space and time. (A detailed discussion can be found
in ref. [31].)

The number of physical units is not limited. When solving a given problem
the choice of units is determined by considerations of convenience. However from
the point of view of “the world as a whole” c, h and G (or instead of G some
other quantity representing gravity) are deﬁnitely singled out as fundamental
dimensional constants. Of course they must be accompanied by a number of
dimensionless parameters. But the number of fundamental units could not be
less than three [31].

The inclusion of candela into the set of base units (see Fig. 9) seems to
be unconvincing from the point of view of physics. Of course, practically it is
convenient to use it when discussing the brightness of light. But it does not look
logical to put it on the same footing as units of length, time and mass.

As SI is imposed on the physics literature by governmental laws, the oblig-
atory usage in textbooks of such notions as permitivity ε0 and permeability µ0
of vacuum, makes it diﬃcult to appreciate the beauty of the modern electrody-
namics and ﬁeld theory. It corresponds to the prerelativistic stage of physics.

This list can be extended, but it seems that the above remarks are suﬃcient
for a serious discussion. The metrological institutes and SI are of great impor-
tance for science and technology. Therefore the metrological legal documents
should be to a greater degree based on modern physical concepts. Especially

Fundamental units: physics and metrology

11

they should give more freedom to the usage of Gaussian and Heaviside-Lorentz
systems of units in the textbooks.

12 Acknowledgements

I would like to thank A. Clairon, H. Fritzsch, J. Jackson, S. Karshenboim,
N. Koshelyaevsky, H. Leutwyler, N. Sanchez, M. Tatarenko, V. Telegdi, Th. Udem,
L. Vitushkin and H. Wagner for fruitful discussions. The work has been partly
supported by the Russian Federal Special Scientiﬁc-Technological Program of
Nuclear Physics Fund 40.052.1.1.1112 and by A. von Humboldt award.

References

1. M. Planck, S.-B. Preuss: Akad. Wiss. (1899) 449;

M. Planck: Ann. d. Phys. 4, 1, 69 (1900). Reprinted in Max Planck. Physikalische
Abhandlungen und Vortr¨age, Band I, Fried. Vieweg. 1958, pp. 500-600, 614-667.
2. G. Gamov, D. Ivanenko, L. Landau: Journal of Russian Physicochemical Society,
Ser. Phys. LX, 13 (1928) (in Russian), reprinted in Yad. Fiz. 65, 1406 (2002),
translated into English in Physics of Atomic Nuclei 65, 1373 (2002).

3. M. Bronstein: Phys. Zeitschrift der Sowjetunvon 9, 140 (1936).
4. A. Zelmanov: ‘Kosmologia’. In Razvitie Astronomii v SSSR (Nauka, Moskva, 1967)

5. G. Gorelik: Razmernost’ prostranstva (MGU, Moskva, 1983) Chapter 5 (in Rus-

p. 323 (in Russian).

sian).

6. L. Okun: Sov. Phys. Usp. 34, 818 (1991).
7. K. Kuchar: Phys. Rev. D22, 1285 (1980).
8. N. Sanchez: ‘Recent Progress in String Cosmology’. International school of astro-
physics “D. Chalonge”, 5th Course “Current topics in astrofundamental physics”,
Erice, September 1996.

9. G.J. Stoney: The Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 11, 381 (1881).
10. Z. Bay, G.G. Luther, J.A. White: Phys. Rev. Lett. 29, 189 (1972);

Z. Bay, J.A. White: Phys. Rev. D5, 796 (1972).

11. T.J. Quinn: Metrologia 40, 103-133 (2003).
12. Th. Udem, R. Holzwarth, T.W. H¨ansch: Nature 416, 233-236 (14 March 2002).
13. S.G. Karshenboim, F.S. Pavone, F. Bassani, M. Inguscio, T.W. H¨ansch (Eds.): The
Hydrogen Atom. Precision Physics of Simple Atomic Systems (Springer, 2001).

14. B.D. Josephson: Phys. Lett. 1, 251 (1962).
15. K.V. Klitzing, G. Dorda, M. Pepper: Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 494 (1980).
16. E.R. Williams, R.L. Steiner, D.B. Newell, P.T. Olsen: Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2404

(1998).

17. R.N. Taylor, P.J. Mohr: Metrologia 36, 63 (1999).
18. L.B. Okun: Physics Today, June 1989, 31; May 1990, 13, 15, 115-117; Uspekhi Fiz.

Nauk 158, 511 (1989); Sov. Phys. Usp. 32, 629 (1989).

19. J.C. Maxwell: A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism. (Oxford Univ. Press, 1873)

Part IV, Chapters IX, X, XIX. 3rd edn. (1891); reprint Dover, New York (1954)

20. A. Einstein: The meaning of relativity, 4th edn. (Princeton, 1953)
21. L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz: The Classical Theory of Fields, 4th edn. (Pergamon

Press, Oxford, 1987)

12

L.B. Okun

22. L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz: Electrodynamics of continuous Media, 2nd edn.

(Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1984)

23. C.M¨oller: The Theory of Relativity, 2nd edn. (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1974)
24. P.G. Bergmann: Introduction to the Theory of Relativity (Dover reprint, 1976)
25. W. Pauli: Theory of Relativity (Pergamon Press, New York, 1958)
26. J.D. Jackson: Classical Electrodynamics, 3rd edn. (John Wiley and sons, Inc. 1998)
27. A. Sommerfeld: Phys. Z. 36, 814 (1935)
28. A. Sommerfeld: Electrodynamik (Leipzig, 1949. Academic Press, New York, 1952)
29. N. Ashby, D. Allen: Radio Science 14, 649 (1979).
30. B. Guinot: Metrologia 34, 261 (1997).
31. M.J. Duﬀ, L.B. Okun, G. Veneziano: JHEP 03, 023 (2002), arXiv, physics/0110060.

Figure captions

Fundamental units: physics and metrology

13

Fig. 1. Meeting in Kharkov, 1928, attended by Gamow, Ivanenko, and Landau.
Fig. 2. Who is who in Fig.1.
Fig. 3. English version of the 2002 reprint of the 1928 article by Gamow, Ivanenko, and Landau.
Fig. 4. Orthogonal axes. At the origin there is no gravity, no maximal velocity, no quantum

eﬀects.

Fig. 5. Cube of theories.
Fig. 6. Dimensional pyramid.
Fig. 7. Cover of the book dedicated to G.J. Stoney.
Fig. 8. The title page of “Philosophical Magazine and the beginning of article [9] by G.J. Stoney.
Fig. 9. The base units of the SI, with their present uncertainties of realization, and some of their
links to atomic and fundamental constants with their present uncertainties in terms of the
SI. The absence of a useful quantitative estimate of the long-term stability of the
kilogram, indicated by ?, is reﬂected in three of the other base units. The dashed lines to
the kilogram indicate possible routes to a new deﬁnition. (From the article by T.J. Quinn
“Base Units of the Syst`eme International d’Unit´es, their Accuracy, Dissemination and
International Traceability”, Metrologia 31 (1994/95) 515-527.).

Fig. 1. Meeting in Kharkov, 1928, attended by Gamow, Ivanenko, and Landau

Fig. 2. Who is who in Fig.1.

23. Vereschagin
24. Slutsky
25. Gamov
26. Shubnikov
27. Landau
28. Shtrumm

12. Kopp
1. Dunaev
13. Kotsarova
2. Heitler
14. Khalﬁn
3. Arsenyeva
4. Davydov
15. Eﬁmovich
5. Todorovich(?) 16. Ogievetsky
6. Frish
7. Bursian
8. Ivanenko
9. Obreimov
10. Fock
11. Leipunsky

17. Grommer
18. Muskelischvili 29. Frenkel
19. Korsunsky
20. Gorwitz
21. Ambartsumian 32. Jordan
22. Mandel

30. Rosenkevich
31. Finkelshtein

33. Timoreva

Fundamental units: physics and metrology

15

Physics of Atomic Nuclei, Vol. 65, No. 7, 2002, pp. 1373–1375. Translated from Yadernaya Fizika, Vol. 65, No. 7, 2002, pp. 1406–1408.
Original Russian Text Copyright c(cid:1) 2002 by Gamow, Ivanenko, Landau.

KEY PROBLEMS IN FUNDAMENTAL PHYSICS

World Constants and Limiting Transition*

G. Gamow, D. Ivanenko, and L. Landau

§ 1. In constructing a system of units in physics,
there exist two basic methods for choosing units of
any new quantity:

(i) One merely speciﬁes an arbitrary standard of
measure (this is the way in which one introduces the
usual deﬁnitions of, say, gram or ohm).

(ii) By employing some law—we denote it by A—
that relates the quantity in question to those that are
known and which involves a numerical coeﬃcient,
one chooses a satndard in such a way as to reduce this
coeﬃcient to unity (this is exempliﬁed by the deﬁnition
of a charge unit in terms of the Coulomb law).

Technical diﬃculties apart, one can always make
use of either method of the above two.1) In the ﬁrst
case, we have a new arbitrary satndard; that is, we
increase the number of units forming the basis of
the theory of dimensions. Moreover, the coeﬃcient in
the law A then takes a speciﬁc numerical value that
appears to be a new world constant.

In the second case, both the number of basic arbi-
trary standard and the number of world constants re-
main unchanged; for measuring the quantity in ques-
tion, we only obtain a unit that is natural with respect
to preceding ones. This unit will change in response
to changes in basic standard. The character of this
variation is studied within a dimensional analysis that
introduces the concept of dimensions of a given phys-
ical quantity.

Constants of zero dimensions are independent of
the choice of basis units and can therefore be treated
as mathematical constants (numbers). One can hope
that all these numerical constants can be obtained
theoretically. Within a given system of dimensions,
world constants from which one can compose a com-
bination of zero dimension must therefore obey a
mathematical relation, so that they are not indepen-
dent.

From the aforesaid, it follows that we can always
reduce the number of basic standard (number of di-
mensions) using one of the world constants for this
and setting it to unity. Below, this process, which is

∗Translated from the Journal of Russian Physicochemical So-
ciety, Ser. Phys., LX, 13 (1928).

1)Of course, this is so if there is a law that relates the new

quantity being considered to some known previously.

equivalent to going over from the ﬁrst deﬁnition to the
second one, will be referred to as a reduction.

For a complete reduction (that is, a reduction to
the number of standard that is equal to zero) to be
possible, it is necessary that the number of indepen-
dent constants not be less than the number of dimen-
sions forming the basis of the system of units being
considered. Obviously, the number of independent
constants cannot be greater than the number of basic
independent basic units in our system of dimensions.
For example, only the reduction to two units was
possible in Newtonian mechanics, since, in the pres-
ence of three basic dimensions of T , L, and M , there
was only one law featuring a world constant; that is,

A second constant, which enables a reduction to one
dimension is introduced by the special theory of rela-
tivity via the relation

Finally, the last missing constant h appears in the

framework of quantum mechanics:

f = χ

mm′
r2 .

xi = ict.

ϕ =

2πW
h

(this is the expression for the phase ϕ in terms of the
action W ).

Usually, we are dealing with the case where the
number of constants known from experiments and
not yet reduced to a smaller number by establish-
ing mathematical relations is much greater than the
adopted number of basic units. In this case, it is
advisable to choose the most general constants for
performing complete reduction.

The quartic system CGS1◦ is employed in mod-
ern experimental physics. In technologies, however,
practical considerations dictate the use of a much
greater number of standards (cm, g, s, 1◦, Ω, A, . . . );
there, one adopts some CGS1◦Ω . . . system.

Yet another example of choosing a basic system is
provided by Planck’s natural system of units (c, χ, h,
k).

§ 2. We have seen above that each constant is
a representative of a physical law (theory), a world

1063-7788/02/6507-1373$22.00 c(cid:1) 2002 MAIK “Nauka/Interperiodica”

Fig. 3. English version of the 2002 reprint of the 1928 article by Gamow, Ivanenko,
and Landau.

16

L.B. Okun

G

Fig. 4. Orthogonal axes. At the origin there is no gravity, no maximal velocity, no
quantum eﬀects

~

1=

GR

N G

N QG

T OE

N M

QM

SR

Fig. 5. Cube of theories

QF T

Fundamental units: physics and metrology

17

Fig. 6. Dimensional pyramid

18

L.B. Okun

Fig. 7. Cover of the book dedicated to G.J. Stoney

Fundamental units: physics and metrology

19

Fig. 8. The title page of “Philosophical Magazine and the beginning of article [9] by
G.J. Stoney

20

L.B. Okun

Fig. 9. The base units of the SI, with their present uncertainties of realization, and some
of their links to atomic and fundamental constants with their present uncertainties in
terms of the SI. The absence of a useful quantitative estimate of the long-term stability
of the kilogram, indicated by ?, is reﬂected in three of the other base units. The dashed
lines to the kilogram indicate possible routes to a new deﬁnition. (From the article
by T.J. Quinn “Base Units of the Syst`eme International d’Unit´es, their Accuracy,
Dissemination and International Traceability”, Metrologia 31 (1994/95) 515-527.)

