4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

“Physics in Films”
A New Approach to Teaching Science

C. Efthimiou1 and R. Llewellyn2
Physics Department
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816

Abstract

Over the past year and a half we have developed an innovative approach to the
teaching of Physical Science, a general education course typically found in the cur-
ricula of nearly every college and university. The new approach uses popular movies
to illustrate the principles of physical science, analyzing individual scenes against the
background of the fundamental physical laws. The impact of being able to under-
stand why, in reality, the scene could or could not have occurred as depicted in the
ﬁlm, what the director got right and what he got wrong, has excited student interest
enormously in a course that, when taught in the traditional mode, is usually consid-
ered to be ‘too hard and boring’. The performance of students on exams reﬂected
the increased attention to and retention of basic physical concepts, a result that was
a primary goal of the ‘Physics in Films’ approach. Following the ﬁrst oﬀering of the
revitalization of the Physical Science course, in which action and sci-ﬁ ﬁlms were the
primary source of the scene clips used in class, the instructors have demonstrated the
versatility of the approach by building variations of the course around other genres,
as well —Physics in Films: Superheroes and Physics in Films: Pseudoscience. A
parallel approach to the general education course in astronomy is currently being
discussed; many others are in our thoughts.

Keywords: Physics, Physical Science, Films, General Education, Science Literacy, Multime-

dia

BACKGROUND

It is well documented that interest and understanding of science among people of all
ages in the United States has declined severely and currently stands at an alarmingly low
level. According to surveys conducted by the National Science Foundation (NSF 2002)
over many years, about 50 percent of the people do not know that Earth takes one year
to go around the sun, that electrons are smaller than atoms, and that early humans did
not live at the same time as the dinosaurs. These examples of faulty knowledge of physics
surely extend to other sciences and are mirrored in other nations. This trend is due in

1costas@physics.ucf.edu
2ral@physics.ucf.edu

1

part to a changing society that encourages new generations to adopt a more materialistic
ideology and a disrespect, even distrust of scientiﬁc knowledge. Even though the luxury
of technology we currently enjoy is due in large measure to science, our society has chosen
to forget that, tacitly assuming that such progress is a natural phenomenon that occurs
automatically and about which one need not worry.

Figure 1: Some facts about science literacy in USA.

THE CORE IDEA AND THE FIRST IMPLEMENTATION

The project addresses the issue of how to instill in the broad spectrum of college and
university students the enthusiasm and excitement of physics all physicists have experienced
and continue to experience. We have thus proposed to accomplish this by adopting as a
teaching vehicle a medium that the students have already accepted as a reﬂection of today’s
culture, namely by using popular movies to illustrate both the basic principles and frontier
discoveries of science (Efthimiou & Llewellyn 2003). The targeted audience is science and
non-science majors alike. The course we have created is more relevant and, frankly, a
more interesting substitute for the traditional Physical Science courses taught in nearly all
colleges and universities. If this eﬀort proves to be as successful as our early results suggest
that it will be, an appropriate version for majors in other science disciplines is a deﬁnite
option for the future.

Summer 2002: Action and Sci-Fi Movies!

During the initial oﬀering of the course in Summer 2002 we discussed the principles of
physics using scene clips from popular action and sci-ﬁ movies. For example, the law of
gravitation as (mis)used in Independence Day, conservation of momentum in Tango and
Cash, speed and acceleration in Speed 2, and so on. Figure 2 shows the nine movies used

2

that ﬁrst summer. Students were required to watch the ﬁlms at home and turn in a brief,
written analysis of the physics principle illustrated in each of three scenes of their own
choosing (homework!). In class, ﬁve to ten percent of the class (of 90) were called upon
each day to orally present their analysis of one scene to the class. Both the written and
oral analyses became part of their grade in the course.

Figure 2: Action and Sci-Fi ﬁlms used in the original approach of the Physics In Films
variation of the Physical Science course.

Based on the data collected so far and on discussions among the several physical science
instructors and hundreds of physical science students at our institution (physical science
enrollment: 2600 students per year), we have had an overwhelming success (APS News
2003, Chow 2003, Graham 2002, Grayson 2002, Priore 2003). Our experiences thus far
reveal a strong tendency by the students to participate enthusiastically in discussions of
physical science, if the topic under discussion is familiar from TV shows or movies. Not
only may such a course be widely emulated and serve to educate our society, but it may
also help correct misconceptions of science that popular movies and TV series have created,
misconceptions that we feel have contributed to the public mistrust of science.

Example—Speed 2

In Speed 2 (starring Sandra Bullock) there is a scene where a large cruise ship crashes
into the waterfront of a busy resort town, hitting other boats, docks, the shoreline, and
ultimately buildings. As the ship approaches the shore and hits various things, it begins
to decelerate and people and objects onboard are thrown violently toward the bow, two
men on the bridge even thrown through the windows onto the forward deck. All of the
mayhem is seemingly in agreement with the audience’s ‘gut’ feeling of what would happen
as a consequence of the deceleration of the ship. However, throughout the scene we are
given frequent views of the ship’s digital speedometer on the bridge. Since the crashing of

3

Figure 3: The deceleration of the cruise ship according to the director’s data in Speed 2 as
it crashes on the port.

the ship is shown in real time, by simply noting the time of each speed reading as the ship
approaches the shore and ﬁnally comes to a stop, we can directly compute the deceleration,
using the simple formula:

deceleration =

speed change
time change

.

The table in ﬁgure 3 shows the results of such a calculation based on the director’s data. The
numbers in the second column are clock times (according to the DVD timer) at which speeds
(in knots) were read from the ship’s meter. The numbers in the third column (lined up
with the horizontal lines) are the seconds between successive readings. The fourth column
converts the speeds into meters per second (1 knot is about a half meter per second) and
the right-hand column shows the corresponding decelerations in meters per second square
(m/s2). Comparing the decelerations in the last column with the acceleration of gravity,
about 10 m/s2, we see that the ship’s deceleration was actually quite low. To understand
how low, think about the deceleration you would experience in bringing your car, travelling
at 30 miles per hour, to a gentle stop (that is, applying the brakes for about 10 seconds) at
a red traﬃc signal; this acceleration would be about 1.33 m/s2, or more than 30 times the
greatest deceleration 0.0433 m/s2of the table. At this point the students are amazed! The
ship certainly has an enormous amount of kinetic energy and that energy is dissipated in
the collisions, but the widespread tumbling about of things and people on the ship would
not have occurred. Indeed, a passenger who happened to be asleep in a bunk might not
have even noticed the collision. The concept of impulse can also be discussed with the aid
of this scene. The forces that people and objects on the ship experience during the collision
are quite low because (1) the ship is not going very fast to begin with (hence, momenta are
not large) and (2) the collision takes place over a very long time, more than 10 minutes.

4

Figure 4: Summary of the calculation for the deﬂection of the asteroid fragments in Ar-
mageddon.

Example—Armageddon

In Armageddon (starring Bruce Willis) a huge, errant asteroid the size of Texas is
on a collision course with Earth. A team of oil well drillers is dispatched via a pair of
space shuttles to intercept the asteroid, drill a hole in it at the right place, lower a large
nuclear bomb into the hole, and subsequently blow the asteroid into two large pieces.
The transverse velocities imparted to the two pieces by the explosion, when added to
their (undiminished) velocities toward Earth, are to cause the pieces to just miss Earth,
thereby averting worldwide disaster. Analysis of this situation uses conservation of energy,
conservation of momentum, vector addition, and the law of gravity. A summary of the
overall situation is depicted in the diagram of ﬁgure 4.

Using numbers provided in the ﬁlm, we introduce the students to the idea of making
reasonable approximations. For example, the asteroid is, we are told, the size of Texas, so
we assume Texas is a square whose surface area equals that of the state, then approximate
the asteroid as a cube, each of whose sides equals the surface area of the state. Multiplying
the volume of the cube by the average density of Earth gives us a decent estimate of the
mass of the asteroid. Assuming the bomb as being equal to 100,000 Hiroshima bombs
provided an estimate of the energy available for the job. Then, assuming all of that energy
became kinetic energy equally divided between the two pieces of the asteroid (i.e., ignoring
the energy needed to break the asteroid into two pieces), we can readily compute the
distance the pieces have moved perpendicular to their original direction of motion by the
time they reach Earth. As noted in the diagram, the deﬂection for each piece is only a
bit over 200 meters. Once again the students are astonished. Instead of being hit by one
Texas-size asteroid, Earth will be hit by two half-Texas-size asteroids few city-blocks apart!
We then wind up this discussion with an explanation of what is realistically possible and

5

why the government has an ongoing project to detect and track space objects approaching
Earth or in Earth-crossing orbits.

BEYOND ACTION AND SCI-FI MOVIES

After the pilot course was very successfully tested in four sections (with total enrollment
of 800 students), the authors were motivated to develop the course further and to explore
new directions. The original pilot course included movies that were selected to span the
entire topical range of the standard Physical Science course. In the selection of the movies
no attention was paid to the genre or the theme of the movie; eventually all the movies
used were action, adventure, and science ﬁction ﬁlms.

Encouraged by the enthusiasm of the students, the authors decided to take the project
to the next level by considering possible extensions of the course that would accommodate
the curiosity of every student and would satisfy the needs of every instructor. Thus, we
decided to create versions (packages) —nicknamed ﬂavors—of the course whereby each
ﬂavor used a particular genre or theme of movies. As a result, plans were developed to
create the following ﬂavors, each using ﬁlms with a well deﬁned theme:

Figure 5: Superheroes ﬁlms used in the superhero approach of the Physics In Films varia-
tion of the Physical Science course.

1. Action/Adventure that would use action and adventure movies;

2. Sci-Fi that would use science ﬁction movies;

3. Superhero that would use superhero movies;

4. Modern Physics that would use movies that enable the teaching of topics from

Modern Physics;

6

5. Astronomy that would use movies that contain topics related to astronomy;

6. Pseudoscience that would use movies including topics from pseudoscientiﬁc;

7. Metaphysics that would use movies that touch on questions of metaphysical content.

The instructors started building the Superhero and Pseudoscience ﬂavors in Summer 2003
and the coming summer will ﬁnish their development. In ﬁgures 5 and 6, the reader sees
the movies used so far.

Example–Superman II

In Superman, the movie the audience learns that before the planet Krypton exploded,
three criminals were sealed in a container and sent to the Phantom Zone (an extraordinary
prison) for eternity. All of them (on Earth) would possess incredible powers exactly equal
to those of Superman. In Superman II, extraordinary conditions, of course, allow them to
escape and arrive at Earth where they terrorize the humans. During their trip towards
Earth, they stop on the Moon. There they become aware of their incredible powers and
we witness a discussion among them on their newly found powers. As real as this scene
seems to the audience, it could never have taken place. Human voice is a sound wave
that is created by vibrations of the vocal cords generating density variations in the air
inside the larynx. Sound waves can be created only inside materials (such as the air of
Earth’s atmosphere) since they are really changes in the density of the material. The
Moon, however, has no atmosphere; there is no material whose density can be aﬀected
to create sound waves. Therefore, sound on the surface of the Moon (without the use of
sophisticated electronic equipment) is impossible. As has humorously been said, “in the
vacuum of space, no one can hear you scream”.

Example—Sixth Sense

The Sixth Sense is a ﬁlm concerned with ghosts. A child has the ability to see and
communicate with ghosts. The movie consistently tells the viewer that ghosts like low
temperatures, although why that should be is not explained. In a scene where the young
hero goes to the bathroom during the night, the director clearly and distinctly shows a
sudden drop in the room temperature, so that one expects the appearance of a ghost; and
indeed one appears.

To get a hint concerning the possibility that the appearance of ghosts is heralded by
a sudden drop in temperature, we shall look at a case studied by scientists (BBC News
2001, Frood 2003).
In Hampton Court Palace near London, UK, there is a well-known
Haunted Gallery. It is said that The Gallery is stalked by the spirit of Catherine Howard.
Many visitors to the room have described strange phenomena in the gallery such as hearing
screams and seeing apparitions. Due to many reports of such occurrences, a team of ‘ghost-
busting’ psychologists, led by Dr Richard Wiseman of Hertfordshire University was called

7

Figure 6: Films with pseudoscientiﬁc content used in the pseudoscience approach of the
Physics In Films variation of the Physical Science course.

to investigate. The team installed thermal cameras and air movement detectors in the
gallery, following which about 400 palace visitors were asked if they could feel a “presence”
in the gallery. The response was quite amazing: more than half reported sudden drops
in temperature and some said they sensed a ghostly presence. Several people claimed to
have seen Elizabethan ﬁgures. However, the team discovered that the experiences could
be simply explained by the gallery’s numerous concealed old doors. These exits are far
from draught-proof and the combination of air currents which they admit cause sudden
changes in the room’s temperature. In two particular spots, the temperature of the gallery
plummeted down to 36o F. “You do, literally, walk into a column of cold air sometimes,”
said Dr Wiseman. Convection is one of the three ways heat propagates; the other two
are conduction and radiation. Convection appears in ﬂuids that have a non-uniform dis-
tribution of temperature. As a result, currents inside the ﬂuid will be such as to attempt
to restore a uniform temperature. These currents are stronger when the non-uniformity
is greater. In the case of the gallery rooms, the convection currents would be felt as cold
drafts, similar to those experienced by someone who opens the door of a refrigerator a hot
day in summer.

THE RESULTS

Student interest and performance in the Physical Science course have both increased
dramatically compared with the traditional teaching mode, which we still use in some
sections. In ﬁgures 7 and 8 we give an example of the several measures of student interest
that we have used, including student opinions of the electronic personal response system
used in class to answer quiz questions and to take attendance (both of which contribute to
the ﬁnal grade).

8

Figure 7: One of the many class evaluation questions given to students. Notice that
students strongly support the further development of the course. (SA=strongly approve,
A=approve, NO=no opinion, D=disapprove, SD=strongly disapprove.) Statistics to other
questions is similar.

The exam scores distribution in two classes of about the same size (295 students each)
taught by the same instructor, one in traditional lecture mode, the other Physics in Films
mode and covering the same topics are quite dramatically diﬀerent, as the table below
illustrates.

Figure 8: The class is using a personal response system in order to obtain real-time data on
the class state of knowledge. Although the students at the beginning of the class complain
about the use of the system (since it increases their expenses for the course and forces them
to attend the lectures), by the end of the course are very enthusiastic about it.

9

Fall 2002 Traditional mode
Exam 1 Exam 2 Exam 3 Final
59.4

65.3

49.3

58.2

Fall 2003 ‘Physics in Films’ mode
Exam 1 Exam 2 Exam 3
67.7

Final
72.8

74.9

75.7

Table 1: Exam averages (100 being the maximum score)of two large sections of Physical
Science taught by the same instructor.

THE FUTURE

Our goal is to increase awareness of science and to demonstrate that understanding
some physics can be exciting and rewarding when presented in the context of an enjoyable
activity. Our presentation has illustrated in detail exactly how the movies are used as a
vehicle for learning physical science. In class clips from the ﬁlms are integrated with lecture
materials, quizzes, demonstrations, and slides so as to enhance both student attention and
retention. We have given two sample scene analyses and comparative statistics of student
reactions and performance. This new technique can be extended to many other disciplines,
as the following list (with some suggested ﬁlms) illustrates.

1. Math in Films: Pi, Good Will Hunting, Pay it Forward, A Beautiful Mind

2. Biology in Films: Spiderman, Planet of the Apes, Fly, Hollow Man

3. Engineering in Films: Armageddon, The Bridge on River Kwai, Space Cowboys

4. Archeology in Films: Indiana Jones: Raiders of the Lost Ark, The Mummy, The

Relic

5. Computers in Films: Independence Day, The Net, Swordﬁsh

6. Philosophy in Films: Matrix, Terminator, Blade Runner

7. History in Films: Patriot, Braveheart, Gladiator, Elizabeth

8. Law in Films: Legally Blonde, Erin Brockovich, The Firm, The Rainmaker

9. Forensic Science in Films: Murder by the Numbers, Bone Collector, Torso,

Jennifer 8

10. Psychology in Movies: Don’t Say a Word, Control, Final Analysis, Primal Fear

10

The authors are in the process of preparing a self-contained physical science course, com-
plete with textbook and a CD-ROM with all scene analyses and slides we use, that can be
handed to an instructor ready-to-go.

References

APS News (2003). Physics in ﬁlms. http://www.aps.org/apsnews/0303/030 306.html.

BBC News (2001, March 29) Palace Ghost Laid to Rest. BBC News on-line. Retrieved
3/14/2003 from http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/124936 6.stm.

Chow,
http://www.physicstoday.org/vol-56/i ss-5/p15a.html.

(2003). Cinema

physics

lesson.

as

L.

Physics Today,

56,

15.

Efthimiou, C. E. & Llewellyn, R. A.
tion of
http://www.arXiv.org/physics/0303005.

A revitaliza-
the traditional course by avatars of Hollywood in the physics classroom.

(2003). Physical

science:

Frood, A. (2003, May 21) Ghosts ’all in the mind’. BBC News on-line. Retrieved 1/6/04
from http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/ 3044607.stm.

Graham, A. (2002). A little bit of Hollywood, a lot of physics. Retrieved 1/6/03 from
http://www.ucffuture.com/main.cfm?in include=detail&storyid=287529.

Grayson, C. (2002). Students play games, watch movies, raise grades. Retrieved 1/6/04
from http://www.ucffuture.com/main.cfm?in clude=detail&storyid=328832.

Science & engineering
NSF (2002).
http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind02.

indicators

2002. Retrieved

1/6/04

from

Priore, T. (2003). With great power comes a physical explanation: Action ﬁlms teach stu-
dents the laws of physics. Retrieved 1/6/04 from http://www.ucffuture.com/main.cfm?in
clude=detail&storyid=436180.

11

