Relativity in Introductory Physics

Department of Physics, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, Canada N9B 3P4

(Date textdate; Received textdate; Accepted textdate)

William E. Baylis

Abstract

A century after its formulation by Einstein, it is time to incorporate special relativity early in

the physics curriculum. The approach advocated here employs a simple algebraic extension of

vector formalism that generates Minkowski spacetime, displays covariant symmetries, and enables

calculations of boosts and spatial rotations without matrices or tensors. The approach is part of a

comprehensive geometric algebra with applications in many areas of physics, but only an intuitive

subset is needed at the introductory level. The approach and some of its extensions are given here

and illustrated with insights into the geometry of spacetime.

4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Special relativity, which has now been with us for about one century, presents a new

worldview or paradigm[1] of physics. It revises the concepts of time and space from those

assumed in Newtonian and Galilean physics, with consequent changes, for example, in what

we mean by simultaneity and how we “add” velocities. It also establishes the framework for

fundamental symmetries of electromagnetic phenomena and much of modern physics. Such

symmetries provide new approaches to many problems, simplifying many computations, and

they are frequently important even at low (“nonrelativistic”) velocities, as demonstrated

below. Yet, it appears that the physics community has still not completed the paradigm

shift: relativity is commonly taught as a complicating correction to Newtonian mechanics,

and if elementary electromagnetic theory texts mention it at all, it is usually only later in

the text after the basic laws and phenomena have been discussed. Is it not time to integrate

relativity more tightly into the early physics curriculum?

One reason for delaying the introduction of relativity in the curriculum can be traced to

the conceptual inertia of the educational process: those teaching today learned Newtonian

mechanics before relativity and typically feel that a good grounding in Galilean transforma-

tions is needed before Lorentz transformations can be understood. It may be argued that

the remnants of Aristotelian notions must be cleared away before students are faced with

concepts such as the observer-dependence of space and time. However, the relativistic ap-

proach is the correct one, and in some respects it may be more intuitive to the beginner than

Newtonian mechanics. It is doubtful that it serves the students’ best interests to ingrain

faulty concepts such as universal time and instantaneous interactions at a distance.

An important practical reason for delaying the introduction of relativity is mathematical.

Introductory treatments of relativity that go beyond basic concepts to practical calculations

almost all use matrices or tensors at the expense of the vector notation common in Newto-

nian physics. Matrix and tensor elements are much less eﬀective than vectors at conveying

the geometry that is so critical for our physical understanding. (Some eﬀorts to use the

geometrical power of diﬀerential forms has been made, but they face a conceptual barrier in

the abstraction of vector concepts and have been largely reserved to treatments of general

relativity.)

This paper advocates an alternative treatment: an algebraic approach based on a simple

2

extension of vectors in physical space. By replacing the dot and cross products of vectors with

a simpler but more general associative product, one is led to add scalar time components to

vectors. Such objects form a four-dimensional linear space with Minkowski spacetime metric.

The algebra that results allows relativistic calculations while avoiding matrices and tensors

(although these are readily derived in the approach). The algebraic approach advocated here

for introductory courses is a subset the powerful and well-developed covariant formalism of

Cliﬀord’s geometric algebra of physical space (APS).[2, 3, 4] APS is the Cliﬀord or geometric

algebra of three-dimensional Euclidean space, sometimes denoted Cℓ3 or G3. It is isomorphic

(equivalent in structure) to complex quaternions, the algebra of Pauli spin matrices, and the

even subalgebra of Hestenes’ spacetime algebra (STA).[5, 6]

The following Section emphasizes the importance of relativistic symmetries even at low

velocities. In Section III, we introduce the basic algebra needed to compute Lorentz trans-

formations and give several examples appropriate for an introductory course. A discussion

of the new geometrical concept of a bivector and its advantages over the more traditional

cross product is given in Section IV. Extensions to rotor and spinor representations for use

in later courses are discussed in Section V. APS is brieﬂy compared to an alternative al-

gebraic approached using STA in Section VI, and conclusions are summarized in the ﬁnal

Section. While the paper is largely pedagogical, several new results that ﬂow from the APS

approach are presented. These include a simple formulation in Subsection III-C of relations

between the Minkowskian geometry of spacetime vectors and the lengths and angles actually

measured (in a Euclidean sense) on a spacetime diagram, a derivation of reduced algebraic

forms for Lorentz rotations in arbitrary spacetime planes Subsection IV-B, and the demon-

stration in Subsection IV-C that any boost of an electromagnetic plane wave is equivalent

to a spatial rotation and dilation.

II. RELATIVITY AT LOW VELOCITIES

The importance of relativity is well appreciated for understanding Einstein’s mass-energy

relation or for correctly computing such values as threshold energies for particle production

in high-velocity collisions. Less appreciated is the power of relativistic symmetries at low

(“nonrelativistic”) velocities, particularly in electromagnetic theory. One fruitful example

is the understanding that the electric and magnetic ﬁelds are aspects of a single covariant

3

electromagnetic ﬁeld. For example, the electric ﬁeld lines of a moving charge sweep out

spatial planes that represent its magnetic ﬁeld. The magnetic ﬁeld is the vector normal

(dual) to the planes (see Fig. 1), as discussed in Subsection III.G.

FIG. 1: The electric ﬁeld lines of a moving charge q sweep out spatial planes that represent the

magnetic ﬁeld B .

There are many cases in which a relativistic transformation can simplify a computation

and clarify its signiﬁcance. The following examples will serve to illustrate that the im-

portance of relativity is not restricted to exotic phenomena that occur only with particle

velocities close to the speed of light.

To calculate the eﬀect of a plane wave incident at an oblique angle on the plane surface

of a good conductor, we can compute the simpler case of normal incidence and then apply

a boost (velocity transformation) in the plane of the conductor (see Fig. 2). This can be

extended to the calculation of wave-guide modes by boosting standing waves.[2]

We return to these examples at the end of this paper and show that the boost of a

propagating plane wave and of its wave vector in spacetime is equivalent to a rotation and

dilation (rescaling).

4

FIG. 2: When propagating plane waves are boosted, they are simply rotated and dilated. As a

result, waves obliquely incident on a conductor can be obtained by boosting normally incident

ones. Similarly, waveguide modes can be found by boosting standing waves.

III. THE ALGEBRAIC APPROACH

The key step in the algebraic method is to introduce an associative product of vectors.

This product, called a geometric product, is deﬁned by the axiom that any vector p times

itself is the scalar product p · p, that is, the square length of p :

p2 = pp = p · p .

(1)

The square length of a vector p = pxe1+pye2+pze3 in (ﬂat, Euclidean) physical space is given
y + p2
by the orthonormality of the basis vectors ej to be the Pythagorean value p2 = p2
z .
Multiplication of a vector p by a (real) scalar α scales its length, and the two vectors p and

x + p2

αp are said to be aligned. It follows that the geometric product of any two aligned vectors

is their scalar product. The product of nonaligned vectors will be considered below.

The product of elements in APS behaves like the product of square matrices. There are in

fact inﬁnitely many matrix representations of APS, but explicit matrices are never needed.

The existence of a single matrix representation proves that APS exists as a consistent algebra,

5

and once its existence has been accepted, only the algebra itself is important.

Those familiar with matrices but uncomfortable with vector algebras may ﬁnd it initially

reassuring to represent the basis vectors ej by the three 2 × 2 Pauli spin matrices σj. The

vector-space properties of physical space, namely vector addition, scalar products of vectors,

and multiplication of vectors by scalars, then works just as well as when the ej are thought of

as three-dimensional column or row vectors, as is common in elementary vector treatments.

However, the alternative representation of vectors as 2 × 2 matrices also leads naturally

to (i) an associative multiplication of vectors, and (ii) the addition of a fourth dimension

proportional to the unit matrix σ0 = 

, which is linearly independent of the σj. A 2×2

representation of the full APS is generated from products of the matrix representations of

vectors. Every element is then some 2 × 2 matrix, and scalars in particular are represented

by the scalar value times σ0 . Generally, however, matrices can and probably should be

1 0

0 1







avoided entirely when introducing the algebra.

The geometric product is the only product needed in the algebra. As we will see below,

both the dot and cross product of vectors can be expressed in terms of it. Like the cross

product, the geometric product of nonaligned vectors does not commute. This is seen by

setting p = q + r in the axiom (1) to get

(q + r) (q + r) = q2 + rq + qr + r2 = q · q + 2r · q + r · r ,

which with the help of the axiom gives an expression for the dot product:

r · q =

(rq + qr) .

1
2

(2)

If r and q are perpendicular, this expression vanishes. Thus, while aligned vectors com-

mute, perpendicular vectors anticommute. Unlike the dot and cross products, the geometric

product is associative and invertible: if p, q, r are any vectors,

and

The additional eﬀort required to teach the geometric product is more than compensated for

by avoiding the confusion caused by the non-associative cross product. Furthermore, unlike

(pq) r = p (qr) ≡ pqr

p−1 =

p
p2 .

6

the cross product, the geometric product is easily extended to spaces of more than three

dimensions.

A. Spacetime Vectors

A point r in spacetime depends on the time t as well as on the spatial position r in

physical space. Now elements of APS include sums of vectors and their products, and as

we have seen, those products include real scalars. We might therefore try to represent r in

APS by the sum r = ct + r . (The factor of the speed of light c is included to ensure that

all components of r have the same dimensions.) In Cliﬀord algebras, the sum of a scalar

and a vector is commonly called a paravector,[7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. We adopt this name here to

distinguish it from a vector in three-dimensional physical space. A displacement of r is then

a spacetime vector represented by

dr = cdt + dr.

p = p0 + p ,

Other spacetime vectors are similarly represented, for example the spacetime momentum of

a particle is given by a paravector

where E = p0c is the energy and p the spatial momentum. The sum is analogous to the

sum of a real number and an imaginary number to form a complex number.

Whether or not paravectors in APS can represent spacetime vectors depends on how the
square length of a paravector is determined. The square length of a vector p is simply p2,

but the square of a paravector p is generally not a scalar. The analogy to complex numbers

suggests that we need to multiply p a conjugate, and what we need is called the Cliﬀord
conjugate (or bar conjugate) ¯p = p0 − p , which changes the sign of the vector part. The

product

p¯p =

p0 + p
(cid:0)

(cid:1) (cid:0)

p0 − p
(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

=

2

p0

− p2 = ¯pp

(3)

is always a scalar and can be taken as the “square length” of p. The minus sign ensures that

paravector space has the geometry of Minkowski spacetime. It marks an important departure

from the Euclidean space of p since the “square length” of p and ¯p can be either positive,

negative, or zero. By replacing p by q + r, the scalar product two distinct paravectors q, r is

7

found. It is the scalar part of the geometric product q¯r :

hq¯riS ≡

(q¯r + r ¯q) = q0r0 − q · r = hr ¯qiS .

1
2

Note that q¯r = r ¯q. Paravectors q and r are said to be orthogonal if hq¯riS = 0. As long as
p¯p 6= 0, p has an inverse

p−1 = ¯p/ (p¯p) .

This is similar to the inverse of a complex number, but there is now a new possibility:

if

p¯p = 0 but p 6= 0, then p is null and has no inverse. Null elements are orthogonal to

themselves. They arise for particles or waves traveling at the speed of light.

The paravector basis is four-dimensional, and we deﬁne an orthonormal set {e0, e1, e2, e3}

comprising one unit paravector along the time direction e0 ≡ 1 plus the three orthogonal

paravectors ej ≡ ej along the spatial axes. Their scalar products give elements of what is

known as the Minkowski spacetime metric tensor

heµ¯eνiS =

−1, µ = ν = 1, 2, 3

.

1,

µ = ν = 0

0,

µ 6= ν





B. Lorentz Transformations

An important paradigm of relativity is that space and time are not absolute but are

mixed by physical Lorentz transformations, which may be viewed as rotations in spacetime.

The square length of a spacetime vector is invariant under such rotations. If dr = cdt + dr

is the displacement of a particle, the Lorentz-invariant square length of the displacement is

It suggests the deﬁnition of a Lorentz-invariant proper time τ as the time in the commoving

inertial frame of the particle, where dr = 0. The dimensionless proper velocity is deﬁned as

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

dr d¯r = c2dt2 − dr2 = c2dτ 2.

u =

dr
cdτ

=

dt
dτ (cid:18)

1 +

dr
cdt(cid:19)

= γ (1 + v/c) ,

8

where γ = dt/dτ is its time-dilation factor, and v = dr/dt is its coordinate velocity. Since

cdτ is an invariant interval in spacetime, u transforms in the same way as dr and is by

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

deﬁnition unimodular, that is of unit length:

It follows immediately that u and ¯u are inverses of each other and that

u¯u = 1.

γ =

dt
dτ

=

1 −

(cid:20)

−1/2

.

2

v
c (cid:17)

(cid:21)

(cid:16)

A simple Lorentz rotation is a rotation in a single spacetime plane of two dimensions.

Any Lorentz rotation can be built up of products of such simple rotations. If the rotation

plane comprises two spatial directions, the transformation is a physical rotation. If, instead,

one of the directions in the rotation plane is the scalar time axis, the transformation is a

boost (velocity transformation). A simple rotation mixes the components of the spacetime

vector in the rotation plane and leaves components perpendicular to the plane unchanged.

The simple rule for calculating the Lorentz rotation that boosts the frame of a paravector

p = p0 + p from rest to proper velocity u is

where p△ is the part of p that lies coplanar with the rotation plane in spacetime and p⊥ is

the remaining part, namely the part orthogonal to the rotation plane:

p → p′ = up△ + p⊥

p△ = p − p⊥ = p0 + (p · ˆv) ˆv,

where ˆv is the unit vector in the direction of v. The spacetime plane of the Lorentz rotation

contains the time axis, e0 ≡ 1, the boost direction v, and all linear combinations of e0 and

v. The part of p in this plane is simply multiplied by u. The part p⊥ perpendicular to the

rotation plane, with components on the spatial directions perpendicular to v, is unchanged

by the transformation.

The transformation (10) is all one needs to boost any spacetime vector. As shown below,

its form is the same as for spatial rotations. The inverse transformation is given by replacing

u by ¯u, as seen from (8). No matrices or tensors are needed. To evaluate the boost (10),

only the products of scalars and the geometric product of collinear vectors is needed, and

as we saw above, the geometric product of collinear vectors is just their scalar product.

In particular, this transformation applies to the basis vectors of paravector space: Suppose

our boost is along e1, that is the proper velocity of the boost is u = γ (1 + ve1/c) . Then the

9

transformation

e0 ≡ 1 → u

e1 → ue1

e2 → e2, e3 → e3

v
c

(cid:17)

ue0 = u = γ

e0 +

e1

ue1 = γ

(cid:16)
e1 +

(cid:16)

v
c

e0

.

(cid:17)

gives the spacetime basis of the frame moving with proper velocity u. This is easily plotted

on a spacetime diagram if we note

For example, if v = 0.6c, then γ = 5/4 and the basis paravectors of the moving frame are

(see Fig. 3). The perpendicular vectors e2 and e3 (not shown) are unchanged.

FIG. 3: Boost of the basis for v = 0.6ce1.

ue0 =

e0 +

e1

ue1 =

e0 +

e1

3
4
5
4

5
4
3
4

10

C. Spacetime Geometry

It is worthwhile to point out some surprising features of spacetime geometry. Note ﬁrst

that the transformed paravectors have the same square length as the original ones:

ue0 (ue0) = u¯u = 1

ue1 (ue1) = ue1¯e1 ¯u = −u¯u = −1 .

Obviously the deﬁned square length of spacetime vectors does not correspond to the Eu-

clidean length that would be measured with a ruler on the diagram. The Euclidean length of
a spacetime vector p is hp2i

1/2
S . A good exercise for students is to work out the loci of space-
time vectors of square length ±1 on a spacetime diagram. The result gives hyperboloids of

revolution as seen in Fig. 4, which are asymptotic to the lightcone r¯r = 0. The loci can be

written u = exp (w) for the timelike paravector and ˆw exp (w) for the spacelike one, where

the rapidity w = |w| ˆw can be any real spatial vector. Note that one spatial dimension in

the e2e3 plane has been suppressed in the diagram, and the lightcone, which is drawn as

a two-dimensional surface, actually represents the three-dimensional hypersurface of a light

pulse emitted at the origin.

FIG. 4: Geometry of spacetime.

All space at an instant in time for an observer at rest is a hypersurface that appears

as a horizontal plane in the diagram. The intersection of such a hypersurface with the

11

lightcone gives a circle on the diagram that represents a spherical surface in space. Since

Lorentz rotations preserve the square lengths of paravectors, they leave the paravectors

within deﬁned regions of spacetime. Spacetime vectors can be classiﬁed as either past

timelike, future timelike, spacelike, or lightlike (null), and Lorentz rotations do not change

the classiﬁcation.

Note further that the paravectors ue0 and ue1 are orthogonal:

hue1ue0iS = h¯uu¯e1iS = 0,

and a spacetime vector on the lightcone is orthogonal to itself. Orthogonal paravectors are

not generally perpendicular (in a Euclidean sense) on the spacetime diagram, but ue1 is

perpendicular to ue0. More generally, paravectors p, q are perpendicular if hpqiS = 0, and
orthogonal paravectors are always perpendicular to each other’s Cliﬀord conjugate.

D. Examples: Lorentz Contraction and Velocity Composition

The time dilation derived above implies Lorentz contraction of a moving object. As an

example, consider a car racing at constant velocity v = ve1 in the lab. We place a clock at

the origin and measure the time for the car to cross the line x · e1 = 0. If l is the length of

the car in the lab, it takes a time t = l/v for the car to cross. In the frame of the car, the

clock has velocity −v and the crossing time is therefore dilated to t0 = γt, implying a car

length l0 = vt0 = γl. The car length in the lab is said to be Lorentz contracted by the factor
γ−1 relative to that in the frame of the car. It is important to specify the motion of the

clock that records the events. It is easy for students to forget that the synchronization of

clocks at diﬀerent positions is generally destroyed by a boost. Because boosts are so easily

calculated in APS, students can readily work out the full details:

In the lab, the spacetime position of the front of the moving car is x1 = ct + vt and the

rear of the car is at x2 = x1 − le1, where l is the length of the car in the lab. The rear of

the car crosses the start line when x2 · e1 = 0, that is when t = l/v. In the frame of the car,

the spacetime positions are found by boosting the car to rest, using the proper velocity ¯u :

¯ux1 = ¯u (c + v) t = γ−1ct

¯ux2 = ¯u (x1 − le1) = γ−1ct + γvl/c − γle1.

12

The vector part of ¯u (x1 − x2) gives the length of the car in its rest frame, namely γl, which

is larger than that in the lab by the factor γ.

While the scalar parts, and hence lab times, of x1, x2 are equal, the times in the frame of
the car diﬀer by γvl/c2. This shows that clocks synchronized in the lab are not synchronized

in the rest frame. The scalar part of ¯ux2 gives the time at the rear of the car in its rest

frame, and by substituting l = vt we get the time of the rear crossing

γ−1t + γvl/c2 = γt

γ−2 + v2/c2

= γt

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

in the car frame, which is just the dilated time of the clock ﬁxed in the lab.

As an even simpler application, consider the composition of two collinear boosts uBA and

uCB (uBA can be read as the proper velocity of A with respect to B, etc.). Since the proper

velocity uBA is itself a spacetime vector, we can use (10) with u given by uCB to obtain

simply the product (note that u⊥

BA = 0)

uCA = uCBuBA .

Thus the addition of collinear velocities in Galilean transformations becomes a product of

proper velocities in relativity. The vector part of (12) gives

γCAvCA = γCBγBA (vCB + vBA)

and the scalar part is

Their ratio gives the standard result immediately:

γCA = γCBγBA

1 + vCB · vBA/c2

.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

vCA =

vCB + vBA
1 + vCB · vBA/c2 ,

which demonstrates that at speeds small compared to c, the Galilean result vCA = vCB +vBA

is obtained.

The composition of non-collinear velocities is also easily found from (10):

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

uCA = uCBu△

BA + u⊥
BA
vCB

1 +

= γCB

γBA

1 + vk

BA

+ γBA

(cid:16)

c (cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

v⊥
BA
c

,

13

where vk

BA = vBA − v⊥

BA is the component of vBA along vCB . The scalar part is as before

(14) but the vector part (13) is modiﬁed to

giving

γCAvCA = γCBγBA

vCB + vk

BA

+ γBAv⊥

BA,

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

vCA =

vCB + vk

BA + v⊥
1 + vCB · vBA/c2

BA/γCB

See also Subsection IV.2 on extensions to rotors.

E. Spatial Rotations and Bivectors

To better understand why boosts are considered rotations in spacetime and why they

have the algebraic form (10), we compare them to common rotations in physical space.

Such spatial rotations are Lorentz rotations in a spatial plane, and they have exactly the

same form as (10) but with u replaced by a rotation element such as

cos θ + e2e1 sin θ = exp (θe2e1) ,

(16)

which gives a rotation by the angle θ in the plane e2e1, the plane that contains all linear

combinations of e1 and e2. Any product of orthogonal vectors is called a bivector and is an

intrinsic representation of the plane spanned by the vector factors. Bivectors generate spatial

rotations, and with their help, such rotations can be evaluated with simple algebra instead

of matrices. Recall from (2) that perpendicular vectors anticommute. The bivectors e1e2

and e2e1 thus diﬀer by a sign, which may be thought of as indicating the circulation pattern

or rotation direction in the plane. Since (e1e2) e1 = −e2 and (e1e2) e2 = e1, the product of

e1e2 from the left with any linear combination v = vxe1 + vye2 rotates v clockwise in the

e1e2 plane by 90◦. If e1e2 is replaced by its inverse, e2e1, the rotation is counter-clockwise

by 90◦. The Euler-like relation (16) follows by power-series expansion and the easily veriﬁed

result that (e2e1)

= −1.

2

For example, to rotate the paravector

p = p0e0 + pxe1 + pye2 + pze3

(17)

14

by the angle θ in the e2e1 plane, we calculate

p → exp (e2e1θ) p△ + p⊥

(18)

= (cos θ + e2e1 sin θ) (pxe1 + pye2) + p0e0 + pze3.

The form of the transformation (10) ensures that components orthogonal to the plane of

rotation are unchanged. Here, components along e0 and e3 are invariant while those in the

plane are rotated:

pxe1 + pye2 → (pxe1 + pye2) cos θ + (pxe2 − pye1) sin θ

= (px cos θ − py sin θ) e1 + (py cos θ + px sin θ) e2 .

F. Duals and Cross Products

The bivector e1e2 plays a role similar to that of the unit imaginary for rotations in the

e1e2 plane. There is a diﬀerence, however, in that e1e2 is seen to anticommute with vectors

in the plane:

e1e2p△ = −p△e1e2 .

It is the volume element e1e2e3 in APS that can be identiﬁed to i : it squares to −1 and

commutes with all vectors and their products. With the identiﬁcation

every bivector in APS is equivalent to an imaginary vector directed perpendicular to the

plane of the bivector. For example

e1e2e3 = i,

e1e2 = e1e2e3e3 = ie3.

The vector e3 is called the dual to the plane e1e2. It is common in physics to represent a

spatial plane by its dual vector. Indeed, this is the principal use of the vector cross product

since the vector dual to a plane is the cross product of vectors in the plane. In the case

above, e3 = e1 × e2 . However, the dual vector is an extrinsic representation of the plane: it

depends on the space in which the plane resides. A two-dimensional plane in a space with

four or more dimensions does not possess a unique dual vector. The bivector, as mentioned

above, is an intrinsic representation of a plane: it depends only on two linearly independent

vectors in the plane.

15

More generally, the bivector part of the product of vectors p, q is related to the cross

product by

ip × q =

(pq − qp) = pq − p · q

(19)

1
2

The axis of rotation is the vector dual to the rotation plane. Such a vector is called an axial

vector (or pseudovector), denoting its invariance under such rotations as well as under a

spatial inversion of its vector factors. Important examples are the orbital angular momentum

L = r × p and the magnetic ﬁeld of a moving charge, both of which are vectors dual to the

plane of motion (the plane of r and p). By using the dual vector, one can write the rotation

element exp (e2e1θ) in terms of the rotation axis: exp (−ie3θ) .

A geometrically distinct use of the cross product occurs in the cross product of a vector

with a pseudovector, for example (p × q) × r, which arises algebraically as the product of

the bivector (19) with the coplanar component r△ of r. As seen above, the result is a vector

in the plane of p and q that is perpendicular to r△ (and hence to r). A common example

of this use of the cross product occurs in the Lorentz force qv × B . These two geometrical

uses of the cross product can be the source of confusion in usual vector treatments, but they

are cleanly distinguished in APS, where vectors and bivectors are distinct elements.

Aside: One can identify 1

2 (pq − qp) as the exterior or wedge product p ∧ q of the vec-

tors p, q. This product is important in treatments with diﬀerential forms and in geometric

algebras of higher dimension. However, its use requires further rules for combining wedge

and dot products with other elements, a complication that can be avoided in APS. (See also

Section V.)

G. Boosts as Spacetime Rotations

The relation of spatial rotations to boosts (10) is strengthened by writing the proper

velocity of the boost in the explicitly unimodular form

u = exp (wˆv) = cosh w + ˆv sinh w,

(20)

where the boost parameter w is called the rapidity of the boost. A comparison with the

deﬁning form (7) establishes that γ = cosh w. The unit vector ˆv = ˆv¯e0 represents the space-

time plane of rotation for the boost, namely the plane containing all real linear combinations

of the direction ˆv of the boost velocity and the time axis e0. It is the product of orthogonal

16

directions in spacetime. We discuss spacetime planes more thoroughly below in Section

IV. The essential diﬀerence between boosts and spatial rotations arises from geometrical

diﬀerences in the planes of rotation. The rotation plane for boosts includes the time axis

e0 and its generator (such as ˆv¯e0) squares to +1. Spatial rotations, on the other hand, are

generated by a bivector that squares to −1. Because of this diﬀerence, the parameter θ for

the spatial rotation is periodic, with a rotation by angle θ + 2nπ for any integer n giving

the same result as one by θ. All possible rotations in the plane are given by a ﬁnite range

of the parameter, say 0 ≤ θ < 2π. However, for boosts, each value of the parameter in the

range −∞ < w < ∞ gives a distinct boost.

H. Electromagnetic Field

An introductory physics class may also need to transform electromagnetic ﬁelds. Under

spatial rotations, the electric and magnetic ﬁelds are transformed exactly like other vec-

tors. However, boosts act diﬀerently on electromagnetic ﬁelds than on spacetime vectors

because the ﬁelds transform as spacetime planes rather than spacetime vectors. As above,

by “planes” we mean two-dimensional geometrical objects that contain all real linear com-

binations of two noncollinear paravectors. The boost transformation for spacetime planes

can be found from that for paravectors, as illustrated in Fig. 5.

The electric and magnetic ﬁelds are given by the real and imaginary parts of a covariant

FIG. 5: Boosts of spacetime planes.

17

electromagnetic ﬁeld F = E+icB (in SI units), a complex vector that represents a spacetime

plane at a point in spacetime. The real part of F is the electric ﬁeld and its imaginary part

is the bivector for a spatial plane whose normal vector is c times the magnetic ﬁeld B. An

electric ﬁeld along e2 sweeps out a spacetime plane containing e2 and e0, and under a boost

along e1, it is rotated in the plane of e1 and e0 and thereby picks up a spatial (horizontal)

component in the e1e2 plane that represents a magnetic in the e3 direction. Similarly, a

magnetic ﬁeld along e3, corresponding to a component of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in the

e1e2 plane, is rotated by the boost and picks up a vertical-plane component corresponding

to an electric ﬁeld along e2. More generally, under a boost to proper velocity u, F can be

shown to transform as

F → uF⊥ + Fk

(21)

where Fk = F · ˆv ˆv = F − F⊥ is the component of F along the boost direction. Note that the
product vE⊥ is a bivector that contributes to the magnetic ﬁeld, whereas ivB⊥ = −iBv△,

where v△ is the component of v in the plane of iB and hence perpendicular to B, is a

vector in the plane of iB and perpendicular to v, and it contributes to the electric ﬁeld. The

signiﬁcance of the spacetime form of the ﬁeld and a derivation of its transformation can be

left for a later treatment (see Section IV).

This completes a major goal of this paper: to show how arbitrary boosts and spatial

rotations can be easily calculated algebraically, without matrices or tensors. Instructors can

readily add the many other examples traditionally presented in ﬁrst courses on relativity,

all without matrices or tensors. The formalism maintains close contact with vectors and

with the geometry of physical space implicit in the vector notation, and by simply adding

time components as scalars to the vectors, it provides an intuitive introduction to relativity

suitable for use early in the physics curriculum.

IV. EXTENSIONS

APS does considerably more than allow relativistic computations with vectors:

it eﬃ-

ciently models the geometry of spacetime, representing objects in relativity covariantly as

paravectors and their products. We saw above how paravectors in APS unite the space and

time components of spacetime vectors. Boosts rotate the paravectors and thereby mix space

and time parts.

18

The material that follows goes beyond what would normally be presented to beginning

students, but bright students and instructors may want a fuller understanding of the alge-

braic formalism as a framework for treating advanced problems in physics. First the APS

treatment of planes is extended to spacetime, and then Lorentz transformations are gener-

alized to rotations in arbitrary spacetime planes. Next spin transformations are introduced,

and a new decomposition for compound rotations is given. Finally I apply transformations

to objects other than spacetime vectors, in particular, to the electromagnetic ﬁeld and study

its spacetime geometry.

A. Planes in Spacetime

The important geometrical concept of two-dimensional planes in which rotations occur is

readily extended to the four dimensions of spacetime. Whereas spatial planes are represented

by bivectors, that is, a product of perpendicular vectors, planes in spacetime are represented

by biparavectors, that is products of two orthogonal paravectors. The plane spanned by

orthogonal paravectors p and q is represented by p¯q or q ¯p. They are written as operators

that rotate paravectors in the plane into an orthogonal direction in the plane, and they diﬀer

by the sense of the rotation. Thus, p¯q, when multiplying q from the left, rotates q into the

direction ±p and p into the direction ±q whereas q ¯p = −p¯q rotates in the opposite direction.

(The actual signs depend on the signs of ¯qq and ¯pp, respectively.)

4
2
(cid:1)

(cid:0)

There are

= 6 linearly independent planes in spacetime, and a suitable orthonormal

basis of biparavectors is {e1¯e0, e2¯e0, e3¯e0, e3¯e2, e1¯e3, e2¯e1} . Each basis biparavector generates

rotations in a spacetime plane. The ﬁrst three generate boosts, the last three generate

spatial rotations. By using e1e2e3 = i = e0¯e1e2¯e3, we can also express the biparavector basis

as {e1, e2, e3, ie1, ie2, ie3} , which comprises three real and three imaginary vectors. We saw

above that imaginary vectors represent spatial planes in terms of their axial vectors. The

real vectors can be thought of here as persistent vectors, ones that persist in time and sweep

out timelike planes (planes that contain the time axis e0 = 1).

An important physical plane in spacetime is the electromagnetic ﬁeld F at some spacetime

point r. If F is expanded in the biparavector basis, the coeﬃcients give the usual tensor

19

components F µν :

F = E + icB =

F µν heµ¯eνiV ,

(22)

3

1
2

Xµ,ν=0

where heµ¯eνiV = 1
2 (eµ¯eν − eν ¯eµ) is the vector-like part of eµ¯eν; it vanishes when µ = ν
but otherwise equals eµ¯eν. The expansion (22) relates the tensor components F µν of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld F to local vector components of E and B. The factor of 1

2 compensates

for the appearance of each basis biparavector twice. We have already noted that B is the

vector dual to spatial planes. The vector E is an example of a vector that persists in time;

it sweeps out the timelike plane E = E¯e0 in time. For any observer, F may have both a

timelike part E and a spatial part icB. We should note that although we have spoken of F

as a single spacetime plane, in four dimensions it is also possible for F to be the sum of two

orthogonal planes, in which every paravector in one is orthogonal to every paravector in the

other. In contrast to spatial planes in three dimensions, where two planes always share a

vector and can be added to give a single spatial plane, orthogonal planes in four dimensions

are dual to each other and cannot be combined into a single real plane. However, since

dual objects in APS are related by the volume element e0¯e1e2¯e3 = i, any sum of orthogonal

planes in APS can be expressed as a complex scalar times a single plane.

B. Rotors and the Group of Lorentz Rotations

The transformations (10) and (18) allow simple calculations of individual boosts and

spatial rotations, but they are not particularly convenient for representing a sequence or

group of such transformations. Instead, the general Lorentz rotation of paravector p can be

written in the form of a spin transformation[11]

p → LpL†,

(23)

where the Lorentz rotor can be written L = ± exp (W/2) . For a simple Lorentz rotation,

that is, a rotation in a single spacetime plane, L = + exp (W/2) , and W is a biparavector

that gives both the plane and the magnitude of the rotation. Compound rotations, that is

simultaneous rotations in orthogonal planes, can be expressed as a commuting product of

two simple rotations. The dagger † indicates reversion, that is the reversal of the order of

all vector factors; it is equivalent to hermitian conjugation for any matrix representation in

20

which the basis vectors are hermitian. It is easily seen that L† = exp

W†/2

and that for

spatial rotations, W is “imaginary”, that is W† = −W, whereas for boosts W is “real”:
W† = W. Since ¯W = −W, L is unimodular: L ¯L = 1.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

We can easily show that the spin transformation (23) reduces to the form (10) and (18)

for any simple Lorentz rotation. Let W be the product r¯s of real orthogonal paravectors.

Then,

W (αr + βs) = (αr + βs) W†,

where W† = (r¯s)† = ¯s†r† = ¯sr. It follows from multiple applications of this relation in the

power-series expansion of L that

L (αr + βs) L† = L2 (αr + βs) .

On the other hand, if q is any paravector orthogonal to both r and s (and hence to the

plane containing r and s), then since q¯s = −s¯q and ¯qr = −¯rq,

It follows that orthogonal paravectors are invariant under rotations in the plane:

qW† = q¯sr = −s¯qr = s¯rq = −Wq .

LqL† = L ¯Lq = q.

Consequently, the simple Lorentz rotation (23) of an arbitrary paravector p can always be

split into two parts that transform distinctly:

p → L

p△ + p⊥

L† = L2p△ + p⊥.

(cid:1)
Our previous expressions (10) and (18) of boosts and spatial rotations are seen as special

(cid:0)

cases of (28). From (28) we can establish an explicit relation for the Lorentz rotor in terms
of non-null paravectors p and q = LpL† = L2p that lie in the plane of rotation. Thus,

L =

1/2

=

pq−1
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

1 + qp−1
2 (1 + hpq−1iS)

.

p
We can readily extend the result (28) for paravector rotations in single planes to com-

pound rotations, in which rotations are made in a pair of dual planes. Because the bipar-

avectors for the dual planes commute, the Lorentz rotor for any compound rotation can be

factored into a pair of simple rotations, one for each of the dual planes: L = L1L2 = L2L1.

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

21

Similarly, any paravector can be uniquely split into components coplanar with the two planes:

p = p△1 + p△2, where p△1 is coplanar with the plane of rotation of L1 and orthogonal to its

dual, that is the plane of rotation of L2, and vice versa for p△2. The compound rotation of

p is then easily split as follows:

LpL† = L1L2

p△1 + p△2

L†

2L†

1 = L2

1p△1 + L2

2p△2.

(30)

(cid:1)
The result (28) for simple Lorentz rotations is the special case of the compound case (30)

(cid:0)

when the exponent of one of the pair of rotors vanishes.

The forms (23) and (28) of the Lorentz rotations are equivalent, and while (28) is often

simpler to evaluate, the spin form (23) leads to powerful spinor methods with the Lorentz

group. An important example is the use of the spin form (23) to extend Lorentz rotations

to products of paravectors. In particular, any product p¯q of paravectors is seen to transform

according to

The scalar part of p¯q is thus invariant under Lorentz transformations, and any biparavector

such as the electromagnetic ﬁeld F transforms as

p¯q →

LpL†
(cid:0)

(cid:1) (cid:0)

(cid:1)

¯L† ¯q ¯L

= Lp¯q ¯L .

F → LF ¯L .

Using methods analogous to those above, for simple rotors L = exp (W/2) in nonnull planes

W, one can put this into a form analogous to the paravector rotation (28):

F → L2

F − FW

+ FW

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

where FW =

FW−1
(cid:10)

S
(cid:11)

forms (18) and (21) for rotations and boosts, respectively.

W is the projection of F onto W and its dual. This reduces to the

C. Example: Boosts and Scaled Rotations

Propagating plane waves are null ﬁelds (F2 = 0), which have the form

where the electric ﬁeld E is perpendicular to the direction ˆk of the energy ﬂow. This form

follows easily from Maxwell’s equations for source-free space applied to a ﬁeld F that is

F =

1 + ˆk

E = E

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

1 − ˆk
(cid:17)
(cid:16)

,

22

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

assumed to depend on spacetime location x only through the scalar s = hk¯xiS, where k is a
constant paravector.[2] It is found that k is null and can thus be written

ω
c (cid:16)
where c is the wave speed, ˆk is the propagation direction. If the wave is monochromatic, ω
is its frequency and the corresponding photon momentum in spacetime is ~k. We show here

1 + ˆk
(cid:17)

(35)

k =

,

that any boost of such a wave is equivalent to a rotation and dilation (rescaling), and that

k and F are rotated and dilated by the same amount.

A boost of F and k gives

F′ = LF ¯L

k′ = LkL†

(36a)

(36b)

with a rotor

L = ewˆv/2 = cosh

+ ˆv sinh

= L†,

w
2

w
2

where w is the rapidity of the boost and ˆv its direction. Now a curious property of null
paravectors such as 1 + ˆk is that they can gobble (or ungobble) factors of ˆk in what has

become known as the pacwoman property:[2]

ˆk

1 + ˆk
(cid:17)

(cid:16)

= 1 + ˆk =

1 + ˆk
(cid:17)
(cid:16)

ˆk .

(37)

Consequently

L

=

cosh

1 + ˆk
(cid:17)
(cid:16)
2 + ˆvˆk sinh w
and the factor cosh w
2 is a scalar plus a bivector, which can always be factored
into eα/2R, the product of a dilation factor eα/2 with a unitary rotor R for a spatial rotation
in the plane of ˆv and ˆk. In the special case that ˆv · ˆk = 0, ˆvˆk is a spatial bivector and we

1 + ˆk
(cid:17)

+ ˆvˆk sinh

(38)

(cid:16)

,

w
2 (cid:17) (cid:16)

w
2

have

where the rotor is

L

1 + ˆk
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

cos

+ ˆvˆk sin

θ
2

θ
2(cid:19) (cid:16)

1 + ˆk
(cid:17)

=

cosh w
2
cos θ
2 (cid:18)
= eα/2R

1 + ˆk
(cid:17)

,

(cid:16)

(39)

(40)

R = eθˆvˆk/2,

23

the dilation factor is

and the rotation angle is given by

eα/2 =

cosh w
2
cos θ
2

,

tan

= tanh

θ
2

w
2

F′ = eαRF ¯R

k′ = eαRkR†.

and thus by cos θ = 1/ cosh w = γ−1 = e−α. Combining these results with their reversion

and Cliﬀord conjugation, we ﬁnd that the boost rotates and dilates both F and k by the

same amount:

(41)

(42)

(43a)

(43b)

V. COMPARISON TO STA

The formulation of relativistic physics used above is based on the algebra of physical

space (APS). The spacetime algebra (STA) is the geometric algebra based on Minkowski

spacetime. It was developed by Hestenes[5], who together with Doran and Lasenby[12] and

others have applied it to a wide variety of problems in physics. In this section, we compare

APS and STA for introductory treatments of relativity.

APS and STA are closely related. Both are geometric algebras that emphasize the geo-

metric signiﬁcance of vector products and avoid matrices and tensor elements. The starting

or ground space in APS is the space of vectors in three-dimensional physical space, whereas

STA is based on four-dimensional vectors in Minkowski spacetime. In APS, spacetime vec-

tors are represented by real paravectors, inhomogeneous elements that are sums of scalars

and vectors, whereas in STA spacetime vectors are the homogeneous vectors of the ground

space. APS starts with vectors in a Euclidean metric and ﬁnds the Minkowski metric as

the natural metric of paravector space.

In STA, the Minkowski metric is assumed from

the outset.

In APS all the basis vectors can be taken as real or hermitian. This is not

possible in STA, where the metric requires either the timelike basis vector to be real and

the spacelike ones to be imaginary or vice versa, depending on the metric signature. It is

usual to assume a negative metric signature in STA; the adoption of a Minkowski spacetime

metric with positive signature would create a nonequivalent algebra. In APS, the signature

24

of the paravector metric is trivially changed by reversing the sign of the quadratic form for

paravectors, that is, what one identiﬁes as their square lengths.

The number of real linearly independent elements in APS is 8, whereas in STA it is 16.

Any element in APS can be expressed as a complex paravector, where the four parts, namely

the real and imaginary scalar parts and the real and imaginary vector parts represent distinct

geometrical entities. APS and STA are related by an isomorphisim between APS and the

even subalgebra of STA. As a result, anything calculated in APS can also be calculated in

STA. Less obvious, it has recently been shown[13] that any measurable physical process that

can be represented in STA can also be treated in APS. Both APS and STA give covariant

descriptions of relativistic phenomena, but in STA the extra size also admits an absolute-

frame model, in which each inertial observer and each ﬁeld or object frame is absolute,

whereas in APS, only the experimentally veriﬁable relative nature of spacetime vectors and

frames is posited. The relation of APS to physical-space vectors is immediate, and diﬀerent

observers in APS see diﬀerent splits of spacetime vectors into scalar and vector parts as

well as diﬀerent splits of the electromagnetic ﬁeld into electric and magnetic parts.

In

STA, spacetime vectors and ﬁelds can be absolute, and the measurable components arise by

multiplying the absolute object frame by the absolute observer time axis and extracting a

space/time split of the resulting bivector.

For introductory treatments, it is especially convenient that the volume element in APS

is the unit imaginary scalar, and that it is the same for both physical space and for space-

time. The volume element I in STA, on the other hand, although it is called a pseudoscalar

and is used to deﬁne dual elements, it actually anticommutes with all vectors and thus acts

rather like a ﬁfth dimension. The wedge product in APS is largely avoided, and indeed its

deﬁnition is problematic for inhomogeneous elements such as paravectors. However, it is

used extensively in STA, where one must pay attention to rules for combining contractions

(dot products) and wedge products and to the fact that the introduction of I into a product

can change one type of product into the other. An extra conjugation, the Cliﬀord conju-

gation, is required in APS but not STA. However, as seen above in Subsection III-B, the

Cliﬀord conjugation provides a simple way to relate lengths and orthogonality in Minkowski

spacetime with measured (Euclidean) lengths and perpendicularity on a spacetime diagram.

Some of the eﬃciency of APS in representing relativistic phenomena arises from the

double role playing of its element types. Thus a real scalar may be a Lorentz invariant or it

25

may be the time component of a spacetime vector, and a real vector may be the spatial part

of a spacetime vector or the real part of a spacetime plane. Such ambiguity of roles may

appear a potential source of confusion, but in fact it is part of our language and common

usage. The context usually makes the role clear. For example, a proper-time interval

(times c) is both a Lorentz-invariant spacetime displacement and the time component of

the displacement in the particle rest frame. Similarly, the mass of a particle (times c) is

both the Lorentz invariant length of its spacetime momentum and the time component of

the momentum in the particle rest frame. In APS, the same element plays both roles, but

in STA, one distinguishes, say, between the Lorentz invariant mc and the time component

of the spacetime momentum, mcγ0 . Similarly, in APS the electric ﬁeld E is both a vector

and, through its persistence in time, a timelike plane E¯e0 in spacetime, whereas in STA, E

and Eγ0 remain distinct.

APS, in contrast to STA, provides a more direct extension of physical space with fewer

new rules and operators. The volume element, through which duality is deﬁned, is the

same for three-dimensional physical space as for four-dimensional paravector space, which

represents spacetime. It is the true pseudoscalar for both spaces in that it commutes with

all elements of the algebra. These distinctions argue for APS as the preferred vehicle for

teaching relativity in introductory physics. STA requires more overhead and may be more

easily approached after students have been exposed to many of the concepts of geometric

algebra, and after they have mastered some of the spacetime geometry from APS.

VI. CONCLUSION

Hestenes[14] has advocated geometric algebra as a universal language of physics. The

proposal made in the present article is a modest step in that direction. The algebra of

physical space, equivalent to the even half of Hestenes’ spacetime algebra,[6] oﬀers a simple

approach to special relativity that is suitable for introduction at an early stage into the

physics curriculum. As its name suggests, APS is based on physical (three-dimensional

Euclidean) space that is familiar to beginning students. However, it also includes a four-

dimensional linear space of paravectors, which are formed by adding scalar time components

to the vectors. The algebra builds on the natural appearance of the Minkowski spacetime

metric in paravector space. Paravectors represent spacetime vectors, and their products

26

represent planes and other geometrical structures in spacetime. Rotations of paravectors

and their products give the physical Lorentz rotations. Only basic elements of the algebra

are needed for the student to easily calculate arbitrary boosts and rotations without recourse

to matrices or tensors. Space and time are united in the spacetime continuum of paravector

space, but the familiar spatial vectors and their physical signiﬁcance are never left far behind.

Other geometric algebras can also be used to formulate relativistic physics, and STA has

been especially well developed for this purpose. However, APS is based more immediately

on the familiar vectors of physical space, and it requires only half as many independent

elements as STA and avoids some of the abstractions and potential hazards such as wedge

products and noncommuting pseudoscalars. Even Hestenes seems to agree that APS is

the best algebra for introducing relativity, since this is what he has used in the second

edition of his mechanics text.[4] A simpler alternative candidate is the algebra of complex

quaternions. It has a long history[15, 16, 17] as a mathematical framework for relativity,

but its broader use in the physics community has remained limited, probably because the

geometric interpretation is rather disguised and it does not lend itself easily to a covariant

formulation.

The APS approach is part of a comprehensive geometric algebra that nicely displays both

spatial and spacetime symmetries and can be applied to all areas of relativistic physics. Much

of the power of Cliﬀord’s geometric algebras can be traced to their intrinsic representation

of planes as bivectors, which can generate rotations. Planes in the paravector space of APS

are represented by biparavectors. They not only generate Lorentz transformations but also

covariantly represent physical entities such as the electromagnetic ﬁeld. Some results of

APS, such as analytic solutions for the relativistic motion of charges in ﬁelds of propagating

plane-wave pulses, are easy to obtain in the algebra[18] but almost impossible to ﬁnd without

use of its spinor and projector tools. In this paper, I have illustrated the algebraic language

with several simple examples, a couple of new insights into understanding and computing the

geometry of spacetime in APS, and by proving that any boost of the electromagnetic ﬁeld

of a propagating plane wave is equivalent to a rotation and a dilation, and that the same

rotation and dilation result for both the ﬁeld and its propagation (and thus momentum)

paravector.

The successful introduction of relativity as an integral part of the ﬁrst-year physics cur-

riculum faces diﬃculties regardless of the approach taken. The concept of an observer-

27

dependent spacetime in place of absolute space and independent universal time may have a

certain intuitive appeal, but since that spacetime has an extra dimension and is no longer

Euclidean, it will challenge and stretch the minds of even the best students. Nevertheless,

that is the physical world as we have known it for almost a century, and it is high time

that we taught it directly to our beginning physics students. This will only be practical if

a suitable mathematical approach is used, and proposing such an approach has been the

primary purpose of this paper. The challenge of relativistic concepts may be too great for

quantitative calculations in service courses to biologists or engineers, say, but it may also

be just the ingredient that excites good students to major in physics. Certainly being able

to recognize and use relativistic symmetries will facilitate studies in areas of physics such as

electromagnetic theory.

Acknowledgment

acknowledged.

Support of the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada is gratefully

[1] T. S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (University of Chicago, Chicago, 1970).

[2] W. E. Baylis, Electrodynamics: A Modern Geometric Approach (Birkh¨auser, Boston, 1999).

[3] W. E. Baylis,

in Lectures on Cliﬀord (Geometric) Algebras and Applications, edited by

R. Ab lamowicz and G. Sobczyk (Birkh¨auser, Boston, 2004), chap. 4.

[4] D. Hestenes, New Foundations for Classical Mechanics (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, The

Netherlands, 1999), 2nd ed.

[5] D. Hestenes, Spacetime Algebra (Gordon and Breach, New York, 1966).

[6] D. Hestenes, Am. J. Phys. 71, 691 (2003).

[7] J. G. Maks, Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universiteit Delft, the Netherlands (1989).

[8] I. R. Porteous, Cliﬀord Algebras and the Classical Groups (Cambridge University, Cambridge,

[9] R. Ab lamowicz and P. Lounesto, eds., Cliﬀord Algebras and Spinor Structures (Kluwer Aca-

1995).

demic, Dordrecht, 1995).

28

[10] W. E. Baylis, ed., Cliﬀord (Geometric) Algebra with Applications to Physics, Mathematics,

and Engineering (Birkh¨auser, Boston, 1996).

[11] P. Lounesto, Cliﬀord Algebras and Spinors (Cambridge University, Cambridge, 2001), 2nd ed.

[12] C. Doran and A. Lasenby, Geometric Algebra for Physicists (Cambridge University, Cam-

bridge, UK, 2003).

[13] W. E. Baylis and G. Sobczyk, arXiv.org/math–ph/ 0405026 (2004).

[14] D. Hestenes, Am. J. Phys. 71, 104 (2003).

[15] A. W. Conway., Phil. Mag. 24, 208 (1912).

[16] L. Silberstein, Phil. Mag. 23, 790 (1912).

[17] L. Silberstein, The Theory of Relativity (MacMillan and Co., London, 1914).

[18] W. E. Baylis and Y. Yao, Phys. Rev. A 60, 785 (1999).

29

