Braving the Challenges of Being Small ∗

–The Unique Physics Program at Manhattanville College

Zhang Chen1, †
1Department of Physics, Manhattanville College, Purchase, NY 10577, USA
(Dated: January 15, 2014)
Abstract
We present the formulation and development of the unique physics program at Manhattanville
College. By addressing challenges faced by small physics departments in liberal arts colleges, such
as the lack of critical mass, lack of signiﬁcant funding, and under-staﬃng, we share our eﬀorts and
experiences in revitalization of the program into one that is small but of rigor and vitality, with
unique features that take advantage of the resources available, including adoption of computer
technology in instructional laboratory, collaborations with nearby institutions, and joint eﬀorts
with colleagues of other departments/schools. Also included are some discussions on the balance
between service and the major, on the relationship with K-12 physics education, and on the rigor
of the curriculum, particularly in view of the opposite but converging trends in US and in China.

PACS numbers: 01.40.-d, 01.50.Lc

4
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
1
8
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ Talk given at the Education Forum of OCPA04, Joint International Conference of Chinese Physicists

Worldwide, Shanghai, PRC.

†Electronic address: chenz@mville.edu

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The outline of the paper is as follows.

In Section II, we give a brief introduction to
Manhattanville College and its background. In Section III we provide a general overview
of the physics program/department at Manhattanville. Section IV contains a more detailed
discussion of several special features of the program that make it unique. Section V presents
some ideas and plans of future growth as well as some more general discussions on the trends
in physics higher education in US and China. We conclude the paper by giving the summary
and outlook in Section VI.

II. BACKGROUND AND CURRENT STATUS OF MANHATTANVILLE

Manhattanville College was founded in 1841, originally as a Catholic all-female college.
In Spring 1971, it became fully co-educational and non-denominational. Currently it is in
essence a residential private liberal arts college.

Manhattanville was initially located in the Manhattanville area of Manhattan, New York
City. It later moved into Purchase, Westchester County, NY, about 25 miles north of NYC,
a very convenient and attractive location.

The College now has 1, 500 full-time undergraduate students, of which about 85% are
residential. The student body represents more than three dozens of states and ﬁfty nations.
The acceptance rate is at about ﬁfty per cent, with average incoming SAT 1100 and GPA
3.0. More information can be found at the college’s web-site at http://www.mville.edu/

Manhattanville College’s mission is to ”educate socially and ethically responsible global
leaders”. Its general education vision is to provide every student a broad-based liberal arts
education, with highly attentive and individualized instructions. As is indicated in New
York State regulations, a student need 120 credits to graduate, and 90 of those credits have
to be from liberal arts courses for a Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree. A student can get a
Bachelor of Science (BS) degree with 60 liberal arts credits (among the total 120)[1].

At Manhattanville, in addition to complying with New York State regulations, we have
a set of requirements to further assure that our students come out with well-rounded skill
sets: A student needs both a major AND a minor to graduate; he/she needs to fulﬁll a
distribution requirement that he/she must take at least 6 credits each in four area out of
the following ﬁve: Science & Mathematics, Social Sciences, Humanities, Arts, and Foreign
Languages; a student must also fulﬁll a Global Awareness requirement to broaden his/her
visions and understandings beyond his/her own original cultural background.

All these requirement are set up in a well-developed framework called the ”Portfolio
System”, in which the students set out to plan his/her college education together with
their advisors from the beginning and have constant checks and adjustments on their plans
through out the course of study. This process starts with the freshmen ”Preceptorial”, a
one-year general liberal arts course in essence being ”introduction to college learning and
life”, and then continues till graduation. This structured and ﬂexible approach greatly helps
the students along their higher education journey.

2

III. PHYSICS PROGRAM AT MANHATTANVILLE: AN OVERVIEW

Manhattanville has had a physics program for a very long time. Before the 70s, it was a
full undergraduate program with a set of courses oﬀered and both major and minor students.
It had a stable faculty size and would graduate several majors each year. The instructional
laboratory was also decently established.

However, since the change of nature of the College in the 70’s, the physics program went
into a continuous declination, till the summer of 1999. At the time, there was only one
course oﬀered each semester (the pre-med algebra-based introductory course), the program
had no major or minor student(s), the department had zero full-time faculty (the one course
was taught by a part time adjunct faculty member), and there had been no new purchase
or update of any laboratory equipment.

Starting fall of 1999, with the hiring of the ﬁrst full-time faculty member in physics
in many years, the physics program at Manhattanville underwent a revitalization process.
We completely redesigned the whole curriculum, purchased and updated the equipment in
the instructional laboratory in a continuous fashion, devoted much eﬀorts in raising the
awareness of the program both on and oﬀ campus, and attempted diﬀerent innovative ways
in making the program more attractive by tapping into its strengths and circumvent its
weaknesses.

As of spring of 2004, the physics program at Manhattanville has become a small but
eﬃcient one, with oﬀerings of three diﬀerent introductory physics courses simultaneously
and a set of intermediate physics courses alternating between semesters and academic years.
With a stable physics minor student body and the emerging major enrollment, advanced
level courses will also soon become a regular part of the course oﬀerings. On the facility side,
we have updated and rebuilt much of the introductory instructional laboratory with newly
purchased instruments. We have also developed a computer-based instructional laboratory
and a summer research internship, both to be covered in more detail later, to provide
the experimental training students need. Currently the program is running smoothly and
successfully at full capacity with one full-time and one part-time adjunct faculty members.
It is posed in a ready position to develop further once the situations in funding and staﬃng
are ready.

IV. SPECIAL FEATURES OF THE PHYSICS PROGRAM

The Physics Program at Manhattanville has many unique features that set it apart from
any other program in the country. First of course is its small size [2], which is both the source
of its strength and uniqueness and the origin of the challenges and diﬃculties it faces. We
tried to develop a program that utilizes any and all the resources that we could draw upon,
and have indeed been successful in achieving a nice balance under the many constraints.

A. The Major Program

The redesigned physics major requires 54 mandatory credits total, which includes a large
16-credit mathematics co-requisite. This means the physics requirement is 38 credits, quite
in line with other liberal arts (including science) majors at the college. It is expected that

3

the requirements could be ﬁnished reasonably by a student in either four or (even) just three
years.

The required course structure is: one year of calculus based introductory physics sequence
(University Physics I & II, 2 × 4 cr); the intermediate physics core consisting of four 2000
level courses (Mechanics, Electromagnetism, Quantum Physics, and Thermodynamics &
Statistical Physics, 4 × 4 cr); two advanced electives chosen from a set of 3000 level special
topic courses (eg, Advanced Mechanics, Quantum Mechanics, Solid State Physics, etc, 2 ×
4 cr); one summer research internship ( 3 cr); and the senior research seminar with a thesis
( 1 × 3 cr or 2 × 1.5 cr). The mathematics courses are Calculus I, II & III, and Ordinary
Diﬀerential Equations (4 × 4 cr). There is also a minor program that requires the one year
introductory sequence, two intermediate physics courses, and a one year calculus sequence
(Calc I & II). Students are encouraged to take more advanced mathematical courses like
Linear Algebra or Complex Variables, some physical or other science courses like General
Chemistry and/or Biology to deepen and/or broaden their scientiﬁc background.

With a program set up like the above, the students, while receiving rigorous training,
also have the freedom to adjust and streamline their course of study to match their own
general study plan (the ”Portfolio”, see II). They can, for example, choose the timing of the
summer internship, even opt to do an extra one; pace themselves a bit by taking just one
intermediate core course a semester while fulﬁlling other college requirements or pursuing
their other interests in liberal arts; or structure their senior research in either an intense
one semester or a thorough two semester fashion. Having both high-standard courses and
diﬀerent structural options, the major/minor program at Manhattanville is one of rigor and
ﬂexibility.

B. The Service Courses

Besides the rigorous calculus based introductory physics sequence, the department also
oﬀers on a regular basis two other one-year introductory physics courses. One is the also
rigorous algebra based ”College Physics” sequence, mainly intended for students in vari-
ous pre-health programs and/or biological sciences.
It in fact has the largest enrollment
of all physics courses at Manhattanville, and is the most important service course of the
department.

The other service course is a conceptual introduction to physics and astronomy intended
for general liberal arts students. Such a course engages students from the broadest spectrum
and focuses on three aspects:

• The methodology of physics: Illustrating the scientiﬁc approach to a vast array of

diﬀerent problems.

• The knowledge body: Going over major developments of mechanics and modern as-
tronomy. Emphasis is on basic ideas and concepts rather than techniques of problem-
solving.

• Relationship to everyday-life: Giving the students an appreciation of how to evaluate
the merit (or lack of merit) in arguments presented in current scientiﬁc controversies,
such as debates about the environment, about energy usage and conservation, about
evolution, etc.

4

The sequence has been a success since its inaugural year in 2000-2001. It is now being oﬀered
each year and is taught by a part-time adjunct faculty.

Indeed, all three introductory sequence at Manhattanville have stable enrollment. We
are pleased to be able to oﬀer them to meet the needs of our diverse student body within
such a small department.

C. The Summer Internship

The summer research internship mentioned above is a unique feature of the physics pro-
gram at Manhattanville. Due to the status of the instructional laboratory, staﬃng and bud-
getary constraints at the college and departmental levels, full ﬂedged intermediate and/or
advanced laboratory courses as part of the curriculum are unpractical at least for the mo-
ment. On the other hand, the convenient location of Manhattanville–close proximities to
New York City and major research institutions therein–brings about many opportunities.

We took advantage of the close ties between our faculty members and those at Physics
Department of Columbia University in NYC and established a collaboration with Columbia.
Our major students will take summer research internship course(s) in the summer(s) after
their sophomore year and/or junior year as supplements to the theoretical courses. The
students will be engaging in actual research activities at the Nevis Research Laboratory of
Columbia University, located in Irvington NY, even closer to Manhattanville, by joining as
interns one of the groups working there.

Such experiences will be extremely beneﬁcial to the development of students in many
ways. They are being put into an active scientiﬁc environment that facilitates interactions
with researchers and peer students. They are also being exposed to modern experimental
instrumentation, techniques and methods. The summer research internship will be an im-
portant and eﬀective method for the students to obtain the necessary laboratory experiences
and training, in lieu of the conventional intermediate and advanced laboratory courses. In
the long run, it will be an unique and integral part of the whole experimental training aspect
of the program.

D. The Computer-based Laboratory

One of the innovative ways in physics education has been the application of computer
technology in course instruction. We have started to develop a computer-based instructional
laboratory component in addition to conventional methods. Students will be engaging in
computer-based data acquisition and analysis and performing computer simulated interme-
diate and advanced experiments otherwise not accessible to them. This is another eﬀective
and innovative method of providing the needed training under our constraints.

Currently we have three laboratory stations set up, each with a PASCO physics (USB)
750 interface bundle and a Dell small-form desktop computer. They are going to be fully
integrated into the curriculum starting fall of 2004, with students performing experiments
using them in rotation. This puts us in a leading position among comparable institutions
on this aspect, and in the long term will be another integral and complementary part of the
physics program.

5

V. OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

The Physics program is currently running at its full capacity eﬃciently. Besides the
continued eﬀorts in trying to increase enrollments of major and non-major students and in
upgrading, updating and expanding the laboratory, we are also looking ahead for opportu-
nities of growth and further development.

One such great opportunity is collaboration with our School of Education. Higher stan-
dards from New York State Department of Education for future teachers (K-12) are be-
ing implemented in schools throughout the state, representing a national trend of raised
awareness of the importance of better teacher education, especially in sciences. The new
standard require disciplinary content equivalent to a undergraduate major, and in particular
for physics, 32 credits (including 8 in mathematics). The School of Education at Manhat-
tanville is very successful with great reputation and track record. We have taken advantage
of this opportunity and developed, in collaboration with the School of Education, both an
undergraduate educational track physics major and an Mater of Arts in Teaching (MAT)
program in physics. These may lead to potential signiﬁcant numbers of students for the
physics program in the upcoming years.

Another mid-long term planning of our program has development of interdisciplinary
programs in mind. The 21st century has seen the emergences and rapid expansions of many
interdisciplinary ﬁelds, as well as the ever-growing signiﬁcance in ﬁelds like biological and
material sciences. We want to tap into the strengths of existing programs at Manhattanville
and develop new and exciting interdisciplinary programs. One such example would be a
program in applied mathematical physics. Manhattanville has excellent programs in both
computer science and mathematics. By collaboration with the Department of Computer
Science and Mathematics, we plan to develop a strong and appealing program that provide
students with knowledge in physics and mathematics, abilities in abstract and quantitative
analysis, and skills in applied mathematics and computer science. Such a combination
will be an attractive option for the students, facing the technology intensive economy and
job market. Other programs being considered including bio-physics, bio-informatics, and
chemical physics.

The biggest challenges facing the Department are two-fold. First, the lack of critical
mass in both the faculty and the students. We are actively engaged in various methods of
recruiting and retaining students, hoping to further increase our student body. At the same
time, the eventual increase of faculty size is also a priority of the department. The second
is lack of signiﬁcant development funding. While we have achieved a lot under current
budget constraints, major growth in facilities and/or faculty size still need major funding.
We expect to receive continued support from the college administration on these eﬀorts, at
the same time of actively seeking external funding as well.

VI. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

The Physics Program at Manhattanville is one of unique features and strengths–the
collaborative summer research internship and the computer-based instructional laboratory
being two, despite its small size. Students in the program will receive rigorous and highly
individualized training in both theoretical and experimental aspects of the discipline.

On a bigger scale, enrollment in physics courses in K-12 education has started to
increase[3]. This is an indication of a national trend in the heightened importance peo-

6

ple starting to assign to sciences and physics in particular. The direct result is the potential
larger enrollment for physics programs and the requirement of more rigorous curricula in
physics. On an even larger scale, globally sciences and physics in particular are, more than
ever, recognized as the underlying driving force of development and advancement in eco-
nomics and technology. The theme is to ﬁnd the best way of educating students in seeking
the balance of knowledge body and methodology. China, for example, is starting to turn
away from its traditional high-intensity, large-depth, narrow-focus approach of physics un-
dergraduate education, and beginning to experiment in a more broad-based, liberal arts
oriented approach. For example, the ”Science Platform” at Fudan University[4], one of the
top comprehensive universities in China, is such an attempt by requiring all science majors
to take biology, physics and chemistry in their ﬁrst year. It is not clear yet what the best
balance is, but this presents opportunities for discussion, research and collaboration within
the physics community, or even the whole science community, at a global scale.

We are conﬁdent that with the increasing awareness of the physics program, the continued
pursuit of excellence and innovation, and the constant seeking of collaboration and cooper-
ation, the program will, riding the favorable trend statewide, nationally and internationally,
expand and grow and have a bright future.

Acknowledgments

The author was partly supported by a research grant from Manhattanville College. The
author would like to thank the hospitality of Prof. Ruibao Tao and the Physics Department
of Fudan University, Shanghai, PRC. The author would also like to thank Laura Wang,
without whose encouragement and support this work would not have been possible.

[1] For details on liberal arts courses and so on, please refer to the relevant regulations of New

York State Education Department.

[2] For example, at both the 2003 and 2004 American Institute of Physics Conferences of Physics
Department Chairs, Manhattanville’s Physics Department was the smallest with only one full-
time faculty member.

[3] Statistics provided by AIP at the 2004 Physics Department Chairs Conference, ”Physics in the

Public Interest”.

[4] F. Lu, R. Su, and R. Tao, private communications.

7

