4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
1
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SOLAR NEUTRINOS

Solar Neutrinos
John N. Bahcall

1

How does the Sun shine? How well do we understand the evolution and ages of
stars? Does the neutrino have a mass? Can a neutrino change its lepton number
in ﬂight? Are there weak interactions beyond those described by the standard
model of particle physics? These are some of the questions that motivate the
study of solar neutrinos.

A neutrino is a weakly interacting particle that travels at essentially the speed
of light and has an intrinsic angular momentum of 1
2 unit (~/2). Neutrinos are
produced on Earth by natural radioactivity, by nuclear reactors, and by high-
energy accelerators. In the Sun, neutrinos are produced by weak interactions
that occur during nuclear fusion. There are three known types of neutrinos,
each associated with a massive lepton that experiences weak, electromagnetic,
and gravitational forces, but not strong interactions. The known leptons are
electrons, muons, and taus (in increasing order of their rest masses).

Neutrino astronomy is diﬃcult for the same reason it is interesting. Because
neutrinos only interact weakly with matter, they can reach us from otherwise
inaccessible regions where photons, the traditional messengers of astronomy, are
trapped. Hence, with neutrinos we can look inside stars and examine directly
energetic physical processes that occur only in stellar interiors. We can study
the interior of the Sun or the core of a collapsing star as it produces a supernova.
Large detectors, typically hundreds or thousands of tons of material, are
required to observe astronomical neutrinos. These detectors must be placed
deep underground to avoid confusing the rare astronomical neutrino events with
the background interactions caused by cosmic rays and their secondary particles,
which are relatively common near the surface of the Earth.

The nearest star, our Sun, supplies the largest known ﬂux of neutrinos at the
Earth’s surface. Every second approximately a hundred billion solar neutrinos
cross every square centimeter on Earth. Quite naturally, the ﬁrst attempt to
detect astronomical neutrinos began with an experiment to observe neutrinos
produced in the deep interior of the Sun.

For two decades, from 1968 to 1988, the only operating solar neutrino exper-
iment (carried out by Raymond Davis Jr. and his colleagues and using 37Cl as
a detector) yielded results in conﬂict with the most accurate theoretical calcu-
lations of how many neutrinos are produced in the Sun. This conﬂict between
theory and observation became known as the ’solar neutrino problem.’

Both the theoretical and the observational results for the chlorine experiment
are expressed in terms of the solar neutrino unit, SNU, which is the product of a
characteristic calculated solar neutrino ﬂux (units: cm−2 s−1) times a theoretical
cross section for neutrino absorption (unit: cm2). A SNU has, therefore, the
units of events per target atom per second and is chosen for convenience equal
to 10−36 s−1.

After two decades of critical examination of both the theory and the experi-
ment, both results were determined robustly. The predicted rate for capturing

2

solar neutrinos in a 37Cl target is (Bahcall and Ulrich, 1988; Bahcall, 1989)

Predicted rate = (7.9 ± 0.9) SNU .

The rate observed by R. Davis, Jr. (1986) and his associates in their chlorine
radiochemical detector is

Observed rate = (2.1 ± 0.3) SNU .

(1)

(2)

Both the theoretical and the experimental uncertainties are quoted as 1σ errors.
The predictions used in Eqs. (1) and (2) are valid for the combined standard
model, that is, the standard model of electroweak theory (of Glashow, Weinberg,
and Salam) and the standard solar model.

Similar results to those shown in Eq. (1) and Eq. (2) were obtained in 1968.
The most recent theoretical result is 8.5 ± 1.8 SNU (Bahcall and Pinsonneault
2004) and the ﬁnal experiment value is 2.6 ± 0.2 SNU (Cleveland, Daily, Davis,
et al. 1998). The robustness of the discrepancy between theory and observation
stimulated the development two generations of increasingly more powerful and
sophisticated detectors designed to ﬁnd the reason why theory and observation
diﬀer.

More is known about the Sun than about any other star and the calculations
of neutrino emission from the solar interior can be done with relatively high
precision. Solar neutrino experiments test in a direct and rigorous way the
theories of nuclear energy generation in stellar interiors and of stellar evolution.
These tests are independent of many of the uncertainties that complicate the
comparison of the theory with observations of stellar surfaces. For example,
convection and turbulence are important near stellar surfaces but unimportant
in the solar interior. Hence, the solar neutrino discrepancy puzzled (and worried)
astronomers who want to use neutrino observations to understand better how
the Sun and other stars shine. Prior to June 2001 (see discussion of SNO
experiment below), the solar neutrino problem seemed to most (but not all)
physicists to indicate that astronomers did not understand the details of the
solar nuclear fusion reactions that produce neutrinos.

Neutrinos from the Sun provide particle beams for probing the weak inter-
actions on distance scales that cannot be achieved with traditional laboratory
experiments. Since neutrinos from the Sun travel astronomical distances before
they reach the Earth, experiments performed with these particle beams are sen-
sitive to weak-interaction phenomena that require long path lengths in order
for slow weak-interaction eﬀects to have time to occur. The eﬀects of tiny neu-
trino masses (≥ 10−6 eV), unmeasurable in the laboratory, can be studied with
solar neutrinos. Moreover, neutrinos traverse an enormous amount of matter,
1011 gm cm−2, as they travel from the center of the Sun to detectors on Earth.
The huge column density of matter that solar neutrinos traverse can give rise to
’matter eﬀects’ on neutrino propagation that have not yet been observed with
terrestrial neutrinos.

The Sun shines by converting protons into α particles. The overall reaction

SOLAR NEUTRINOS

3

Table 1: The pp chain in the Sun. The average number of pp neutrinos produced
per termination in the Sun is 1.85. For all other neutrino sources, the average
number of neutrinos produced per termination is equal to the termination per-
centage/100.

Reaction
p + p →2 H + e+ + νe
or
p + e− + p →2 H + νe
2H + p →3 He + γ
3He +4 He → α + 2p
or
3He +4 He →7 Be + γ
7Be + e− →7 Li + νe

7Li + p → 2α

or

7Be + p →8 B + γ
∗
8B →8 Be
∗ → 2α
8Be

+ e+ + νe

Terminationa

Number

(%)

ν energy
(MeV)

1a

1b (pep)
2
3

4
5

6

7
8
9

0.4

100

100
85

15
15

15

0.02
0.02
0.02

≤0.42

1.44

(90%) 0.86
(10%) 0.38

< 15

or
3He + p →4 He + e+ + νe

10

0.00002

≤ 18.77

a The termination percentage is the fraction of terminations of the pp chain,
4p → α+2e+ +2νe, in which each reaction occurs. The results are averaged over
the model of the current Sun. Since in essentially all terminations at least one
pp neutrino is produced and in a few terminations one pp and one pep neutrino
are created, the total of pp and pep terminations exceeds 100%.

can be represented symbolically by the relation

4p → α + 2e+ + 2νe + 25 MeV .

(3)

Protons are converted to α particles, positrons, and neutrinos, with a release of
about 25 MeV of thermal energy for every four protons burned. Each conversion
of four protons to an α particle is known as a termination of the chain of energy-
generating reactions that accomplishes the nuclear fusion. The thermal energy
that is supplied by nuclear fusion ultimately emerges from the surface of the
Sun as sunlight. About 600 million tons of hydrogen are burned every second to
supply the solar luminosity. Nuclear physicists have worked for half a century
to determine the details of this transformation.

The main nuclear burning reactions in the Sun are shown in Table 1, which
represents the energy-generating pp chain. This table also indicates the relative
frequency with which each reaction occurs in the standard solar model. For

4

Fig. 1: Solar neutrino spectrum. This ﬁgure shows the energy spectrum of neu-
trinos predicted by the standard solar model(Bahcall and Pinsonneault 2004).
The neutrino ﬂuxes from continuum sources (like pp and 8B) are given in the
units of number per cm2 per second per MeV at one astronomical unit. The line
ﬂuxes (pep and 7Be) are given in number per cm2 per sec. The spectra from
the pp chain (Table 1) are drawn with solid lines; the neutrino energy spectra
from reactions with carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen (CNO) isotopes are drawn
with dotted lines.

simplicity, we do not include in Table 1 nuclear reactions that involve isotopes of
carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen (CNO reactions). The CNO reactions contribute
only about 1% of the solar luminosity and relatively small neutrino ﬂuxes (see
Figure 1).

The fundamental reaction in the solar energy-generating process is the proton-
proton (pp) reaction, reaction 1a of Table 1, which produces the great majority
of solar neutrinos. However, these p − p neutrinos have energies below the de-
tection thresholds for the 37Cl detector and all other solar neutrino experiments
carried out so far except radiochemical experiments that use 71Ga as a detector
(see below).

Most of the predicted capture rate in the 37Cl experiment comes from the
rare termination in which 7Be captures a proton to form radioactive 8B (Bahcall
1964, see reaction 7 of Table 1). The 8B decays to unstable 8Be, ultimately
producing two α particles, a positron, and a neutrino. The neutrinos from 8B
decay have a maximum energy of less than 15 MeV. Although the reactions
involving 8B occur only once in every 5000 terminations of the pp chain, the

SOLAR NEUTRINOS

5

Table 2: Calculated Solar Neutrino Fluxes and 1σ Uncertainties

Source

Flux
(1010 cm−2 s−1)

pp
pep
hep
7Be
8B
13N
15O
17F

5.9(1 ± 0.01)
0.014(1 ± 0.02)
8(1 ± 0.2) × 10−7
0.49(1 ± 0.12)
5.8 × 10−4(1 ± 0.23)
0.06(1 ± 0.4)
0.05(1 ± 0.4)
6(1 ± 0.4) × 10−4

predicted event rates for the 37Cl, Kamiokande, Super-Kamiokande, and SNO
experiments are dominated by this rare mode.

The neutrino energy spectrum predicted by the standard solar model is shown
in Figure 1, where contributions from both line and continuum sources are
included.

The solar neutrino ﬂuxes at the Earth’s surface that are calculated from the
most recent standard solar model (Bahcall and Pinsonneault 2004) are shown in
Table 2. The 1σ uncertainties in the calculated neutrino ﬂuxes are also shown
in Table 2.

The beautiful 37Cl experiment of Davis and his collaborators (Davis 1978,
Cleveland et al. 1998) was for two decades the only operating solar neutrino
detector. The reaction that was used for the detection of the neutrinos is

νe +37 Cl → e

−

+37 Ar ,

(4)

which has a threshold energy of 0.8 MeV. The target was a tank containing 105
gallons of C2Cl4 (perchloroethylene, a cleaning ﬂuid), deep in the Homestake
Gold Mine in Lead, South Dakota. The underground location was necessary
in order to avoid background events from cosmic rays. Every few months, for
almost three decades, Davis and his collaborators extracted a small sample of
37Ar, typically of order 15 atoms, out of the total of more than 1030 atoms in the
tank. The 37Ar produced in the tank is separated chemically from the C2Cl4,
puriﬁed, and counted in low-background proportional counters. The typical
background counting rate for the counters corresponds to about one radioactive
decay of an 37Ar nucleus a month! Experiments have been performed to show
that 37Ar produced in the tank is extracted with more than 90% eﬃciency.

The existence of the solar neutrino problem (see Eq. 1 and Eq. 2) sparked an
intense debate about the origin of the problem. More importantly, the problem
stimulated the construction and operation of ﬁve sophisticated new solar neu-
trino observatories. These observatories are: Kamiokande (a water Cherenkov
detector of neutrino-electron scattering in Japan), SAGE and GALLEX (radio-

6

chemical detectors, in Russia and in Italy, that observe neutrino absorption by
71Ga), Super-Kamiokande (a much larger version of the original Kamiokande
water Cherenkov detector), and the SNO detector (which detects neutrinos us-
ing heavy water, 2H2O).

The Kamiokande experiment (Kamiokande Collaboration 1996), located in
the Japanese Alps, detected Cherenkov light emitted by electrons that are scat-
tered in the forward direction by solar neutrinos. The reaction by which the
neutrinos are observed is

ν + e → ν

′

′

+ e

,

(5)

where the primes on the outgoing particle symbols indicate that the momentum
and energy of each particle can be changed by the scattering interactions. With
techniques that have been developed so far, only the higher-energy neutrinos
(> 5 MeV, i. e., 8B and hep neutrinos only) can be observed by neutrino-electron
scattering.

A much larger and more sensitive version of the Kamiokande experiment
, known as Super-Kamiokande (Super-Kamiokande Collaboration 1998, 2001),
ﬁrst published new precision data in 1998. Neutrino–electron scattering exper-
iments furnish information about the incident neutrino energy spectrum (from
measurements of the recoil energies of the scattered electrons), determine the
direction from which the neutrinos arrive, and record the precise time of each
event. Super-Kamiokande detected so many neutrino events (about 15 events
per day, more than 5000 in total) that it inaugurated an era of precision mea-
surements of multiple aspects of solar neutrino interactions.

Two radiochemical solar neutrino experiments using 71Ga were performed,
one by a primarily Western European collaboration [with U.S. and Israeli par-
ticipation (see GALLEX/GNO collaboration 1992,1999, 2000)] (GALLEX) and
the second by a group working in Russia (under conditions of hardship that
sometimes required exceptional ingenuity and even heroism) with US participa-
tion (SAGE, see SAGE Collaboration 1994, 2002. The GALLEX collaboration
used 30 tons of gallium in an aqueous solution; the detector is located in the
Gran Sasso National Laboratory in Italy. The Soviet experiment uses about
60 tons of gallium metal as a detector in a solar neutrino laboratory constructed
underneath a high mountain in the Baksan Valley in the Caucasus Mountains
of the Soviet Union. The amount of detector material used in each of these
experiments is impressive considering that, at the time the experimental tech-
niques were developed, the total world production of gallium was only 10 tons
per year!

The gallium experiments provide unique information about the most common
nuclear reaction fusion reaction in the Sun, the p − p reaction (see reaction 1a of
Table 1). The absorption reaction by which neutrinos are detected with gallium
is

νe +71 Ga → e

−

+71 Ge .

(6)

The germanium atoms are removed chemically from the gallium and the ra-
dioactive decays of 71Ge are measured in small proportional counters. The
threshold for absorption of neutrinos by 71Ga is 0.23 MeV, which is well below

SOLAR NEUTRINOS

7

(7)

(8)

the maximum energy of the p − p neutrinos. The independent GALLEX/GNO
and SAGE experiments yield results that are in good agreement with each other.
At this writing, no other solar neutrino experiment has a demonstrated capa-
bility to detect the low-energy neutrinos from the basic p − p reaction, although
several detectors are being developed that could observe electrons produced by
neutrino-electron scattering or by absorption of p − p neutrinos.

The Sudbury Solar Neutrino Observatory (see SNO Collaboration 2001,2002,
2004) is a powerful 1-kiloton heavy water (D2O) experiment that is located in
an INCO nickel mine near Sudbury, Ontario (Canada). The deuterium (denoted
by D or by 2H) experiment is a collaboration between Canadian, American, and
British scientists. Like the Kamiokande and Super-Kamiokande detectors, the
SNO deuterium detector measures the energy and direction of recoil electrons
by observing their Cherenkov light with photomultipliers. Thus SNO can also
observe neutrino-electron scattering, see Eq. (5).

More importantly, SNO can observe two unique reactions. The ﬁrst reaction

detects only electron type neutrinos and can be written

The second reaction is equally sensitive to neutrinos of all types, νe, νµ and ντ ,
and can be written

νe + D → e

+ p + p .

−

ν + D → ν

+ n + p .

′

The SNO detector can measure the all-neutrino reaction, Eq. (8), (also called
a ‘neutral current’ reaction) in several diﬀerent ways.

Figure 2 compares the rates measured in all seven of the solar neutrino exper-
iments with the rates predicted by the combined standard model: the standard
solar model plus the standard model of electroweak interactions. With the
exception of the neutral-current detection of SNO, all of the measurements dis-
agree with the predictions of the combined standard solar and particle physics
model.

The Kamiokande, Super-Kamiokande, and SNO experiments are sensitive to
8B and hep neutrinos, but the other solar neutrinos that are shown in Figure 1
are below the experimental energy thresholds. The thresholds are set at several
MeV in order to avoid numerous lower-energy background events. Only the
gallium experiments are sensitive to the fundamental p − p neutrinos and only
the gallium and chlorine experiments are sensitive to the neutrinos from 7Be
and from the CNO sources of neutrinos (13N, 15O, and 17F).

Neutrino absorption, exempliﬁed by reactions Eq. (4), Eq. (6), and Eq. (7),
is sensitive only to electron-type neutrinos, νe, whose type (ﬂavor) is unchanged
in transit to the Earth. For neutrino–electron scattering, Eq. (5), the cross
section for νµ or ντ at the energies of interest is about one-seventh the cross
section for νe. Neutrino–electron scattering is primarily sensitive to νe but has a
small sensitivity to νµ and ντ . The SNO experiment includes a detection mode
that is equally sensitive to all three types of neutrinos, Eq. (8). In this neutral-
current mode, deuterium nuclei are disintegrated into their constituent neutrons
and protons without changing the charge of the nucleons. The measurement of

8

Fig. 2: Comparison of measured rates and standard-model predictions for seven
solar neutrino experiments. The unit for the radiochemical experiments (chlo-
rine and gallium) is SNU (10−36 interactions per target atom per sec); the
unit for the water-Cerenkov experiments (Kamiokande, Super-Kamiokande, and
SNO) is the rate predicted by the standard solar model plus standard elec-
troweak theory.

the neutral-current disintegration of deuterium provides a determination of the
total ﬂux of solar neutrinos above the energy threshold, about 2.2 MeV, for the
reaction shown in Eq. (8).

On June 18th, 2001 at about 12 noon EDT the SNO collaboration announced
the ﬁrst scientiﬁc results of their epochal experiment. Combining the SNO
measurements of νe (Eq. 7) from 8B neutrinos produced in the Sun with the
precise Super-Kamiokande measurement of neutrino-electron scattering (Eq. 5),
the SNO collaboration solved the 33 year old solar neutrino problem. About
two-thirds of the 8B νe produced in the Sun are transformed into the more
diﬃcult to detect νµ and ντ on their way from the center of the Sun to detectors
on Earth. Moreover, the total number of neutrinos of all types (νe, νµ and ντ )
is equal, within the uncertainties, to the value predicted by the standard solar
model.

The fact that most of the neutrinos that come to us from the Sun are trans-
formed in ﬂight from νe to νµ and ντ explains why the radiochemical experi-

SOLAR NEUTRINOS

9

ments, chlorine and gallium see less than the predicted total number of neutri-
nos. The radiochemical experiments only detect νe. The metamorphosis from
νe to νµ and ντ also explains why the neutrino-electron scattering experiments,
Kamiokande and Super-Kamiokande, see a deﬁcit of neutrinos. The neutrino-
electron scattering experiments are primarily, but not entirely, sensitive to νe.
The SNO and Super-Kamiokande measurements together established two
extraordinarily important conclusions. 1) Physics not included in the standard
model of particle physics occurs. Neutrinos change their type. 2) The neu-
trino measurements conﬁrm the theoretical model of how the Sun shines. The
measured ﬂux of neutrinos from 8B beta-decay, which depends approximately
on the 25th power of the central temperature of the Sun, is in good agreement
with the theoretical calculations.

In short, the solar neutrino experiments showed that the standard model of

particle physics is incomplete and the standard solar model is vindicated.

Subsequent measurements by the SNO and other solar neutrino experimental
collaborations have conﬁrmed and reﬁned the original inferences announced in
June, 2001.

Let’s step back in time for a moment to establish the theoretical particle
physics context. The physics community was electriﬁed in 1985 when an ele-
gant theoretical solution for the solar neutrino problem was proposed that is
consistent with expectations from Grand Uniﬁed Theories (GUT) of neutrino
mass. According to this solution, a νe created in the solar interior is almost com-
pletely converted into νµ or ντ as the neutrino passes through the Sun. This
conversion reﬂects the enhancement by the matter in the Sun of the probability
that a neutrino of an electron type oscillates into a neutrino of a diﬀerent type;
it is universally referred to as the Mikheyev–Smirnov–Wolfenstein (MSW) eﬀect
in honor of its discoverers.

In order for the MSW eﬀect to occur, the ﬂavor eigenstates νe, νµ and ντ
must be diﬀerent from the mass eigenstates. The ﬂavor eigenstates are created
in weak decays and have weak interactions with their associated charged leptons
(electron, muon, and tau) that can be written in a simple (diagonal) form. The
mass eigenstates, which have diagonal mass matrices, are the states in which
neutrinos propagate in a vacuum. The mass eigenstates are often denoted by ν1,
ν2, and ν3. For a simpliﬁed description in terms of two eigenstates, the relation
between ﬂavor and mass eigenstates in vacuum is described by a single mixing
angle θ12, where tan θ12 is the relative amplitude of ν2 and ν1 in the νe wave
function (νe = cos θ12ν1 + sin θ12ν2). The diﬀerence in the squares of the masses
of the two neutrinos is denoted by ∆m2

21 = m2

2 − m2
1.

All of the available data on solar, atmospheric, and reactor neutrino masses
are consistent with an MSW description of neutrino propagation. A recent de-
termination of neutrino parameters using all the available data yields (Bahcall,
Gonzalez-Garcia, and Pe˜na-Garay 2004):

∆m2

21 = 8.2+0.3

−0.3 × 10

−5 eV2,

(9)

10

and

(10)

(11)

(12)

tan2 θ12 = 0.39+0.05
−0.04 .

The same solution analyzing all of the data yields the values given below for
the total ﬂux of pp neutrinos, φ(pp), and the total ﬂux of 8B neutrinos, φ(8B),
both expressed in terms of the values predicted by the standard solar model.

φ(pp) = 1.01 ± 0.02(experimental) ± 0.01(theory) ,

φ(8B = 0.87 ± 0.04(experimental) ± 0.23(theory) .

The uncertainties indicated in Eq. (9)-Eq. (12) are ±1σ uncertainties.

Bibliography
J. N. Bahcall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 12, 300 (1964). Showed that chlorine detec-
tion rate was expected to be dominated by rare 8B neutrinos and provided
theoretical motivation for the chlorine experiment.

J. N. Bahcall and M. H. Pinsonneault, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 121301 (2004).

Solar model used for theoretical predictions in the current article.

J. N. Bahcall and R. K. Ulrich, Rev. Mod. Phys. 60, 297 (1988). State-of-
the-art calculations of solar models, neutrino ﬂuxes, and helioseismological
frequencies in 1988. Solar model used for theoretical predictions in the article
’Neutrinos, Astronomy’ by J. N. Bahcall in the second edition (1989) of the
Encyclopedia of Physics. Very similar to current-day solar models. (A)
B. T. Cleveland, T. Daily, R. Davis, Jr. et al. Astrophysical Journal 496, 505
(1998). An awesome and comprehensive account of a monumental experi-
ment, the chlorine solar neutrino experiment. (A)

J. P. Cox and R. T. Guili, Principles of Stellar Structure. Extended second
edition by A. Weiss, W. Hillebrandt, H. -C. Thomas, and H. Ritter. Cam-
bridge Scientiﬁc Publishers, Cambridge, UK 2004. Comprehensive summary
of the theory, updated from the classic 1968 edition by four of the leading
researchers of the subject. (A)

R. Davis, Jr., et al., in Solar Neutrinos and Neutrino Astronomy, M. L. Cherry,
W. A. Fowler, and K. Lande, eds., Vol. 1, p. 1. American Institute of Physics,
New York, 1978. The classic description of the experiment by the master.
(A)

A. S. Eddington, The Internal Constitution of the Stars. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1926. A beautifully written summary of the early theory
of stellar evolution. Chapter 8 contains a fascinating account of the ﬁrst
gropings toward understanding of the source of stellar energy generation.
(E)

Gallex/GNO Collaboration, P. Anselmann et al., Phys.

Lett. B285, 376
(1992); W. Hampel et al. Phys. Lett. B447, 127 (1999); M. Altmann et
al. Phys. Lett. B490, 16 (2000)Fundamental radiochemical measurement
that includes contribution of the pp solar neutrinos.
Kamiokande Collaboration, Y. Fukuda et al.Phys. Rev.

77, 1683
1996. The second solar neutrino experiment, which conﬁrmed the existence

Lett.

SOLAR NEUTRINOS

11

of the ’solar neutrino problem’, pioneered water Cherenkov detection of solar
neutrinos, and ﬁrst measured the direction and energy of individual solar
neutrino events. (A)

S. P. Mikheyev and A. Yu. Smirnov, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 42, 913 (1986). Nuovo
Cimento 9C, 17 (1986); Sov. Phys. JETP 64, 4 (1986); in Proceedings of 12th
Intl. Conf. on Neutrino Physics and Astrophysics, T. Kitagaki and H. Yuta,
eds., p. 177. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1986. Epochal papers, exciting to
read. Mikheyev and Smirnov obtained by numerical integration the princi-
pal results for matter oscillations in the Sun and presented them succinctly,
together with a clear physical explanation. (A)

B. Pontecorvo, Sov. JETP 26, 984 (1968); V. Gribov and B. Pontecorvo, Phys.
Lett. B28, 493 (1969). The original papers suggesting that neutrino ﬂavor
oscillations explain the solar neutrino problem. Founded a subject. Revolu-
tionary ideas presented with clarity and brevity. (A)

SAGE Collaboration, J. N. Abdurashitov et al. Phys Lett B 328, 234 (1994);
J. N. Abdurashitov et al. J. Exp. Theor. Phys 95, 181 (2002). Funda-
mental radiochemical measurement that includes contribution of the pp solar
neutrinos. (A)

M. Schwarzschild, Structure and Evolution of the Stars. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, 1958. Classical description of the theory of stellar
evolution with emphasis on physical understanding. The clearest book ever
written on the subject. (I)

SNO Collaboration, Q. R. Ahmad et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 071301 (2001);
ibid 89, 011301 (2002); ibid 92, 181301 (2004). The historic articles by
the SNO collaboration, which convinced skeptical physicists that neutrinos
change their ﬂavor on the way to the Earth from the center of the Sun.
Super-Kamiokande Collaboration, Y. Fukuda et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81,
1158 (1998); Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 5651 (2001) The epochal experiment
that inaugurated the era of precision measurements in solar neutrino research,
detecting more than 5,000 solar neutrino events per year. (A)

L. Wolfenstein, Phys. Rev. D, 17, 2369 (1978); Phys. Rev. D 20, 2634 (1979).
Presented the fundamental equations for neutrino propagation in matter, the
basis for the MSW eﬀect. It took seven years for the physics community to
recognize the signiﬁcance of Wolfenstein’s brilliant insight. (A)

