4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
1
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Introductory physics: The new scholasticism1
David W. Hogg (NYU) and Sanjoy Mahajan (Cambridge)
17 December 2004

Abstract. Most introductory physics textbooks neglect air resistance in situations where an astute
student can observe that it dominates the dynamics. We give examples from many books. Using
dimensional analysis we discuss the signiﬁcance of air resistance. Our discussion can be used to
mitigate the baleful inﬂuence of these textbooks. Incorrectly neglecting air resistance is just one
of their many unphysical teachings. Shouldn’t we require at a minimum that our textbooks be
physically correct?

You teach introductory physics, say Newtonian mechanics. You want students to use their everyday
experience to develop their physical intuition. On occasion you get a student who does see her or
his experiences as a physics laboratory. She avidly observes sporting events, street life, and kitchen
appliances for insight into how macroscopic objects behave. Then she encounters problem 4–34
from Halliday, Resnick & Walker: to analyze a golf drive ignoring air resistance; i.e., with the ball
traveling on a parabolic trajectory.2 The observant student knows—from exploring the world—
that golf drives rise quickly and almost straight and drop parabolically only near the end. This
student learns that the world described by her physics textbook is not the real world and that
careful observation is irrelevant to physics.

Contrast this experience with that of a student who parrots equations and regurgitates text-
book paragraphs. This student is untroubled by the golf problem or its variants given in foot-

1. Copyright 2004 David W. Hogg hdavid.hogg@nyu.edui and Sanjoy Mahajan hsanjoy@mrao.cam.ac.uki.
You have a perpetual, worldwide, irrevocable, royalty-free license to copy or republish this document in
any medium and for any purpose, so long as it and this copyright notice remain unchanged.

2. D. Halliday, R. Resnick & J. Walker, Fundamentals of Physics, 7th ed. (Wiley, 2004, 5.7 lbs, US list
price $137.95), problem 4–34, but see also their problems 4–26 (tennis), 4–28 (soccer), 4–31 (bullet), and
4–37 (baseball) and similar problems in R. Resnick, D. Halliday & K. S. Krane, Physics, 5th ed. volume
1 (Wiley, 2001, 3.4 lbs, $87.95). In this latter book, the authors describe the drag force on a basketball
as proportional to v rather than v2
! But we do not single out Halliday et al. R. D. H. Warburton and
J. Wang (Analysis of asymptotic projectile motion with air resistance using the Lambert W function,
American Journal of Physics 72:1404–7, November 2004) analyze the large-velocity limit saying:
‘For
simplicity, we will assume linear air resistance. . . ’ !

For more examples of ignoring air resistance in observably incorrect situations, consider K. Cum-
mings, P. W. Laws, E. F. Redish & P. J. Cooney, Understanding Physics (Wiley, 2004, 6.4 lbs, $133.95)
problems 5–1 (bullet), 5–8 (golf), 5–15 (football), 5–18 (soccer), and 5–23 (baseball); this book does
include a discussion of air resistance but not in relation to the relevant problems; P. M. Fishbane,
S. G. Gasiorowicz & S. T. Thornton, Physics for Scientists and Engineers, 3rd ed. (Prentice Hall, 2004,
$144.00), problems 3–44 (football) and 3–71 (golf); D. C. Giancoli, Physics for Scientists & Engineers,
3rd ed. (Prentice Hall, 2000, 5.0 lbs, $139.00), problems 3–22 (skiing), 3–31 (football), 3–82 (baseball)
and similar problems in the same author’s Physics: Principles and Applications, 6th ed. (Prentice Hall,
2004, $119.20); R. D. Knight, Physics for Scientists and Engineers (Addison–Wesley, 2003, $141.20)
problems 6–29 (tennis), and 6–38 (football); R. A. Serway & J. W. Jewett Jr., Principles of Physics, 3rd
ed. (Brooks/Cole, 2003, $148.95), problems 3–15 (football) and 3–45 (baseball); P. A. Tipler, Physics
for Scientists and Engineers, 4th ed., volume 1 (Freeman, 1998, 3.6 lbs, $80.95), problems 3–85 (bullet)
and 3–88 (baseball); J. S. Walker, Physics, 2nd ed. (Prentice Hall, 2003, 5.7 lbs, $136.00), problems
4–26 (soccer), 4–31 (golf), 4–33 (football), 4–42 (golf), 4–46 (soccer), and 4–48 (golf); or H. D. Young
& R. A. Freedman, University Physics, 11th ed. (Addison Wesley, 2003, 7.4 lbs, $152.00), problems 3.15
(football), 3.17 (ﬂare gun), 3.19 (baseball), and 3.85 (soccer).

1

note Note 2 because he knows the easily memorized ‘fact’ that all trajectories are parabolae. The
parrot student correctly answers this problem and conﬁrms his worldview: Physics is a set of
disembodied mathematical facts to be memorized. Observant student: 0; parrot student: 1.

Our objection is not only to the treatment of air resistance. Most textbooks leave other
assumptions unjustiﬁed and unexamined: massless, inextensible strings, frictionless pulleys, the
use of point particles, and many more. Air resistance is merely a simple and glaring example,
which we now discuss in detail.

You are a physicist. You begin any problem by asking not what equation to apply but what
physics is relevant and what approximations to use. Studying the ﬂight of a golf ball, you might,
as a start, neglect air resistance and then argue from dimensions that the velocity of a golf ball hit
a distance L (say, 250 m) is roughly

v ∼ pgL ∼ p10 m s−2 × 250 m ∼ 50 m s

−1.

You check this assumption by comparing the force of gravity (the weight), about 0.5 N, to the

drag f (the force from air resistance). By dimensional analysis again,

f ∼ ρAv2,

where ρ is the density of air (∼ 1 kg m−3) and A is the cross-sectional area of the golf ball (∼
10−3 m2). The drag is due to the power fed into the turbulent eddies that eventually become
small eddies gobbled by viscosity. The analysis of the turbulence is diﬃcult, if not impossible, but
dimensional analysis gives the correct form of the drag force.

With this result,

f ∼ 1 kg m

−3 × 10

−3

2 × (50 m s

m

−1

2 ∼ 2.5 N.
)

By this estimate, the drag is 5 times the weight! So you reject the original assumption of no drag
and numerically integrate to approximate the trajectory (easy with spreadsheets used by students
in other contexts). An early conclusion of your approach—the physical approach—is that the golf
ball must be hit much faster than 50 m s−1, the speed it would have to be hit if there were no drag,
so the drag would be still larger than the estimate above.

You also know about the physical insight we get from dimensionless ratios. The interesting

ratio here is drag to weight. Symbolically:

If d is the diameter of the golf ball, then its cross-sectional area is A ∼ d2 and its mass is m ∼ ρballd3.
Furthermore the v2 in the drag force is roughly gL from the earlier estimate. So, after cancelling
the factors of g,

Since d2L is roughly the volume of air swept out by the golf ball, the numerator is the mass of
air swept out by the golf ball. The denominator is mass of the golf ball. So air resistance matters
when the golf ball sweeps out a mass comparable to itself.

Doing one more cancellation,

drag
weight

∼ ρairAv2
mg

.

drag
weight

∼ ρaird2L
ρballd3 .

drag
weight

∼ ρair
ρball

× L
d

.

2

In the case under discussion, the ﬁrst factor is ∼ 10−3 because golf balls roughly ﬂoat on water
so ρball ∼ 103 kg m−3. With d ∼ 4 cm, the second factor is roughly L
d ∼ 6000. Their product is
roughly 6, which echoes the ratio of 5 between drag and weight calculated earlier.

This argument—a quantitative argument about the relative importance of gravity and air
resistance—uses neither advanced mathematics nor abstruse concepts. Yet it is sophisticated and
leads to a general insight about the ratio of displaced masses. It is sophisticated because it uses
the physicist’s special tools: estimation and dimensional analysis. This kind of argument appears
in no introductory text. Why not? Not because the arguments are beyond the students, for they
apply simple principles to familiar objects. And not because similar arguments have been tried and
failed, for they have never been tried.

Of the textbooks in Note 2 that come in a single volume, the average price is nearly $140 and
the average weight is 6 pounds. We should not teach from, take problems from, or ask students
to buy obese and expensive books ﬁlled with bogus physical analyses of easily observed phenom-
ena. If you agree with this principle, then you will not voluntarily assign or use the textbooks in
Note 2, nor others that incorrectly analyze golf shots, baseball hits, tennis serves, downhill skiing,
or any phenomena where air resistance is important. The simple principle that textbooks should be
physically correct rules out most books on the market.

One book treats air resistance correctly: Matter & Interactions I: Modern Mechanics.3
In
problem 5.3 (pp. 187–188), students numerically integrate the trajectory of a baseball with and
without air resistance. The authors point out that ‘the eﬀect is surprisingly large–about a factor
of 2!’ The problem even compares the eﬀect of air resistance at high altitude (Denver) with its
eﬀect at sea level. This book and the companion volume on electricity and magnetism are highly
recommended to teachers who want to put the physics back into introductory physics.

We live and teach in the desert of the real. Sometimes we must assign one of the books
in Note 2. We should mitigate their harm with quantitative checks on the approximations and
assumptions and, sometimes, with an explicit class discussion about why certain problems cannot
be trusted.

There is great value in explaining and analyzing trajectories neglecting air resistance, such
as the trajectory of a baseball or golf ball when tossed gently from hand to hand or of a solid,
dense metal ball falling a few meters. The golf drive can be analyzed neglecting air resistance so
long as the problem’s unreality is emphasized and physically reasonable approaches follow. Our
recommendation here need not make introductory physics more diﬃcult. We just want it to become
more physical.

If a student can tell you that an object with constant acceleration moves on a parabolic
trajectory, then the student has learnt a mathematical fact. If a student can tell you when and why
constant acceleration usefully approximates a real system, then the student has learnt physics and
understands important patterns in our Universe. Physics is about the world, not just mathematical
relationships. By that standard, introductory ‘physics’ has become as remote from students’ reality
as have questions about the sizes of angels.

We thank Mike Blanton, David Goodstein, Bruce Sherwood, and Aimee Terosky for helpful

comments and discussion.

3. Ruth Chabay and Bruce Sherwood, (John Wiley, 2002), pp. 180–188. The book has a companion website

at hhttp://www4.ncsu.edu/˜rwchabay/mi/i.

3

