Surveying the solar system by measuring angles and times: from

the solar density to the gravitational constant

Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, Caixa Postal 369, S˜ao Carlos,

Klaus Capelle

13560-970 SP, Brazil

(January 14, 2014)

Abstract

A surprisingly large amount of information on our solar system can be gained

from simple measurements of the apparent angular diameters of the sun and

the moon. This information includes the average density of the sun, the dis-

tance between earth and moon, the radius of the moon, and the gravitational

constant. In this note it is described how these and other quantities can be

obtained by simple earthbound measurements of angles and times only, with-

out using any explicit information on distances between celestial bodies. The

pedagogical and historical aspects of these results are also discussed brieﬂy.

4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
1
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I. INTRODUCTION

All standard textbooks of astronomy and classical mechanics show how the great insights

of Kepler and Newton can be used to determine the geometry of our solar system and the

physical properties of its constituent bodies (Refs. 1–3 are representative examples). Such

calculations are normally based on simple relations between masses and distances, which

follow directly from Newton’s or Kepler’s laws. The purpose of the present note is to discuss

a little noticed similar relation that allows us to determine the densities and other properties

of celestial bodies, as well as the gravitational constant, from entirely earthbound and very

simple observations of angles and times.

Section II of this paper shows how the average solar density can be obtained from knowing

nothing more than the apparent angle under which the sun appears as seen from the earth

and the duration of a year. Section III applies the same idea to the moon. Although

the details are slightly more complicated in this case, it still proves possible to calculate

the moon’s average distance from the earth, and its radius, by measuring the density of

the earth. Section IV shows how the relations derived can also be used to calculate the

gravitational constant (which was not known to Newton) by using only data available at

Newton’s time.

Although, of course, nothing new is added to current research in astronomy by these

considerations, is seems that the resulting curious relations are well suited to stimulate a

student’s interest in the subject. They might also be interesting from the point of view of the

history of science, because they show how Newton could, e.g., have obtained the gravitational

constant long before the celebrated Cavendish experiment.4 Another aspect of the relations

discussed here is that they serve as vivid illustrations of how indirect measurements, together

with the assumed universal validity of the laws of physics, allow us to obtain information

on quantities that are completely inaccessible for direct measurements. These pedagogical

and historical issues are taken up again in the ﬁnal Section V of this little note.

2

II. PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF THE SUN

In order to derive an expression for the average density of the sun, ρs, we start by writing

this density as the ratio of total mass to total volume,

where the sun is assumed to be a perfect sphere of radius Rs. The mass can be eliminated

from this equation by equating the centripetal force the earth experiences on its (approxi-

mately circular) orbit with the gravitational attraction of the sun, which is assumed to be

so much heavier than the earth that the center of mass of the system earth-sun coincides

with that of the sun alone. Hence,

where m is the earth’s mass, G the gravitational constant, and r the distance from earth

to sun. Expressing the angular velocity of the earth, ω, in terms of its rotation period,

T = 2π/ω, and solving Eq. (2) for M, one readily ﬁnds

which is essentially Kepler’s third law.

As seen from Fig. 1 the distance r between earth and sun is related to the angle under

which the sun appears from the center of the earth by

where 2β is the apparent angular diameter of the sun. Since the radius of the earth is much

smaller than the distance r between earth and sun, this equation still holds approximately

when β is measured from the surface of the earth, and not its center. (In technical terms

this means that surface parallax can be neglected.) Since the solar radius Rs is also much

smaller than r, β is a very small angle and we could replace sin(β) by β with negligible

ρs =

=

M
V

3M
4πR3
s

,

−mω2r = −G

mM
r2 ,

M =

4π2r3
GT 2 ,

sin(β) =

Rs
r

,

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

error, but for generality and future applicability to other systems we keep the trigonometric

functions here and below.

any distances,

Substituting Eq. (4) into Eq. (3) and the result into Eq. (1) one ﬁnds that the solar

radius Rs cancels, and what remains is an expression for ρs that does not explicitly involve

ρs =

3π
GT 2 sin3(β)

.

(5)

To the best of the author’s knowledge Eq. (5) does not appear explicitly in any of the

standard English-language textbooks (although, as the author learned after completing this

work, its derivation is asigned as a problem in Ref. 5). The remainder of this note is dedicated

to exploration of a few interesting consequences of this result.

A remarkable feature of Eq. (5) is that all quantities refering explicitly to diameters and

distances have disappeared. The remaining quantities, T and β, are accessible via purely

earthbound and very simple measurements. T is simply the duration of a year, and 2β, the

angle subtended by the sun as seen from the earth, is found to be about half a degree. This

value varies slightly during a year because the earth’s orbit is not exactly circular, but this

variation is neglected below, where β = 0.25o is adopted for convenience. (Suggestions how

to measure β using simple equipment are made in Sec. V, below). The gravitational constant

G = 6.7 × 10−11 m3s−2kg−1 must be known to evaluate Eq. (5). This does not impede its use

in the classroom, but would have had interesting consequences if Newton had known that

equation. Some of these consequences are explored in the following sections. Plugging the

above numbers in Eq. (5) one obtains

ρs = 1.7 × 103 kg m−3 = 1.7 g cm−3,

(6)

where the second equation expresses the result in units more common in astronomy.

The curious little formula (5) never fails to surprise students and even more mature

scientists. The surprise is not really that the value found in Eq. (6) agrees rather well with

the literature value6 ρs = 1.4 g cm−3 (the main source of error doubtlessly being the imprecise

4

measurement of the angular diameter of the sun7), but that it has been obtained without

measuring any distances.

It thus provides us with a rather diﬀerent type of information

about our solar system than do the classical measurements of distances and diameters,

which usually treat celestial objects as point masses without internal properties. While

these determine the scale of the solar system, knowledge of the density allows us to draw

conclusions concerning the internal composition of its constituents.

If one, in an admittedly arbitrary way, takes solid iron as representative of the earth’s

metals (ρFe = 7.87 g cm−3),6 silicon dioxide as representative for rocks and sand (ρSiO2 =

2.65 g cm−3),6 and both of these as representative for the composition of the earth as a whole,

it immediately follows that the sun is not composed primarily of these solid materials, and

thus of a diﬀerent physical nature than the earth. Furthermore, by comparing with the

densities of other solids, liquids, and gases one concludes that the sun is, due to its low

average density, most likely not solid at all.8

Newton himself, by using a related but much more complicated method, based on obser-

vations of the orbit of the planets around the sun and of the moon around the earth, arrived

at a very similar conclusion. In the Principia he writes: The sun, therefore, is a little denser

than Jupiter, and Jupiter than Saturn, and the earth four times denser than the sun; for

the sun, by its great heat, is kept in a sort of rareﬁed state.9 A little later he provides his

estimate of the density of the earth: Since, therefore, the common matter of our earth on

the surface thereof is about twice as heavy as water, and a little lower, in mines, is found

about three, or four, or even ﬁve times heavier, it is probable that the quantity of the whole

matter of the earth may be ﬁve or six times greater than if it consisted all of water; ....10

This estimate of the density of the earth, ﬁve or six times that of water, is remarkably

close to the modern value6 of 5.5 g cm−3. Together with the factor of four by which, according

to him, the earth is denser than the sun, one ﬁnds that the solar density is inbetween about

1.3 g cm−3 and 1.5 g cm−3, which is even closer to the modern value than that found from

Eq. (5) (but obtained with considerably more labour).

5

III. DISTANCE AND RADIUS OF THE MOON

It is tempting to apply Eq. (5) to the moon as well. After all, the moon’s apparent

angular diameter is almost exactly the same as that of the sun (as evidenced by solar

eclipses or direct measurement), and its orbital period is also well known. One could thus

determine the average density of ... of what? Of the earth or the moon? The answer is

that this tentative procedure does not directly determine the average density of either of

these bodies. We can again use Fig. 1, which we already used in our determination of the

solar density, to understand why. Quite generally, this ﬁgure depicts angles and distances

characterizing the geometry of the revolution of a lighter body orbiting around a heavier

one. However, when we are dealing with the system earth-moon instead of sun-earth, our

point of view has shifted from the orbiting to the central body. This means that Eq. (4) is

not directly applicable here: the mass M in Eq. (1) is that of the central body, so that the

angular diameter and the density in Eq. (4) are that of the central body as seen from the

accompanying body.

This is not the end of the story, though. Eq. (5) determines the average density of the

central body, i.e., in the case of the system earth-moon that of the earth. This density is

reasonably well approximated by that of the typical materials mentioned above, and can be

obtained without requiring any input from celestial mechanics. This enables us to turn the

argument around and obtain information on the moon from Eq. (5), by treating the earth’s

density as a known quantity. Let us denote the apparent angle of the moon as seen from the

earth by 2αm and that of the earth as seen from the moon by 2βe. This latter angle seems

hard to obtain in preastronautical times, but from Fig. 1, reinterpreted now as depicting

the system earth-moon, it follows that

sin(βe) =

sin(αm),

Re
Rm

(7)

where Re and Rm denote the radii of earth and moon, respectively. This relation allows us

to eliminate the unknown angle βe from the equations. Eq. (5), rewritten for the system

earth-moon, reads

6

where Tm is the duration of the orbital period of the moon (about 27 days), and ρe the

average density of the earth. From this expression we obtain with the help of Eq. (7) that

ρe =

3π
m sin3(βe)

,

GT 2

ρe =

3π
GT 2
m

R3
m
R3
e

1
sin3(αm)

.

(8)

(9)

Assuming again that the average density of the earth is close to the average of that of the

typical materials iron and silicon dioxide, given above, and treating the radius of the earth

as a known quantity (which it certainly was at Newton’s times), we can calculate the radius

of the moon from this equation. Putting in the numbers yields

Rm =

1/3

GT 2

mρe
3π !

 

Re sin(αm) ≈ 1600 km,

(10)

which is to be compared with the literature value3 of 1738 km. The diﬀerence between both

values has several sources. First, there is the rather arbitrary choice of using the average

density of iron and silicon dioxide to represent that of the earth. Second, the angular

diameter of the moon is only imprecisely known, and also changes slightly during the course

of a month. Third, the parallax resulting from the fact that the observer is on the surface of

the earth and not at its center, has been neglected. Finally, the derivation of Eq. (5) is only

correct for circular orbits around a stationary central body, an assumption which is less well

satisﬁed for the motion of the moon around the earth than for that of the earth around the

sun. It can be instructive to discuss with students which of these is the dominant source of

error. Discussions of how to improve on some of these aspects of the above procedure can

make for rewarding science projects of high-school level students, or be used as homework

problems for more advanced ones.

Since the ratios between many distances in the solar system were already known to

Newton and his contemporaries, the determination of a single absolute value, like Rm, enables

one to calculate the other distances explicitly. As an example, we can now work backwards

from the counterpart to Eq. (4) for the system earth-moon,

7

sin(αm) = Rm/re−m,

(11)

where re−m stands for the distance earth-moon, and ﬁnd re−m ≈ 3.7×105 km. The literature

value6 for the average distance is 3.8 × 105 km. Students may ﬁnd it rewarding to reﬂect

about how it was possible to come this close to today’s value for the distance of the moon

by measuring the density of the earth, and what margin of error the various approximations

made imply for the ﬁnal value.

IV. THE GRAVITATIONAL CONSTANT

Newton himself did not know the numerical value of the gravitational constant. Following

the style of reasoning common in his days he expressed his results in terms of ratios between

masses, distances and densities. From such ratios the constant prefactor G of course disap-

pears. Hence, in Newton’s days there seems to have been little interest in determining this

and similar universal prefactors. The ﬁrst reasonably precise determination of G was made

possible in 1798 by Henry Cavendish, more than hundred years after Newton developed his

theory of gravitation, and even Cavendish’s experiment was not explicitly recognized as a

determination of G until another hundred years later.4

Newton’s lack of knowledge concerning the value of G is particularly surprising in view

of the fact that he could, for example, have obtained this value from the equation of motion

for a test particle of mass mt in the gravitational ﬁeld of the earth,

mtg = G

mtMe
R2
e

,

(12)

where g is the gravitational acceleration at the earth’s surface. By expressing the mass of the

earth, Me, in terms of its radius and density, and using g = 9.81 ms−2 one readily obtains

G.

Apparently Newton did not do this simple calculation. He did, however, work hard to

obtain his estimate of the density of the sun quoted above. This estimate, in conjunction

with Eq. (5), opens up another path for determining the gravitational constant, which would

8

have also been available to Newton. By solving Eq. (5) for G, substituting the numerical

values for T and β (which were both available at Newton’s times), and using Newton’s own

estimate for ρs, quoted in Sec. II, one ﬁnds

G =

3π
ρsT 2 sin3(β)

≈ 8.1 × 10−11 m3s−2kg−1,

(13)

which is surprisingly close to the modern value of 6.7 × 10−11 m3s−2kg−1, and could have

been obtained by Newton and his contemporaries, or later by Cavendish, without having to

perform diﬃcult measurements of the mutual attraction of masses.4

V. DISCUSSION

From a pedagogical point of view, the above calculations demonstrate, in a very simple

case, the power of physics. Measuring nothing more than the duration of a year and the

apparent angular diameter of the sun we can obtain the solar density, a number which is

not related to these two quantities in any obvious way. Surprises like this may be a valuable

pedagogical tool, since they illustrate vividly how the universal validity of the laws of physics

allows us to obtain information on properties of nature which are totally inaccessible by

means of direct measurement. Apart from this more philosophical aspect, the above little

calculations are also well suited as classroom exercises in an introductory astronomy course

on the undergraduate or high-school level, since they require nothing but the most basic

classical mechanics, a measurement of the angular diameter of the sun, and simple algebra.

This angle can be measured directly if a telescope with a cross wire eye piece and a

solar ﬁlter is available. Using the fact that the sun traverses 360 degrees in one day, and

measuring the time it takes the sun to traverse its own apparent diameter, one immedi-

ately obtains 2β. Due to the great intensity of the sunlight such a direct measurement is

somewhat dangerous and it may be preferable to image the sun with a lense of known focal

length instead. Alternative ways of measurement, accessible to high-school or undergrad-

uate students, include estimating the angular diameter of the sun from the duration of a

9

sunset, or directly measuring the angular diameter of the moon. As pointed out above, this

diameter is almost identical to that of the sun, a fact that is most impressively demonstrated

by showing pictures of solar eclipses. A discussion with the students of the advantages and

disadvantages of the various procedures for obtaining 2β can be very instructive.

From the point of view of history of science, the above considerations demonstrate that

Newton (or his successors) could have obtained more detailed information concerning the na-

ture of our solar system than they seem to have done. These remarks are in no way meant to

diminish Newton’s tremendous intellectual achievements, but they show that purely earth-

bound and very simple mesurements allow to obtain much more detailed information than is

often thought. What makes this possible is precisely the generality of Newtonian mechanics,

the universal validity of which implies relations between quantities measured on earth and

quantities pertaining to other celestial bodies.

Acknowledgments

on the subject matter of this note.

It is a pleasure to thank L. N. Oliveira, V. L. Libero, and S. Ragusa for interesting discussions

10

REFERENCES

1 B. W. Carroll and D. A. Ostlie, Modern Astrophysics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1996).

2 J. M. Knudsen and P. G. Hjorth, Elements of Newtonian Mechanics (Springer-Verlag,

Berlin, 1995).

p. 210 (1987).

1996).

Raton, 1997).

3 K. R. Lang, Astrophysical Formulae, 2nd. ed. (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1980).

4 B. E. Clotfelter, The Cavendish experiment as Cavendish knew it, Am. J. Phys. 55(3)

5 H. M. Nussenzveig, Curso de F´ısica B´asica-1, Mecˆanica (Edgard Bl¨ucher Ltda. S˜ao Paulo,

6 Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, ed. D. R. Lide 78th ed. (CRC Press LCC, Boca

7 The value β = 0.267o, which to the precision of the simple measurement techniques

discussed here is virtually undistinguishable from β = 0.25o, adopted in the main text,

reproduces the literature value ρs = 1.4 g cm−3.

8 Of course there are solid materials with densities comparable to that of the sun, but these

are typical neither for the earth’s composition nor for solid materials in general.

9 Isaac Newton, Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, Book III, Proposition 8,

Corrolary III (Quoted from the reprinting by Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc., Chicago,

1952).

10 Isaac Newton, Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, Book III, Proposition 10

(Quoted from the reprinting by Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc., Chicago, 1952)

11

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Geometry of the motion of an orbiting lighter body of radius Re, revolving about a

heavier stationary body of radius Rs, at distance r. In Sec. II the heavier body is the sun and

the lighter the earth, while in Sec. III they are earth and moon, respectively. The angle β is half

the apparent angular diameter of the central body, as seen from the orbiting body (neglecting

parallax), while α is that of the orbiting body, as seen from the central body.

12

R
s

r

β

α

Re

