Experimental technique to observe weak localization in thin silver

ﬁlms

Abstract

A. D. Beyer, M. Koesters, K.G. Libbrecht, and E.D. Black
California Institute of Technology, Department of Physics, Pasadena, CA, 91125∗

A simple experiment to observe weak localization in thin Ag ﬁlms is presented. A clear theoretical

signature of weak localization is predicted in mangetoresistive measurements of thin ﬁlms samples.

We present a simple method for making thin Ag ﬁlm samples, using evaporative deposition, and

observing the small magnetoresistive signal, using a resistance bridge technique. Typical results

from our students show that Ag ﬁlms show the predicted behavior for weak localization with spin
eﬀects. These eﬀects can be easily observed in a liquid 4He dewar.

5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
0
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

One of the many challenges in a senior level lab course is to simulate the research envi-

ronment. These types of labs are geared toward helping students transition from performing

pre-packaged experiments to more independent experiments. However, experiments of this

sort should be designed so that motivated students can succeed and can do so in a term or

semester. With this in mind, we have designed a simple experiment for students to observe

the phenomena of weak localization.

Weak localization is an interesting macroscopic expression of the quantum mechanical

behavior of electrons. Electrons begin to localize around impurities at low temperatures

because of an eﬀect that can be described as a self-interference eﬀect. As electrons scatter

around during transport measurements, they hit impurities, and special paths for partially

scattered electron waves can add together to start localization of electrons. This eﬀect of

pre-localization is lumped under the term weak localization, and one consequence is that

the bulk behavior of electrons is altered.

The bulk property that most clearly gives evidence for weak localization is the magneto-

conductance signal, which is best seen in thin ﬁlm samples at low temperatures (accessible

with liquid helium). The magnetoconductance is a small correction to the bulk conductance
of a sample, theoretically on the order of 10−4 of the bulk conductance.

In this lab, we

discuss common techniques that students can use to fabricate samples and then measure

the magnetoconductance.

First, we present a simple method for making thin ﬁlm samples through evaporative

deposition. Evaporative deposition works by simple physics arguments, which we review,

and it provides a good introduction to vacuum systems. As a concrete example of how an

evaporative deposition system works, we present the apparatus our students use to deposit

thin ﬁlms of Ag on silicon wafers, and we provide the basic vacuum knowledge needed to

put together a similar apparatus.

After a brief discussion of how to wire up the sample, we then review the resistance

bridge technique that our students use to resolve the magnetoconductance. The philosophy

is simple: null out the large signal due to the bulk magnetoconductance and amplify the

deviations that arise in a magnetic ﬁeld. We also review some sources of noise that can arise

in the bridge, such as ground loops, and how to eliminate these sources of noise.

2

Typical students’ results and a brief interpretation of these results are then discussed. We

ﬁnd that for the Ag thin ﬁlm samples, students observe weak localization with spin eﬀects at

temperatures below about 14 K. Above 14 K, phonons destroy the weak localization eﬀect.

II. THEORY

A. Drude conductivity

If we apply an electric ﬁeld inside a normal metal, that ﬁeld will drive an electrical current.

The current density J is related to the ﬁeld E by

J = σE

where σ is called the conductivity. Materials with high conductivity allow large currents for

a given ﬁeld, whereas materials with lower conductivities allow lower current densities.

A formula for the conductivity was derived by Drude1, based on some very simple as-

sumptions about the microscopic properties of metals. If the current is carried by electrons,

then the current density is just

J = −ne < v >

where n is the number of electrons per unit volume, −e is the electric charge on a single

electron, and < v > is the average velocity of the electrons. Now, we need to calculate this

average velocity. To do so, let’s assume that the electrons move inside the metal ballistically

until they run into something. The electric ﬁeld provides a force on the electrons given by

−eE, and the equation of motion is then

If we know an electron’s velocity at time t = 0, we can calculate it at a later time t, provided

it does not run into anything.

For this particular electron, let’s assume that just before t = 0 it ran into something inside

the metal (an impurity or phonon, for example) and bounced oﬀ. Moreover, let’s assume

that, just after the collision, the velocity of the electron is completely random. This means

that, on average,

m

dv
dt

= −eE

v(t) = v(0) −

eEt
m

< v(0) >= 0

3

With the assumption of isotropic scattering, the average velocity of all the electrons inside

a metal is easy to calculate.

where τ is the average time since the last scattering event. This ensemble average is inde-

pendent of the time when we take the snapshot, and it gives the conductivity.

< v >= −

eEτ
m

σD =

ne2τ
m

This expression is known as the Drude conductivity, after the scientist who ﬁrst derived it.

It relies on the assumption that, after a scattering event, an electron’s velocity is completely

randomized. Put another way, the electron has no memory of its previous state after it

suﬀers a collision inside the material. As we shall see, this assumption is good at room

temperatures, but it breaks down when the temperature of the metal becomes very low.

The cause of this breakdown is the wave nature of the electron, which did not play a role in

the derivation of the Drude conductivity, and the resulting change in the conductivity is one

of the few macroscopically observable consequences of the wave-particle duality of matter.

B. Coherent backscattering

When we calculated the Drude conductivity, we assumed the electrons were point par-

ticles, obeying the laws of classical physics. In reality, however, electrons have associated

with them wave functions, the square of the amplitude of which gives the probability of ob-

serving an electron. When the wave that describes an electron scatters oﬀ of some obstacle

in its path, it produces partial waves emanating from that obstacle, much like ripples in a

pond produced by a wave when it hits a stationary reed sticking out of the surface. These

partial waves go on to strike other obstacles, impurities or defects in the case of a metal,

and produce more partial waves. All of these partial waves add up, as waves do, to produce

a complicated diﬀraction or interference pattern. For the most part, the phase between any

two partial waves is random, and the partial waves, on average, add incoherently (see Figure

1). However, there is one direction in which the partial waves will always add up in phase,

and that is the direction opposite that of the initial wave. This is because, for every path

that takes a partial wave back to its origin, there is a complementary path with the same

length that takes the same route, but in the opposite direction. The two partial waves that

4

take these complementary paths will always add coherently (see Figure 2). The sum of all

these complementary waves then gives a slightly stronger wave going backward relative to

the initial direction. This corresponds to an enhanced probability of backscattering, which

in turn reduces the conductivity below the Drude prediction.

If the metal is inﬁnitely large and the electrons can maintain phase coherence over in-

ﬁnitely long complimentary paths, then the backscattering eﬀect dominates the dynamics of

the electrons, and the conductivity is completely suppressed. In this case, the metal becomes

an insulator, and the electrons are trapped, or localized, by the disordered scattering centers.

For samples with ﬁnite size, or more commonly ﬁnite coherence lengths, the backscattering

gives rise to a small correction to the Drude conductivity. This small correction ought to be

called “pre-localization,” but instead it is commonly referred to as “weak localization.”

The coherent backscattering eﬀect can only occur if the phase of each partial wave is

preserved as it goes around its path. At high temperatures, where most scattering events

are oﬀ of phonons, coherent backscattering cannot occur. A magnetic ﬁeld can also introduce

a phase diﬀerence between the complementary paths, destroying the coherent backscattering

and any correction to the Drude conductivity it produces. The resulting dependence of the

conductivity on temperature or applied magnetic ﬁeld is quite small even at liquid-helium

temperatures, but it can be observed experimentally by employing a few basic low-noise

techniques. In the experiment we will describe below, we use this weak-localization eﬀect

to teach some basic low-noise and small-signal-detection methods that are commonly used

in many research labs.

C. Weak localization

A complete, quantitative derivation of the weak localization eﬀect requires the use of

quantum many-body theory and the quantum-ﬁeld-theory techniques that go with it. This

is beyond the scope of this paper, and we will just give the result here without derivation.
See Reference2 or3 for a detailed treatment of the theory of weak localization.

The change in the conductance of a sample when a magnetic ﬁeld is applied is called the

magnetoconductance. This magnetoconductance is easiest to observe in a two-dimensional

sample, where we can apply a magnetic ﬁeld that is perpendicular to the sample and thus

perpendicular to all of the complimentary, closed-loop paths that give rise to the coherent

5

is

and

backscattering. For a thin ﬁlm (a nearly two-dimensional sample), the magnetoconductance

a∆σ(B) =

e2
πh
1
2

3
2

ψ

1
2
(cid:18)
~c
+
4e

(cid:20)
1
2

+

~c
4e
1
L2
0B

(cid:26)
ψ

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

1
L2
1B

(cid:19)
− ln

~c
4e
(cid:18)
1
L2
0B

− ln

~c
4e

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:27)

1
L2
1B

(cid:19)(cid:21)

−

(1)

where a is the thickness of the ﬁlm, ∆(B) ≡ σ(B) − σ(0), and ψ is the digamma function,

deﬁned in terms of the ordinary gamma function Γ(x) as

The dephasing lengths L0 and L1 are combinations of the average lengths an electron can

diﬀuse before colliding with a phonon Lφ, and the average lengths an electron can diﬀuse

before it gets dephased by spin-orbit Lso or spin-ﬂip Lsf interactions with the scatterers.

ψ(x) =

ln Γ(x)

d
dx
1
Γ(x)

=

dΓ(x)
dx

1
L2
0

=

1
L2
φ

 

+

2
3L2

sf !

+

4
3L2
sf

1
L2
1

=

1
L2
φ

 

+

2
3L2

sf !

+

4
3L2
so

A ﬁlm is considered thin, or quasi-two-dimensional, if it is much thinner than the typical

dephasing lengths, a ≪ L0, L1.

is particularly simple.

If spin eﬀects are negligible L0 = L1 = Lφ, and the weak localization magnetoconductance

a∆σ(B) =

e2
ψ
πh ("

1
2

 

+

~c
4e

1
L2
φB !

− ln

~c
4e

1
L2
φB !#)

 

(2)

In this paper we will describe how to construct samples that display pure orbital weak-

localization magnetoconductance and samples that show spin eﬀects, so we will use both

Equations 1 and 2.

Compared to the Drude conductivity, the weak-localization correction is very small. At

most, the fractional correction to the conductivity, δσ ≡ σ(0) − σD, is of the order

δσ
σ

≤

e2
aπh

m
ne2τ

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

6

For a typical metal ﬁlm with a thickness of a = 100˚A, this is, approximately

≤ 10−4

δσ
σ

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

In order to measure this magnetoconductance with an accuracy of 1%, then, we would

need to resolve changes in the total conductivity on the order of parts-per-million. This

resolution demands good low-noise and small-signal detection methods, and teaching these

methods is the purpose of this lab.

III. EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS

A. Sample preparation

A simple way to make ﬁlms, 60 − 200˚A thick, is by evaporative deposition (ED), evapo-

rating a source material and allowing the resulting gas of material to deposit on a substrate.

For our students, the source material is a Ag pellet and the substrate is a silicon wafer.

Their apparatus for ED is shown in Figure 5. Let us discuss some of its features.

First, notice that the sample is located far from the source (24 inches). This is so students

can make a relatively uniform ﬁlm. The gas of evaporated Ag may diﬀuse non-isotropically

from the source, and by placing their substrate far from the source, the angular extent of the

sample at 24 inches is small–the smaller the angular extent, the more uniform the deposited

ﬁlm will be.

Second, there are vacuum pumps and gauges attached to the sealed ED chamber in Figure

5, which students use to maintain a vacuum in our ED chamber. To deposit a usable ﬁlm

of Ag on our substrate, the Ag atoms must be able to reach the substrate without suﬀering

collisions with other gas molecules in the chamber. These collisions are a problem because

they eﬀectively block the Ag atoms from reaching the substrate. Therefore, students must

produce a vacuum such that the mean free path of Ag atoms exceeds the sample-substrate

separation. The mean free path for Ag atoms colliding with other molecules is given by

where kB is Boltmann’s constant, d is the silver atom diameter, T is the temperature, and

P is the pressure inside the chamber. This means that in our apparatus the students must

achieve pressures lower than about 0.1mTorr.

(3)

l =

kBT
πd2P

,

7

1. Evacuation/Vacuum Techniques

Here, we brieﬂy review the basic techniques for generating vacuum that we discuss with

our students. To do so, we will introduce vacuum pumps, conﬂat seals, leaks and outgassing,

and vacuum gauges for those uninitiated with the aspects of generating vacuum.

To achieve vacuum, we need to remove gas from a chamber. This is done using vacuum

pumps. For our ED apparatus, we use a mechanical pump (a.k.a roughing pump) and a

turbomolecular pump.

Roughing pumps usually have some type of valve and piston mechanism to push com-

pressed gas molecules out of a chamber. The most common type of roughing pump is a
rotary vane sealed roughing pump, described elsewhere4, that compresses air, using an oil-

sealed, rotating vane, and pushes it out of a one way valve. Roughing pumps, like all pumps,

can achieve base pressures dependent on their compression ratios. However, the oil in rough-

ing pumps usually creeps back into the chamber and limits the attainable base pressure to

around 100 mTorr—this is known as backstreaming. For the roughing pump we use, we can

pump down to about 200 mTorr.

Turbopumps, on the other hand, work via a high speed rotor that kicks molecules out

of a chamber. The rotor spins at speeds comparable to the speed of gas molecules in the

chamber. Because diﬀerent types of molecules have diﬀerent average speeds, the compression

ratio of a turbo pump depends on the type of molecule it is pumping. The turbopump has
a compression ratio of about 107 for air molecules and much higher for hydrocarbons. This

last fact means that the turbopump is good at keeping the oils from the roughing pump

from leaking back into the chamber. With the turbopump maintaining an outlet pressure,
of air molecules, on the order of 100 mTorr, we should theoretically be able to pump to 10−8

Torr.

An important note about these two pumps is that they work in diﬀerent pressure regimes,

the viscous regime for the roughing pump and the molecular ﬂow regime for the turbopump.

The viscous ﬂow regime is the regime where we can ignore collisions of molecules with the

walls of the chamber, and the gas ﬂow dynamics are governed mostly by molecule-molecule

collisions. In the molecular ﬂow regime, the opposite happens. Wall collisions are basically

the only collisions molecules experience in this regime. So, students are trying to get into

the molecular ﬂow regime to get ED to work. The turbopump will allow them to get to

8

10−8 Torr, so ED should work. However, leaks and outgassing will raise our base pressure
above 10−8 Torr. To make sure they still reach the molecular ﬂow regime, students must

keep unwanted gases out of the chamber as much as possible.

There are several precautions that can be taken to keep unwanted gases out of the cham-

ber. Leaks and outgassing are the major sources of unwanted gases in the system, so it is

important to follow some preventive measures that can help reduce these sources.

Leaks come in two varieties, those due to poor seals and those due to virtual leaks. Poor

seals are usually a result of improper conﬂat ﬂange sealing. A conﬂat seal, with a copper

gasket, is shown in Figure 6. There are knife edges on the underside of the ﬂange and the

topside of the opening, or port, of the chamber. These knife edges cut into the copper

gasket, which is sandwiched between them, to make a tight seal. Naturally, an even seal is

vital to achieving high vacuum (and especially for ultra high vacuum). By tightening the

bolts and nuts in Figure 6, we can provide the force to cut into the copper gasket.

The simplest method to make a tight seal is to ﬁrst imagine a clock’s face on the ﬂange.

Now tighten the nuts and bolts, by 1/4 turn at most, in the following order: 12 o’clock, 6,

9, and 3. Rotate this pattern by one bolt in a clockwise direction, and repeat until you are

back at the 12 o’clock position. Repeat this tightening pattern until the seal does not show

a gap between the ﬂange and the port. This method will lead to an even “bite” into the

gasket. Because metals relax, it will be necessary to tighten again from time to time.

The other common type of leak is a virtual leak. Virtual leaks are most often the result

of screws in a vacuum chamber. Screws inside the chamber are usually tightened into blind

tapped holes, which trap gases. These gases slowly leak when pumped upon. By drilling

relief holes through the screws and into the tapped holes, these areas can be pumped out

much faster.

Outgassing is another common problem, and it is basically another type of virtual leak.

Outgassing refers to the slow release of unwanted gas molecules stuck to the surfaces of the

vacuum chamber. For example, oils and moisture stick to the walls of the chamber and slowly

release upon pumping. Some simple precautions to reduce outgassing include wearing gloves

to keep oils oﬀ the surfaces of the chamber and lubricating screws with silver plating instead

of oily lubricants. Also, we can perform what is called a bake out by wrapping heating tape

around the chamber and heating the walls. Baking out speeds up the desorption of gases

from surfaces and more rapidly depletes the absorbed oils and moisture. We use copper

9

(4)

(5)

(6)

gaskets, which do not break down during baking like o-rings, so we can do this if needed.

To understand why our base pressure will not be 10−8 Torr, we simply should know

that outgassing will occur to some extent—no matter what precautions we take. Our base

pressure is then determined by the balance between the outgassing rate and how fast we can

get gases out of the chamber.

mass ﬂow equation,

The equation that governs the rate of pumping air from the chamber is known as the

where S is the net pumping speed, P is the pressure, and Q, measured in Torr·l/s, is equiv-

alent to mass ﬂow per second or throughput. To predict the base pressure of the system

in the molecular ﬂow regime, students must ﬁrst ﬁgure out the net pumping speed in this

regime. The net pumping speed is

Q = SP,

1
S

=

1
Spump

+

1
C

,

with Spump the speed of the pump and C the conductance of the pipe connecting our pump to

the chamber. The conductance of the pipe connecting the turbopump to the chamber is only

dependent upon the geometry of the tube in the molecular ﬂow regime. The conductance is

C = 12liters/sec ×

D
1cm

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

3

1cm
L

,

where D is the diameter of the pipe and L is the length. For our pipe with diameter 2”

and length 36”, the net speed is about 14.2 l/s. This net pumping speed relates the rate at

which gases leave the system.

Leaks and outgassing produce an input of gases that are expressed in units of Torr l/s
cm−2. To calculate the base pressure, the outgassing rate is divided by the net speed

of pumping and multiplied by the surface area contributing to the outgassing. For our

chamber, we ﬁnd that the outgassing limits our base pressure to about 5µTorr.

We use a thermocouple gauge and an ion gauge to measure pressure in our lab. Ther-

mocouple gauges measure the thermal conductivity of gases in the chamber to determine

pressure down to about 10 mTorr. They do this by dissipating a known amount of heat into

the chamber, using a ﬁlament, and then measuring the temperature of the ﬁlament. This

temperature depends on the thermal conductivity of the surrounding gas, which depends on

the pressure in a known way.

10

Below 10 mTorr, the ion gauge takes over, because the thermal conductivity of the gas is

roughly constant below 10 mTorr. The ion gauge works by thermionically emitting electrons,

which ionize molecules in the chamber. The resulting ions are then collected on a negatively

charged grid, and the ion current tells us the gas density, which is proportional to the

Using these gauges and the techniques mentioned above, our students can easily achieve
and measure a base pressure on the order of 10−6 Torr and successfully deposit thin ﬁlms.

pressure.

2. Deposition

Deposition of a Ag ﬁlm is simple once we are at low enough pressure to make a uniform

ﬁlm. Students simply have to melt a Ag pellet to make a gas of Ag atoms, and these atoms

will then accumulate into a ﬁlm on the substrate.

In our setup, we melt Ag pellets by applying current across a tungsten boat available
from Midwest Tungsten Service5. As shown in Figure 5, we have electrical feedthroughs

that connect to the two sides of the tungsten boat in the chamber. We apply an AC signal

through a variac transformer (with power provided from the wall) to generate a current in

the boat and melt the pellet. The generated heat from 70V AC easily melts the pellet in

our setup.

To measure how much Ag they are depositing, students use a standard deposition gauge6.

The gauge is a resonating quartz crystal with some resonant frequency. As material is

deposited on the crystal, the resonant frequency changes and the controller converts this

into a thickness reading for the students. This allows them to monitor the thickness of a

ﬁlm and the rate of deposition.

They can further control deposition by employing a simple shutter to block or permit

deposition. The shutter we use is simply a thin piece of aluminum attached to the end

of a rotatable feedthrough that can be positioned between the gas of Ag atoms and the

substrate to prevent deposition, or it can be moved to allow deposition. It does not block

the deposition gauge.

Students ﬁnd it is best to melt the pellet and let the Ag gas deposit on the shutter before

depositing onto the substrate. This is because there is usually unwanted material on the

surface of the Ag pellet that they want to get rid of before depositing on the substrate.

11

Once their sample is made, students vent the chamber and remove the thin ﬁlms. The

next task is to prepare the sample for measurements.

B. Sample loading

After making the ﬁlms, students apply contacts to the silver ﬁlm and load it into a
commercially available liquid helium dewar, from Quantum Design Inc.7, to make measure-

ments. The samples load onto a resistivity stage for insertion into the dewar, and we provide

a breakout box to make connection to the sample through this stage.

First, students mount the samples onto the resistivity stage. For our arrangement (using
a DC resistivity puck from Quantum Design8), we have 12 gold-plated contact pads around

a gold-plated sample mounting rectangle. The samples are stuck on the mounting rectangle

by vacuum grease. This provides enough force to hold the samples in place. At this point,

students can apply four contacts between the thin ﬁlm and four of the gold-plated contact

pads to provide connection to the breakout box for measurements.

Students make contact to the thin ﬁlm sample using gold wires and silver paint. The

method for making contacts is simple. The students apply a blob of silver paint onto a glass

slide and dip one end of a short gold wire into the blob to grab some silver paint. The end

of the wire with paint is then placed on the silver ﬁlm’s surface. More silver paint is dabbed

onto the gold wire and the ﬁlm’s surface using a toothpick, while the initial amount of silver

paint, from dipping the wires, holds the wire in place. Finally, the other end of the gold

wire is extended to the gold contact pad, where more silver paint is painted on top of the

pad and the wire to ﬁnish up the contact. After about 10 minutes of drying, the contact is

solid. Spring contacts might work better, but this method produces acceptable results.

C. Detection of magnetoresistance

The measurement electronics form the heart of this lab. Here, students learn techniques

widely used in condensed matter labs for measuring very small signals in the presence of

noise. In particular, they learn how to measure part-per-million changes in the resistance of

a sample that will accept no more than a few milliamps of excitation current.

In order to compare our sample with the prediction of Equation (1), we must measure two

12

quantities: the overall resistance per unit square (R(cid:3)) and the change in the total resistance

as a function of applied magnetic ﬁeld R(B) − R(0) ≡ ∆R(B), where R(B) is the resistance

at magnetic ﬁeld, B.

R(cid:3) is the resistivity formula for a ﬁlm. It is a material dependent property, just like the

formula for bulk resistivity, and this means R(cid:3) is independent of our sample size.

The other quantity, ∆R(B) is related to the theoretical conductivity by

∆R(B) = −R(0)R(cid:3) × a∆σ(B).

(7)

The relevant ∆σ(B) ( ∆σ(B) ≡ σ(B) − σ(0)) for a Ag thin ﬁlm will be Equation 1, because

spin eﬀects are relevant in Ag ﬁlms.

We measure these two quantities in very similar ways. To get R(cid:3), we simply pass a

small excitation current through the sample and then measure the resulting voltage across

the sample. This gives us the total resistance of the sample R(0), and from that we can
calculate R(cid:3) = R(0) · w

l , provided we know the sample’s length and l and width w.

Measuring the magnetoresistance ∆R(H) is done in a similar way, but because ∆R(H)

is so much smaller than the “background” signal R(0), we need an extra trick: nulling.

What we are really measuring, remember, is the voltage across the sample produced by the

excitation current i, or V (H) = iR(H).

If we can produce a reference voltage that is equal to the zero-ﬁeld voltage across the

sample, V0 = iR(0), then we can subtract this from the actual voltage across the sample to

get ∆R(H).

ﬁeld H.

V (H) − V0 = iR(H) − iR(0)

This very small signal can then be ampliﬁed and examined in detail as a function of magnetic

= i∆R(H)

(8)

This process of nulling will only work if we can produce a small voltage V0 that is inde-

pendent of the magnetic ﬁeld. Fortunately, this is easy to do using a passive, adjustable,
low noise voltage divider. We used a Dekatran DT72A tunable voltage divider,9 driven by

the same voltage that produced the excitation current for the sample.

13

In both the R(cid:3) and ∆R(H) measurements, it is important not to use the same set of

wires to carry the excitation current and to measure the resulting voltage across the sample.

Long wires leading down into the cryostat may have resistances of their own which, if there

leads carry current, will produce voltages that have nothing to do with the sample. In order

to measure only that voltage produced by the sample, we employ a four-wire geometry, as

shown in Figure 7.

For this four-wire technique to be eﬀective, no current must be allowed to ﬂow along the

measurement leads. If it did, a spurious voltage would be produced from the resistances

in the measurement leads, and this would contaminate the measurement. Such a condition

can result, for example, from the measurement device and the excitation source sharing a

common ground, as shown in Figure 5. This condition is known as a ground loop, and care

is needed to avoid it.

All of these measurements are performed at audio frequencies using a lock-in, which the
students have been introduced to in a previous lab.10 We add to their training with a lock-in

by encouraging them to analyze the noise in each component of their apparatus and in the

apparatus as a whole. This is easily done with a lock-in by terminating the input of a device

with a 50Ω terminator and then measuring the noise of the output signal on the lock-in.

The students can then determine which component is setting their noise ﬂoor; our students

ﬁnd the pre-ampliﬁer sets their noise ﬂoor.

Lock-in detection, nulling, four-wire measurements, and ground loops are all essential

topics for modern, condensed matter experimentalists to be familiar with, and these labs to-

gether provide students with a thorough, quantitative, foundation in each. A brief schematic

of our entire apparatus for performing these functions is in Figure 9.

IV. TYPICAL RESULTS

At this point, we can discuss some typical results that our students observe. Students in

our lab used the superconducting magnet, provided with the commercially available dewar,

to apply a magnetic ﬁeld and make magnetoconductance measurements of their thin ﬁlms.

A typical set of data is shown in Figure 10, where we plot the magnetoresistance instead of

the magnetoconductance.

A ﬁt to their data is simple if we consider Equation 7. Our students ﬁt Equation 7 by

14

adjusting the parameters, L0 and L1 until the ﬁt is visually close. Typical values for the

lengths lie around 0.5µm, and some values obtained from the plots in Figure 10 are plotted

versus temperature in Figure 11 as an example.

We can interpret the data as follows. At low temperatures (T < 14K), spin orbit scat-

tering is much more frequent than inelastic phonon scattering. We see that this leads to an

observation of the spin eﬀects of weak localization in the data. This is seen by comparing the

data at 2K in the plot of Figure 10 with Figure 3 for the case where L1 > L0 (noting that we

are plotting magnetoresistance in Figure 10 instead of magnetoconductance). Above 14K,

the two lengths, L0 and L1, become comparable because inelastic phonon scattering is much

more frequent than spin orbit scattering. At these temperatures, spin eﬀects are negligible

and L1 = L0.

In an experimental paper with similar results to ours, Gershenzon11 points out that the

slope of L1 and L0 squared versus temperature, on a log-log plot, should be equal to -2 if we

expect 2D thermal phonons to be the source of inelastic scattering. As shown in Figure 11,

the slope above 14 K for our data lies between -1.61 and -2.15, so we are likely observing

2D thermal phonon modes being excited and causing localization eﬀects to die away.

V. CONCLUSIONS

Our experiment on weak localization provides a good introduction to the experimental

techniques of ED and measuring small signals with a resistance bridge. It is easily accessible

to students and provides a nice transition to more independent work on the students’ part.

The typical results from our students indicate that our technique is able to observe the

predicted macroscopic expression of weak localization through the thin ﬁlm magnetoresis-

tance of Ag thin ﬁlms. The students’ results show that at easily accessible temperatures the

eﬀect is clear to resolve.

15

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

0088658.

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under grant number DUE-

∗ Electronic address: beyer@its.caltech.edu
1 Paul Drude, “Zur elektronentheori der metalles 1 Teil,”Ann. Phys. 1, 566–613 (1900); ”Zur

elektronentheori der metalles 2 Teil, Galvanomagnetische und thermomagnetisch eﬀecte,” Ann.

Phys. 3, 369–402 (1900).

2 Gerd Bergmann, “Weak Localization in Thin Films: a time-of-ﬂight experiment with conduction

electrons,”Phys. Rep. 107, 1–58 (1984).

3 Sudip Chakravarty and Albert Schmid, “Weak localization” The quasiclassical theory of electrons

in a random potential,”Phys. Rep 140, 193–236 (1986).

4 John H. Moore, Christopher, C. Davis, and Michael A. Coplan, Building Scientiﬁc Apparatus:

A Practical Guide to Design and Construction (Perseus Books, Cambridge, MA, 1991), 2nd ed.,

pp. 75–118.

13057-9741.

5 Availabe from http://www.tungsten.com
6 XTC/C: Thin Film Deposition Controller. Inﬁnicon, Two Technology Place. East Syracuse, NY

7 Physical Property Measurement System. Quantum Design, Inc. San Deigo, CA.
8 DC resistivity puck. Quantum Design, Inc. San Diego, CA.
9 Dekatran DT72A. Tegam, Ten Tegam Way, Geneva, OH 44041.
10 K.G. Libbrecht, E.D. Black, and C.M. Hirata, “A Basic Lock-in Ampliﬁer Experiment for the

Undergraduate Laboratory,”Am. J. Phys. 71 1208–1213 (2003).

11 M.E.Gershenzon, V.N. Gubankov, and Yu. E. Zhuravlev, ““Weak” localization and electron

scattering in silver thin ﬁlms,” JETP Lett. 35, 576–580 (1982).

16

VII. FIGURES

FIG. 1: Most randomly selected partial waves have random relative phases, and on average they

add incoherently.

FIG. 2: Each partial wave that returns to the origin has another partial wave that is in phase

with it, in the backscatter direction.

17

FIG. 3: The weak-localization magnetoconductance at a ﬁxed temperature. The diﬀerent curves

represent diﬀerent relative contributions from spin eﬀects.

FIG. 4: The weak-localization magnetoconductance in a sample where spin eﬀects are negligible,

at several diﬀerent temperatures (Φ0 =

~c
4e ).

18

FIG. 5: The vacuum chamber we use. The two pumps, (10) and (11), evacuate the chamber to

a base pressure determined by leaks and outgassing. Students then melt a Ag pellet [6e] in the

W boat [6d], which creates a gas of Ag atoms that travels to the substrate (2). {(1) Rotatable

manipulator (2) Substrate/Mask: [a] S.S. Flange [b] Mask [c] Si substrate (3) Shutter (4) Ion gauge

(5) Thermocouple gauge (6) W boat and Ag pellet: [d] W boat [e] Ag pellet (7) Voltage lines (8)

Voltage source: 70 V (9) Chamber valve (10) Turbopump (11) Roughing Pump}

19

FIG. 6: To make a vacuum seal, we tighten a Cu gasket between the top of the chamber and a

stainless steel (SS) ﬂange. The nuts and bolts are tightened in an even manner such that the seal

is uniform across the gasket. This is the proper conﬂat sealing method. {(1) Bolt (2) Washer (3)

SS Flange (4) Cu gasket (5) Top of the chamber (6) Nut}

FIG. 7: A four-wire arrangement. Here no current ﬂows through the contact resistances, so when

we measure a voltage, it is due to the sample only.

20

FIG. 8: An example of how a ground loop may develop in a four wire measurement. The lock-in

inputs we use are ﬂoated to prevent this condition.

FIG. 9: The setup used to measure weak localization. It is a 4-wire resistance bridge that utilizes

a lock-in, a pre-ampliﬁer, and a decade transformer to resolve the magnetoresistance.{(1) Decade

transformer (2) 35kΩ resistor (3a) Sample resistance (3b) Contact resistances (4) SR560 Pre-

ampliﬁer (5)SR830 Lock-in ampliﬁer (6) Internal lock-in reference (7) Lock-in inputs (8)10 V

proportional output (9) Oscilloscope}

21

FIG. 10: Typical data of magnetoresistance versus ﬁeld. The ﬁeld scale is a log scale. Weak

localization, with spin eﬀects, is evident from 2K to about 14K , manifested as a positive mag-

netoresistance at low ﬁelds and negative at larger ﬁelds. Data above 2K is oﬀset for clarity;

magnetoresistance goes to 0 when H = 0. Lines are ﬁts to Equation (7).

FIG. 11: Coherence lengths squared versus temperature. The linear portion above 14 K has a

slope between -1.61 and -2.15. If we expect 2D thermal phonons to dominate inelastic scattering

then the slope should be P=2.

VIII. CAPTIONS

average they add incoherently.

22

Figure 1: Most randomly selected partial waves have random relative phases, and on

Figure 2: Each partial wave that returns to the origin has another partial wave that is in

phase with it, in the backscatter direction.

Figure 3: The weak-localization magnetoconductance at a ﬁxed temperature. The diﬀer-

ent curves represent diﬀerent relative contributions from spin eﬀects.

Figure 4: The weak-localization magnetoconductance in a sample where spin eﬀects are

negligible, at several diﬀerent temperatures (Φ0 = ~c

4e ).

Figure 5: The vacuum chamber we use. The two pumps, (10) and (11), evacuate the

chamber to a base pressure determined by leaks and outgassing. Students then melt a Ag

pellet [6e] in the W boat [6d], which creates a gas of Ag atoms that travels to the substrate

(2). {(1) Rotatable manipulator (2) Substrate/Mask: [a] S.S. Flange [b] Mask [c] Si substrate

(3) Shutter (4) Ion gauge (5) Thermocouple gauge (6) W boat and Ag pellet: [d] W boat

[e] Ag pellet (7) Voltage lines (8) Voltage source: 70 V (9) Chamber valve (10) Turbopump

(11) Roughing Pump}

Figure 6: To make a vacuum seal, we tighten a Cu gasket between the top of the chamber

and a stainless steel (SS) ﬂange. The nuts and bolts are tightened in an even manner such

that the seal is uniform across the gasket. This is the proper conﬂat sealing method. {(1)

Bolt (2) Washer (3) SS Flange (4) Cu gasket (5) Top of the chamber (6) Nut}

Figure 7: A four-wire arrangement. Here no current ﬂows through the contact resistances,

so when we measure a voltage, it is due to the sample only.

Figure 8: An example of how a ground loop may develop in a four wire measurement.

The lock-in inputs we use are ﬂoated to prevent this condition.

Figure 9: The setup used to measure weak localization. It is a 4-wire resistance bridge

that utilizes a lock-in, a pre-ampliﬁer, and a decade transformer to resolve the magne-

toresistance.{(1) Decade transformer (2) 35kΩ resistor (3a) Sample resistance (3b) Contact

resistances (4) SR560 Pre-ampliﬁer (5)SR830 Lock-in ampliﬁer (6) Internal lock-in reference

(7) Lock-in inputs (8)10 V proportional output (9) Oscilloscope}

Figure 10: Typical data of magnetoresistance versus ﬁeld. The ﬁeld scale is a log scale.

Weak localization, with spin eﬀects, is evident from 2K to about 14K , manifested as a

positive magnetoresistance at low ﬁelds and negative at larger ﬁelds. Data above 2K is

oﬀset for clarity; magnetoresistance goes to 0 when H = 0. Lines are ﬁts to Equation (7).

Figure 11: Coherence lengths squared versus temperature. The linear portion above 14 K

has a slope between -1.61 and -2.15. If we expect 2D thermal phonons to dominate inelastic

23

scattering then the slope should be P=2.

24

