5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
1
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Symmetry in a Perturbed Optical System

Jason H. Steﬀen∗
University of Washington, Department of Physics
(Dated: January 5, 2014)

This paper investigates the eﬀects that perturbations to an optical system, such as translations
or rotations of the optical elements, have on the ﬁnal location where a light ray strikes a detector.
Symmetry arguments are employed to give selection rules for the combinations of those perturbations
that can aﬀect the light ray. It is shown that a “Transverse Parity” can be assigned to each type
of perturbation and that only combinations with an overall odd parity will produce an eﬀect. Some
examples of how these results can be applied to undergraduate classroom or laboratory courses are
given.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The study of physics is replete with the use of symmetry
to explain physical phenomena. The conservation of energy,
momentum, and electric charge stem from symmetries as
do the selection rules for allowed quantum-mechanical in-
teractions or multipole moments of a force ﬁeld or mass
distribution. Indeed, in the undergraduate curriculum one
ﬁnds symmetries and their application in nuclear and par-
ticle physics, electromagnetism, quantum mechanics, and
statistical mechanics to name a few. It comes as no sur-
prise that symmetries play a role in optics as well. Indeed,
once one moves beyond the nominal placement of the ele-
ments of an optical system and studies, instead, the eﬀects
of perturbations to such systems, the eﬀects of symmetry
in optics become more subtle and more rich.

This work investigates some roles that symmetry plays
in an optical system that has been perturbed from its nom-
inal conﬁguration. This investigation reveals straightfor-
ward relations between the perturbations (translations or
rotations) of the optical elements that can combine to pro-
duce a displacement of the beam spot or a rotation of the
incident angle of the beam as it impinges upon a screen or
detector. A straightforwared symmetry argument gives the
selection rules for the allowed couplings among the pertur-
bations.

The advantage of this development for the undergraduate
is that, unlike most treatments of symmetry (e.g. quantum
mechanics), an optical system is easily manipulated and the
consequence of changes to the system are immediately ap-
parent. The relative transparancy of the eﬀects of changes
to an optical system allows the student to focus on under-
standing the underlying physical principles instead of the
proper use of a given experimental apparatus. With a few
basic optical elements and a well designed set of exercizes,
a physics student can study one of the most important as-
pects of modern physical theory and appreciate the power
of using symmetries to describe physical scenarios. The
materials presented here are the aspects of a more general
study that are readily incorporated into a standard under-
graduate lecture or laboratory course.

The original motivation for this work was to examine the
systematic eﬀects that are introduced into an experiment
due to imperfections in the placement and alignment of the
optical elements in several, nominally-identical optical sub-
In particular, an array of eight optical systems
systems.

was used to determine the parameters of motion of a tor-
sion pendulum undergoing large-amplitude torsional oscil-
lations. Since the experiment required nanosecond timing
precision, precise placement of the optical elements was im-
portant as well as understanding the leading systematic ef-
fects. The results of that investigation are the basis for this
work.

This paper will proceed by ﬁrst introducing the approach
that was used for developing the optical system model along
with the assumptions that are made about the optical el-
ements themselves. Some short examples are provided to
show the nature of the model and the results it bears. Next,
selection rules for the allowed couplings of optical element
perturbations are demonstrated and derived via the intro-
duction of a “Transverse Parity” that is assigned to the
various ways that an element can be perturbed. Finally,
attention is given to the application of this work to the
undergraduate classroom or laboratory.

II. MODEL OF THE OPTICAL SYSTEM

For this study, the optical system is modeled using a quasi
object-oriented approach where the position and orientation
information of a given lens, mirror, ray, etc. is encapsulated
in a lens, mirror, or ray object. For example, a ray object
consists of a point of origin and a direction vector, a lens
object consists of a focal length, a center point, and a nor-
mal vector. The eﬀect of a ray refracting through a lens is
found using a function that takes a given ray and lens, then
returns the refracted ray using analytic geometry.

This method is diﬀerent from the standard geometrical
or two-dimensional matrix formulation that is presented
in most undergraduate optics texts1,2 and from more gen-
eral three dimensional matrix approaches3. This approach
was chosen because it facilitates the three-dimensional ma-
nipulation of the optical elements and allows for a more
straightforward interpretation of the analytic results that
it produces. Most of the computation was done with the
symbol-manipulating software Mathematica.

The following assumptions are made throughout this
work: all of the optical elements are perfect, thin, are suf-
ﬁciently large that displacements and rotations of the ele-
ments still allow the beam to impinge upon them, and that
refraction is not wavelength dependent.
It is also conve-
nient to assume that the deviations of the optical elements

from their nominal position are small so that they can be
treated perturbatively4. That is, rotations are small and
displacements are small compared to the appropriate focal
lengths. Finally, only a single, central ray of the beam is
considered in this investigation. Some comments concern-
ing an extended beam are made near the end of the paper.

A. Example: Linear Displacement I

The ﬁrst example to consider is that of a single lens and
detector nominally placed along the longitudinal (or “op-
tic”) axis. If the lens is displaced vertically a distance dy, as
shown in ﬁgure 1, then the location where the beam strikes
the detector is also displaced vertically by an amount

h =

sd − sl
f

dy

(1)

where f is the focal length of the lens, sl is the longitudinal
position of the lens, and sd is the longitudinal position of the
detector. Equation (1) shows that the vertical displacement
of the beam spot is linear in the displacement of the lens and
also linear in the separation of the lens and detector—the
“lever arm”.

f

f

dy

Sl

dS

FIG. 1: A light ray refracting through a lens of focal length f
which is displaced vertically by an amount dy from its nominal
position. This perturbation causes the ﬁnal location of the beam
to be displaced vertically by an amount h.

where s1, s2, and sd are the positions of the ﬁrst lens, the
second lens, and the detector respectively and f1 and f2 are
the focal lengths of the lenses.

f
1

f
1

f
2

f
2

2

h

dy
1

dy
2

S
1

S
2

S
d

FIG. 2: A light ray refracting through two lenses. One, with
focal length f1 is displaced vertically by an amount dy1. The
other, with focal length f2 is displaced by an amount dy2. The
vertical displacement of the beam at the screen is given by h.

h

This example shows that the displacement of the beam
spot grows linearly with the vertical displacements of the
lenses, as expected. It also shows that there are two com-
peting eﬀects that depend upon the separation of the optical
elements. For small separations of the optical elements the
spot height grows linearly with the nominal placements of
the lenses. For large separations of the elements, the height
falls quadratically.

A more interesting feature of equation (2) is that there is
no coupling between the displacements dy1 and dy2. Gener-
ally, one might expect that cross terms of the form dy1dy2
might exist, yet they do not.
If a third lens is included,
then there are three terms in the resulting height of the
beam spot. Each term is linear in the displacement of a
particular lens, and again, no cross terms exist. This fact
holds true for any displacements that lie in the plane that
is transverse to the incoming beam. This trend, however,
does not apply for longitudinal displacements.
It can be
seen from equation (1) that a small displacement of the lens
in the longitudinal direction (sl → sl +dz) would contribute
a quadratic term of the form dydz/f .

B. Example: Linear Displacement II

Now, suppose that two lenses are used in the optical sys-
tem, again aligned nominally along the longitudinal axis.
If the two lenses are displaced vertically by amounts dy1
and dy2, as shown in ﬁgure 2, then the resulting vertical
displacement of the beam spot is given by

sd − s1

s2 − s1

sd − s2

h =

−

(cid:18)(cid:18)

f1 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

f1 (cid:19) (cid:18)

f2 (cid:19)(cid:19)

dy1

(2)

+

sd − s2

(cid:18)

f2 (cid:19)

dy2

C. Example: Rotation

In the model used for this paper, each rotation of an opti-
cal element is about a body centered axis that remains par-
allel to the corresponding lab-frame axis. Thus, the origin
of the rotation axes move with the lens, but the orientation
of the axes do not. To see the eﬀects of rotation, consider
the case of a single lens displaced vertically a distance dy
and rotated about the x axis by an angle dα as shown in
ﬁgure 3. This example, to third order in the perturbations,

gives a vertical displacement of the beam on the detector

h =

sd − sl

f (cid:19)

dy +

f − (sd − sl)
f 2

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

dy2dα

(cid:18)

−

1
2 (cid:18)

sd − sl

f (cid:19)

dydα2.

(3)

Unlike the previous examples where all the perturbations
were displacements, here there are cross terms between the
transverse displacements and the rotations of the lens about
the transverse axes. Regardless of the number of elements
in the optical system, each term in equations like (3) will
contain an odd number of transverse perturbative factors
(i.e. factors that correspond to perturbations in the trans-
verse directions). Similar to the previous examples, if there
is a rotation about the longitudinal axis, then some cou-
plings will contain an even number of perturbative factors.
However, the terms that involve longitudinal perturbations
still have an odd number of transverse perturbations. The
selection rules for terms that ultimately contribute to the
displacement of the beam spot are addressed in the next
section.

f

f

h

αd

S
l

dy

S
d

FIG. 3: A light ray is refracted by a lens of focal length f which
is displaced vertically a distance dy and rotated by an angle dα
about the x-axis. The resulting displacement of the beam on
the detector is given by h.

III. TRANSVERSE PARITY

The examples presented in the last section show that not
all possible combinations of displacements and rotations of
the optical elements in a system will change the ﬁnal posi-
tion of the beam spot. The derivation of the selection rules
for the allowed terms is relatively straightforward. The dis-
placement of the beam spot in the detector (x, y) can be
expressed to arbitrary order as a polynomial function of the

3

displacements and rotations of the set of optical elements
in the system

(x, y) = f ({dx}, {dy}, {dz}, {dα}, {dβ}, {dγ})

(4)

where α, β, and γ are rotations about the x, y, and z
axes respectively and the curly braces represent the set
of all perturbations of a given kind (i.e. {dx} represents
the x displacements of the set of optical elements).
If
the entire system is reﬂected through the nominal axis of
symmetry (or rotated about the axis of symmetry by π)
then the beam spot must also reﬂect in a similar manner,
(x, y) −→ (−x, −y). Therefore, each term in the polyno-
mial function (4) must have odd symmetry in the plane
transverse to the axis of symmetry.

From this discussion, one can deﬁne a preliminary, multi-
plicative, transverse parity operator P such that transverse
perturbations, whether displacements or rotations, change
sign while the signs of longitudinal displacements or rota-
tions remain unchanged

P(x, y, z, α, β, γ) −→ (−x, −y, z, −α, −β, γ).

(5)

Every possible perturbation to an optical element, whether
a lens, detector, or mirror, etc. can be designated as having
either even or odd transverse parity, though for a general
optical element the transverse perturbations need not have
odd transverse parity (hence “preliminary”). The expres-
sion for the ﬁnal location of the beam spot can only be
expressed using terms that have overall odd parity.

From the example of two lenses given earlier, each of the
displacements of the lenses has odd transverse parity and
the result (2) has two terms, both linear in the transverse
displacements and thus both with odd transverse parity. A
longitudinal displacement of a lens has even parity. Such
a displacement would allow a coupling of the form dydz to
contribute to the location of the beam spot since the overal
parity of such a term is still odd

P(dydz) = (−dy)(dz) = −dydz.

(6)

Each term in the rotation example also has odd parity. The
third term in equation (3), for example, is proportional to
dydα2 which has parity

P(dydα2) = (−dy)(−dα)2 = −dydα2.

(7)

One application of transverse parity is to shorten the cal-
culation (to a given order) of the ﬁnal location of the beam
spot in a large optical system. Instead of allowing the com-
puter to calculate all the terms in the expansion, thereby
spending a lot of time on terms that are ruled out because
of incorrect parity, one can reject such terms immediately
and focus on those that are allowed to contribute.

A. Other Symmetries

Other symmetries that are inherant in a particular op-
tical element can further restrict the allowed terms in (4)
and may aﬀect the parity of a particular perturbation. For

example, a mirror has translational symmetry in the trans-
verse plane and a cylindrical lens has translational symme-
try along its axis of cylindrical symmetry. A translation
of a cylindrical lens along that axis or a rotation about
that axis would produce no eﬀect on the incident beam and
would therefore have even transverse parity.

Symmetry arguments such as this also demonstrate why
even-parity combinations of otherwise odd-parity perturba-
tions are not allowed. Consider the forbidden combination
of dydβ for a standard lens, a vertical translation followed
by a rotation about the vertical axis. Since the vertical
translation maintains the left-right symmetry of a lens, no
rotation about that same axis will produce a change in the
location of the beam spot.

The parity of a given perturbation to a given optical ele-
ment is ultimately deﬁned by how that perturbation aﬀects
either the ray of light that passes through the geometric
center of the optical element for translations or how it af-
fects a ray of light that strikes the element at a point that
is oﬀ of the rotation axis of a rotation-type perturbation.
A perturbation that produces a result with odd symmetry
has odd transverse parity, and one that gives an even result
would have even symmetry. These deﬁnitions of parity only
slightly change the parity operation given in (5) in that the
odd parity perturbations will change sign and the even per-
turbations will not, regardless of the axis involved in the
perturbation.

B. A Real Beam

Transverse parity can also describe the behavior of a
beam with physical extent. A ray that is displaced from
the center of the beam would have an overall odd trans-
verse parity. The same is true for a ray that is not paral-
lel to the longitudinal axis. That transverse parity applies
here is not surprising since, using a ﬁnite number of lenses
and a central ray, one can reconstruct any other ray in the
physical beam. The physical beam is essentially a superpo-
sition of odd-parity, perturbed, central rays and each of the
terms that are allowed in this construction must already
have overall odd transverse parity.

4

tions such as (1) or (3) using either a matrix optics approach
or analytic geometry. Another possibility, directly applica-
ble to laboratory research, is to determine the sources of
systematic error in a given optical system and their relative
importance. Such a study could include how those errors
scale with the nominal placement of the optical elements
(e.g.
the separation of a light source and a collomating
lens) or with perturbations to the elements. The introduc-
tion of a cylindrical lens presents an opportunity to study
the translational symmetry of the lens and also the eﬀects
that arise from the addition of the “preferred direction”
along the axis of cylindrical symmetry.

Beyond the direct application to optics, there are many
aspects of this work that pertain to many branches of
physics. Selection rules, parity, symmetry, dimensionless
ratios, and perturbations are ubiquitous in physics and can
all be studied with this model. A student could be asked to
determine if a given coupling is allowed, to determine the
coeﬃcient that corresponds to that perturbation, or even to
empirically ﬁnd the analytic expression for that same coef-
ﬁcient by using the dimensionless ratios that can be formed
by the separation of the lenses and their focal lengths. Sim-
ilarly, a student could study how the coeﬃcients scale with
the nominal separation of the optical elements, such as the
expression that multiplies the perturbation to the ﬁrst lens
in equation (2) which scales linearly with short separations
and quadratically with large separations.

Using the perturbed optical system one can learn about
many important tools that physicists use in their eﬀorts
to understand natural law. The apparatus, consisting of
a beam of light and a few lenses, is relatively inexpensive
and easy to manipulate. The eﬀects of a perturbation to
the system appear instantly on a screen or detector which
transparancy allows for a deeper investigation of the phys-
ical principles being studied instead of simply a tutorial
on the use of a particular piece of laboratory equipment.
This system should prove useful as a pedagogical device for
undergraduates, both as a theoretical tool and as an exper-
imental investigation of a simple theory.

IV. DISCUSSION

Acknowledgments

One example of the application of this study to an under-
graduate course in optics would be the derivation of equa-

I would like to thank Drs. Michael Moore and Paul Boyn-

ton for their comments pertaining to this work.

jsteﬀen@astro.washington.edu

∗
1 R. A. Serway, Physics for Scientists and Engineers (Saunders

3 J. B. Almeida, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 16, 596 (1999).
4 When only displacements are considered, the presented for-

mulas are exact—there are no higher order terms.

College Pub., 1996), 4th ed.

2 E. Hecht, Optics (Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc.,

1987), 2nd ed.

