5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
1
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The conceptualization of time and the constancy of the speed of light

Vasco Guerra∗ and Rodrigo de Abreu
Departamento de F´ısica, Instituto Superior T´ecnico, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

In this work we show that the null result of the Michelson-Morley experiment in vacuum is deeply
It can be deduced without any mathematics only from the
connected with the notion of time.
assumption that all good clocks can be used to measure time with the same results, independently
of the machinery involved in their manufacturing.

A second important assumption, intrinsic to the very notion of time, is that clocks measure time
in the same way in diﬀerent frames, i.e., the notion of time is the same in all inertial frames. Under
this assumption, we point out that the “postulate” of constancy of the “two-way” speed of light
in vacuum in all frames independently of the state of motion of the emitting body is also strongly
related to the concept of time, together with the existence of a limit speed in the “rest frame”. This
postulate simply results from the construction of clocks where tic-tacs are made by objects traveling
with the limit speed.

PACS numbers: 01.55; 03.30
Keywords: Time; Clocks; Michelson-Morley experiment; Special Relativity

I.

INTRODUCTION

Einstein’s celebrated article “On the electrodynamics of moving bodies”1 was published precisely 100 years ago.
During this time, Special Theory of Relativity established itself as one of the most exciting topics in Physics. The
challenges and results of Special Relativity are so stimulating that it keeps attracting the attention of physicists and
philosophers, fascinating the general public as well. The centenary of Special Relativity and the 2005 World Year of
Physics provide the perfect occasion to revisit its foundations. In this work we suggest that the roots of both the null
result of Michelson-Morley experiment and of the postulate of the constancy of the speed of light in vacuum in all
inertial frames, independently of the state of motion of the emitting body, rest ﬁrmly on the very notion of time.

The structure of this article is as follows. In the next section we very brieﬂy describe Michelson-Morley experiment,
to somehow introduce the scenario. Section III deals with the notions of “time” and “clocks”. Finally, section IV
contains the main discussion, proposing that the null result of the Michelson-Morley experiment and the postulate of
the constancy of the speed of light in vacuum are strongly related with the concept of time.

II. THE MICHELSON-MORLEY EXPERIMENT

As it is well known, in the end of 19th century several scientists admitted that light waves move through a light ether
and that the speed of light in vacuum was c only in a special, absolute frame at rest with respect to this ether. Now,
if light moves with speed c only with respect to one special frame, it was supposed the speed of light on earth should
be faster or slower than c, depending on the way the earth would be moving through the ether. Several attempts were
made to determine the absolute velocity of the earth through the ether. The most famous was performed by Michelson
and Morley in 1887. A simpliﬁed scheme of the Michelson interferometer is shown in ﬁgure 1. Essentially a light
source emits a beam of light which is divided at a beam splitter. The two resulting beams continue in perpendicular
directions to mirrors 1 and 2, where they are reﬂected, coming back to the same point, where they are recombined
as two superposed beams. The details of the experiment are not too complicated to follow and can be found in any
physics textbook, such as the classic ones by Feynman2 or Serway3. Basically, what happens is that if the time taken
for the light to go from the beam splitter to mirror 1 and back is the same as the time from the beam splitter to mirror
2 and back, then the two beams would reinforce each other. However, if these times diﬀer slightly, an interference
pattern should be formed. If the interfermoter is at rest (i.e., on the ether frame) and in vacuum, the times should
be precisely equal. But if it is moving with a certain speed it was expected they would be diﬀerent. Yet no signiﬁcant
time diﬀerence was found: it seemed the speed of the earth through the ether could not be detected. The small time
diﬀerences found were considered at the time to be merely errors of experiment and it was concluded the experiment
had given a null result. This was of course a puzzling issue, that was solved by Lorentz in 18954. He suggested that all
moving bodies contract in the direction paralel to their movement through the ether. Lorentz has shown that if the
length of a moving body is contracted by a factor p1 − v2/c2, and this contraction occurs only in the direction of the
motion, then the null results of Michelson-Morley experiment would be readily explained. A rather similar hypothesis
of a change in the length of material bodies had been formulated independently by Fitzgerald in 18895, who promoted

2

Mirror 2

L

Ether wind

L

Source

Beam splitter

Mirror 1

FIG. 1: Schematic diagram of the Michelson-Morley experiment.

his deformation idea in his lectures and correspondence. Einstein’s Special Relativity “solves” the problem of the
null result of Michelson-Morley experiment by postulating that the speed of light is constant and independent of the
speed of the source not only in a preferred ether frame, but in all inertial frames. The Michelson-Morley experiment
is thus related to the postulate of the constancy of the speed of light in vacuum and plays a central role in Special
Relativity, appearing in almost all books presenting the subject.

III. TIME AND CLOCKS

We all have an intuitive idea about the notion of time. However, it is likely we will have an hard time in answering
in a simple way the fundamental question “what is time?”. Many scientists and philosophers have reﬂected about
this question. One celebrated example is that of St. Augustine, who wrote in his “Confessions”:

What is time? Who can readily and brieﬂy explain this? Who can even in thought comprehend it, so as
to utter a word about it? But what in discourse do we mention more familiarly and knowingly, than time?
And, we understand, when we speak of it; we understand also, when we hear it spoken of by another.
What then is time? If no one asks me, I know: if I wish to explain it to one that asked, I know not.

Interestingly enough, the diﬃculty in deﬁning in words what is time is not of great concern to start studying physics...
since we know how to measure it! Time is what is measured with clocks. Therefore, the “only” things needed to
proceed are clocks.

Let us for now follow Einstein1 and restrict the analysis to

a coordinate system in which Newton’s mechanical equations are valid. To distinguish this system verbally
from those to be introduced later, and to make our presentation more precise, we will call it the “rest
system.”

We will further conﬁne the discussion to clocks in “vacuum”, in order to avoid the problem of the interactions between
clocks and the surrounding medium. In principle, any periodic phenomenum may be associated with a clock. Galileo
even used the rhythm of his heart beat as a clock. Which raises the question of how do we know if the time intervals
given by a certain clock are really equal. The truth is that we do not know. What is possible to do is to compare the
readings of diﬀerent clocks (see below). Then, using these comparisons and with the help of theoretical arguments
about the laws ruling each of the periodic phenomena involved, decide which clock is more trustful.

One very simple clock is Feynman’s light clock2, schematically depicted in ﬁgure 2.

It consists of two mirrors
vertically aligned and a light source close to one of the mirrors. At a certain instant the source emits one photon in
the direction of the other mirror. The photon is continuously reﬂected by both mirrors, making “tic” each time it is
reﬂected on the upper mirror, and “tac” each time it is reﬂected on the lower one. The unit of time is then deﬁned by
a complete “tic-tac”. Notice that rigourously it is not convenient to deﬁne the unit of time with just the “tic” or just
the “tac”, because this would involve the additional assumption that one is equal to the other. This assumption is
generally accepted to hold, but it is by no means obvious nor even necessary, as pointed out in6,7. Such discussion is
far beyond the purpose ot the present work and we simply want to stress that the periodic movement corresponds to
the complete “tic-tac”. That being so, for a general deﬁnition of time this is the time interval that must be considered.

Mirror

3

Mirror

FIG. 2: The Feynman light clock.

It is implicitly assumed that time passes independently of the type of clocks we use to measure it. Therefore, we
expect that clocks built upon diﬀerent phenomena, when in the same location, will mark the same times. This is of
course an assumption, but even though it is what we expect. In any case, it can be veriﬁed by experiment. And up
to now there is no reason to suspect that diﬀerent clocks in the same place do not provide the same time readings,
independently of the machinery involved in their construction, as long as they are precise enough. If this idea is true,
if any good clock can be used to measure time, then the time measurements of a certain clock do not depend on its
orientation. Even if two equal clocks with diﬀerent orientations may be regarded as two diﬀerent clocks, they should
still measure the same time intervals (ﬁgure 3). If our notion of time is correct, this must be true not only in the
“rest system”, but in any “moving” inertial frame as well, since the clocks used to measure time in these frames are
exactly equal to the ones used in the “rest system”.

FIG. 3: Identical clocks with diﬀerent space orientations measure the same times.

IV. THE CONSTANCY OF THE SPEED OF LIGHT

We are now ready to discuss the Michelson-Morley experiment and the postulate of the constancy of the speed
of light. Consider two Feynman light clocks, exactly equal, placed side by side. The particular periodic movement
involved in Feynman clocks repeats itself after a complete “tic-tac”, corresponding to a round trip of light from one
mirror to the other and back. The time-unit is one tic-tac and is the same for both clocks. Now rotate one of the
clocks by 90 degrees, as shown in ﬁgure 4. What happens? If time does not really depend on the clocks used to
measure it, if time does not depend on the orientation of clocks, then the complete tic-tac of both clocks is still the
same. But two Feynman clocks rotated by 90 degrees are no more no less than Michelson-Morley interferometer!
Therefore, the times light takes to go along each arm of the interferometer and back must be the same. This must be
true for the “rest system” as well for any “moving” inertial frame. In other words, in each inertial frame the two-way
speed of light is constant. Once more notice that to keep the argument completely general we must use the two-way
speed of light, which corresponds to the average speed of light when it makes a round trip, since the complete “tic-tac”
deﬁning the time unit involves such a round trip. It is not necessary to invoke any additional assumption about the
one-way speeds of light, which dictate the time intervals for the “tic” and the “tac”.

As we have just seen, the null result of Michelson-Morley experiment is actually a conﬁrmation that any good clock
can be used to measure time and is deeply connected with the notion of time. The null result of Michelson-Morley
experiment and the constancy of the two-way speed of light may seem odd, but it would be a disaster for our notion of

4

a)

b)

FIG. 4: Two similar Feynman light clocks give a complete tic-tac exactly at the same instant both when a) they are side by
side and b) one of them is rotated by 90 degrees.

time if it had been otherwise. And, quite surprisingly, the null result of Michelson-Morley experiment could probably
have been anticipated.

The Michelson-Morley experiment shows that in vacuum light takes the same time to go up to the mirrors and back
in both arms of the interferometer (see ﬁgure 1). The null result of the experiment is related only to the equality of
both these times. It corresponds to the assertion that in each particular inertial frame the two-way speed of light is
the same in all directions. This is already some “constancy” of the speed of light, but the experiment does not tell it
has the same value in all inertial frames. Lorentz original explanation of the experiment was based only on the space
contraction hypothesis and time was not aﬀected. To arrive at the conclusion that the two-way speed of light is the
same in all inertial frames it is necessary to go beyond the null result of Michelson-Morley experiment, by actually
measuring its value. We shall now see that this second kind of “constancy” is also implied by the fundamental concept
of time.

Imagine a Feynman-like clock with bullets. The argument given above is related only with time measurements and
equivalence of clocks, not with light clocks. It can be applied with clocks where bullets travel instead of light rays and
guns replace the mirrors. Therefore, in each inertial frame the two-way speed of bullets must be the same, otherwise
the tic-tacs given by two bullet clocks rotated by 90 degrees would be diﬀerent. Is that really so? Yes it is. But what
is diﬀerent with light is that, contrary to bullets, its two-way speed is the same in all inertial frames, independently
of the speed of the source. This very striking fact is connected to c being a limit speed in the “rest system”, as we
will now show.

We have just seen that if time does not depend on the clocks used to measure it, then in each inertial frame the
two-way speed of any object (emmited by perfectly equal devices) must be the same. This is true for bullets, as well
as for light. Let us now give a second step, which deals with a diﬀerent idea of “constancy” of speed. Consider again
a Feynman-like clock with bullets. We already know that in any particular moving inertial frame S′, say a train that
is passing in a station, the two-way speed of bullets ﬁred in that frame is the same, no matter the direction they are
travelling. Now, if the two-way speed of these same bullets, that were shot with guns ﬁxed in the train, is measured
in the station, one obtains a diﬀerent value. Thus, the same bullets travel with diﬀerent two-way speeds in diﬀerent
frames. In this sense one can say the two-way speed of bullets is not the same in all inertial frames. However, suppose
now that the bullet-clock is taken from the train to the station and bullets are again shot. It is precisely the same
clock, which does “tic-tac” and measures time precisely in the same way. Notice that time is actually measured with
distances and that since a clocks involve a periodic movement, time units – the tic-tacs – are deﬁned with average
two-ways speeds. Thus, if bullets move in S′ with a certain two-way speed v′ along a straigth line, the total distance
x′ they travel in a round trip in S′ is related with the elapsed time t′ via x′ = v′t′. For instance, if the round trip
takes 1 meter and the two-way speed is 1 meter per second, one second passes in each tic-tac. If the same clock is
used in a second inertial frame S′′, in each tic-tac bullets now travel a distance x′′, which corresponds to a certain
time t′′. Of course x′′ = v′′t′′, where v′′ is the two-way speed of bullets in S′′. But, if the clock measures time in the
same way as before, then this correspondence between distance and time must be done exactly in the same way, i.e.,
v′ = v′′ and the two-way speeds of bullets must be the same in both frames. Hence, the two-way speed, measured in
the station, of bullets ﬁred in the station, must be the same as the two-way speed, measured in the train, of bullets
ﬁred in the train. This is intrinsic to the very notion of time: it only means clocks measure time in the same way in
diﬀerent frames: the notion of time is the same in all inertial frames. So there is also a “constancy” of the two-way
speed of bullets in all inertial frames! But this constancy refers to diﬀerent objects, the bullets ﬁred in the train and
the bullets ﬁred in the station. Diﬀerent bullets travel with the same two-way speed in diﬀerent frames. Evidently
the argument is valid not only for bullets. Therefore, the two-way speeds of any kind of objects must be the same
in all inertial frames, as long as we are referring to diﬀerent objects of the same kind, emmitted by perfectly equal
devices at rest in relation to the diﬀerent frames. This is true for bullets, as well as for light.

5

The ﬁnal step is the issue of a limit speed. Assume that such a limit exists: that no object travelling in the “rest
system” can have a speed higher than a certain value c. To all objects moving with speeds lower than the limit speed,
the constancy of their two-way speed in all frames refers to diﬀerent objects, such as the “bullets ﬁred in the train”
and the “bullets ﬁred in the station”. For simplicity, let us make the station coincide with the “rest frame” and refer
speeds to this frame. If the bullets are ﬁred in the direction of the head of the train, bullets shot from the train always
have a higher speed than the bullets shot from the station with a perfectly equal gun. Now pick a more powerful gun,
that shoots bullets at higher speeds. The same thing happens. The bullets shot from the train always have a higher
speed than the bullets shot from the station, which, in turn, move faster than the bullets shot with the less powerful
gun. The process can continue by successively taking more powerful guns. For a really powerful gun, the speed of
bullets ﬁred in the station can be very close to the limit speed. But in the “rest frame” of the station the bullets ﬁred
from the moving train cannot have a speed higher than the limit speed! Therefore, in this case the bullets shot from
the train will move almost imperceptibly faster than the bullets shot from the station. And so, if an object emmited
from the “rest frame” moves with the limit speed c, it will also move with speed c when emmitted from a “moving”
inertial frame: objects travelling with the limit speed must do so independently of the velocity of the emmiting source.
In this way, the existence of “objects” moving with the same speed independently from the speed of the source is
directly connected to the existence of a limit speed in the “rest frame”.

What is special about light is that it moves with the limit speed. That being so, and contrary to bullets, if two
light rays are emitted simultaneously, on the same position in space, one in the train and the other in the station,
there is no diﬀerence between the two rays! Light propagates on the “rest frame” with the same speed independently
of the velocity of the source emitting the light, and actually both rays can be seen as forming the same object. In the
“second step” it was argued that diﬀerent objects of the same kind have the same two-way speed in diﬀerent frames.
This is true for bullets, as well as for light. But with light the distinction between “diﬀerent” light rays is artiﬁcial.
The two-way speed of the same light rays must then be constant in diﬀerent inertial frames. And this speed must be
the limit speed in the “rest frame”. Because diﬀerent objects, emmited from diﬀerent inertial frames, collapse into
the same object if and only if they travel with the limit speed c. Only in this case the constancy of their two-way
speeds refers to the same object. The same light rays travel with the same two-way speeds in all inertial frames.
This distinctive feature of the limit speed, that its two-way value is the same in all inertial frames regardless of the
speed of the source, makes it the privileged way to convert spaces to times through x = ct. All the argumentation
was made only on the basis of our notions of time and clocks. In this sense, the limit speed can somehow be seen as
“the speed of time”.

V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

We have shown that both the null result of Michelson-Morley experiment and the postulate of constancy of the
two-way speed of light in vacuum are a direct consequence of the fundamental notions of time and clocks. They can be
obtained under three very reasonable assumptions: i) that all good clocks can be used to measure time, independently
of the periodic physical phenomena they are built upon; ii) that time is measured in the same way in all inertial
frames, i.e., if a particular clock can be used to measure time in the “rest system”, a similar clock can be used to
measure time in “moving” inertial frames; iii) that a limit speed exists in the “rest system”.

The question of the possible constancy of the one-way speed of light in vacuum is related to the one century long
question of a preferred frame vs. “equivalence” of all inertial frames, and is left for a forthcoming paper. However,
the arguments presented here are completely general and have be true in both scenarios.

∗

Electronic address: vguerra@alfa.ist.utl.pt; Also at Centro de F´ısica dos Plasmas, Instituto Superior T´ecnico, 1049-001
Lisboa, Portugal

1 A. Einstein, in Einstein’s Miraculous Year, edited by J. Stachel (Princeton University Press, 1998), (the article ﬁrst appeared

in Annalen der Physik 17 (1905)).

2 R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics (Addison-Wesley Publishing Company,

3 R. A. Serway and R. J. Beichner, Physics For Scientists and Engineers with Modern Physics (Saunders College Publishing,

1979), 13th ed.

2000), 5th ed.

4 H. A. L. Lorentz, Versuch einer Thoerie der electrischen und optischen Erscheinungen in bewegten K¨orpern, (Leiden, 1985).
5 G. F. Fitzgerald, Science 13, 390 (1889).
6 W. F. Edwards, Am. J. Phys. 31, 482 (1963).
7 R. Mansouri and R. U. Sexl, General Relativity and Gravitation 8, 497 (1977).

