5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
1
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Abuse and Use of Relativistic Mass

Gary Oas
Education Program for Gifted Youth
Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305
(Received

October 17, 2012

Abstract

The concept of velocity dependent mass, relativistic mass, is examined and is found to be inconsistent with
the geometrical formulation of special relativity. This is not a novel result; however, many continue to use
this concept and some have even attempted to establish it as the basis for special relativity. It is argued that
the oft-held view that formulations of relativity with and without relativistic mass are equivalent is incorrect.
Left as a heuristic device a preliminary study of ﬁrst time learners suggest that misconceptions can develop
when the concept is introduced without basis. In order to gauge the extent and nature of the use of relativistic
mass a survey of the literature on relativity has been undertaken. The varied and at times self-contradicting
use of this concept points to the lack of clear consensus on the formulation of relativity. As geometry lies at
the heart of all modern representations of relativity, it is urged, once again, that the use of the concept at all
levels be abandoned.

PACS numbers: 01.40.Gm, 03.30.+p

1

Introduction

The year 2005 has been deemed the “World Year of Physics” in conjunction with the 100th anniversary of
Einstein’s “Annus Mirabilis.” As a result, numerous discussions of Einstein’s achievements will ensue throughout
the year. There will, no doubt, be numerous presentations of the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics
in newsprint, books, and on television.
It is the responsibility of physicists to educate the lay-public about
these ideas and their importance to society. However, it behooves the physics community to insure that such
presentations are free of inaccuracies and hyperbole. Action must be taken when broad, inaccurate assertions
are put forth (such as stating everything is random in quantum mechanics, or that Einstein did not believe in
quantum mechanics at all).

There is one concept that has been ingrained into the collective mindset of not only lay-people but also many
working physicists. This is the notion of relativistic mass; a moving object’s mass increases with velocity with
respect to an observer considered to be at rest,

m(v) =

m0
p(1 − v2/c2)

.

(1)

The decision whether or not to introduce relativistic mass in pedagogical expositions is still not universally
agreed upon. The debate on the usage of this concept has been going on since the early days of relativity. On
both sides of the issue there have been advocates insisting their view is the correct one. Some have relied on
historical precedent as a rationale for its inclusion.

Whether or not to speak of velocity-dependent mass is largely a matter of taste. Although it is currently
unfashionable to do so, Einstein did and we shall as well. (pg 212 of Understanding Relativity[1])(Q1).

Reliance upon such a controversial history for validation is not only pedagogically suspect but is, in this
instance, incorrect; Einstein was not in favor of using relativistic mass, except in his earliest works. In fact, one
would be hard-pressed to ﬁnd an explicit statement of relativistic mass in Einstein’s work after his 1906 paper
on transverse and longitudinal mass[2]. Later in life, he addressed the issue directly in a letter to L. Barnett.

1

It is not good to introduce the concept of the mass M = m/(1 − v2/c2)1/2 of a moving body for which no
clear deﬁnition can be given. It is better to introduce no other mass concept than the ’rest mass’ m. Instead
of introducing M it is better to mention the expression for the momentum and energy of a body in motion.
(quote from [3])(Q2)

In the late 1980’s a renewed eﬀort was made to dissuade the physics community from introducing this
concept[3][4][5][7]. These attempts spawned a vigorous debate on the interpretation and usefulness of relativistic
mass. In section 4 evidence will show that this debate has had some inﬂuence in diminishing the use of this
concept in textbooks; however, it is clear that these eﬀorts have gone unheeded by many.

It is not the intent here to revisit all of the previous arguments but to expand upon them in order to convince
the need and urgency of the issue. (See Lev Okun’s extensive arguments[4] for a thorough discussion). The
need for continued discussion stems from recent work attempting to legitimize the concept as a basis for special
relativity, and also the continual ﬂood of books utilizing the concept geared for the general public.

2 What are the opposing viewpoints?

Most of the previous arguments debating the use of relativistic mass have oversimpliﬁed the diﬀerence in view-
points in question; it is not merely a matter of taste whether to employ the concept or not. Thus, the ﬁrst task
at hand is to deﬁne the opposing viewpoints.

Non-relativistic mass view, Geometric Formulation (G): Central to the geometric formulation (G) is that
the isotropy of space and uniformity of space and time, along with the notion of causuality[8][9][10], is suf-
ﬁcient to lead to a four-dimensional spacetime endowed with a Lorentzian signature metric. The principle
of relativity yields a consistent kinematics incorporating the eﬀects of time dilation, length contraction,
addition of velocities, etc. The Lorentz transformation is seen as a direct consequence of the hyperbolic
geometry. The extension to dynamics is immediate by postulating the primitive concepts of mass and mo-
mentum. In order to have a Lorentz covariant 4-momentum, the mass is found to be a Lorentz invariant.
The validity of this approach will be assumed in what follows.

Relativistic Mass (RM): Here we deﬁne the concept of relativistic mass (RM) as the relation (1). This is a
dynamical concept without speciﬁcation to kinematics. Exactly how RM is invoked in relation to kinematics
will be explored below, as this is the purpose of this paper.

In regards to the antiquated concepts of longitudinal and transverse mass, they shall not be considered here.

C. Adler[5] demonstrated how these must be accepted if one is to propose an inertial relativistic mass.

2.1 How is RM invoked?

In most introductory treatments of special relativity the exact nature of how RM is arrived at is varied and often
vague. Thus, the task at hand is to explore how this concept is to be incorporated within the theoretical structure
of special relativity. There are two possibilities,

1. RM supplants the geometric formulation as a primitive concept,

2. RM is introduced in conjunction with the geometric formulation.

However one may feel about the validity of either possibility, both are taken seriously in diﬀerent works and
thus it is important to examine each closely. We begin with the foremost reason that RM is introduced in works
directed at the general public; to explain why no material object can travel at or beyond the speed of light (this
concept will be denoted as Noc). Given that G implies time dilation, which yields Noc, the question arises as
to exactly how RM is invoked to give Noc. There are two possibilities: either RM itself is the causation of Noc
(1. above), or RM is considered in conjunction with the proper kinematics to yield Noc (2. above). If neither
position can be made tenable all that is left is a heuristic device.

2.1.1 Can RM supplant G?

Those adherents of the ﬁrst position might be inclined to state that there are two diﬀerent, yet equivalent,
viewpoints of the same phenomena. In regards to Noc, a common argument is provided in the following quote.

2

...Einstein’s equation gives us the most concrete explanation for the central fact that nothing can travel faster
than light speed. You may have wondered, for instance, why we can’t take some object, a muon say, that
an accelerator has boosted up to 667 million miles per hour – 99.5 percent of light speed – and “push it a
bit harder,” getting it to 99.9 percent of light speed, and then “really push it harder” impelling it to cross
the light-speed barrier. Einstein’s formula explains why such eﬀorts will never succeed.
[. . . ] But the more
massive an object is, the harder it is to increase its speed. Pushing a child on a bicycle is one thing, pushing a
Mack truck is quite another. So, as a muon moves more quickly it gets ever more diﬃcult to further increase
its speed. (pg 52 of The Elegant Universe[11])(Q3)

Some suggest that this viewpoint obviates the need to introduce time dilation, Lorentz transformations, or
other seemingly complicated concepts in demonstrating Noc[13], that is, RM is a suﬃcient to explain Noc. The
problem with this explanation is that, by itself, relativistic mass does not prevent the observation of superluminal
objects. For it does not imply the addition of velocity formula and therefore two observers in two IRFs moving
in opposite directions may observe the other to be traveling at a speed greater than c. Thus it is not a suﬃcient
reason for the existence of a fundamental speed limit for any object. Of course along with the principle of special
relativity, and its implication that the speed of light is an invariant, relativistic mass does allow for Noc. However
the constancy of the speed of light is suﬃcient, in itself, to give Noc[14]. To repeat, RM in itself is not suﬃcient
to give Noc, yet if it is introduced along with the principle of special relativity it is superﬂuous.

Throughout the past century there have been a few attempts to derive special relativity from classical me-

chanics and the relativistic mass relation, (1), alone[15][16][17].

For those who want to learn just enough about it so they can solve problems, that is all there is to the theory
of relativity – it just changes Newton’s laws by introducing a correction factor to the mass.
(pg 15-1 of The Feynman Lectures on Physics[18]) (Q4)

No attempt has been entirely successful, however this does not prevent some from trying. It is instructive to

examine the latest such attempt to see how this program fails.
Jammer. In his more recent book on concepts of mass[16], Max Jammer delves extensively into the numerous
arguments related to relativistic mass. The conclusion reached is that both formalisms are valid and that the
diﬀerence is “ultimately the disparity between two competing views of the development of physical science.” To
this end he cites the work of B. V. Landau and S. Samanthapar[17] in which the addition of velocity relation and
Lorentz transformation are said to be derived from Newtonian mechanics and the relativistic mass formula alone.
As Jammer puts it “The fact that the Lorentz transformation and relativistic mass equation mutually imply one
another seems to indicate that the relation between these two is more intimate than commonly thought”. This
result would formally show the validity of relativistic mass as a possible basis for special relativity, thus making
the RM formalism and the geometric formalism complementary views of special relativity.

A close examination of Landau and Samanthpar’s derivation ﬁnds that the hyperbolic geometry of spacetime
is the basis for their result and not the relativistic mass formula. By considering conservation of momentum in a
simple two-particle process, the authors implicitly invoke the geometry of spacetime by redeﬁning, without expla-
nation, the velocities as hyperbolic tangents (i.e. u1
c = tanhα, etc.). Then by relying on hyperbolic trigonometric
relations, hyperbolic spacetime has been introduced, automatically yielding the relation they desire[6]. Thus this
derivation does not provide a basis for Jammer’s claim since the Lorentz transformation arises from the geometry
and not from the relativistic mass formula.

To support his claim further, Jammer derives the relativistic mass relation from the Lorentz transformation.
However his derivation is, at the outset, set up to give a relativistic mass once the spatial components of the
4-momentum are deﬁned. For all agree (modulo interpretations of m0) that the Lorentz transformations yield a
4-momentum that must be of the form,

pµ = γm0uµ,

(2)

dt . This derivation precludes the interpretation of a proper 4-velocity, vµ = dxµ

where uµ = dxµ
dτ , that stems from
G and which results in (2) without need for relativistic mass. Thus the derivation does not prove the claim that
the Lorentz transformations unequivocally lead to a relativistic mass, nor does it lend credence to the idea that
these two concepts are intimately related.

Feynman’s assertion above (Q4) is incorrect (for example pµ

rel). Clearly the notion that relativity
can be derived from the relativistic mass relation and classical principles alone is untenable. Without the kine-
matical eﬀects of time dilation one is forced to accept superluminal, imaginary mass objects that could easily be
generated by a suitable choice of reference frames. All one need do to observe such objects in such a world is to
walk briskly in a direction opposite that of electrons near the end of a linear accelerator such as SLAC. It is the
geometry of spacetime and not RM that limit material objects to less than the speed of light.

rel 6= m(v)vµ

3

2.1.2 Can RM be consistent with G?

With the failure to base special relativity upon relativistic mass, independent of G, one is lead to consider the
second possibility of invoking RM, as a primitive concept, in conjunction with G.

And it’s not just distance and time that change. Special relativity also shows that as an object travels faster,
its mass increases. But as the mass of an object increases, it takes more and more energy to increase its speed
any further. Eventually, as the object gets close to the speed of light, it becomes so massive that no amount of
energy will make it go any faster. This means that the speed of light is a universal speed limit which nothing
with mass can break. (Einstein Year UK web site[19])(Q5)

To see how relativistic mass is arrived at in more formal texts, we need to understand the main motivation

behind its introduction –maintaining familiar, Newtonian-like, expressions for velocity and momentum.

. . . we shall show that it is possible to preserve the form of the classical deﬁnition of the momentum of
a particle, p = mu, where p is the momentum, m is the mass, and u the velocity of a particle, and also to
preserve the classical law of conservation of momentum of a system of interacting particles, provided that we
modify the classical concept of mass.[20](Q6).

This predilection towards Newtonian momentum is back of most derivations of relativistic mass. The reason
stems from the early history of special relativity, especially the eﬀorts of Lewis and Tolman[21][22][23], that were
picked up by later authors[18][24][20]. Just as in Jammer’s case above, these derivations posit a Newtonian form
for the 3-momentum,

px = mux,

and then impose conservation of momentum. Naturally the result found is that the new relativistic expression
for momentum, that is Lorentz covariant, must be of the form (2). From his derivation, Tolman (1912, as cited
in Jammer[16]) makes the bold assertion that “the expression m0(1 − v2/c2)−1/2 is best suited for THE mass of
a moving body”.

Breaks Lorentz Covariance. By asserting (3) as the deﬁnition of relativistic momentum, one is forced to
adopt a primitive concept of an improper 4-velocity; for uµ = dxµ
is not Lorentz covariant. It is easy to see that
dt
Lorentz transforming from a frame where an object is moving with a 3-velocity u to its rest frame that,

(3)

(4)

′µ = Λµ

u

ν (u)uν = (

, 0, 0, 0),

c
γ

whereas in its rest frame it is required to be (c, 0, 0, 0). This improper velocity also does not obey the relativistic
law of addition of velocities: An object moving with velocity u′
x in a frame S’, which moves with velocity V with
respect to frame S, is observed to have a 3-velocity in S, ux = γ(V )(u′ + V ). Nothing restricts the observed
velocity in S, ux, from being greater than c. Thus this velocity is at odds with the accepted kinematics of special
relativity (i.e. addition of velocity relation). The improper velocity being a direct result of the imposition of RM
means that RM is at odds with the accepted kinematics of special relativity. The notion that the choice whether
to utilize relativistic mass or not is merely a matter of taste is seen to be fallacious: The true nature of special
relativity stems from geometry (or kinematics).

Indeed, it should be noted that, whether we identify the factor 1/p1 − β2 with mass or with velocity, the
origin of this factor in collision measurements is kinematical; that is, it is caused by the relativity of time
measurements. (pg 199 of [20])(Q7).

The above method of breaking Lorentz covariance by hijacking the dilation factor away from the proper 4-
velocity and assigning it, for reasons of familiarity or heuristics, to the mass is exempliﬁed in Wolfgang Rindler’s
classic text[25]. This is an excellent formal introduction to relativity that delves into the geometric formalism
with great clarity and depth. However, imbedded within this discussion are continual dichotomous references to
relativistic mass.

We begin by assuming what we already know, that associated with each particle there is an intrinsic positive

scalar, m0, [...] This allows us to deﬁne the 4-momentum P of a particle in analogy to its 3-momentum,

P = m0U
U being the 4-velocity.

One paragraph later it is amended,

4

we ﬁnd the following components for P: P = m0U = m0γ(u)(u, c) =: (p, mc).

(Q8).

This relativistic shell game would not be too objectionable if the improper 4-velocity were not to be considered.
However, the geometric formulation has been usurped by the introduction of an improper velocity that does not
transform under a Lorentz transformation.

If this concept is so central to relativity it ought to be employed throughout any discussion of relativity.

However it is nearly always abandoned soon after its introduction.

In section 2.12 we assumed a relativistic momentum of the form p = m(v)v and used this to look for an
expression for the relativistic mass m(v) such that the conservation laws for mass and energy would hold in an
interaction. [...] The expression for momentum is simply rest mass multiplied by γv which we now recognise
[sic] as the ﬁrst three components of the 4-velocity. (Pg 161 of [26])(Q9).

Some authors use the relativistic mass but we shall do so only in the next two sections. (pg 49 of [27])(Q10).

Clearly those who utilize the concept do not hold it dear. The concept has only limited explanatory power and
is inconsistent with the geometrical formulation. If one can provide simple alternative explanations for Noc, as
well as other aspects of relativity, while reinforcing the spacetime concept, why introduce RM in the ﬁrst place?

3 Pedagogical arguments: Can RM be a Useful Heuristic?

Having found that a consistent theory of special relativity that is based upon proper relativistic quantities and
relativistic mass can not be formulated, one is left to wonder why it is still considered with such passion. If it
can not be considered as a primary concept of the theory, all that is left is to consider it as a heuristic. This is
troublesome for it introduces a view that is at odds with the formal theory. An analogy might be to insist on
discussing centrifugal forces, without reference to non-inertial frames, for “it appears” as if there is a force in a
non-inertial frame, however few physicists would ﬁnd this an advisable approach. However this does not deter all
from abandoning this approach. In his response to Okun’s call to abandon the concept, Rindler[28] oﬀered the
following,

To me, m = γm0 is a useful heuristic concept. It gives me a feeling for the magnitude of momentum p = mv
at various speeds [. . . ] I will confess to even occasionally using the heuristic concepts of longitudinal mass
γ3m0 and transverse mass γm0 to predict how a particle will move in a given ﬁeld of force. (Q11)

Potential misconceptions. The concept of relativistic mass is often thrust upon the reader with little or no
justiﬁcation (a typical example is the popular The Physics of Star Trek[29]). Not only does this force the reader
to accept it on faith, it leaves a seed of misconception that in the object’s rest frame the mass is increasing.
Consider the following passages,

Because of the equivalence of energy and mass, the energy which an object has due to its motion will add to
its mass. In other words, it will make it harder to increase its speed. [. . . ] As an object approaches the speed
of light, its mass rises ever more quickly, so it takes more and more energy to speed it up further. It can in fact
never reach the speed of light, because by then its mass would have become inﬁnite, and by the equivalence of
mass and energy, it would have taken an inﬁnite amount of energy to get it there. For this reason, any normal
object is forever conﬁned by relativity to move at speeds slower than the speed of light.

(pg 20-21 of A Brief History of Time [30])(Q12)

The faster something moves the more energy it has and from Einstein’s formula we see that the more energy
something has the more massive it becomes. Muons traveling at 99.9 percent of light speed, for example,
weigh a lot more than their stationary cousins. In fact, they are about 22 times as heavy–literally.

(pg 52 of The Elegant Universe [11])(Q13).

Special relativity - how clocks can run slow, and objects can shrink and gain mass at the same time

(UK Einstein Year Web Site, [19] )(Q14)

5

The implication within these passages is that the object is literally growing more massive. These statements
are indeterminate for the reference frame is not stated. This is not true of all works[12], however this form of
relativistic indetermination pervades the literature.

For the uninitiated this situation may be hard to grasp –exactly how is it becoming more massive? Are there
more atoms in the object? How does one actually measure this increase? Can one actually measure it? Without
further explanation one is left with a physical picture that is vastly diﬀerent than what the author intended. Or
is it? To see that RM leads to misconceptions, not only among students but authors as well, all one need do is
purview some popularizations of relativity. Consider two examples that highlight this problem.

• Relatively Speaking by Eric Chaisson[31]

On page 62 of this pedestrian introduction to relativity there is a series of three illustrations of a girl standing
on a scale. The intent is to convey observations when she is at rest and travelling at two diﬀerent speeds
(labeled “fast” and “faster”). The girl is seen to Lorentz contract as expected and the scale indicates her
weight to increase – the needle points to successively higher values. This is exactly the type of misconception
that is reinforced by this concept. If this image is to represent the girl in various IRFs then the needle
pointing to diﬀerent weights violates the primal nature of events, one of the most basic tenets of relativity.

• Space and Time in the Modern Universe by P.C.W. Davies[32]

On page 45 there is depicted a stick ﬁgure, holding a string with a ball on the end, standing on a scale
indicating 1 kg. Adjacent to this image is an image in which the same person is twirling the ball over its
head and the scale now indicates 5 kg – supposedly reﬂecting the increase with mass with velocity. The
manner in which the ball was set into motion is not stated. If an outside agent set it in motion then there
is no controversy that the mass of the isolated person-ball system has increased. The RM viewpoint is that
the energy input went into the kinetic energy of the ball plus its mass increase while the G viewpoint is that
the energy went to the kinetic energy alone. If the person sets the ball in motion (which seems to be the
implication), then there is no valid interpretation of the depiction, for energy (and hence mass) is conserved
for this isolated system.

This last example leads to a subtle point about the deﬁnition of mass and the deﬁnition of object (or system
of objects) and is stated by some[13][33] to be a pitfall of the non-RM viewpoint. However, the deﬁnition of the
mass of a system as the proper energy divided by c2 –regardless of the motion of the system’s center of mass – is
clearly described by Einstein[43]. The energy of an object as measured in other frames of reference is not inherent
to the object itself (is not proper). There are no conceptual inconsistencies with this approach (see Harris[34] for
a clear textbook treatment).

The two viewpoints of kinetic energy lead to a diﬀering ontology of spacetime.

KRM = (1 − 1/γ)mrelc2,

KG = (γ − 1)mc2.

(5)
(6)

The divergence of kinetic energy as light speed is approached has its cause in the diverging mass in the RM
viewpoint and the geometry of spacetime in the G viewpoint. This, once again, points to the incompatibility of
the RM viewpoint with a geometrical view of spacetime.

3.1 Preliminary Research Into Misconceptions

It has been argued that the concept of relativistic mass can not be a part of any complete, consistent, formulation
of relativity. Two examples of popular introductions to relativity demonstrated that the use of relativistic mass
may lead to misconceptions, even among experts. In order to fully gauge the potential for such misconceptions to
arise, more research is needed. If it can be clearly demonstrated that RM leads to problematic thinking, regardless
of any purported pedagogical beneﬁts, then one must seriously examine its continued use.

A preliminary investigation into misconceptions developing among ﬁrst time learners of relativity has been
undertaken, consisting of a brief survey given to 118 students[35]. Students were randomly given one of three
short passages from popularizations of relativity geared for general audiences; consisting of quotes (Q12) on page
5, (Q5) on page 4, and the following, (Q15), taken from a recent popularization of modern physics.

Einstein also showed that the mass of an object moving at close to the speed of light, as seen by an outside
observer, increases. [...] It explains, among other things, why the speed of light serves as the ultimate speed
limit in the universe. Suppose you’re in a spaceship, approaching the speed of light. You think ‘I’ll just step

6

on the accelerator a little harder and I’ll pass that pesky speed limit, no problem.’ But it won’t work: to make
your craft move faster, you have to use energy; the more massive the spaceship, the more energy you need.
And, thanks to Einstein’s special relativity, the mass keeps increasing, so you need more and more energy to
further boost the speed. And you’ll never quite make it. If you reached the speed of light, your spaceship, as
seen by an outside observer, would have an inﬁnite mass and it would have taken you an inﬁnite amount of
energy to get there. (from Universe on a T-Shirt[12]) (Q15)

After reading their brief passage the students were queried about two identical twins, one of which (Al) is
aboard a rapidly moving train car while the other (Bob) watches from the ground. Given that Bob sees his own
scale to read 200 lbs, the students were asked; a) As Bob looks at Al’s scale what does he see it to indicate?; b)
As Al looks at his own scale what does he see it to indicate? The choice of response consisted of less than, greater
than, or equal to, 200 lbs. The results are given in the following table.

Response to b):

Response to a): > 200 lbs. = 200 lbs. < 200 lbs.

> 200 lbs.
= 200 lbs.
< 200 lbs.

12(4,6,2)
9(3,5,1)
2(0,2,0)

39(5,17,17)
27(13,6,8)
9(3,3,3)

8(4,2,2)
7(3,1,3)
5(0,1,4)

Results of survey of 118 students. Rows refer to answers to question (a) – the scale reading of Al as viewed by Bob, and
columns correspond to (b) –the scale reading of Al as viewed by Al himself. The total number of responses is given and
the subscript triplet gives the breakdown by passage given ((Q5), (Q12), (Q15)).

Of note is that less than a quarter of the students gave the completely correct response, (=,=), and that more
than a third indicated that the weight changes in the rest frame Al. Also interesting is that (Q15) is the only
quote of the three to explicitly state the relativity of the observations in diﬀerent frames, yet less than a quarter
(8/40) gave the correct answer.

While these are only preliminary results, and do not warrant a ﬁrm conclusion, they do suggest that invoking
the concept of relativistic mass may create more confusion among the lay reader. Clearly more thorough research
is needed and is currently underway.

One might argue that the misconception discovered here is no diﬀerent than what is often found in regards to
time dilation or length contraction – a strong bond to Galilean relativity that is diﬃcult to overcome. The eﬀects
of time dilation and length contraction can be explictly measured in simple ways. Any change in mass can not
be measured directly but only inferred. In addition, the use of relativistic mass is based on heuristic grounds and
is not a fundamental part of the theory. Why employ an unnecessary concept that is furthering confusion?

4 Survey of Literature

The discussion up to this point has been intended to demonstrate that the concept of relativistic mass is prob-
lematic. For those that already understand this point we would like to point out that this notion is still prevalent
in the literature on relativity. To this end the results of an extensive, yet not exhaustive, literature search are
now discussed.

In total, 637 works were reviewed to determine whether the concept of relativistic mass is introduced. Those
works that introduce RM but then discuss its shortfalls, or dissuade its use, are listed as not having introduced the
notion. The primary concern is to identify those works that deem relativistic mass as a valid aspect of relativity.
Emphasis has been placed on latest, available editions of works. Due to its length, the reference list for these
works, along with further commentary, is given in a separate report[36].

Of all the works examined, 477 relied upon the concept. This is not a very informative fact in itself; it
is more revealing to examine the historical trend among diﬀerent types of works. To this end, the works were
categorized into four broad categories: texts devoted to special and/or general relativity, introductory and modern
physics textbooks, popularizations of relativity and physics, and a miscellany of other works. This latter category
includes: philosophical, historical, religious, and science ﬁction books as well as textbooks that fall outside of
those categories above (such as advanced physics, math and engineering). Articles and peer-reviewed journals
were excluded from this survey. One reason was simply to keep the task manageable, the other was to limit to
sources that are accessible to a wide population, not primarily scientists.

The historical trend of the use of relativistic mass is displayed in ﬁgures 1 - 4. The works were binned into

ﬁve year increments beginning from 1970.

7

36

64

92

222

18

86

8

4

4

8

12
16

20

24

28

32
26
24
20
16
12
8
4

4
8
12
16
20
24
26
32

8

4

4

8

12

16

20
24

28

32

36

56

no RM

RM

no RM

RM

pre 1970 1970-74

1975-79

1980-84

1985-89

1990-94

1995-99 2000-05

no RM

12

RM

SRT, GRT

Figure 1: Special and General Relativity Textbooks: 100 textbooks devoted to relativity displayed by year of
publication and classiﬁed as whether having introduced the concept of relativistic mass (RM) or not (no RM).

pre 1970 1970-74

1975-79

1980-84

1985-89

1990-94

1995-99 2000-05

IPT, MPT

Figure 2: Introductory and Modern Physics Textbooks: 314 editions of introductory and modern physics text-
books displayed by year of publication of edition.

pre 1970 1970-74

1975-79

1980-84

1985-89

1990-94

1995-99 2000-05

Figure 3: Popularizations of Relativity and Physics: 103 books on science that are geared for the general public,
displayed by year of publication.

Pop. Phys.

8

pre 1970 1970-74

1975-79

1980-84

1985-89

1990-94

1995-99 2000-05

14

105

no RM

RM

8

4

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

40

44

Misc.

Figure 4: Miscellaneous: 119 books on various topics such as: advanced physics, math texts, philosophical works,
engineering texts, science ﬁction, religious, etc.

The last ﬁgure, 4, would appear to allude to a large bias in the treatment of the concept; however, one most
be careful in drawing too strong of a conclusion from this portion of the survey. A large portion of the references
were obtained from a search for relativistic mass. One should not conclude from this set that the ratio of works in
this category that use the concept to those that do not is growing rapidly. A valid conclusion is that the number
of works in this category that use this concept is growing.

Certain trends are clearly indicated; the use of relativistic mass in introductory physics textbooks has clearly
been diminishing while its occurrence in more informal works is growing. A slightly more troubling result is the
lack of any trend in more advanced texts devoted to relativity.

4.1 A Closer Look at Some Textbooks

Of the more signiﬁcant trends, in terms of pedagogy, is the use of RM in introductory and modern physics
textbooks. In addition to the above plot, ﬁgure 2, it is of interest to see how individual textbooks have approached
this concept as they evolved into their later editions. In ﬁgure 5 are displayed some of the more popular physics
textbooks categorized by year of edition and use of RM. The introductory physics texts have been categorized
by their level, A, B, and C, as deﬁned by the College Board[37]. Category A being conceptual introductions;
B, algebra-based; C, calculus-based introductions; and an additional category D, representing modern physics
textbooks.

In all of the hundred or so titles falling under this category only two have been found that moved from a
position of not employing the concept of relativistic mass to utilizing it. The ﬁrst is the popular Physics: for
Scientists and Engineers by R. Serway[38] wherein the third and fourth editions are the only ones to adopt the
concept. In fact, within these two editions, contradicting statements about the mass of the object are stated. On
page 1175 of the fourth edition it is stated,

Finally, note that since mass m of a particle is independent of its motion, m must have the same value
in all reference frames.

Two pages later it is claimed,

It follows that mass varies with speed (relative to the observer). We must therefore distinguish between
the rest mass, m0, which is the mass measured by an observer at rest relative to the particle (and
at the same location), and the mass measured in real experiments.

In the third edition the contradiction is more blatant; ﬁrst, a mathematical expression for relativistic mass is
given (page 1124) and then on page 1128 the ﬁrst of the two quotes above appears.

The second case is the classic calculus-based textbook University Physics by Sears, Zemansky, and Young[39]
(carried over into later editions by the authors Young and Freedman). This series has enjoyed a very long history
and has reversed its position on the concept twice, initially employing the concept (like most texts of the time)
and then moving away from it (5th ed.) only to return to its use in the latest editions. (This later inclusion can

9

1st 2nd 3rd 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83

Year of edition publication

2

4

2
3

3
2

1

5

1

4

6

7

2

5

6

W

1

1

2

HB

PH

BC

PH

JW

MH

MH

19__

AW '47 '52 '60
MH '65
AW ]

College Physics
Principles of Physics
Physics
Physics, Princ. w/ Appl.
College Physics
Physics
College Physics
Physics: Alg & Trig
Physics
Introductory Physics

                                                                                                     
AUTHORs
TITLE
    Category A:  CONCEPTUAL PHYSICS TEXTBOOKS
Physics for Poets
March
Conceptual Physics
Hewitt
The Physics Around You
Long
Physics: A World View
Kirkpatrick, Wheeler
    Category B:  ALGEBRA-BASED INTRODUCTORY PHYSICS TEXTBOOKS
Sears, Zemansky, Young
Bueche
Beiser
Giancoli
Serway, Faughn
Cutnell,  Johnson
Wilson, (Buffa (4,5))
Hecht
Walker
Touger
    Category C:  CALCULUS-BASED INTRODUCTORY PHYSICS TEXTBOOKS
Sears, Zemansky, Young
Resnick, Halliday, Krane
Halliday, Resnick, Walker
Tipler
Serway
Ohanian
Giancoli
Fishbane, Gasiorowicz, Th. Physics for Sci. & Eng.
Principles of Physics
Serway  (Jewett 3,4)
Knight
Physics: For Sci. & Eng.
    Category D:    MODERN PHYSICS TEXTBOOKS
Concepts of Mod. Phys.
Beiser
Modern Physics
Tipler, (Llewellyn (3,4))
Krane
Ohanian
Serway, Moses, Moyer
Harris
Bernstein, Fishbane, Gas. Modern Physics

University Physics
Physics
Fundamentals of Physics
Physics; For Sci. & Eng.
Physics for Sci. & Eng.
Physics
Physics: For Sci. & Eng.

Modern Physics
Modern Physics
Modern Physics
Nonclassical Physics

AW '49 '55 '64 4
JW '60 '66

MH '63
W '69

WN

AW

AW

WF

JW

JW

JW

PH

HB

PH

HB

PH

PH

BC

HB

PH

1

1

2

5

2

6

4

2

4
3

6

2
1

5

1

3

2

3

2

3

1

Publishers:

AW = Addison-Wesley,  BC = Brooks-Cole,  HB = Harcourt-Brace,  JW = J. Wiley,  MH = McGraw-Hill,  PH = Prentice-Hall,  

W = Wadsworth,  WF = W. H. Freeman,  WN = W. W. Norton

Figure 5: A selection of some popular introductory textbook editions categorized by year of publication and
whether or not the concept of relativistic mass is used. Darker shading and white entires (orange online) indicates
introduction of relativistic mass and lighter shading, dark letters (green online) indicates its absence. Omissions
are left unshaded and last editions are given a shelf life of 10 years.

10

be traced to the addition of T.R. Sandin as contributing author, an ardent promoter of RM’s use in pedagogical
texts[13]). These two texts aside, the overall trend has been one of moving away from relativistic mass.

One of the purposes of this survey is to attempt to measure any eﬀect of previous calls to abandon this concept.
Outside of the ﬁrst edition of Spacetime Physics[6], most of the debate occurred between 1987 and 1992[5][3][7][28].
The inﬂuence of these later calls can be seen in the movement away from the concept in introductory and modern
physics textbooks beginning in the 1990s. Thus it appears that such eﬀorts were successful; however, among
formal textbooks devoted to relativity little change has occurred over the past thirty years. Worse yet, those
works directed at the general public still, overwhelmingly, utilize this concept. These diverging trends in the use
of RM can be understood from the observation that much more attention is paid to physics education research
when writing an introductory textbook as opposed to an advanced text or popularization of physics. Reﬂection
upon this research often lead to the concept’s exclusion. More vocal calls for the abandonment of relativistic mass
are clearly needed. An expanded, up-to-date, version is available on the web[40].

4.2 A journey around the neighborhood

A survey of texts over the past century does provide insight into the general viewpoint of relativistic mass among
various writers. A diﬀerent but poignant test is to ascertain what an average person, who desires to learn about
relativity, might encounter by accessing available resources. To get a sense of such an encounter, I visited the
local, chain, mega-bookstore and surveyed the entire physics section. In this particular branch in downtown San
Francisco, the section had an ample supply of books on physics, 351 in total. Of these, 107 discussed aspects of
relativity and 58 put forth a concept of a velocity dependent mass. Similar results were obtained among surveys
conducted in the San Francisco public library, another key resource for the average citizen to access knowledge.
Another avenue for knowledge for the general public is television. Indeed, entire channels have been devoted
to the dissemination of science knowledge. No serious study is reported here but anecdotal evidence suggest that
the concept of relativistic mass is still prevalent. The most recent example aired in February 2005 on the Science
Channel’s special “100 Greatest Discoveries”[41], in which Michio Kaku states that objects moving very fast,
literally, grow heavier.

Lastly, the most fashionable font of knowledge today is the world wide web, and within this realm the starting
point is often the Google search engine[42]. A search for the term ‘special relativity’ returned approximately
739,000 hits (the simpler search for ‘relativity’ primarily returned sites pertaining to general relativity). Now,
the average person will not stray too far from the ﬁrst page, consisting of 10 links; thus, an exhaustive survey
to gauge exposure to the concept can eﬀectively be replaced by an examination of sites listed on the ﬁrst two
pages. Of the ﬁrst 20 links returned only two were not pedagogical expositions of relativity, and of the remainder
6 included a discussion of relativistic mass.

These anecdotal surveys support the claims put forth in this section; the concept of relativistic mass is still
widely embraced. Those ordinary citizens who strive to learn the theory through self-study are likely to run across
statements that relativity tells us that mass increases with velocity.

5 Conclusion

The modern theory of relativity relies upon the geometrical properties of spacetime as its foundation. The
simplicity and beauty of the theory are regarded as its hallmark. A clear, precise deﬁnition of mass in this
formalism arises naturally when deﬁning momentum as the product of mass and 4-velocity. All primitive concepts
are Lorentz covariant. The nature of mass is no longer simply Newtonian mass, as insisted by some[3], but has a
clear conception as expressed by Einstein[43]. By introducing a concept that is inferred and not primitive, that
destroys the Lorentz covariance of the theory, and ousts the relativistic addition of velocity relation, relativistic
mass is in direct conﬂict with the kinematical structure of special relativity. As the concept can in no way be
considered a primitive concept of the theory, the statement that it is merely a matter of choice whether to use it
or not is ﬂagrantly incorrect.

For those who insist on continuing to use the concept of relativistic mass, serious reﬂection and examination
are required. Is it possible to have a completely consistent velocity-dependent mass integrated into the full theory
of relativity? Here we have seen it can not. Thus, is it wise to use it even as a heuristic device, as it may lead to
erroneous conceptualization? Later studies will require students to unlearn the concept as it is rarely employed
in formal treatments. One must justify its use with research that demonstrates its superiority over the geometric
formulation. Preliminary evidence introduced here suggests that it is not and furthers misconceptions.

A survey of works that put forth a view of relativity show that, for those industrious citizens that wish to
tackle the theory of relativity on their own, an increasing majority of books to help in this endeavor profess a

11

mass that increases with velocity. However those that enroll in an institution of higher learning will increasingly
be presented with a view not requiring a radical reconceptualization of mass. A widening gap in the fundamental
underlying meaning of relativity is afoot.

It is the view of this author that the continued introduction of such a problematic concept to the general public
presents a consistency problem that must be addressed. In fact, I ﬁnd myself in agreement with Lev Okun[4],
who states that this entails an ethical problem, “Teaching the reader this formula usually entails deceiving him.”
There have been several past calls to abandon this concept, however they have met with only limited success.
With the continual ﬂood of books on the market that utilize this concept, many by non-experts, more vigilance is
required by the physics community in writing, reviewing, and recommending such works. In the centenary year
of special relativity, we owe it to Einstein to get it right.

Acknowledgments: I am indebted to Charles DeLeone for many helpful suggestions on the various drafts.

I would also like to thank the Education Program for Gifted Youth and Patrick Suppes for support.

References

Berkeley, 1996).

[1] L. Sartori, Understanding Relativity: A Simpliﬁed Approach to Einstein’s Theories (Univ. of Cal. Press,

[2] A. Einstein, On a Method of the Determination of the Ratio of the Transverse and the Longitudinal Mass of

the Electron, Ann. Phys 21 583 - 586 (1906).

[3] L. B. Okun, “The Concept of Mass,” Physics Today 42, 31-36, June 1989.

[4] L. B. Okun, “The Concept of Mass (Mass, Energy, Relativity),” Sov. Phys. Usp. 32, 629 - 638 (1989).

[5] C. G. Adler, “Does mass really depend on velocity, dad?” Am. J. Phys. 55, 739-743 (1987).

[6] E. F. Taylor, J.A. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics 1st Ed. (W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1963).

[7] E. F. Taylor, J.A. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics 2nd Ed. (W. H. Freeman, New York, 1992).

[8] H. Reichenbach, The Direction of Time, (Univ. of Cal Press, Berkeley, 1956).

[9] S.W. Hawking, G. F. R. Ellis, The Large Scale Structure of Space-time (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge

1973).

(1987).

2000).

(1972).

[10] L. Bombelli, J. Lee, D. Meyer, R. D. Sorkin, “Space-time as a Causal Set” Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 521-524

[11] B. Greene, The Elegant Universe (W. W. Norton, New York, 1999).

[12] D. Falk, Universe on a T-Shirt (Arcade, New York, 2004).

[13] T. R. Sandin, “In Defense of Relativistic Mass” Am. J. Phys. 59, 1032-1036 (1991).

[14] N. D. Mermin, “Relativistic addition of velocities directly from the constancy of the velocity of light”, Am.

J. Phys. 51, 1130-1131 (1983).

[15] Y. Terletskii, Paradoxes in the Theory of Relativity (Plenum, New York, 1968).

[16] M. Jammer, Concepts of Mass in Contemporary Physics and Philosophy (Princeton U.P., Princeton, N.J.,

[17] B. V. Landau, S. Samanthapar “A New Derivation of the Lorentz Transformation” Am. J. Phys. 40, 599-602

[18] R. Feynman, Feynman Lectures on Physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1963).

[19] http://www.einsteinyear.org/facts/special relativity referenced 10/13/2004.

[20] R. Resnick, Introduction to Special Relativity (John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, 1968).

[21] G. Lewis, R.Tolman, Philos. Mag. 18, 510 (1909).

12

[22] R. Tolman, Philos. Mag. 23, 375 (1912).

[23] R.Tolman, The Theory of the Relativity of Motion (Univ. of Calif., Berkeley 1917). (Republished in 2004).

[24] A.P. French, Special Relativity (Thomas Nelson & Sons, London, 1968).

[25] W. Rindler, Relativity: Special, General, and Cosmological (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 2001).

[26] S. Adams, Relativity: An Introduction to Space-Time Physics (Taylor & Francis, Philadelphia, 1997).

[27] W.S.C. Williams, Introducing Special Relativity (Taylor & Francis, New York, 2002).

[28] W. Rindler, et. al. “Putting to Rest Mass Misconceptions” letters to Physics Today, 13, (May 1990).

[29] L. Krauss, The Physics of Star Trek (Perennial, New York, 1995).

[30] S. Hawking, A Brief History of Time (Bantam, New York, 1988).

[31] E. Chaisson, Relatively Speaking: Relativity, Black Holes, and the Fate of the Universe (W.W. Norton, New

York, 1988).

[32] P.C.W. Davies, Space and Time in the Modern Universe (Cambridge U. P., Cambridge, 1977).

[33] M. A. B. Whitaker “Deﬁnitions of mass in special relativity” Physics Education, 11, 55-57 (1976).

[34] R. Harris, Nonclassical Physics: Beyond Newton’s View (Addison Wesley, Menlo Park, 1999).

[35] The survey was given to the following groups of students. Two groups (99 students in all) consisted of general
education science students at the college level. I am indebted to Charles DeLeone of C.S.U., San Marcos for
his assistance. The third consisted of 12 gifted high school students from Singapore. A fourth group consisted
of 7 adults just beginning a basic modern physics course. None of these students had a formal introduction
to special relativity at the time the survey was conducted.

[36] G. Oas “On the Use of Relativistic Mass in Various Published Works”, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0504111

[37] College Board Entrance Examination Board, 2004, 2005 Course Description for AP Physics, (2003).

[38] Serway, Faughn Physics; for Scientists and Engineers, Harcourt Brace, editions: 1(1982), 2(1986), 3(1990),

4(1995), 5(1999), 6(2003).

[39] F. W. Sears, M. W. Zemansky, H. D. Young University Physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA) 1st Ed.

(1949) through 7th Ed. (1987 ).
Young, Freedman, University Physics 8th Ed. (1992) through 10th (2003).

[40] http://epgy.stanford.edu/physics/rm

[41] B. Nye, 100 Greatest Discoveries, The Science Channel, Discovery Communications Inc. (2005).

[42] http://www.google.com.

[43] A. Einstein, Relativity: The Special and General Theory (H. Holt, New York 1920).

[44] A. Einstein, “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies”, Ann. Phys. 17 891- 921(1905).

13

