5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hamilton’s principle: why is the integrated diﬀerence of kinetic and potential energy
minimized?

Alberto G. Rojo∗
Department of Physics, Oakland University, Rochester, MI 48309.
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

I present an intuitive answer to an often asked question: why is the integrated diﬀerence K − U
between the kinetic and potential energy the quantity to be minimized in Hamilton’s principle?
Using elementary arguments, I map the problem of ﬁnding the path of a moving particle connecting
two points to that of ﬁnding the minimum potential energy of a static string. The mapping implies
that the conﬁguration of a non–stretchable string of variable tension corresponds to the spatial
path dictated by the Principle of Least Action; that of a stretchable string in space-time is the one
dictated by Hamilton’s principle. This correspondence provides the answer to the question above:
while a downward force curves the trajectory of a particle in the (x, t) plane downward, an upward
force of the same magnitude stretches the string to the same conﬁguration x(t).

I.

INTRODUCTION

Nature loves extremes. Soap ﬁlms seek to minimize
their surface area and adopt a spherical shape; a large
piece of matter tends to maximize the gravitational at-
traction between its parts and, as a result, planets are
also spherical; light rays refracting on a magnifying glass
bend and follow the path of least time, and a relativistic
particle chooses to follow the path between two events
in space-time that maximizes the time measured by a
clock on the particle.[1, 2] Nor are humans divorced from
extremum principles, attempting to reduce the complex-
ities of the world to the smallest number of dominating
principles.

For mechanical systems, this goal has been accom-
plished by Maupertuis and Hamilton in diﬀerent versions
of the celebrated Principle of Least Action. Both formu-
lations emerge from conceiving the trajectories of par-
ticles as light rays traversing diﬀerent media which, ac-
cording to Fermat, follow the path that minimizes time.
In 1744, Maupertuis proposed that “Nature, in the
production of its eﬀects, does so always by the simplest
means” [3] and, in 1746, wrote “in Nature, the action
(la quantit´e d’action) necessary for change is the small-
est possible. Action is the product of the mass of a body
times its velocity times the distance it moves”.[4] For a
light ray or a particle passing from one medium into an-
other, both the minimization of time and minimization
of action gives rise to angles of incidence and refraction
in a ﬁxed proportion to each other: the analog of Snel’s
law[5] for a light ray n1 sin θ1 = n2 sin θ2 corresponds to
the conservation of particle momentum along the inter-
face mv1 sin θ1 = mv2 sin θ2. Even though Maupertuis’
formulation was vague–and there was controversy on the
priority over the idea[6]–his name remains attached to
the principle arguably for two reasons: his metaphysi-
cal view that minimum action expresses God’s wisdom

∗Electronic address: rojo@oakland.edu

in the form of an economy principle[7], and Euler’s role
in settling the controversy in his favor.

Hamilton’s principle,

formulated almost a century
later, is similar to the Principle of Least Action and is
based on the optical-mechanical analogy as well.[8] While
the trajectory followed by a particle of ﬁxed energy E
connecting two points in space is prescribed by the Prin-
ciple of Least Action, Hamilton’s principle determines
the trajectory for which the particle will spend a given
time t in travelling between the same points. In such a
case, the optimal path is the one for which the sum of
U )∆t along the path is a minimum
the products (K
(K and U are the kinetic and potential energies and ∆t
the time interval). Hamilton’s method was mentioned
throughout the nineteenth century but was rarely used
in practice because simpler methods were as eﬀective in
most cases.[9]

−

The situation changed in 1926 when Schr¨odinger, in-
spired by de Broglie’s ideas, resorted to Hamilton’s anal-
ogy between mechanics and geometric optics, extended
the treatment from geometrical to undulatory mechan-
ics, and arrived at his famous equation for the dynamics
of a quantum mechanical particle.[10] Moreover, in 1948,
Feynman[11] (following a hint from Dirac) oﬀered a new
perspective on Hamilton’s principle: in propagating be-
tween two points, a quantum particle “explores” every
path, treating them on equal footing. This “democracy
of histories”[12] becomes the Principle of Least Action
for a classical particle due to destructive interference that
eliminates those paths that diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the
classical (or extremal) path.

A lesser known approach to what is called now
the Principle of Least Action was taken by John
Bernoulli[13], who showed that Snel’s law can be ob-
tained from the condition of mechanical equilibrium of
a tense, non-stretchable string (see Figure 1). This anal-
ogy was also noted by M¨obius[14, 15] and discussed by
Ernst Mach in his classical book on mechanics.[16] Ref.
[17] considers an inextensible string and is the only article
I was able to ﬁnd on this analogy.

In the present paper I show that a simple extension of
this idea to paths that are covered in ﬁxed time can be

2

argument, which is based on the hypothesis that, in me-
chanical equilibrium, it is equivalent to say that the net
force on each point of the system is zero, and that the
system is in the state of minimum potential energy. In
discussing the particle motion I will assume knowledge of
Newton’s law F = ∆p/∆t relating the force on a particle
with the rate of chance of its momentum.

Call T1 and T2 the weights hanging from points A and
B; the point of contact between the upper and lower
portions of the string slides horizontally without friction
along the line CD. The pulleys at A and B are considered
frictionless and with zero inertia; therefore the tensions
of the diﬀerent portions of the string will be T1 and T2.
Compare the potential energy of the conﬁgurations where
the point of contact are E and e. There is a potential
energy diﬀerence between the two conﬁgurations because
in going from E to e, mass 1 will rise from M to m
and mass 2 will decrease its height from N to n. The
tensions are determined by the weights and are, therefore,
in both conﬁgurations, T1 and T2. Calling ℓ1 = AE
and ℓ2 = EB, the change in potential energy ∆U of the
system becomes

∆U = T1∆ℓ1 + T2∆ℓ2,

(1)

Ep. This
where ∆ℓ1 = M m
means that, up to an additive constant, the potential
energy of the system can be written as

qe and ∆ℓ2 =

N n

−

≡

≡

U = T1ℓ1 + T2ℓ2.

(2)

Another way of visualizing the above expression is of-

fered in Figure 2.

Since the conﬁguration of mechanical equilibrium cor-
responds to the minimum of potential energy the mini-
mum U is attained when the components of the forces
from the diﬀerent portions of the string along CD can-
cel. In term of the angles 6 AER = θ1 , 6 SEB = θ2, the
minimum potential energy is attained when

T1 sin θ1 = T2 sin θ2.

(3)

The above relation is equivalent to Snel’s law if the
indices of refraction n1 and n2 in the diﬀerent regions are
identiﬁed with the corresponding tension of the strings: if
the time t is minimized, or equivalently the optical length
ct given by

ct = n1ℓ1 + n2ℓ2,

(4)

then n1 sin θ1 = n2 sin θ2. For the analogy between the
conﬁguration of the tense string and the trajectory of a
particle with energy E between points A and B I reason
in reverse: knowing that conservation of momentum at
the interface requires

mv1 sin θ1 = mv2 sin θ2,

(5)

what is the magnitude that should be minimized in or-
der to get the above relation? Clearly, from the above
analysis the quantity to be minimized is

A = mv1ℓ1 + mv2ℓ2,

(6)

FIG. 1: (a) and (b) John Bernoulli’s proof of Snel’s law using
the mechanical equilibrium of a tense string. (c) Mechanical
model for the law of reﬂection, which is not discussed in the
present paper. (Figure reproduced from Reference [13]).

used to prove the equivalence of Hamilton’s principle to
the static equilibrium of a stretchable string. My aim is
to provide, in the spirit of References [18, 19, 20, 21, 22],
insight into why it is the the diﬀerence between the ki-
netic and potential energy that appears in Hamilton’s
principle.
In section II, I review Bernoulli’s approach
and in section III, I present a simpliﬁed derivation of
Hamilton’s principle without calculus. In section IV, I
present a slightly more elaborate derivation using ele-
mentary calculus. Given the importance of the Principle
of Least Action in so many areas of Physics, I hope that
this paper will contribute to its presentation in introduc-
tory courses rather than it being postponed to advanced
mechanics courses.

II. THE LEAST ACTION PRINCIPLE AND
NON-STRETCHABLE STRINGS

Figure 1 shows the diagram used by John Bernoulli to
derive Snel’s law for a light ray travelling from point A
to B using the analogy with the static equilibrium of a
tense string. The following is a rephrasing of Bernoulli’s

3

(7)

(8)

FIG. 2: An alternative version of Bernoulli’s setup: (a) Two
weights hanging from frictionless points A and B is assigned
zero potential energy. (b) The two weights are then lifted,
and the ends of the strings are joined at point E along the
line CD. The work done is equal to the increase in potential
energy: U = T1ℓ1 + T2ℓ2.

which is Maupertuis’ action. The correspondence be-
tween Eq. 4 and Eq. 6 expresses the famous analogy be-
tween mechanics and geometric optics that has been the
subject of many recent pedagogical expositions[23, 24].

−

p

2m(E

The tension Ti of the string is identiﬁed with the
velocity vi on each region which, in turn, is given by
vi =
Ui), where E is the total energy and Ui
is the corresponding potential energy. For paths that
transverse many regions where the particle velocities are
diﬀerent, the trajectory has to be broken up in many
straight segments. The Principle of Least Action states
that the trajectory the particle will follow between two
ﬁxed points and at ﬁxed total energy is the one that min-
imizes the sum of the products mviℓi in each segment.
In order to use the analogy with the string, the arrange-
ment will correspond to frictionless pulleys that can slide
on rods, with the string passing through them a suﬃcient
number of times[16] (see Figure 3).

Table I summarizes the analogies between the quanti-

ties discussed in this section.

III. HAMILTON’S PRINCIPLE AND
STRETCHABLE STRINGS

The Principle of Least Action as stated in the previous
paragraph gives the optimal trajectory for a particle of
a given energy between two ﬁxed points. It doesn’t say

FIG. 3: Frictionless pulleys that can slide in horizontal lines
with a string passing through them a suﬃcient number of
times gives the trajectory of the particle if Ti is identiﬁed
with mvi at each segment. Since the string can only pass
through each pulley an integer number of times, the ratios of
the velocities are approximated by the ratio of the times the
rope passes through each segment.

anything about the time it takes to travel from one point
to the other. Now consider the problem of ﬁnding a path
that will connect point P to point Q in a ﬁxed time t. In
other words, what is the path that the particle will choose
in going from point P = (xP , 0) to point Q = (xQ, t)? In
extending the treatment to paths that go from two ﬁxed
space–time points it is useful to treat t as a new geomet-
rical dimension. To simplify the analysis, and to retain
the two dimensional picture of the previous paragraph, I
will consider motion in one (spatial) dimension.

Consider the path as a continuous function x(t), that
is broken into small straight segments connecting points
separated by a ﬁxed time interval ∆t. The fact that
the segments are straight means that the motion is of
constant velocity during that interval, then changes due
to an impulsive force. This force will be diﬀerent from
zero if the potential is changing as a function of x at
the particle position. Consider for simplicity two broken
segments as in Figure 4(a).

Before the force F acts on the particle, the velocity is

given by the slope of the curve in the (x, t) plot:

The eﬀect of the force is to change the velocity. In the
(x, t) plot (also called the “world line”), this means that
the slope of the line changes at the intermediate time.
The velocity after the force has acted on the particle is

vP =

xP

xi −
∆t

.

vQ =

xQ −
∆t

xi

.

TABLE I: Corresponding quantities in the analogy used in the Principle of Least Action between mechanics, geometric optics
and the equilibrium of a non-stretchable string.

Particle
mv (momentum)

Light Ray
n (refractive index)

Non-stretchable string
T (tension)

mv1 sin θ1 = mv2 sin θ2 (momentum conservation) n1 sin θ1 = n2 sin θ2 (Snel’s law) T1 sin θ1 = T2 sin θ2 (static equilibrium)

∆A = mv∆ℓ (action)

c∆t = n∆ℓ (optical length)

∆U = T ∆ℓ (potential energy)

4

the force of a system of two springs of identical spring
constant, the ﬁrst spring connecting point (xi, ∆t) with
(xP , 0), the second connecting (xQ, 2∆t) with (xi, ∆t).
In order for the systems to be in equilibrium, or, in other
words, for the intermediate coordinate to have the value
xi (the other two are ﬁxed) there has to be a force of
precisely magnitude F but of opposite sign.

The path given by Newton’s law is given by the equi-
librium condition of a mechanical model of two springs
in the presence of a potential of opposite sign as U (x).
The equilibrium condition is the one that minimizes the
potential energy of the entire system, springs plus “ex-
ternal” potential U (x). Since the potential energy for a
spring of spring constant k connecting two points sepa-
rated by a distance δ is kδ2/2 , the total potential energy
of the system (that I will call

S) is given by

S =

m
2 (cid:18)

xi −

xP
∆t (cid:19)

2

+

2

m
2 (cid:18)

e
xQ −

xi
∆t (cid:19)

−

U (xi).

(11)

e
Coming back to the original world line picture, the op-
timum path in space–time is the one that minimizes the
diﬀerence between kinetic and potential energy. This is
Hamilton’s principle, which I obtained using a mechan-
ical analogy similar to the Principle of Least Action in
the sense that there is a correspondence between the ki-
netic energy and the potential energy of ﬁctitious springs
of spring constant k = m/(∆t)2.
In other words, the
stretchable string is in equilibrium due to two types of
forces in space-time: the external force due to (minus)
the real external potential, and the elastic force of ﬁcti-
tious springs playing the role of the kinetic energy.

For a a longer path with N straight segments each of
them traversed by the particle in a time ∆t, the velocity
at the i-th segment will be vi = (xi+1
xi)/∆t and the
equivalent potential energy will be given by

−

S =

mv2
1
2 −

(cid:20)

U (x1)

+

(cid:21)

mv2
2
2 −

(cid:20)

U (x2)

+

+

(cid:21)

· · ·

mv2
N
2

.

(12)
e
For a large number of segments, which will correspond
to a continuously varying path, the last term in the sum
above can be ignored; the total potential energy to be
minimized is the sum of the diﬀerences between the ki-
netic and potential energies.

Notice that the potential energy for the ﬁctitious
springs corresponds to springs of zero length. Also, Equa-
tions 11 and 12 omit the potential energy associated with
the “horizontal displacement” ∆t of each spring. I ignore

FIG. 4: (a) Space-time trajectory of an otherwise free one-
dimensional particle acted upon by an impulsive force F
at ti = ∆t.
(b) Equivalent equilibrium conﬁguration of
two segments of a stretchable string with spring constants
k = m/(∆t)

and an external force −F .

2

Notice that, since the force is downward, the slope de-
creases: downward force means that, at xi , the potential
is increasing as a function of x.

The path [in space time (x, t)] is a solution of Newton’s
second law, according to which the rate of change of the
velocity times the particle mass is the force acting on it:

F = m

vQ −
∆t

vP

.

(9)

Replacing the above expressions for the velocity:

F =

m

(∆t)

2 (xQ −

xi)

−

(∆t)

2 (xi −

xP ) .

(10)

m

At this point take a step of abstraction, and forget the
space-time picture for a moment. This expression gives

this contribution because the horizontal forces due to the
springs cancel and, therefore, the potential energy asso-
ciated with this displacement is the same for all conﬁgu-
rations of the string.

time.) Therefore,

S = (mv1ℓ1

Et1) + (mv2ℓ1

mv2
=
(cid:0)
= (K1

1 −
−

−
E

t1 +
U1) t1 + (K2

mv2
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

Et2)
−
E
t2
U2) t2,

(cid:1)

2 −
−

IV. HAMILTON’S PRINCIPLE USING
ELEMENTARY CALCULUS

which is the quantity to be minimized according to
Hamilton’s principle.

A. Connection between Maupertuis’ and
Hamilton’s action

B. Could Hamilton have discovered quantum
mechanics in 1834?

5

(16)

−

p

2m(E

U1) and v2 =

In this section I, derive Hamilton’s principle using a
slightly more sophisticated approach while still keeping
it elementary. In reference to Figure 1(a), the Principle of
Least Action tells us the path a particle of ﬁxed energy E
will choose in going from A to B. Call U1 and U2 the po-
tential energies in the upper and lower parts of the line
CD, and v1 =
U2)
the corresponding velocities. Now consider paths with
diﬀerent energies and ask for which of those paths the
particle will satisfy Newton’s laws and spend a ﬁxed
amount of time t going from A to B. Following the logic
of the Principle of Least action, I want to ﬁnd a function
of the paths that will give the desired one upon mini-
mization. For the special case in consideration, the path
consists of two straight segments and the function has to
be such that, of all paths that take a time t in going from
A to B, it chooses the one that satisﬁes the “Snel’s law
for particles” of Eq. 5.

2m(E

p

−

Call a and b the perpendicular distances of A and B to
the interface CD, L the horizontal distance between A
and B and x the distance CE. Maupertius action of Eq.
6 can be thought of as a function of x and the energy:

p

A(x, E) = mv1(E)

x2 + a2 + mv2(E)

x)2 + a2.
(13)
In order to explore whether A(x, E) is the desired func-
tion, compute the variations of A with respect to x and
E, assuming knowledge of the ratios of dE and dx that
will keep the time t constant:

(L

p

−

dA = (mv1 sin θ1

mv2 sin θ2) dx +

dE.

(14)

−

∂A
∂E

It is clear that minimizing A (or equivalently setting
dA = 0) does not give us the desired Eq.5 because of
the second term above. However, notice that dvi/dE =
1/mvi, and

∂A
∂E

=

√x2 + a2
v1

(L

−

x)2 + a2
v2

+

p

= t1 + t2 = t, (15)

with t1
particle to go from A to B and from E to B.

ℓ1/v1 and t2

ℓ2/v2 the times it takes the

≡

≡

This means that if Et is subtracted from A the de-
sired quantity is obtained: S = A
Et. (Notice that
d(Et) = tdE since the paths considered last a constant

−

Writing p = mv and ℓ = x, the above action S (Eq.16)
for a path has precisely the form of the phase change of
a wave

φ

px

Et

∼

−

(17)

(up to a multiplicative constant that will render it
dimension-less) with momentum and energy playing the
role of wave number k and frequency ω. The path of
least–or, more precisely stationary–action could hence
be regarded as the stationary phase limit of some wave.
With this motivation I ask wether Hamilton could have
discovered quantum mechanics in 1834. The answer is
most probably “no,” since Hamilton did not have any ex-
perimental motivation to think of particles as waves.[26]
However, the close parallelism between geometric optics
and mechanics could have invited him to ask himself the
following: what would be the structure of a wave equa-
tion for particles that, in the limit of small wavelengths,
gives the trajectories of particles just as the wave equa-
tion for light in the same limit gives the trajectories of
light rays?

Let us follow the analogy provided by the Principle
of Least Action and consider trajectories of constant en-
ergy for particles which will correspond to light rays of
constant frequency. Since the Principle of Least Action
establishes an equivalence between the geometry of tra-
jectories and not between the dynamics of those trajecto-
ries, for constant energy (and frequency) I seek an equiva-
lence between stationary states of the corresponding wave
equations.

Now let us introduce wave-lengths into the discussion.
The wave length of a monochromatic light wave in a
region in which the index of refraction n(x) is varying
slowly is given by

λ(x) =

λ0
n(x)

.

(18)

Since equations 4 and 6 imply that the trajectories of
particles and light rays are equivalent if n(x) is identiﬁed
with mv(x), the “natural” choice for the spatial depen-
dence of the particle wave length λP is

λP (x) =

K
mv(x)

=

K

−

2m [E

U (x)]

p

,

(19)

with K a constant that has units of angular momentum
and is precisely the required constant to make φ in Eq.
17 dimension-less: φ = 2π

Et).

Now let us consider the wave equation for the ampli-
tude φ(x, t) describing a light wave in one dimension (I ig-
nore the polarization and consider it as a scalar wave)[25]:

K (px

−

∂2φ
∂x2 =

n2(x)
c2

∂2φ
∂t2 .

(20)

(21)

I want to compare this with the stationary wave equa-

tion for particles, so I substitute φ(x, t) = φ(x)eiωt

and the equation becomes

2

λ0
2π (cid:19)

∂2φ
∂x2 = n2(x)φ.

− (cid:18)

Using the equivalences of Eqs. 18 and 19, the struc-
ture of the wave equation for the stationary states Ψ for
particles should be

−

−

(22)

U (x)] Ψ.

2
(K/2π)
2m

∂2Ψ
∂x2 = [E
In comparison with Eq. 21, if K is treated as a free
0 (which corresponds to the
parameter, the limit K
limit λ0
0) gives the trajectories for particles of energy
E and Eq. 22 could be used as a wave equation for
particles. If many years later someone were to discover
that particles in conﬁned potentials had discrete energies,
K could be tuned to ﬁt the experiments obtaining

→

→

K
2π

= 1.0546

10−34J s,

×

(23)

which is of course Planck’s constant ¯h. Given the iden-
tiﬁcation of energy with frequency, the time dependence
of the stationary states should be Ψ(x)e−iEt/¯h and the
“naturally” implied time dependence for Eq. 22 is

¯h2
2m

∂2
∂x2 + U (x)
(cid:21)

(cid:20)−

∂
∂t

Ψ = i¯h

Ψ,

(24)

which is the celebrated Schr¨odinger equation.

6

V. CONCLUSION

I have presented an elementary derivation of Hamil-
ton’s principle based on the analogy between particle
(and light ray) trajectories with the conﬁguration of a
tense non-stretchable string. The analogy was (to my
knowledge) ﬁrst considered by Bernoulli in a practically
unreferenced article and gives an intuitive picture of the
Principle of Least Action. Extending the analogy to
stretchable strings, I derived Hamilton’s principle, pro-
viding an intuitive picture of the origin of the diﬀerence
between kinetic and potential energy in Hamilton’s char-
acteristic function.
I also presented a derivation using
elementary calculus, which extends the analogy between
mechanics and geometrical optics to undulatory mechan-
ics and “derived” Schr¨odinger’s equation.

I have endeavored to present a pedagogical approach
that can help students in introductory courses appreciate
the beauty and compactness of the Principle of Least
Action.

Acknowledgments

I wish to thank Anthony Bloch, Roberto Rojo and Ar-
turo L´opez D´avalos for conversations, Alejandro Garc´ıa,
Paul Berman and an anonymous referee for valuable cor-
rections, and Estela As´ıs for her help with the translation
from the Latin of Ref.[13]. This work is partially sup-
ported by Research Corporation, Cotrell College Science
Award.

[1] E. F. Taylor and J. A. Wheeler, Exploring Black Holes,
1st edition (Addison Wesley, San Francisco, 2000), Chap.
1, p.5.

[2] Strictly speaking, extremal (maxima or minima) are a
subset stationary paths (or states). However, the term
Principle of Least Action is more frequently used than
the more precise Principle of Stationary Action.

[3] P. L. Moreau de Maupertuis, “Accord de diﬀ´erentes loix
de la nature, qui avaient jusqu’ici paru incompatible,”
Memoires de l’Acad´emie Royale de Sciences (Paris) pp.
417-26 (1744), reprinted in Oeuvres, 4 pp. 1-23 Repro-
graﬁscher Nachdruck der Ausg. Lyon (1768).

[4] P. L. Moreau de Maupertuis, “Recherche des lois du Mou-

vement”, Reprinted Oeuvres, 4 p. 36.

[5] The English spelling (Snell) found in most textbooks
of the name of the Dutch astronomer and mathemati-
cian Willebrord Snel (1580-1626) derives from its La-
tinized version Willebrodus Snellius. See for example K.
Hentschel, “The law of refraction according to Snellius
- Reconstruction of his path of discovery and a transla-
tion of his Latin manuscript along with additional docu-
ments”, Arch. Hist. Exact. Sci. 55, pp. 297-344 (2001).
[6] Several years before, Clairaut [in “Sur les explica-
tions Cart´esienne et Newtonienne de la r´efraction de la
lumi`ere”, Memoires de l’Acad´emie Royale de Sciences
(Paris) pp. 259-75 (1739)] had shown that Newtonian at-
traction could be applied to refraction. The controversy
with Samuel Koenig, who accused Maupertuis of plagia-

7

rizing Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz’s work in this principle
is detailed in P. Brunet, Etude Historique sur le Principe
de La Moindre Action, Herman & Cie, ´Editeurs, Paris,
1938.

[7] See for example M. Terrall, The Man Who Flattened the
Earth, Maupertuis and the Sciences of Enlightenment
(The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2002) pp.
178-179.

[8] W. R. Hamilton, “On a general method of expressing the
paths of light, and of the planets, by the coeﬃcients of
a characteristic function,” Dublin University Review and
Quarterly Magazine, 1, 795-826 (1833).

[9] For a historical account see T. L. Hankins, Sir William
Rowan Hamilton, (The John Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, 1980).

[10] E. Schr¨odinger, Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics
(Blackie & Son Limited, London 1928), pp. 13-27.

[11] R. P. Feynman,

“Space-Time Approach to Non-
relativistic Quantum Mechanics,” Rev. Mod. Phys., 20,
pp. 367-387 (1948).

[12] The phrase is taken from C. W. Meisner, K. S. Thorne
and J. A. Wheeler, Gravitation (W. H. Freeman and
Company, New York, 1973) pp. 499-500.

[13] J. Bernoulli, “Disquisitio Catoptico-Dioptrica,” Opera
Omnia, (Geneve, sumptibus Marci-Michaelis Bousquet
& sociorum, 1742) Vol. 1, pp. 369-376.

[14] A. F. M¨obius, Lehrbuch der Statik, Sweiter Theil.

(Liepzig, 1837) pp. 217-313.

[15] J. Gray, “M¨obius’s geometrical mechanics,” included in
M¨obius and his band edited by J. Fauvel, R. Flood and
R. Wilson (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1993) pp.79-
103.

[16] E. Mach, The Science of Mechanics: Account of its De-
velopment, translated by Thomas J. McCormack, sixth
edition, (The Open Court Publishing Company, Illinois,
1960) pp. 463-474.

[17] C. Bellver-Cebreros and M. Rodriguez-Danta, “Eikonal
equation from continuum mechanics and analogy be-
tween equilibrium of a string and geometrical light rays,”
Am. J. Phys. 69, 360-367 (2001).

[18] J. Hanc, S. Tuleja and M. Hancova, “Simple derivation of
Newtonian mechanics from the principle of least action,”
Am. J. Phys. 71, 386-391 (2004).

[19] T. A. Moore, “Getting the most action out of least action:

A proposal,” Am. J. Phys. 72, 522-527 (2004).

[20] J. Hanc and E. F. Taylor, “From conservation of energy
to the principle of least action: A story line,” Am. J.
Phys. 72, 514-521 (2004).

[21] J. Hanc, E. F. Taylor and S. Tuleja “ Deriving Lagrange’s
equations using elementary calculus,” Am. J. Phys. 72,
510-513 (2004).

[22] J. Hanc, E. F. Taylor and S. Tuleja “ Variarional me-
chanics in one and two dimensions,” Am. J. Phys., in
press.

[23] J. Evans and M. Rosenquist, “ ‘F=ma’ optics,” Am. J.

[24] D. S. Lemons, Perfect Form (Princeton University Press,

Phs 54, 876-883 (1986).

Princeton 1997).

[25] In consonance with this historical excercise it could be
objected that Hamilton didn’t know the wave equation
for light, but the argument applies to any scalar wave in
a nonhomogeneous medium. For example, Eq. 20 could
represent a sound wave in a medium with varying density.

[26] The title of this section was taken from Ref.[9] p. 209.

