5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
9
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

AJP

Advantages of adopting the operational deﬁnition of weight

Jos´e M. L. Figueiredo∗
Departamento de F´ısica da Faculdade de Ciˆencias e Tecnologia da Universidade do Algarve,
Campus de Gambelas, 8005-139 FARO, Portugal
(Dated: February 17, 2014)

With rare exceptions, in high school and college/university physics courses literature and in
journals of physics, the weight is deﬁned as the gravitational force or an exclusive consequence of
it. These deﬁnitions lack logic from the perspective of present knowledge and can be misleading.
The operational deﬁnition of weight of a body as the force the body exerts on its support or
suspender can eliminate the ambiguities associated to “true weight”, “apparent weight”, “state
of weightlessness”, “zero weight”, “zero gravity”, “microgravity”, “vertical”, “up” and “down”.
Nevertheless, the concept of weight of a body is not fundamental in Physics and its exclusion from
the physics vocabulary will eliminate some of former concepts or their ambiguousness with evident
beneﬁt for physics teaching and learning. This paper discusses weight of a body concepts and the
advantages of adopting the above-mentioned operational deﬁnition or avoiding its use. It is believed
that this will eliminates the frequent identiﬁcation with the body’s mass and will boost student’s
understanding of associated subjects.

PACS numbers: 01.40.-d, 01.40.Fk, 01.40.Gm

I.

INTRODUCTION

Everyone who teaches introductory physics is used to
dealing with the confusion students experience when ﬁrst
confronted with the diﬀerences between concepts of mass
and weight, and with the ambiguities of the notions re-
lated to the weight deﬁnitions based on the gravitational
force. Several studies have shown students still have some
misconception about the basic physics related to weight
and have diﬃculties applying them especially in impon-
derability and accelerated environments [1][2][3]. This is
evident when they are asked to explain what happens if
everyday events such as walking were to take place in a
“weightlessness” environment.

The students often think “microgravity”, “zero grav-
ity”, or “weightlessness” situations refer to events occur-
ring “outside” the Earth’s or other celestial body’s grav-
itational inﬂuence, and they are surprised to hear that
during a typical shuttle ﬂight mission in an orbit at an
altitude of 400 km the gravitational force of the Earth
is only 12% less than at the Earth’s surface. Particu-
larly, few students do recognize that it is the free fall
movement of the spacecrafts that creates the seemingly
weightlessness environment in the vehicle and any body
orbiting the Earth or another celestial body is in state of
continuous free fall.

In the literature there are several deﬁnitions of weight
based on the gravitational force: “the weight is the Earth
gravitational force” [4]; “the force exerted by the Earth
on an object is called the weight of the object” [4]; “the
weight of a body is the total gravitational force exerted
on the body by all other bodies in the universe” [5]. Fre-
quently, the weight is considered a fundamental property

∗Electronic address: jlongras@ualg.pt

of matter under the inﬂuence of a gravitational ﬁeld. Fur-
thermore, the Conf´erence G´en´erale des Poids et Mesures
in 1901 declared “the weight of a body is the product of
its mass and the acceleration due to gravity” [6]. These
gravitational based deﬁnitions of weight are widely used
in despite of the fact they are not entirely satisfactory
at the present knowledge and sometimes are even mis-
leading. In addition, there are a number of ambiguities
associated with the weight gravitational deﬁnitions on
the meaning of weight and weight-related concepts such
as “true weight”, “apparent weight”, “weightlessness”,
“zero-gravity”, and “vertical”. That can easily lead to
several misconceptions which can contribute to widening
the gap between what is taught and what is learned by
the students.

Very few authors adopt the alternative operational def-
inition of weight of a body: “the force which a body ex-
erts on its support or suspender that prevents its free
fall” [7].
In this operational deﬁnition the weight is a
force that results always from the direct contact of the
body with other body, i.e., the weight is a contact force.
This paper discuss weight, microgravity, weightlessness
and vertical concepts, and presents instructive examples
that show the advantages of the adoption of the opera-
tional deﬁnition of weight or the abandonment of weight
concept.

II. ACCELERATION DUE TO THE GRAVITY

In the frame of the classical physics, the force of gravity
is a long-range force that acts even when the bodies are
not in contact and are separated by large distances in
space. As far we know, this force cannot be shielded [8],
and in practical situations it is independent of the state
of motion of the objects. The acceleration due to the
gravity corresponds to the acceleration of the motion of

a body as a result of the gravitational force, and in a
given instant equals the ratio of the gravitational force
and the body amount of matter.

Accordingly the General Theory of Relativity the grav-
ity corresponds to a local modiﬁcation (curvature) in the
space-time continuum caused by a concentration of mass
or energy.

A. Gravity under newtonian physics

Since Isaac Newton presented the law of Universal
Gravitation it is well accepted that the gravitational in-
teraction is universal and depends only on the body’s
quantity of matter and the distance between their cen-
ters of mass. Following the works of Kepler and Galileu,
Newton concluded that the Earth’s force of gravity ~Fg
exerted on our bodies or other mass m owing to their
gravitational interaction is given by

~Fg = −

GM m
|~r|3 ~r = ~Γm,

(1)

where G is the gravitational constant (6.67×10−11 N
m2kg−2), M is the Earth’s mass, ~r is the position vector
of the body center of mass relatively to the Earth center
of mass. The gravitational force the Earth exerts on the
body ~Fg can be written as the product of the body’s mass
and the local acceleration due to the gravity, ~Fg = m~g; as
mentioned previously, the vector ~g = − GM
|~r|3 ~r corresponds
to the body’s acceleration due to the gravitational ﬁeld
~Γ, and its magnitude is approximately equal to 9,8 m s−2
at sea level.

The intensity of the force of gravity can be measured
approximately with the aid of a dynamometer or a spring
scale, provided that the body and the dynamometer are
at rest relatively to the Earth (as will be discussed in
the following sections). Let us consider a body on the
surface of the Earth at a given latitude, Fig. 1. The
body is acted upon by two forces: the force of gravity ~Fg
pointing towards the center of the Earth and the force of
the reaction of the Earth’s surface (the support reaction
force) ~N , whose direction is determined not only by the
force of gravity, but also by the spinning of the Earth
around its axis. Accordingly the second law of dynam-
ics ( ~F = d(m~v)/dt, where ~v is the velocity of the mass
m), the resultant force ~F of these two forces ensures the
daily rotation of the body along the local parallel. As
a consequence the direction of the measured ~Fg (and ~g)
diﬀers from the direction towards the center of the Earth
- except at the poles and equator - by an angle whose
the maximum amplitude is less than 0.10.
In addition
with the exception at the poles, a scale or a dynamome-
ter measures less than the gravitational force given by
equation 1 because a net force is needed to provide the
centripetal acceleration needed to ensures the body keeps
up with the daily rotation of the Earth: the sensed accel-
eration of gravity is about 0.03 m s−2 (0.35% of g) less

2

at the equator than at the poles, assuming a spherically
symmetric and homogenous Earth.

Furthermore, the variation of density and the surface
irregularities of the Earth give rise to a local changes in
the gravitacional ﬁeld and to the vector ~g). Nevertheless,
we will consider the Earth as an homogenous sphere and
the eﬀects of its rotation around its axis and the trans-
lation around the Sun or other motions will be neglected
throughout the rest of the text, because the values of the
linear and the angular acceleration acquire by a body due
to these eﬀect are very small when compared with the ac-
celeration due to the gravity. For simplicity, the Earth
will be considered a frame of reference at rest during
the characteristic time of the phenomena analyzed here.
The eﬀect of the atmosphere will be also neglected. For
simplicity the gravitational inﬂuences of other celestial
bodies is not considered.

FIG. 1: Forces acting on a body at the the Earth’s surface at
a given latitude: ~F is the net force due to the force of gravity
~Fg acting on the body and the force of the reaction of the
Earth’s surface ~N acting on the body.

B. Gravity under the theory of general relativity

The General Theory of Relativity addresses the prob-
lems of gravity and that of nonuniform or accelerated
motion. In one of his famous thought experiments Ein-
stein concluded that it is not possible to distinguish be-
tween a frame of reference at rest in a gravitational ﬁeld
and an accelerated frame of reference in the absence of
a signiﬁcant gravitational ﬁeld. An observer in a closed
space capsule who found himself pressing down on his
seat could not tell whether he and the capsule were at
rest in a gravitational ﬁeld, or whether they (he and the
capsule) were undergoing acceleration far enough from
a signiﬁcant gravitational ﬁeld - Einstein’s principle of
equivalence. From this principle of equivalence Einstein
moved to a geometric interpretation of gravitation: the
presence of very large mass or a high concentration of
energy causes a local curvature in the space-time con-
tinuum. The space-time geodesic becomes curved lines,
that is, the space-time curvature is such that the inertial
paths of a body is no longer straight a line but some form

of curved orbital path. Having in mind the classical idea
of gravity we can associate to the curved path motion
a centripetal acceleration that is referred as acceleration
due to gravity.

III. WEIGHT OF A BODY

What humans and matter experience as weight is not
the force of gravity. What they experience as weight is
actually the consequence of the normal reaction of the
ground (or whatever surface they are in contact with or
hang up) pushing upwards against them to counteract
the force they are exerting on the surface, the weight of
the body. A good evidence of this is given by the fact
that a person standing on a scale moving up and down
on his toes does see the indicator moving, telling that the
measured force is changing while the gravity force, that
depends only on the person’s and the Earth’ masses and
on the distance between their centers of mass, does not
vary to induce such clear observable changes on the scale
meter.

Consider a body at rest on the surface of the Earth,
Fig. 2a. In this situation the body experiences a force
~Fg due to gravitational pull of the Earth. The reaction
force to this force is − ~Fg and corresponds to the gravita-
tional force exerted on the Earth by the body. The force
pair, ~Fg and − ~Fg, consists on one force ~Fg that acts on
the body and one force − ~Fg that act on the Earth, and
constitutes an action-reaction pair.

The tendency of the body to accelerate towards the
center of the Earth due to ~Fg must give rise to a force ~P ,
Fig. 2b, force exerted by the body on the Earth surface.
If the body exerts on the Earth surface a force ~P , the
Earth solid surface reacts exerting a force ~N on the body
that balances the force ~P , Fig. 2b. The force ~N is called
the normal force and is the reaction to ~P : ~N = − ~P .
The action the body exerts on the Earth surface ~P cor-
responds to the operational deﬁnition of force weight of
the body.

Hence the body experiences no acceleration (it is at
res), the net force due to the two forces acting on the
body, ~Fg towards the center of the Earth and ~N out-
wards, is null (Newton’s second law of dynamics). There-
fore, ~Fg and ~N are equal in magnitude, opposite in ori-
entation and have diﬀerent application points. Similarly,
and because the Earth experiences no acceleration there
are two equal and directly opposite forces acting on the
Earth, − ~Fg applied on the Earth’s center of mass and ~P
applied on the Earth surface in contact with body. Al-
though in this case | ~N | = | ~Fg| the normal force ~N is not
the reaction to the gravitational force ~Fg because this
two forces act on the body (as said previously ~N is the
reaction to ~P ).

Consider now the body is placed on (or hung on) a
dynamometer-scale. When the body is placed on the

3

FIG. 2: a) ~Fg and − ~Fg: the action-reaction force pair due
to the gravitational interaction between the body and the
Earth. b) ~P and ~N : the action-reaction force pair due to the
interaction between the body and the Earth surfaces.

scale platform the dynamometer spring is compressed or
extended (depending on the scale) and its deformation is
communicated to a calibrated dial read out. The body
exerts an action ~P on the scale platform and through
it on the spring. The scale dial reads the magnitude of
the force ~P exerted by the body surface on the scale
platform. By Newton’s third law of dynamics the scale
platform reacts exerting a opposing force ~N on the body
surface: both force have the same magnitude and direc-
tions but opposite orientations.

It is the force ~N that prevents the body free fall to-
wards the center of the Earth. The weight is applied not
to the body being considered itself, but to the scale plat-
form. If the scale is ﬁxed relatively to the Earth then, as
previously, the weight magnitude equals the magnitude
of the force of gravity acting on the body center of mass,
| ~P | = | ~N | = | ~Fg|. The weight and the force of gravity
magnitudes are also equal in the case of uniform and rec-
tilinear motion of the scale and the body in a reference
frame associated with the Earth (as discussed next).

What happens when the scale and body are acceler-
ating in relation to an frame of reference on the Earth?
This is the case, for example, of an elevator during stop-
ping or starting. What is the scale reading in these situa-
tions? During a sudden change in the elevator motion (on
starting or braking, for example) does remain valid the
equality of the weight ~P and gravity force ~Fg intensities?
When going towards the Earth surface in an elevator
one experiences a greater strain in the legs and feet when
the elevator is stopping than when it is stationary or mov-
ing with constant velocity because the ﬂoor is pushing up
harder on the feet.

Consider that a body of mass m is standing on a
bathroom-type scale ﬁxed in the ﬂoor of an elevator with
a TV camera circuit that will be used to record all the
events. When the elevator moves with an acceleration
~a, in accordance with Newton’s second law of dynamics,
as long as the body and the scale surfaces are in con-
tact the body moves together with the elevator and scale
with the acceleration ~a under the action of two forces: the
force of gravity ~Fg and the scale surface reaction force ~N

due to the body surface action on the scale ~P . From
Newton’s second law of dynamics, ~F = d(m~v)/dt, and
assuming the body’s mass does not vary, the resultant
of the forces acting on the body must equal the prod-
uct of its mass by its acceleration, which is the elevator
acceleration ~a = d~v/dt, that is,

m~a = ~Fg + ~N

(2)

(3)

Since the body’s weight ~P and the reaction force of the
scale platform ~N constitutes a action-reaction pair, ~P =
− ~N , and the value indicated in the scale is the body’s
action force (weight of the body) on the scale ~P , equation
can be written as

~P = m~g − m~a.

Currently, the vertical is deﬁned as the direction of
plumb line that at the Earth surface and at rest or on
uniforme and rectilineal motion coincides with the direc-
tion of the gravity force. However, a human being or
other living being feels equilibrated in the direction of
its weight force. The concepts of vertical and down cor-
respond to the direction and to the orientation of the
weight force, respectively. As we will discuss, the verti-
cal and the up and down orientation depend on the body
state of motion characteristics.

In what follows, the axis oz of the cartesian referential
linked to the Earth coincides with the direction along the
center of the Earth and the positive the orientation +ˆz
is outwards the center of the Earth.

Depending on the orientation of the acceleration ~a =
±a~z with a = |~a|, several situations may occur. However,
in this text only the cases dealing with motion along the
direction passing the through the center of the earth are
discussed, Fig. 2.

A. Elevator with uniform and rectilinear motion

Since in this situation the body is not accelerating (~a =
~0) the applied net force on the body must be null. The
equation 3, with ~g = −g ˆz, yields

~P = −mg ˆz.

(4)

The intensity of the weight of a body standing on an-
other body surface in uniform motion in a straight line
is the product of body’s mass and the acceleration due
to gravity. The weight of the body has the orientation
of the acceleration due to gravity. The same results is
encountered when the body is at rest on the Earth’s sur-
face.

B. Elevator with acceleration opposite to the
acceleration due to gravity

When the elevator is accelerating vertically with ~a =
aˆz, Fig. 3b), the net force acting on the body must be

4

(5)

+maˆz, and the equation 3 gives

~P = −m(g + a)ˆz

In this case, the intensity of weight of the body is al-
ways greater than the product of its massa and the ac-
celeration due to gravity, i.e., P > mg. The weight force
maintains the orientation of the acceleration due to grav-
ity.

FIG. 3: Motion of a body siting on the platform of a spring-
scale ﬁxed to the elevator ﬂoor: a) in uniforme motion, i.e.,
~a = ~0; b) moving against the gravity force, i.e., ~a = a~z with
a > 0; c) moving moving with the gravity force, i.e., ~a = −a~z
with a > 0.

C. Elevator with acceleration points towards the
center of the Earth

If the elevator is moving with an acceleration ~a = −aˆz,
Fig. 3c), the net force acting on the body is −maˆz. There
are three possible situations depending on the relative
magnitude of the elevator acceleration compared to the
acceleration due to gravity g:

a) The elevator acceleration is smaller than the
acceleration due to gravity

Because the elevator acceleration is inferior to the ac-
celeration due to gravity, 0 < a < g, the body keeps its
tendency to press the scale platform in order to moves
towards the center of the Earth and the body and the
platform maintain attached.
In accordance with New-
ton’s second law of dynamics, equation 3, the body on
the scale and the elevator moves together with accelera-
tion ~a = −aˆz, yielding:

~P = −m(g − a)ˆz.

(6)

In this situation, the weight intensity is smaller than the
product of its mass and acceleration due to gravity, i.e.,
P < mg; the weight force still have the same orientation
as the acceleration due to gravity.

b) The elevator acceleration equals acceleration due
to gravity: free fall

Lets consider the elevator free falling, that is, its accel-
eration is the acceleration due to gravity ~a ≡ ~g = −g ˆz.
This happens when the elevator cables break. However, it
can be experienced without risk for few seconds in planes
following parabolic trajectories or much longer periods in
spacecrafts orbiting the earth. The bodies in the elevator
are in free fall. From Newton’s second law of dynamics,
equation 3, one gets

~P = m(g − g)ˆz = ~0.

(7)

In this case, although the body does not move in re-
lation to the scale, it exerts no action on the scale sur-
face. Therefore there is no reaction by the scale platform
on the body and consequently the scale dial shows zero
weight. This situation corresponds to the state of weight-
lessness, also known as imponderability. This state is
very often but erroneously reported as zero-gravity state
because the body is far from being away of signiﬁcant
gravitational ﬁelds. The body is weightless because it is
free falling together with the elevator and the scale, and
there are no forces pushing the body against the scale
platform and vice-versa, and not because the body and
the elevator are outside the pull of the Earth’s gravity.
The three objects fall under the action of the Earth grav-
itational force (which is always present unless the Earth
“disappears”).

c) The elevator acceleration is grater than the
acceleration due to gravity

In accordance with equation 3, the weight of the body

in an elevator with acceleration a > g > 0 is given by:

~P = m(a − g)ˆz.

(8)

That is, when the elevator cabin and the scale move with
an acceleration higher than the acceleration of gravity
the weight force would point against the acceleration due
to gravity and the weight intensity measured would be
negative. Unless the object is bound up with the scale
platform that is not physically possible. The relation 8
simply means the body loses contact with the scale plat-
form, which shows zero weight. The body is in free fall
and its acceleration ~a is ~g. The scale and the elevator
move with acceleration a greater than g and as a conse-
quence the body is left behind and shortly is caught by
the elevator ceiling.

Imagining there exist another (identical) scale ﬁxed on
the elevator ceiling facing down and the impact of the
body on the scale is not destructive, assuming the body
rests on the ceiling scale platform, the weight force is

~P = m(a − g)ˆz, com a > g.

(9)

5

Although the equations 9 and 8 are identical, the phys-
ical situations are distinct. The intensity indicated by
the second scale has physical meaning: the weight of the
body is now the force the body exerts on the platform
of the second scale. The weight orientation is now oppo-
site to the acceleration due to gravity. In contrast with
the former situations, the orientation “up” now becomes
“down” and conversely.

D. Weight on an accelerated frame of reference

The weightlessness experienced, for example, in the
International Space station (ISS) make to walk in the
interior of the ISS not possible. In the interior of the sta-
tion the bodies are not constrained to be in permanent
close contact with other bodies or the wall of the station.
In particularly, the astronauts are not pulled against the
station pavement and therefore the body’s action on the
surface of the station is null. As the astronauts action
(weight) on the station is zero there is no normal reac-
tion force is zero, and the friction force is zero. It is the
friction force between the pavement and the astronauts
feet that gives rise to the reaction force needed to walk.
The state of imponderabilidade or weightlessness for
extended periods of time can be experienced in a space-
ship outside the Earth’s or other planet’s atmosphere as
long as no propulsion is applied and veicule is not rotat-
ing about its axis. Because in free fall all parts of an
object accelerate uniformly and thus a human or other
body would experience no weight (assuming that there
are no tidal forces [9]

In the case of a spacecraft accelerating by ﬁring its
rockets the thrust force is applied to the back end of the
rocket by the gas escaping out the back and the bodies
in the interior of the veicule do not experiences weight-
lessness. This force is transferred to each object in the
spaceship through either pressure or tension giving rise
to the bodies weight on their supports. This does not de-
pend on the presence of a signiﬁcant gravitational ﬁeld.
According, the Einstein’s Principle of Equivalence the
bodies in a space veicule with an acceleration ~a in the
absence of a gravitational ﬁeld behave as the spaceship
was at rest or with constant velocity in a gravitational
ﬁeld with acceleration due to gravity ~g = −~a. The plans
to produce “artiﬁcial gravity” in vehicles designed to re-
main in orbit or stay in out space for a long period of
time are to set the space station into rotation with an
angular velocity ω around its central axis. The bodies at
any point at a distance r from the rotation axis experi-
ences a centripetal acceleration a = ω2r. The weight of
the bodies on the outer rim of the space-ship opposes the
centripetal force and its intensity is given by P = mω2r.
From equation 3 results that if the space-ship is ac-
celerating uniformly out of the inﬂuence of a signiﬁcant
gravitational ﬁeld, that is, ~g = ~0, the weight of a body
carried by the vehicle is opposite to the net force acting

on the body m~a, and is given by

~P = −m~a.

(10)

Taking in account the considerations made and the equa-
tion 10 the weight of a body or the weightlessness state
has nothing to do whether the body is under the inﬂuence
of a gravitational ﬁeld or not.

Contrary to what is many times stated, the notions
of vertical and up/down are not determined uniquely
by the gravitational force. The notions of vertical and
up/down of a body depend on its motion state character-
istics. The vertical is always the direction of the weight of
the body and “down” corresponds to the weight force ori-
entation. As an example, lets considere a motor-cyclist
in the “poo da morte”. From quotidian experience we
lean forwards during the bus starting movement and we
lean back when it starts stoping. In these situations our
vertical is oblique and to do not lose one’s balance we
lean with the new vertical.

IV. WEIGHT, WEIGHTLESSNESS AND
MICRO-GRAVITY

A. Weight

The body weight force appears whenever the body’s
surface interacts directly with the surface of another
body. The weight of the body is opposite to the nor-
mal force (reaction force) exerted by the surface where
the body stands on or is in contact with, which prevents
it from being pulled to the center of the Earth or moving
through the other body that is in contact with.

In contrast, if the body and its support or container
are in free fall, neglecting the eﬀect of the atmosphere,
they experiences weightlessness, because they are pulled
down with the same acceleration, the acceleration due
to gravity. Any spring-scale in contact and moving with
them measures no weight because the three objects are
not constrained to contact their surfaces to originate the
normal forces (zero action or zero weight gives rise to no
normal force).

B. Weightlessness state

The experience of no weight, by people and objects, is
known as imponderability, weightlessness or zero gravity,
although micro-gravity is often used to describe such a
condition. Excluding spaceﬂight (orbital ﬂight), weight-
lessness can be experienced only brieﬂy, around 30 sec-
onds, as in an airplane following a ballistic parabolic
path.

The sate of imponderability experienced in orbiting
spacecrafts is not due to large distance from the Earth.
The acceleration due to gravity at an altitude around 400
km is about 88% of its value at the surface of the Earth.

6

Weightlessness is a consequence of the body acceleration
to be only due to gravity. The gravity acts directly on a
person and other masses just like on the vehicle and the
person and the ﬂoor are not pushed toward each other.
In the contrary, contact forces like atmospheric drag and
rocket thrust ﬁrst act on the vehicle, and through the
vehicle on the person. As a consequence the person and
the ﬂoor are pushed toward each other, giving rise to the
weight force (subsection III D).

C. Micro-gravity concept

During free fall all parts of an object accelerate uni-
formly and the human beings and other bodies experience
the sensation of imponderability as long as there are no
tide forces. However, as mentioned the term micrograv-
ity is sometimes used instead of weightlessness to refer to
the situation in free-falling (orbiting) spacecraft. Never-
theless, its meaning is not this. The term microgravity
is usually employed in the case of orbiting spacecrafts
because weightlessness is not perfect. The main reasons
are: i) the acceleration due to gravity decreases 1 ppm for
every 3 m increase in height; ii) in an orbiting spaceship
the required centripetal force and hence the acceleration
due to gravity is higher at the far side than at the near-
est side of the ship relatively to the Earth; iii) although
very thin at around 400 km of height the atmosphere
gradually slows the space-craft.

The term microgravity is more appropriate than “zero
weight” or zero-gravity to characterize the residual ac-
celeration experienced by the bodies in the interior of a
space-craft. Here the term microgravity does not mean
the acceleration due to gravity was strongly reduced but
solely that its eﬀects on the bodies within the vehicle
were substantially reduced. This residual acceleration
the bodies in the vehicle experiences is a consequence of
the tidal forces acting on the bodies. This forces induce
in the bodies acceleration of intensities of some µm s−2,
giving rise to the use of the term microgravity.

The use of the term micro-gravity without specifying
its exact meaning could strengthen the misconceptions
associated to weight and gravitational force because the
term “micro” could lead to the idea that acceleration
due to gravity is very small because the distance from
Earth. To the contrary, the acceleration of the gravity
due to the Earth gravitational interaction is around 8.4
m s−2 at 400 km of height and about 2.63×10−3 m s−2
at the distance of the Moon orbit. True Earth micro-
gravity, g ≃ 1× ∼ 10−6 m s−2, can be only experienced
at locations as far oﬀ as almost 17 times the Earth-Moon
distance, although in these regions the acceleration due
to Sun’s gravity is nearly 6×10−3 m s−2.

7

V. CONCLUSION

The deﬁnition of weight force as the force of gravity
is misleading and very often confusing. Everyone who
teaches introductory physics is used to deal with the
confusion students experience when confronted with such
weight deﬁnition and weight-related concepts as weight-
lessness, micro-gravity and imponderability. In the oper-
ational deﬁnition here discussed, the weight of a body is
the action force the body exerts on the surface of another
body that it is in contact with, and depends on its state
of the motion. Having in mind that the concept of weight
is not fundamental in Physics, the author believes physics
learning would beneﬁt if one does not use the weight of
a body concept. This would have the advantage of dis-
rupting the common sense identiﬁcation between mass

and weight, without aﬀecting the more general and fun-
damental concept of gravitational force. Bearing in mind
that this does not seem executable in the near future it is
expected that this analysis will motivate physics instruc-
tors and authors, as well as the scientiﬁc community, to
replace the gravitational deﬁnition of weight by the op-
erational.

Acknowledgments

The author is grateful to Professor Robertus Potting
and Dr. Jos´e Rodrigues for their comments and the
manuscript revision. The author acknowledges the im-
provements that resulted from further discussions with
his colleagues.

[1] I. Galili, “Weight versus gravitational force: historical and
educational perspectives,” Int. J. Sci. Educ. 23, 1073-1093
(2001).

[2] Z. Gurel and H. Acar, “Research into Students’ Views
About Basic Physics Principles in a Weightless Environ-
ment,” The Astronomy Education Review 2, 65-81 (2003).
[3] H. Niedderer el all, “Epistemological Beliefs of Students in
High School Physics,” NARST Annual Meeting in Boston,
March 1992 (1992).

[4] R. A. Serway, Physics for Scientists and Engineers with
modern physics (Saunders College Publishing, Philadel-
phia, CA, 1996) page 113.

[5] H. D. Young and R. A. Freedman, University Physics with
modern physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 2000)
page 362.

[6] Rsolution de la 3e CGPM, “Dclaration relative l’unit de
la dﬁnition du poids; valeur conventionnelle de

masse et
gn,” Comptes rendus de la 3e CGPM, 70 (1901).

[7] J. B. Marion and W. F. Hornyak, General Physics with
Bioscience Essays (John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY,
1985).

[8] T. Van Flandern e X. S. Yang, “Allais gravity and pen-
dulum eﬀects during solar eclipses explained,” Phys. Rev
D 67, 022002 (2003); C. S. Unnikrishnan, A. K. Mohap-
atra, e G. T. Gillies, “Anomalous gravity data during the
1997 total solar eclipse do not support the hypothesis of
gravitational shielding,” Phys. Rev D 63, 062002 (2001).
[9] The tidal force is a secondary eﬀect of the forces of gravity

due to the diﬀerent celestial objects.

