5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Numerial Methods as an Integrated Part of Physis Eduation

Arnt Inge Vistnes

and Morten Hjorth-Jensen

1

2

2

1

Department of Physis, University of Oslo, N-0316 Oslo, Norway

Department of Physis and Center of Mathematis for Appliations, University of Oslo, N-0316 Oslo, Norway

(Dated: Final version February 2, 2008)

During the last deade we have witnessed an impressive development in so-alled interpreted lan-

guages and omputational environments suh as Maple, Mathematia, IDL, Matlab et. Problems

whih until reently were typially solved on mainframe mahines and written in omputing lan-

guages suh as Fortran or C/C++, an now easily be solved on standard PCs with the bonus of

immediate visualizations of the results.

In our undergraduate programs an often posed question is how to inorporate and exploit e(cid:30)-

iently these advanes in the standard physis and mathematis urriulum, without detrating the

attention from the lassial and basi theoretial and experimental topis to be overed. Further-

more, if students are trained to use suh tools at early stages in their eduation, do suh tools really

enhane and improve the learning environment? And, perhaps even more important, does it lead

to a better physis understanding?

Here we present one possible approah, where omputational topis are gradually baked into our

undergraduate urriulum in Mathematis and Physis, Astronomy and Meteorology. We fous on

training our students to use general programming tools in solving physis problems, in addition to

the lassial analyti problems. By this approah, the students gain an expertise that they an build

upon in their future studies and areers. We use mainly Java, Matlab and Maple as omputational

environments. Our students are now apable of handling at an early stage in their eduation more

realisti physis problems than before. We believe (cid:28)rmly that, in addition to eduating modern

sientists, this promotes a better physis understanding for a ma jority of the students.

I.

INTRODUCTION

it is important to inorporate omputational topis at an

as early as possible stage in for example the undergrad-

uate urriulum in physis. With the advanes made

Computer simulations are nowadays an integral part

in modern omputational environments, whih often in-

of ontemporary basi and applied researh in the phys-

lude powerful tools to visualize immediately the results,

ial sienes. Modern omputational environments are

we feel time is ripe for introduing suh tools in the un-

widely used in industry as well. Computation is nowa-

dergraduate urriulum.

days as important as theory and experiment. The abil-

ity "to ompute" is now part of the essential repertoire

Furthermore, we believe that the introdution of nu-

of researh sientists. Several new (cid:28)elds have emerged

merial exerises an improve the learning environment

and strengthened their positions in the last years, suh

and even add further physis insights to the more

as omputational materials siene, bioinformatis, om-

standard analyti exerises. By using interpreted lan-

putational mathematis and mehanis, omputational

guages and omputational environments like Mathemat-

hemistry and physis, just to mention a few. Sine om-

ia, Maple, Matlab et, modeling often takes onsider-

putation enjoys suh an important standing in the nat-

ably less time than the more old-fashioned and tradi-

ural sienes and mathematis, we feel that our under-

tional omputing tools, whih often are based on large

graduate urriulum should re(cid:29)et this feature as well.

Fortran and/or C/C++ programs and speialized visu-

For this reason it seems obvious that university stu-

alization pakages. Through our new eduational uni-

dents in the physial sienes should get an eduation

versity reform we have therefore started a pro jet where

whih re(cid:29)ets, in a oherent way (see the disussion be-

the main aim is to gradually inlude omputational ex-

low), how omputers are used to solve problems in basi

erises throughout the undergraduate studies in math-

and applied researh as well as in industry. Sadly, this

ematis and physis. Programming languages suh as

is normally not the ase. Suh an eduation ombines in

Java and an interpreted language like Matlab are intro-

priniple knowledge from many di(cid:27)erent sub jets, suh

dued as early as the (cid:28)rst and the seond semester of

as numerial analysis, omputing languages and some

the bahelor programs in Mathematis, Informatis and

knowledge of omputers. These topis are, almost as a

Tehnology (MIT) and Physis, Astronomy and Meteo-

rule of thumb, taught in di(cid:27)erent, and we would like to

rology (FAM) at the University of Oslo. The usage and

add, disonneted ourses. Only at the level of his/her

properties of these languages are added upon in later

thesis work is the student onfronted with the synthesis

ourses. At the end of the seond semester the students

of all these sub jets. The usage of omputers in solving

are fully familiar with the syntax of for example Matlab

problems in physis is often postponed to the master- or

and an use this environment professionally in more ad-

PhD-programs. In order to prepare better our students

vaned undergraduate ourses. This allows teahers in

for their future areers and studies, we believe (cid:28)rmly that

topis like eletromagnetism or the introdutory ourse

our summaries and perspetives in Se. IV.

2

II. COMPUTERS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION

We started to implement numerial exerises in our

undergraduate ourses bak in 1999. The (cid:28)rst few years

we implemented the new tools in two or three mathemat-

is and physis ourses only, with mixed experienes. At

ept for an introdutory (not mandatory) programming

ourse, where typially some high-level language like Java

FIG. 1: Strategy for solving physis problems, and pointing

that time many undergraduate students were not familiar

out where numerial solutions ome into play.

with programming onepts in the natural sienes, ex-

in quantum physis to present more realisti problems,

was taught. The students whih attended this ourse

whih hopefully onvey further physis insights and make

would perhaps not meet omputational problems before

physis muh more fun. At the end of their bahelor stud-

they embarked on their master or PhD thesis, with typ-

ies, our students are also exposed to other omputational

ial time spans from when they learned omputing till

tools suh as Maple or Mathematia and more traditional

they started on a thesis pro jet of three to four years.

ourses in omputational sienes, ourses whih involve

The emphasis of this programming ourse was and still

desriptions of algorithms and advaned problems solved

is on general onepts, with few, if any, appliations to

with languages like C/C++.

problems from the physial sienes. Another important

The strategy for solving physis problems, whih we

problem was and still is that of the readiness of our teah-

have opted, is very lose to the traditional one desribed

ers. Very few were and still are familiar with the new pro-

by several textbook authors. Young and Freedman [1℄ de-

gramming tools and ould therefore not aid in an e(cid:30)ient

sribe it as ISEE: Identify, Set up, Exeute and Evaluate.

way our students in solving problems. Finally, the infras-

The numerial methods only replae some of the pure an-

truture with omputer labs, software, operating systems

alytial tasks that make up the Exeute part of this dia-

et was not optimal, or it was not lear whih solution to

gram. Our approah is an algorithmi one, whih stresses

hoose, for large lasses of students.

the understanding of the underlying physis. This is also

Sine then we have bene(cid:28)ted from several advanes.

the reason we prefer tools like Matlab or Maple, where

We have invested in instrution labs with omputers, in

the students, under guidane, have to model the atual

addition we have general omputer rooms that are open

physial systems. This approah should be ontrasted

most of the day. We also have wireless networks in all

to the widespread use of applets to demonstrate physis

ommon rooms so that students an link their laptops

problems.

to the loal network and get aess to di(cid:27)erent software

Many people think omputers already are inluded in

pakages, ourse pages with exerises, leture notes et.

the physis eduation. In one way this is orret. Thou-

Both Linux and Windows environments are available,

sands of applets have been written for physis alone, and

and there is some support for Ma OS. Student versions

by these applets students may for example visualize the

at low pries exist for many of the interpreted languages.

path of a ball through air. These applets may be use-

However, in spite of the above improvements we feel

ful as a pedagogial tool, hopefully giving the students

that three basi problems still persist. These are

a better understanding of various phenomena. However,

the usage of applets made by others do not neessarily

inrease the students ability to solve physis problems

• How to gradually bring in omputational aspets in

most of our undergraduate ourses without taking

in general. An applet made by others is very seldom to

muh use when the student is to solve physis problems

in a later job. Furthermore, it is often di(cid:30)ult to get

a lose relationship to an applet made by others, sine

away the attention from the basi topis whih have

to be overed. The standard omplaint from many

university teahers is that omputational exerises

bring in an additional ompliation to an already

di(cid:30)ult topi and they do not wish to spend time

one often feels inseure about what is atually going on

below the surfae of the applet, that is, how the model-

on it during the regular lasses.

ing in fat is done. In our experiene, use of applets, for

• Most teahers are not familiar with many of the

these reasons, has a more limited importane than one

new programming tools. A dediated program to

would expet.

inrease the level of knowledge of our teahers is

In the next setion we present the basi struture of our

needed for this program to be suessful.

program on 'Computers in Siene Eduation' applied to

the bahelor programs FAM and MIT, with an emphasis

• Finally, to make meaningful exerises whih go be-

on the Physis program. Se. III presents examples of

yond the available body of very good analyti ex-

numerial exerises the students are exposed to during

erises and an trigger further insights represents

their two (cid:28)rst years of physis studies. Finally, we present

perhaps the greatest hallenge we fae.

3

Through our reent university reform dating from the

subatomi physis, advaned quantum mehanis and so

fall 2003 and an extensive ollaboration with the bahe-

forth. Here it is up to the various teahers whether they

lor program in Mathematis (MIT), we have now estab-

wish to inlude numerial exerises or not. However, the

lished a pro jet alled 'Computers in Siene Eduation',

bakground of the students for doing this is now muh

where the aim is to address the above three topis. The

better than previously.

reform of 2003 introdued a three-year bahelor program,

To meet the needs of our university teahers we

a two-year master program and (cid:28)nally a three-year PhD

have developed and arrange on a regular basis inten-

program. The introdution of the bahelor program al-

sive one week ourses on various omputer tools. We

lowed us to re-model the undergraduate urriulum, im-

have developed ourses on Matlab, Maple, visualization

plying a large degree of ommon and ompulsory ourses

tools, Fortran95, C/C++, Sripting languages and high-

in physis, informatis and mathematis. Our two bah-

performane omputing. All ourse material is available

elor programs have typially 200-300 new students every

on the net for self-study, with a large body of exerises.

year, with roughly 100 starting with Physis, Astronomy

For links to these ourses see Ref. [2℄. Most of the mate-

and Meteorology.

rial is in english.

Our physis and mathematis students follow the same

Below we disuss two examples of physis exerises

ourses the (cid:28)rst semester. The (cid:28)rst semester onsists

whih an be solved using Matlab.

of a standard mathematis ourse on analysis and al-

ulus, one on programming (Java) and (cid:28)nally a ourse

on modeling and mathematis appliations. The latter

two ourses introdue programming onepts using Java,

III. EXAMPLES FROM PHYSICS COURSES

operating systems suh as Linux and Windows, use of

editors, numerial algorithms for integration and solu-

We had several aims in mind when we embarked on

tion of di(cid:27)erential equations, representations of numbers,

omputational exerises in our undergraduate physis

roots of transendental equations and so forth. This gives

ourses.

our students a ommon and uniform bakground in vari-

ous tools and programming environments. Our students

• We wanted to give the students an opportunity to

meet Matlab appliations the seond semester through

gain a deeper understanding of the physis. In most

the mehanis ourse (see setion III), a mathematial

ourses one is normally onfronted with simple sys-

ourse on (cid:28)eld theory and vetor analysis and a ourse

tems whih provide exat solutions and mimi to

on linear algebra. The latter two ourses are also part

a ertain extent the realisti ases. Many are how-

of the bahelor program in mathematis whereas the me-

ever the omments like 'why an't we do something

hanis ourse is optional for mathematiians[3℄

else than the lassial box potential in quantum me-

Our students are thus exposed to programming topis

hanis?' In several of the numerial exerises we

and numerial exerises in (cid:28)ve out of six undergraduate

propose more 'realisti' ases to solve by various

ourses the (cid:28)rst year of study. This allows us to portion

numerial methods. This also means that we wish

out the omputational learning threshold over time and

to give examples of how physis an be applied in

in di(cid:27)erent ourses, avoiding thereby muh of the well-

a muh broader ontext than it is disussed in the

known ritiisms disussed above.

traditional physis undergraduate urriulum.

With this aveat we are able to give our students a uni-

form bakground in omputational skills, skills whih an

• To enourage the students to "disover" physis in

then be used in solving slightly more advaned problems,

a way similar to how researhers learn in the on-

without taking away the attention from the interesting

text of researh.

physis. The seond year of study begins then with a

ourse on eletromagnetism, an optional ourse on astro-

Our overall goal is to enourage the students to learn si-

physis/meteorology and an advaned linear algebra and

ene through experiene and by asking questions. Our

alulus ourse. The eletromagnetism ourse ontains

ob jetive is always a deeper understanding. The pur-

several numerial exerises, inluding even solutions of

pose of omputing is further insight, not mere numbers!

partial di(cid:27)erential equations suh as Laplae's equation.

Moreover, and this is our personal bias, to devie an al-

Matlab is used in solving suh problems. The seond year

gorithm and thereafter write a ode for solving physis

ends with the spring semester and with an introdutory

problems is a marvelous way of gaining insight into om-

ourse on quantum physis, a ourse on wave equations

pliated physial systems. The algorithm one ends up

and osillations and an experimental physis ourse. All

writing re(cid:29)ets in essentially all ases the understanding

these ourses o(cid:27)er numerial exerises and use omput-

of the physis of the problem.

ers for pro jet writing. At this stage most students are

Below we disuss two simple appliations whih illus-

fairly familiar with omputational topis. The last year

trate the above aims, one from our mehanis ourse (se-

of the bahelor degree ontains more advaned topis,

ond semester of the (cid:28)rst year of study) and the other

inluding topis suh as statistial physis, mathemati-

from our introdutory ourse in quantum physis (se-

al physis, omputational physis, solid state physis,

ond semester of the seond year of study).

4

of the ball, Cd is the air resistane oe(cid:30)ient, v is the

v

speed, and

is the veloity of the ball (a vetor).

It

is the variation of the oe(cid:30)ient Cd that is displayed in

Figure 2. The Reynolds number is proportional with the

veloity, as usual.

When using numerial methods, fous tends to be on

Newton's seond law, not on for example the (cid:28)nal in-

tegrated solutions for the simpli(cid:28)ed system without air

resistane. Furthermore, the students realize that the

Exeute part of Figure 1, is merely a tool part that is

rather separate from the physis involved. In the tradi-

tional approah the mathematis part (exeute part) is

often foused on to suh a degree that it is ommon to

FIG. 2: Air resistane vs. Reynold's number for a sphere

think that that part is the important one in the problem

moving through air. See Physis World for similar details

solving, whereas the opposite often is the ase. Thus, by

(http://physisweb.org/artiles/world/11/6/8/1/world-11-6-8-3 ).

introduing numerial methods, the students an more

A. Mehanis Problems

lem, and what is not. And again, the realism of the

problem helps to inspire the students in their work.

easily grasp what is the important physis in the prob-

It would have been pratially impossible to treat a

On the other hand, our approah is more demanding

realisti pro jetile motion for a football by using the tra-

ditional analytial tools alone. The reason is that the

air resistane varies in a rather ompliated way for the

football problem. Figure 2 displays the air resistane o-

e(cid:30)ient for a spherial ball moving through air (for or-

than the traditional one. Of ourse it is easier to use

blindly the (cid:28)nal equations for a pro jetile motion without

air resistane, than to solve a more realisti problem,

sine in the latter ase the students must go somewhat

deeper into the problem. Our approah therefore tends

to some degree to exlude our weakest students. This

responding equations, see below). The initial slope for

low speeds makes the air resistane approximately pro-

represents a hallenge to your physis eduation.

portional with the speed.

In the plateau region of the

The above is just one of many examples of physis ex-

urve, the air resistane is roughly proportional with the

erises inluded in our undergraduate ourses. Other nu-

square of the speed. However, for really high ball speeds,

merial exerises inluded in for example our mehanis

(seond semester) and eletromagnetism (third semester)

whih professional football players atually obtain, the

air resistane drops drastially.

ourses are

Sine there are no single purely analytial expression

1. Hunting gun bullet (ballisti) movement with om-

with onstant oe(cid:30)ients that an be used to desribe

the air-resistane throughout the pro jetile motion for a

plex desription of air resistane.

football, it is impossible to work out a solution in losed

2. Roket launhing with almost all realisti parame-

form. However, when we solve the pro jetile motion by

numerial methods, only approximately (cid:28)ve to ten extra

ters.

lines of ode are needed in order to inlude all the details

3. Mathematial and physial pendulum with large

of Figure 2 in the alulations. The full Matlab ode for

this problem, implementing Euler's method for solving

amplitudes.

a seond order di(cid:27)erential equation, and plotting of the

results, an easily be written with 50 lines of ode. This

4. Chaoti motion.

represents a manageable problem for our students. One

suh a program is written, it an easily be modi(cid:28)ed to

5. Planetary movement, position of planets ompared

quite di(cid:27)erent problems. With a few hanges it an for

to the bakground star sky.

example handle a realisti roket launh (for sienti(cid:28)

rokets that our department sends up in the atmosphere

6. Calulate magneti (cid:28)eld from arbitrary urrent ge-

in order to study auroras). In the roket problem almost

ometries, based on Biot-Savart's law.

every thinkable parameter hanges during the (cid:29)ight (for

example, the roket engine thrust, the air resistane and

7. Transients when a fored harmoni osillation

even the gravitation fore).

starts, for di(cid:27)erent Q-fators.

The expression for the air resistane we use is given by

the following:

8. Di(cid:27)erent forms for eletromagneti waves, anima-

1
2
where ρ is the density of the air, S is the ross setion

ρSCdvv,

F = −

(1)

tions.

9. Combined e(cid:27)ets of various potentials (e.g. ele-

trostati and gravitational).

5

B. Simple Examples from Quantum Physis

The standard exerise the students are exposed to (and

we laim this is done in an almost uniform way all over

In the traditional (cid:28)rst ourse in quantum physis

the world) is to set up Shrödinger's equation for these

(whih at our university is taught towards the end of

three regions and show that one an obtain a set of tran-

the seond year), students are exposed to topis like one-

sendental equations for the energy and thereby the wave

dimensional potential problems represented by the har-

moni osillator, the standard square well potential and

funtions. They would typially proeed by setting up

the general solutions for regions I and III as follows

the hydrogen atom. In addition, the students get a basi

understanding of the periodi system, moleular physis,

ψI (x) = Aeβx + Be

−βx

some nulear, partile and solid state physis. The more

and

formal mathematial framework of quantum mehanis

is presented in a senior undergraduate ourse in the (cid:28)fth

semester of study (beginning of the last year of the bah-

elor degree).

A standard textbook exerise the students ould be

at

ψIII (x) = F eβx + Ge

−βx.

Similarly, they would show that for region II one arrives

exposed to is to solve Shrödinger's equation for a partile

on(cid:28)ned in a one-dimensional square well potential, given

ψII (x) = C cos(kx) + D sin(kx).

by for example Figure 3. This exerise annot be solved

The oe(cid:30)ients A, B , C , D, F and G are all unknown.

analytially. The one-dimensional Shrödinger equation

The students have to distinguish between symmet-

−a

a

- x

ri and antisymmetri solutions, meaning that the wave

funtions obey either ψ(x) = ψ(−x) or ψ(x) = −ψ(−x).
This gives D = 0 for the symmetri ase and C = 0 for

the antisymmetri ase. In addition, the wave funtions

I

II

III

have to be bounded.

−V0

The (cid:28)nal step is to use the requirement that the wave

funtion is ontinuous at x = a and x = −a and after

some minor algebra the students arrive at

ψIII (a) = ψII (a) = Ge−βa = C cos(ka)
˙ψIII (a) = ˙ψII (a) = −βGe−βa = −kC sin(ka), (7)

(6)

resulting in the the following transendatal equations

β = k tan(ka),

−β = k cot(ka),

(8)

(9)

FIG. 3: Simple quantum mehanial problem for a partile

on(cid:28)ned in a square well potential.

takes the following form

for the symmetri solution and

2

¯h
2m

−

∂2
∂x2 ψ(x) + V (x)ψ(x) = −|E|ψ(x),

(2)

for the antisymmetri ase.

and an be rewritten

∂2
∂x2 ψ(x) −

2m
¯h

2 (V (x) + |E|) ψ(x) = 0.

(3)

would stop. The emphasis is then obviously only on the

mathematial manipulations in order to arrive at the two

(cid:28)nal equations. One ould always plug in values for the

In the traditional approah, this is normally where one

Note that V (x) + |E| ≤ 0. For regions I and III the

however this limits very muh the physis investigations

potential and its range resulting in analytial funtions,

potential is zero and we have

whih an be made with modern tools.

∂2
∂x2 ψ(x) − β2ψ(x) = 0,

As an example, Matlab, Maple and Mathematia all

(4)

have funtions for solving numerially the above non-

linear equations and the students an easily investigate

2
with β2 = 2m|E|/¯h

. In region II V (x) = −V0 , resulting

the number of solutions as funtion of the depth of the

potential and its range. They an also write their own

algorithms for solving suh equations. The next step is to

in

∂2
∂x2 ψ(x) + k
2
where k2 = 2m(V0 − |E|)/¯h

2

ψ(x) = 0,

(5)

use the eigenvalues to obtain the wave funtions and plot

these as funtion of the potential depth and the range. A

is real and positive.

In

tion as the range of the potential inreases. The osillat-

useful exerise is to study the behavior of the wave fun-

all three regions we have simple seond-order di(cid:27)erential

ing wave funtion one then sees from the plot orresponds

equations with their pertinent boundary equations.

to the ase of a free partile.

% T h e r e a f t e r we i n t e r p o l a t e t o g e t

f u n  t i o n y i n i t = ma tBOX in i t ( x )

These problems an easily be solved with most of the

% w h e r e t o p l o t y

above tools, providing the students with an extremely

x i n t = l i n s p a  e ( 0 , 0 . 8 ) ;

useful tool for asking further physis questions. The sim-

plest way to implement the above is then as follows

6

1. Use the funtions of Matlab, Maple or Mathemat-

%

ia for solving non-linear equations. Obtain the

eigenvalues as funtion of the depth and the range

t h e

of the potential.

2. Write a small ode whih inludes these solutions

s o l u t i o n

and obtains the eigenfuntions for the symmetri

and the antisymmetri ase. Plot these funtions

and ompare to the free partile ase.

Most students are apable of implementing the above two

steps. There is no need to onsider the solution of di(cid:27)er-

ential equations with boundary problems and our experi-

ene is that the students (cid:28)nd the immediate visualization

x i n t

y

(

(

i

) )

of the results as very rewarding and interesting. Suh a

S x i n t = d e v a l ( s o l , x i n t ) ;

ode is however not extendable to more interesting ases

% p r e p a r e norm o f w f

suh as the hydrogen atom or the harmoni osillator.

One an inrease the degree of numerial omplexity by

% s q u a r e d w f

w f 2 = S x i n t . ∗ S x i n t ;

letting the students write more generi odes for single-

% Norm by t r a p e z o i d a l

r u l e

partile problems. Matlab o(cid:27)ers a set of funtions for

h i n t = t r a p z ( x i n t , w f 2 ( 1 , : ) ) ;

solving di(cid:27)erential equations with boundary onditions.

% F i n a l e w f

This is exposed in the following Matlab ode for the par-

S x i n t = S x i n t / s q r t ( h i n t ) ;

tile in a square well potential.

% p l o t

t h e wave f u n  t i o n

Matlab ode for the partile in a square well potential

p l o t ( x i n t , S x i n t ( 1 , : ) ) ;

f u n  t i o n B o x P o t e n t i a l

 l e a r

t i t l e ( ' E i g e n f u n  t i o n ' ) ;

f i g u r e ;

a x i s ( [ 0 0 . 8 −5 5 ℄ ) ;

x l a b e l ( ' x ' ) ;

% G l o b a l  o n s t a n t s ( u n i t s : nm and eV )

y l a b e l ( ' S o l u t i o n y ' ) ;

m= 5 1 1 0 0 0 . ;

% e l e  t r o n m a s s

[ eV/  2 ℄

% The p o t e n t i a l

g l o b a l m h b a r  V0 a f a  t o r ;

h b a r  = 1 9 7 . 3 2 7 ; % h b a r ∗  [ eV nm ℄

V0 = 5 . ;

% P o t e n s i a l d e p t h [ eV ℄

f u n  t i o n v = B o x p o t ( x )

a = 0 . 1 ;

% E x t e n s i o n o f V [ nm ℄

g l o b a l V0 a

f a  t o r = 2∗m/ h b a r  / h b a r  ;
( V0− |E | )

% f a  t o r

i n f r o n t o f

i f

( x < a )

v = V0 ;

e l s e i f

( x >= a )

%

I n i t i a l g u e s s

f o r

t h e e n e r g y

v = 0 ;

lambda = 2 . ;

e n d

s o l i n i t = b v p i n i t ( l i n s p a  e ( 0 , 0 . 8 ) , matBOXinit , lambda )

% The ODE,

two  o l u m n s : y ( 1 ) and

y ( 2 ) and dydx ( 1 ) and dydx ( 2 )

% BVP4C r e t u r n s

t h e

f u n  t i o n dydx = matBOXode ( x , y , lambda )

s t r u  t u r e

' s o l ' . The e i g e n v a l u e

i s

g l o b a l

f a  t o r

% i n s o l . p a r a m e t e r s .

dydx = [

y ( 2 )

The mesh p o i n t s u s e d by M a t l a b

% a r e i n s o l . x , w h i l e y ( x )

i s

i n s o l . y

− f a  t o r ∗ ( B o x p o t ( x)− lambda ) ∗ y ( 1 )

℄ ;

% s o l . yp  o n t a i n s

t h e d e r i v a t i v e o f

s o l . y u s i n g s o l . x

% B o u n d a r y  o n d i t i o n s

f u n  t i o n r e s = matBOXb ( ya , yb , lambda )

s o l = b v p 4  ( matBOXode , matBOXb , s o l i n i t ) ;

r e s = [

y a ( 2 )

f p r i n t f ( ' E i g e n v a l u e

i s % 7 . 3 f . \ n ' , s o l . p a r a m e t e r s )

yb ( 1 )

y a ( 1 ) − 1 ℄ ;

% H e r e we d e f i n e an a r r a y o f x−v a l u e s

f o r

% t r i a l

f o r

t h e s o l u t i o n and i t s d e r i v a t i v e

y i n i t

our students to pursue a physis areer.

7

• The students meet more interesting and realisti

problems than before

• We believe this helps in motivating and inspiring

• The hoie between traditional analytial mathe-

matial tools alone and the same tools ombined

with numerial tools, lari(cid:28)es in a better way what

is the important physis and whih are the useful

tools to be used in problem solving.

• We an devote more time on the ore physis equa-

tions.

=

[

 o s ( x )

− s i n ( x ) ℄ ;

The above is for a partile moving in a square well po-

tential, however it is easy to extend this to other types of

• The students get an expertise that an make them

single-partile potentials. It allows, by simply hanging

more produtive in their future jobs and areers.

the di(cid:27)erential equations, the boundary onditions and

the potential, to attak many other single-partile prob-

• It gives the university teahers a greater advantage

lems and provides thereby a generi bakground whih is

sine it brings the students loser to the way we

independent of the spei(cid:28) physis problem. This is obvi-

do researh. It is more fun to teah. Our experi-

ously in line with modern omputing onepts whih our

ene is that we gain muh more insights ourselves

students are exposed to in ourses on programming on-

than in the more traditional approahes sine we

epts. As suh it allows one to fous on the basi physis,

an address muh more interesting questions.

represented by the boundary onditions and the poten-

tial. This abstration is however di(cid:30)ult for most stu-

Problems:

dents, and a balane has to been sought. It is also a muh

• Many university teahers do not know how to use

more di(cid:30)ult proedure to grasp as it hides the solution

the new tools. We o(cid:27)er therefore several intensive

of a di(cid:27)erential equation with boundary onditions. On

ourses in order to upgrade the knowledge of our

average, the students (cid:28)nd the usage of the above ap-

sta(cid:27).

proah rather di(cid:30)ult sine the way it is oded is fairly

ompat. By presenting this algorithm here we also ex-

• However, there will always be a ertain number

pose a di(cid:30)ulty inherent to most modern languages like

of teahers who do not like to spend time on the

Maple or Matlab. The oding of the physis represented

new tools sine that leaves less time for traditional

by the boundary onditions and the potential is highly

teahing and /or student ativities. Parts of this

non-trivial and non-transparent. It would be muh better

relutane is due to pure inertia, but most of the

if the students ould ode diretly the boundary ondi-

ritiism is very atual, and are has to be exer-

tions, the potential and the di(cid:27)erential equation to be

ised so that the time spent on numerial methods

solved in a way whih is lose to the mathematis.

does not beome too large ompared with the total

In the fourth semester most students are not famil-

ativity.

iar with suh problems and we do no reommend to use

suh an approah. The students need to provide the

• We have to give more individual instrutions and

boundary onditions on the wave funtion and its deriva-

feedbak to the students than before. We end up

tive based on the symmetry of the solution, they need

using more teahing resoures.

to ode the potential itself and the form of the seond-

order di(cid:27)erential equation. Our experiene when we used

the above more generi approah, is that it is atually

• Very few textbooks o(cid:27)er problems where numerial

methods are required for obtaining a solution, thus:

better to let the students ode expliitely the shooting

- We have to develop new problems ourselves. It

method for (cid:28)nding the eigenvalues. This is however more

takes time but it is de(cid:28)nitely worth it.

time-demanding than the steps outlined prior to the ode

above.

• Some of the weaker students have problems in get-

ting through the new ourses, whereas the lever

students enjoy the (cid:29)exibility that the new tools give

them. This represents a lear pedagogial hallenge

IV. SUMMARY

to our physis eduation.

The new approah in physis eduation at our univer-

Fortunately, many of the problems will be redued as

sity has been rather suessful as far as we an judge. We

time passes sine students get more used to omputa-

an summarize the benefts and problems as follows:

tional exerises and we make (hopefully) better physis

Bene(cid:28)ts:

problems.

8

[1℄ H. D. Young and R. A. Freedman: University Physis

found at

ley, 2004).

and for parallel omputing see

with Modern Physis, 11th Ed., (Pearson/Addison Wes-

\protet\vrule width0pt\protet\href{http://heim.ifi.uio.no/\string~hpl/VitSimSripting/\endverbatim}{http://heim.ifi.uio.no/\~hpl/VitSimSripting/

[2℄ For the Matlab, Maple and Visualization ourses see

\protet\vrule width0pt\protet\href{http://heim.ifi.uio.no/\string~xinga/MPI-COURSE/\endverbatim}{http://heim.ifi.uio.no/\~xinga/MPI-COURSE/

\protet\vrule width0pt\protet\href{http://heim.ifi.uio.no\string~hpl/INF-VERK4810/index.html\endverbatim}{http://heim.ifi.uio.no$\sim$hpl/INF-VERK4810/index.html

[3℄ Our fall semester lasts 19 weeks, while the spring semester

For the ourses on Fortran 90/95 see

lasts 21 weeks. The last two to three weeks of every

\protet\vrule width0pt\protet\href{http://folk.uio.no/gunnarw/INF-VERK4820/index.html\endverbatim}{http://folk.uio.no/gunnarw/INF-VERK4820/index.html

semester are reserved for the (cid:28)nal exams. On average 15-16

For C/C++ see

weeks of eah semester are dediated to regular teahing.

\protet\vrule width0pt\protet\href{http://heim.ifi.uio.no/\string~hpl/INF-VERK4830\endverbatim}{http://heim.ifi.uio.no/\~hpl/INF-VERK4830

Every ourse gives ten redits in the new ECTS system.

Similarly, a ourse on Python as sritping language an be

