A uniﬁed model for the long and high jump

O. Helene

Instituto de F´ısica, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo,

C.P. 66318, CEP 05315-970 S˜ao Paulo, SP, Brasil

M. T. Yamashita

Unidade Diferenciada de Itapeva, Universidade Estadual Paulista,

CEP 18409-010 Itapeva, SP, Brasil

Abstract

A simple model based on the maximum energy that an athlete can produce in a small time

interval is used to describe the high and long jump. Conservation of angular momentum is used to

explain why an athlete should run horizontally to perform a vertical jump. Our results agree with

world records.

5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
2
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

A few years ago, William Harris asked how the kinetic energy acquired from running is

converted in the long and high jump events.1 The question was whether athletes running
horizontally can change their velocity into one that forms an angle of 45◦ with the horizon-
tal without changing their speed. The three negative answers2,3,4 were that athletes cannot

convert their initial horizontal velocity into a vertical one,3 because it is impossible to gen-

erate the necessary power required by the task,4 or equivalently, athletes cannot sustain the

necessary acceleration to acquire the vertical velocity at takeoﬀ.2

If the answer were positive, the center of mass of a world class athlete running at 10 m/s
and taking oﬀ at 45◦ would go a horizontal distance of about 10.2 m. Because the athlete’s

center of mass is forward of the front edge of the runway at takeoﬀ and behind the point

where her heels hit the ground at landing (see Sec. III), the actual total jump length would

be about 11 m. For the high jump, the athlete’s center of mass would attain a maximum

height of 3.5 m. These results are much greater than actual records. We conclude that

athletes cannot totally change their horizontal velocity into a vertical one, as stated by the

negative answers.

The negative answers bring some new questions.

If the magnitude of the velocity is

assumed to be unchanged and thus the kinetic energy, why is extra power necessary? Why

does a high jumper run horizontally to jump vertically? How do runners change their

horizontal velocity into a velocity with a vertical component? What is conserved and what

is changed at takeoﬀ?

II. WHAT LIMITS AN ATHLETE’S PERFORMANCE?

There are three systems that any animal uses to produce energy.5 In the case of humans,

for activities whose duration is longer than a few minutes, aerobic energy is produced at a

low rate by burning carbohydrates or fats. For activities that last a few tens of seconds,

the main source of energy is the breakdown of glycogen in the absence of oxygen and the

production of lactic acid. For very short duration activities the body uses the adenosine

triphosphate (ATP) stored in muscles, and energy is supplied immediately, following the

conversion of ATP into adenosine diphosphate (ADP).

2

The static force generated from muscle contraction can be very high. However the mag-

nitude of the force is limited by the rate that the muscles can produce energy, which is

limited by the rate that ATP is depleted (ATP depletion is completed in a few seconds).

For example, after a few seconds sprinters no longer accelerate, but decelerate,6 because

they cannot overcome the force due to air resistance. ATP is the source of energy in all

explosive sports, such as jumps, sprints, and weightlifting. Thus, if we produce a force with

a non-vanishing velocity, that is, we produce mechanical power, the force is limited by the

rate that our muscles can convert ATP into ADP.

To discuss the performance of a jumper, we use the results of two observations. One is

that the maximum force that athletes can produce in a small time interval with their legs

while producing work. We will take this information from observations of the squat.

In

this exercise a weight is rested on the shoulders of an athlete. He starts from the upright

position, and bends his ankles, knees, and hips as if sitting. At the lowest position, when his

thighs are horizontal, he returns to the upright position. The maximum weight an athlete

can lift doing a squat is about 5000 N. For a ﬁrst class male athlete with mass 100 kg, the

maximum force that can be made with just one leg is about 3000 N. (In the high and long

jump, athlete’s use just one leg to push their center of mass.) This force is diﬀerent from a

static force.

In both the high and long jump, the height of the runner’s center of mass remains almost

constant until the last stride. In the last stride the center of mass rises about 25 cm before

the runner takes oﬀ and his foot loses contact with the ground.

From these two observations we conclude that an 80 kg runner (assuming 80 kg athlete can
produce the same 3000 N force with each leg) can add about (3000 − 800) N × 0.25 m = 550 J

to the kinetic energy. We will use this result in the following.

An equivalent result can be obtained from an analysis of an elite 100 m runner. At 6 m/s,

an elite runner has an acceleration of about 5 m/s2 (see, for instance, Fig. 1 in Ref. 6). For

an 80 kg athlete this acceleration corresponds to a mechanical power of 2400 W. At every

stride, the runner’s center of mass rises about 5 cm. At a rate of 5 strides/s (a typical rate

in the 100 m dash), the up-down movement of the center of mass corresponds to 200 W of
additional power. Thus at each stride, the runner produces (2400 + 200) W × 0.2 s = 520 J.

If we also include a small contribution due to the air resistance, this result is consistent with

the previous estimate of 550 J.

3

For female runners, the time of the 100 m dash is about 10% greater, and the velocity

about 10% smaller than the male records. Thus, we estimate that the acceleration and,

hence the force, is about 20% smaller than that for male runners. Thus, for events that

depend on velocity and force – as do the long and high jumps – we expect that female

performance to be between 10% and 20% smaller.

III. LONG JUMP

The model for the long jump is simple. After running a few seconds the runner produces

a big vertical force against the ground in the last stride. Some details of the movement

of the athlete are shown in Fig. 1. At takeoﬀ, the runner’s center of mass is about 0.4 m

forward of the front edge of the runway, L1, in Fig. 1. At landing, the runner’s center of
mass is behind the point where the heels hit the sand (L3 ≃ 0.4 m). The diﬀerence between

the vertical height of the runner’s center of mass at takeoﬀ and at landing, which would

lead to a small diﬀerence between L1 and L3,7 will be neglected. The length of the jump

is L1 + L2 + L3, where L2 is the ﬂight distance. The horizontal velocity of the runner at

FIG. 1: Schematic of the long jump. The distance of the long jump is the sum of the takeoﬀ (L1),

the ﬂight (L2), and the landing (L3) distances.

the last stride, v0, is about 10 m/s. (Usually, long jumpers are good sprinters.) The best a

runner can do is to use the additional energy of 550 J to obtain a vertical velocity. For an

80 kg athlete, the vertical velocity gained is ∆v = 3.7 m/s. Thus, L2 is given by

L2 =

= 7.6 m,

2v0∆v
g

(1)

and L1 + L2 + L3 = (0.4 + 7.6 + 0.4) m = 8.4 m. The latter result agrees with observations

between 7.4 m and 8.8 m for elite male long jumpers and 6.5 m and 7.5 m for elite female

4

jumpers.7 The takeoﬀ angle can be calculated from the velocity diagram in Fig. 2, and we
ﬁnd θ = arctan(∆v/v0) ∼ 20◦. This result agrees with observations of θ ∼ 20◦ ± 2◦.7

FIG. 2: The long jump velocities at takeoﬀ.

IV. HIGH JUMP

Before jumping, a high jumper runs a few meters and attains a speed of about 7.5 m/s.

Why does the jumper run horizontally before jumping vertically? What is the mechanism

used by the jumper to change her horizontal velocity into a velocity with a vertical compo-

nent? (A detailed description of the high jump can be found in Ref. 8.)

To answer these questions, consider a bar representing a jumper of length 2ℓ, which has a

horizontal velocity v0 and is inclined backward, as shown in Fig. 3. At point P, the bottom

end of the bar stops suddenly, and the bar begins to rotate around P. Due to the impact,

the bar’s velocity will change, but the angular momentum with respect to P is conserved.

Conservation of angular momentum at the instant the bottom end stops gives

v =

v0 sin θ,

3
4

(2)

where v is the bar’s center of mass velocity immediately after the impact and the velocity

is perpendicular to the bar. Thus, the initial horizontal velocity has changed to a velocity

with a vertical component.

FIG. 3: A bar with a horizontal velocity v0 is suddenly stopped at point P and begins to rotate,

changing its initial horizontal velocity into a new one with a vertical component (adapted from

Fig. 2 of Ref. 8.)

5

The horizontal, vh, and vertical, vv, projections of the velocity just after the bottom end

of the bar stops are

vh =

v0 sin2 θ,

vv =

v0 sin θ cos θ.

3
4
3
4

(3)

(4)

If the bar stops the rotation immediately after hitting P and if the horizontal and vertical

velocities at takeoﬀ are given by Eqs. (3) and (4), the center of mass of the bar will attain

a maximum height (calculated by energy conservation) given by

2
m
If we use v0 = 7.5 m/s and a 2 m (ℓ = 1 m) bar, we obtain the maximum h for θ = 56◦.

550J) + ℓ sin θ.

1
2g

h =

(v2

v +

(5)

Suppose that the runner is represented by a bar moving at 7.5 m/s inclined backward at
56◦ (in Sec. V we will show how this motion is possible) Then the runner begins to rotate

just for a moment around point P. As in the long jump, she can add 550 J to the total kinetic

energy. The best the higher jumper can do is to gain an additional velocity in the vertical

direction, which can be calculated from

m(v2

h + v2

v) + 550 J =

m(v2

′
h + v
v

2),

(6)

1
2

1
2

giving v′

v = 4.5 m/s. The increase in her vertical velocity is ∆v = v′

v − vv = 1.9 m/s.

If the runner takes oﬀ with a vertical velocity equal to 4.5 m/s, the runner’s center of

mass will rise about 1.0 m. If we add this value to the initial position of the runner’s center

of mass at takeoﬀ, which is about 1.1 m, we obtain a total height of 2.1 m. Because we know
the horizontal and vertical velocities, we can calculate the takeoﬀ angle as 49◦ (see Fig. 4).
The world record is 2.45 m for men and 2.09 m for women and a typical takeoﬀ angle is 50◦.

These values suggest that the model is reasonable.

FIG. 4: The high jump velocities at takeoﬀ.

Despite the simpliﬁcation of representing a person by a bar to explain the high jump,

the pole vault is even simpler to analyze. The pole vaulter runs about 15 m and reaches a

6

velocity of about 10 m/s. Her kinetic energy is changed to elastic potential energy of the

bar, and then the energy is changed to the vaulter’s gravitational potential energy. If we

assume that the vaulter’s center of mass at the beginning of the jump is about 1.1 m above

the ground, we can use energy conservation to calculate that the height reached by a pole

vaulter is 6.2 m. The records are about 5 and 6 m for men and women, respectively. This

estimate is only approximate because it does not take into account that the vaulter’s center

of mass passes signiﬁcantly under the bar, and it assumes a 100% eﬃciency of horizontal to

vertical jump energy conversion.

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Can a high jumper run with his body inclined backward, as assumed in the model?

The answer is that it is not possible. Like everyone else, the jumper runs in a vertical

position. However, in the last strides, the high jumper makes a circular curve with a radius

of about 10 m. Due to the centripetal force, the jumper leans to the center of the circle

and the trajectory of the center of mass diﬀers from the trajectory of the footprints. These

trajectories are illustrated in Fig. 5. At the beginning of the takeoﬀ, corresponding to the

instant that the bottom end of the bar stops, the jumper’s center of mass is tilted toward

the center of the curve, and his velocity is along the arrow shown in Fig. 5.9 During the

next 0.2 s, he changes his body orientation, tilting it outside the circle, and produces a very

strong vertical force against the ground. (This model is an oversimpliﬁcation of the detailed

model of Ref. 8, but it retains the essence of the athlete’s movement at takeoﬀ as illustrated

in Fig. 1 of Ref. 8)

long jumper.

In our model we assumed that the long jumper does not change her initial velocity into

a new velocity using the same trick used by the high jumper because ﬁxing one foot against

the ground would cause some loss of the horizontal velocity, which is very important to the

We note that the high jump diﬀers from the vertical standing jump, which has been

studied in Ref. 10. In the standing jump the athlete uses both legs to jump. In the vertical

standing jump the athlete does not run before jumping and the only source of energy comes

from the leg muscles. As can be estimated from the ﬁgures of Ref. 10, the mechanical energy

gained at takeoﬀ by a non-athlete is about 550 J when using both legs; our hypothesis that

7

FIG. 5: Trajectory developed by the athlete before high jumping. The solid line in the circum-

ference is the trajectory of the athlete’s feet, the dot-dashed line is the trajectory of her center of

an elite athlete can add 550 J when using only one leg seems reasonable.

mass.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by the Brazilian agency FAPESP.

1 William D. Harris, “Question #58. Is a good long jumper a good high jumper?,” Am. J. Phys.

2 Andrew Rex, “Answer to question #58. Is a good long jumper a good high jumper?,” Am. J.

3 Stephen Hanzely, “Answer to question #58. Is a good long jumper a good high jumper?,” Am.

4 John D. Barrow, “Answer to question #58. Is a good long jumper a good high jumper?,” Am.

5 D. L. Nelson and M. M. Cox, Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry (W. H. Freeman, New York,

65, 105–105 (1997).

Phys. 69, 104–105 (2001).

J. Phys. 69, 105–105 (2001).

J. Phys. 69, 105–106 (2001).

2005).

(2001).

6 J. R. Mureika, “A realistic quasi-physical model of the 100 m dash,” Can. J. Phys. 79, 697–713

8

7 J. G. Hay, J. A. Miller, and R. W. Canterna, “The techniques of elite male long jumpers,” J.

Biomechanics 19, 855–866 (1986).

8 J. Dapena and C. S. Chung, “Vertical and radial motions of the center of mass during the

takeoﬀ phase of high jumping,” Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 20, 290–302 (1987).

9 J. Dapena, “How to design the shape of a high jump run-up,” Track Coach 131, 4179–4181

10 N. P. Linthorne, “Analysis of standing vertical jumps using a force platform,” Am. J. Phys. 69,

(1995).

1198–1204 (2001).

9

