5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Is the Bohr’s quantization hypothesis necessary ?

J.H.O.Sales
Instituto de Ciˆencias, Universidade Federal de Itajub´a, CEP 37500-000, Itajub´a, MG, Brazil.

A.T. Suzuki
Department of Physics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-8202.

D.S. Bonaf´e∗
Escola Estadual Major Jo˜ao Pereira, Av. Paulo Chiaradia, Cep: 37500-028, Itajub´a, MG, Brazil.
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

We deduce the quantization of Bohr’s hydrogen’s atomic orbit without using his hypothesis of
angular momentum quantization. We show that his hypothesis is nothing more than a consequence
of the Planck’s energy quantization.

PACS numbers: 12.39.Ki,14.40.Cs,13.40.Gp

I.

INTRODUCTION

The existence of an atomic nucleus was conﬁrmed in 1911 by E. Rutherford in his classic scattering experiment [1].
Before that time, it was believed that an atom was something like an ice-cream with chocolate chip ﬂakes in it, where
the ice-cream would be the positive charge (protons) and the chocolate chip ﬂakes the negative charge (electrons); an
atomic model proposed by J.J.Thomson in 1897. However, this atomic model had problems, in that E. Rutherford
showed the inconsistencies of the model in face of his experiments of alpha particle (ionized helium) scattering by thin
sheets of gold as targets.

Then, Rutherford himself proposed the orbital model for the atom, where the nucleus is constituted by protons
having electrons moving around it in orbital trajectoryies, similar to that of mechanics describing the planetary orbits.
This model was later modiﬁed by Bohr, which proposed the hypothesis for quantization of electron orbits making

it possible to understand the properties of atoms and of the stuﬀ with which they are made of.

At that time, the atomic nucleus was understood as a “storage” of mass and positive charge of the atom. There

was no need to know neither a hint as to what was the internal structure of the nucleus.[2]

II. THE PLANETARY ATOM

The discoveries that ocurred by the end of XIX century led the physicist Ernest Rutherford to do scattering experi-
ments that culminated in a proposal for the planetary model for atoms.

According to this model, all positive charge of a given atom, with approximately 99% of its mass, would be
concentrated in the atomic nucleus. Electrons would be moving around the nucleus in circular orbits and these would
be the carriers of the negative charges. Knowing that the charge of an electron and the charge of a proton are the
same in modulus, and that the nucleus has Z protons, we can deﬁne the charge of the nucleus as Ze−.

Experimentally we observe that in an atom the distance r between the electron orbit and the nucleus is of the order

10−10m.

In this section, we build the planetary atom and analyse its predictions compared to experimental data.
Using Coulomb’s law

and the centripetal force acting on the electron in its circular orbit

F =

2
Z |e−|
4πε0r2

(1)

∗On sabbatical leave from
Permanent address: Instituto de Ciˆencias, Universidade Federal de Itajub´a 37500-000, Itajub´a, MG, Brazil.

results in

Fc =

mev2
r

2
Z |e−|
4πε0r2 =

me.v2
r

v =

e2
4πε0mer

.Z

s

r =

e2
4πε0mev2 Z ,

where we have used the shorthand notation |e−| = e.

in the nucleus therefore,

We can obtain of the (4) the measure of the ray of the orbit of the electron that is dependent of the protons number

then we observed that the ray of the orbit depends, also, of the speed of the electron. As a superior limit exists for
the speed or be v = c, we will obtain which would be the limit of the ray r in that speed..

Using values for load electronic e = 1, 602 × 10−19C, the mass of the electron me = 9, 109 × 10−31kg and ε0 =

8, 854 × 10−12F/m [3], we have

where Z=1 and we didn’t consider the relativistic mass. That result imposes a limit for the ray of the orbit, which
this in agreement with the observed data, 10−10m.

r = 2, 813 × 10

−15m,

A. Limitations of the model

Even though this model could explain some features of the atomic structure concerning the scattering data, there was
nonetheless problems that could not be explained just by classical mechanics analysis. Since protons and electrons
are understood as charged particles, electromagnetic forces do play their role in this movement, and according to
Maxwell’s equations, an accelerated electron emits radiation (and therefore energy), so that electrons moving around
the nucleus would be emitting energy. This radiated energy would of course lead to the downspiraling of electrons
around the nucleus uo to hitting it. Classical theoretical calculations done predicted that all electrons orbiting around
a nucleus would hit it in less than a second!

However, what we observe is that there is electronic stability, and therefore the model had to be reviewed.

III. BOHR’S HYPOTHESIS

Analysis of the hydrogen spectrum led Niels Bohr to postulate that the circular orbit of the electron around the
nucleus is quantized, that is, that its angular momentum could only have certain discrete values, these being integer
multiples of a certain basic value [4]. This was his “ad hoc” assumption, introduced by hand into the theory.

In this short work we propose that Bohr’s atomic orbit quantization hypothesis is not necessarily needed as an “ad

hoc” assumption, but that this can be arrived at using only Planck’s assumption of energy quantization.

Using Newton’s second law for the electron moving in a circular orbit around the nucleus, and thus subjec to

Coulomb’s law, we have:

e2

4πε0r2 = m

v2
r

.

2

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

This allows us to calculate the kinetic energy of the electron in such an orbit:

The potential energy for the system proton-electron on the other hand is given by

where r is the radius of the electronic orbit.

Therefore, the total energy for the system is

Ec =

mv2 =

1
2

e2
8πε0r

.

Ep = −

e2
4πε0r

,

E = −

e2
8πε0r

.

This result suggests that, since the radius can have any value, the same should happen with the angular momentum

L.

that is, the angular momentum depends on the radius. The linear momentum of the electron is given by

L = pr sin θ = pr, where θ = 900

Therefore the problem of quantizing the angular momentum L reduces to the quantizing of the radius r, which

depends on the total energy (9).

Bohr introduced an additional hypothesis here, in that the angular momentum of the electron is quantized, i.e.,

h
2π

where ¯h =
the usual pathway wherein the textbooks normally follow in their sequence of calculations.

. In this manner he was able to quantize the other physical quantities such as the total energy. This is

Here we show another way, in which we do not need the additional Bohr’s assumption of angular momentum

quantization, but stress the importance of Planck’s original energy quantization.

Planck’s hypothesis to quantize the energy (7) is

If we thus assume the kinetic energy to be quantized, we have

so that if we take the derivative of Ec with respect to the frequency f we get

Knowing that the scalar orbital velocity is

where f is the frequency and r is the radius of the electronic orbit, we have that the ratio of kinetic energy variation
with respect to the frequency is

p = mv.

L = n¯h,

E = nhf

nhf = Ec

dEc
df

= nh

v = 2πf r,

3

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

4

(17)

(18)

(19)

From (16), (10) and (11), we rewrite (17), so that

Using now (15) in (18) we obtain

dEc
df

= 4π2mr2f.

dEc
df

= 2πL.

L = n¯h.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We see that the ratio of kinetic energy variation with respect to the frequency plus the Planck’s hypothesis of energy

quantization leads to the Bohr’s assumption.

The identity (15) can be clariﬁed by Wilson-Sommerfeld’s rules for quantization [5]. They proposed a set of rules
to quantize any physical system whose coordinastes are periodic functions of time. Their rules are the following:
For all physical systems whose coordinates are periodic functions of time there exists a quantum condition for each
coordinate expressed as:

where i labels any one of the coordinates, pi the conjugate momentum associated with such coordinate and ni a
quantum number atributed to such a coordinate.

H

In our case, we have

pidqi = nih

(20)

and by (20)

that is,

obtaining therefore our result (19).

pidqi = L

dθ = 2πL

H

H

2πL = nh

L = n¯h

Acknowledgments: D. S. Bonaf´e thanks the PIBIC-Jr to the Universidade Federal de Itajub´a-MG.

[1] Rutherford, E. 1911a. Proc. Lit. Phil. Soc. (Manchester), 55(4):18.
[2] Jos´e Maria F. Bassalo, Crˆonicas da F´ısica, Editora Universidade Federal do Par´a (1987).
[3] Hayt, William H., Jr. Eletromagnetism, Ed. McGraw-Hill, 4
[4] H. Moises Nussenzveig,Curso de F´ısica B´asica, V.4, Editora Edgard Blucher (1998).
[5] Jun Ichi Osada, Evolu¸c˜ao das Id´eias da F´ısica, Editora Universidade de S˜ao Paulo (1972).

a.ed, 1981.

