5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
1
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

AJP

Do we really need the concept of weight force in Physics?

Jos´e M. L. Figueiredo∗
Departamento de F´ısica da Faculdade de Ciˆencias e Tecnologia da Universidade do Algarve,
Campus de Gambelas, 8005-139 FARO, Portugal
(Dated: February 3, 2014)

The gravitational deﬁnition of the weight force lacks logic from the perspective of present knowl-
edge and can be misleading. The operational deﬁnition of weight of a body as the force the body
exerts on its support or suspender can eliminate the ambiguities associated to “true weight”, “ap-
parent weight”, “state of weightlessness”, “zero weight”, “zero gravity”, “microgravity”, “vertical”,
“up” and “down”. Because the concept of weight of a body is not fundamental in Physics its ex-
clusion from the physics vocabulary will eliminate the need of some of former concepts or their
ambiguousness with evident beneﬁt for physics teaching and learning. This paper discusses weight
of a body concepts and the advantages of adopting the above-mentioned operational deﬁnition. It
is believed this will eliminate the frequent identiﬁcation of the body’s weight with the body’s mass
and will boost student’s understanding of associated subjects.

PACS numbers: 01.40.-d, 01.40.Fk, 01.40.Gm

I.

INTRODUCTION

Everyone who teaches introductory physics is used to
deal with the confusion students experience when ﬁrst
confronted with the diﬀerences between concepts of mass
and weight, and with the ambiguities of the notions re-
lated to the weight deﬁnitions based on the gravitational
force. Several studies have shown students still have some
misconception about the basic physics related to weight
and have diﬃculties applying them especially in impon-
derability or accelerated environments [1][2][3]. This is
evident when they are asked to explain what happens if
everyday events such as walking were to take place in a
“weightlessness” environments. The students often think
“microgravity”, “zero gravity”, or “weightlessness” situ-
ations refer to events occurring “outside” the Earth’s or
other celestial body’s gravitational inﬂuence, and they
are surprised to hear that during a typical shuttle ﬂight
mission in an orbit at an altitude of 400 km the gravi-
tational force of the Earth is only 12% less than at the
Earth’s surface.

In the literature there are several deﬁnitions of weight
based on the gravitational force: “the weight is the Earth
gravitational force” [4]; “the force exerted by the Earth
on an object is called the weight of the object” [4]; “the
weight of a body is the total gravitational force exerted
on the body by all other bodies in the universe” [5]. Fre-
quently, the weight is considered a fundamental property
of matter under the inﬂuence of a gravitational ﬁeld. Fur-
thermore, in 1901 the Conf´erence G´en´erale des Poids et
Mesures declared “the weight of a body is the product of
its mass and the acceleration due to gravity” [6].

These gravitational based deﬁnitions of weight are
widely used in despite of the fact they are not entirely
satisfactory at the present knowledge and sometimes are

∗Electronic address: jlongras@ualg.pt

even misleading. In addition, there are a number of am-
biguities associated with the weight gravitational deﬁni-
tions on the meaning of weight and weight-related con-
cepts such as “true weight”, “apparent weight”, “weight-
lessness”, “zero-gravity”, and “vertical”. That can easily
lead to several misconceptions which can contribute to
widening the gap between what is taught and what is
learned by the students.

Very few authors adopt the alternative operational def-
inition of weight of a body: “the force which a body ex-
erts on its support or suspender that prevents its free
fall” [7].
In this operational deﬁnition the weight is a
force that results always from the direct contact of the
body with other body, i.e., the weight is a contact force.

This paper discusses weight, microgravity, weightless-
ness, vertical, up and down concepts, and the advantages
of the adoption of the operational deﬁnition of weight
and/or the abandonment of weight concept.

II. ACCELERATION DUE TO THE GRAVITY

In the frame of the classical physics, the force of grav-
ity is a long-range force, and, as far we know, cannot be
shielded [8]. In practical situations it is independent of
the state of motion of the objects. The acceleration due
to the gravity corresponds to the acceleration of the mo-
tion of a body as a result of the gravitational force, and
in a given instant equals the ratio of the gravitational
force and the body amount of matter.

Accordingly the General Theory of Relativity the grav-
ity corresponds to a modiﬁcation (curvature) in the
space-time continuum caused by a concentration of mass
or energy, that is, the space-time geodesics surrounding
substantial masses are curved lines and the bodies go
through some form of curved orbital path.

A. Gravity under newtonian physics

Since Isaac Newton presented the law of Universal
Gravitation it is well accepted that the gravitational in-
teraction is universal and depends only on the body’s
quantity of matter and the distance between their cen-
ters of mass. Following the works of Kepler and Galileu,
Newton concluded that the Earth’s force of gravity ~Fg
exerted on our bodies or other mass m owing to their
gravitational interaction is given by

~Fg = −

GM m
|~r|3 ~r = ~Γm,

(1)

where G is the gravitational constant (6.67×10−11 N
m2kg−2), M is the Earth’s mass, ~r is the position vector
of the body center of mass relatively to the Earth center
of mass. The gravitational force the Earth exerts on the
body ~Fg can be written as the product of the body’s mass
and the local acceleration due to the gravity, ~Fg = m~g; as
mentioned previously, the vector ~g = − GM
|~r|3 ~r corresponds
to the body’s acceleration due to the gravitational ﬁeld
~Γ, and its magnitude is approximately equal to 9,8 m s−2
at sea level.

The intensity of the force of gravity can be measured
with the aid of a dynamometer or a spring scale, pro-
vided that the body and the dynamometer are at rest
relatively to the Earth. Let us consider a body at rest on
the surface of the Earth at a given latitude, Fig. 1. The
body is acted upon by two forces: the force of gravity ~Fg
pointing towards the center of the Earth and the force of
the reaction of the Earth’s surface (the support reaction
force) ~N , whose direction is determined not only by the
force of gravity, but also by the spinning of the Earth
around its axis. Accordingly the second law of dynam-
ics ( ~F = d(m~v)/dt, where ~v is the velocity of the mass
m), the resultant force ~F of these two forces ensures the
daily rotation of the body along the local parallel. As
a consequence the direction of the measured ~Fg (and ~g)
diﬀers from the direction towards the center of the Earth
- except at the poles and equator - by an angle whose
the maximum amplitude is less than 0.10.
In addition
with the exception at the poles, a scale or a dynamome-
ter measures less than the gravitational force given by
equation 1 because a net force is needed to provide the
centripetal acceleration needed to ensures the body keeps
up with the daily rotation of the Earth: the sensed ac-
celeration of gravity is about 0.03 m s−2 (0.35% of g)
less at the equator than at the poles, assuming a spher-
ically symmetric and homogenous Earth. Furthermore,
the variation of density and the surface irregularities of
the Earth give rise to a local changes in the gravitacional
ﬁeld and to the vector ~g).

Nevertheless, throughout the rest of the text we will
consider the Earth as an homogenous sphere and the ef-
fects of its rotation around its axis and the translation
around the Sun or other motions will be neglected be-

2

cause the values of the linear and the angular accelera-
tion acquire by a body due to these eﬀect are very small
when compared with the acceleration due to the grav-
ity. For simplicity, the Earth will be considered a frame
of reference at rest during the characteristic time of the
phenomena analyzed here. The eﬀect of the atmosphere
will be also neglected. For simplicity the gravitational
inﬂuences of other celestial bodies is not considered.

FIG. 1: Forces acting on a body at the the Earth’s surface at
a given latitude: ~F is the net force due to the force of gravity
~Fg acting on the body and the force of the reaction of the
Earth’s surface ~N acting on the body.

B. Gravity under the theory of general relativity

The General Theory of Relativity addresses the prob-
lems of gravity and that of nonuniform or accelerated
In one of his famous conceptual experiments
motion.
Einstein concluded that it is not possible to distinguish
between a frame of reference at rest in a gravitational
ﬁeld and an accelerated frame of reference in the absence
of a signiﬁcant gravitational ﬁeld: Einstein’s principle of
equivalence. From this principle of equivalence Einstein
moved to a geometric interpretation of gravitation: the
presence of very large mass or a high concentration of
energy causes a local curvature in the space-time con-
tinuum. The space-time geodesic becomes curved lines,
that is, the space-time curvature is such that the inertial
paths of a body is no longer straight a line but some form
of curved orbital path. Maintaining the classical view of
teh gravitation we can associate to the body’s curved
path motion a centripetal acceleration that is referred as
the acceleration due to gravity.

III. OPERATIONAL DEFINITION OF THE
FORCE WEIGHT OF A BODY

What humans and matter experience as weight is not
the force of gravity. What they experience as weight is
actually the consequence of the normal reaction of the
ground (or whatever surface they are in contact with or
hang up) pushing upwards against them to counteract

the force they are exerting on the surface, the force weight
of the body. A good evidence of this is given by the
fact that a person standing on a scale moving up and
down on his toes does see the indicator moving, telling
that the measured force is changing while the gravity
force, that depends only on the person’s and the Earth’
masses and the distance between their centers of mass,
does not vary to induce such clear observable changes on
the scale meter. Another evidence happens when going
towards the Earth surface in an elevator one experiences
a greater strain in the legs and feet when the elevator
is stopping than when it is stationary or moving with
constant velocity because the ﬂoor is pushing up harder
on the feet.

A. Body at rest

Consider a body at rest on the surface of the Earth,
Fig. 2a. In this situation the body experiences a force
~Fg due to gravitational pull of the Earth. The reaction
force to this force is − ~Fg and corresponds to the gravita-
tional force exerted on the Earth by the body. The force
pair, ~Fg and − ~Fg, consists on one force ~Fg that acts on
the body and one force − ~Fg that act on the Earth, and
constitutes an action-reaction pair.

The tendency of the body to accelerate towards the
center of the Earth due to ~Fg must give rise to a force ~P ,
Fig. 2b, force exerted by the body on the Earth surface.
If the body exerts on the Earth surface a force ~P , the
Earth solid surface reacts exerting a force ~N on the body
that balances the force ~P , Fig. 2b. The force ~N is called
the normal force and is the reaction to ~P : ~N = − ~P .
The action the body exerts on the Earth (or other body)
surface ~P corresponds to the operational deﬁnition of the
force weight of the body.

Hence the body experiences no acceleration (it is at
rest), the net force due to the two forces acting on the
body, ~Fg towards the center of the Earth and ~N out-
wards, is null (Newton’s second law of dynamics). There-
fore, ~Fg and ~N are equal in magnitude, opposite in ori-
entation and have diﬀerent application points. Similarly,
and because the Earth experiences no acceleration there
are two equal and directly opposite forces acting on the
Earth, − ~Fg applied on the Earth’s center of mass and ~P
applied on the Earth surface in contact with body. Al-
though in this case | ~N | = | ~Fg| the normal force ~N is not
the reaction to the gravitational force ~Fg because this
two forces act on the body (as said previously ~N is the
reaction to ~P ).

Consider now the body is placed on (or hung on) a
dynamometer-scale. When the body is placed on the
scale platform the dynamometer spring is compressed or
extended (depending on the scale) and its deformation is
communicated to a calibrated dial read out. The body
exerts an action ~P on the scale platform and through

3

FIG. 2: a) ~Fg and − ~Fg: the action-reaction force pair due
to the gravitational interaction between the body and the
Earth. b) ~P and ~N : the action-reaction force pair due to the
interaction between the body and the Earth surfaces.

it on the spring. The scale dial reads the magnitude of
the force ~P exerted by the body surface on the scale
platform. By Newton’s third law of dynamics the scale
platform reacts exerting a opposing force ~N on the body
surface: both force have the same magnitude and direc-
tions but opposite orientations. It is the force ~N that pre-
vents the body free fall towards the center of the Earth.
The weight is applied not to the body being considered
itself, but to the scale platform.

If the scale is at rest relatively to the Earth then, as
previously, the weight magnitude equals the magnitude
of the force of gravity acting on the body center of mass,
| ~P | = | ~N | = | ~Fg|. The weight and the force of gravity
magnitudes are also equal in the case of uniform and
rectilinear motion of the scale and the body in a reference
frame associated with the Earth.

What happens when the scale and body are acceler-
ating in relation to an frame of reference on the Earth?
This is the case, for example, of an elevator during stop-
ping or starting. What is the scale reading in these situa-
tions? During a sudden change in the elevator motion (on
starting or braking, for example) does remain valid the
equality of the weight ~P and gravity force ~Fg intensities?

B. Body in a accelerated frame of reference

Consider that a body of mass m is standing on a
bathroom-type scale ﬁxed in the ﬂoor of an elevator with
a TV camera circuit that will be used to record all the
events. When the elevator moves with an acceleration
~a, in accordance with Newton’s second law of dynamics,
as long as the body and the scale surfaces are in con-
tact the body moves together with the elevator and scale
with the acceleration ~a under the action of two forces: the
force of gravity ~Fg and the scale surface reaction force ~N
due to the body surface action on the scale ~P . From
Newton’s second law of dynamics, ~F = d(m~v)/dt, and
assuming the body’s mass does not vary, the resultant
of the forces acting on the body must equal the prod-
uct of its mass by its acceleration, which is the elevator

acceleration ~a = d~v/dt, that is,

m~a = ~Fg + ~N .

(2)

(3)

Since the body’s weight ~P and the reaction force of the
scale platform ~N constitutes a action-reaction pair, ~P =
− ~N , equation 2 can be written as

~P = m~g − m~a.

In the operational deﬁnition the (weight of the body)
corresponds to the body’s action force ~P on the support.
Its magnitude | ~P | is proporcional to the value indicated
by the dynamometer scale. Depending on the orientation
of the acceleration ~a =, several situations may occur [9]:
i) | ~P | < mg; ii) | ~P |0 =; iii) | ~P | > mg.

Currently, the vertical is deﬁned as the direction of
plumb line that at the Earth surface and at rest or on
uniforme and rectilineal motion coincides with the direc-
tion of the gravity force. However, a human being or
other living being feels equilibrated in the direction of its
weight force. The concepts of vertical and down corre-
spond to the direction and to the orientation of the weight
force, respectively. From equation 3 one can conclude the
vertical and the up and down orientations depend essen-
tially on the body state of motion characteristics, and
contrary to what is many times stated, the notions of
vertical and up/down are not determined uniquely by
the gravitational force. The vertical is always the direc-
tion of the weight of the body and “down” corresponds
to the weight force orientation. In accordance equation
3, to stay in equilibrium during the bus starting move-
ment we stoop forward and when it starts stopping we
lean backwards. In these situations our vertical is oblique
and to not lose one’s balance we align with the new ver-
tical deﬁned by the direction of ~P .

IV. THE WEIGHT FORCE IN A WEAK
GRAVITATIONAL FIELD

The body weight force appears whenever the body’s
surface is constrained to interact directly with the surface
of another body. The weight of the body is opposite to
the normal force (reaction force) exerted by the surface
where the body stands on or is in contact with, which
prevents it from moving through or away of the other
body that is in contact with. The body action force or
its absence (weightlessness) does not depende of the ex-
istence of a gravitational ﬁeld in the region of the space
where it is staying. Considere a spaceship in a region of
the Universe where the gravitational ﬁeld is very small.
The bodies in the interior of spaceship traveling in this
region with uniforme and rectilinear motion would ex-
perience zero weight, because they are in a zero-gravity
eﬀective situation. Any spring-scale in contact and mov-
ing with them measures no weight because the objects
are not constrained to contact their surfaces to originate

4

the normal forces (zero action or zero weight gives rise to
no normal force).

Lets now considere the spaceship turns on its engines.
In the case of a spacecraft accelerating by ﬁring its rock-
ets the thrust force is applied to the back end of the
rocket by the gas escaping out the back and the bodies
in the interior of the veicule do not experiences weight-
lessness. The rockets thrust force is transferred to each
object in the spaceship through either pressure or tension
giving rise to the bodies action (weight force) on their
supports or suspender. We can conclude that the weight
force in fact does not depend on the presence of a gravi-
tational ﬁeld. Indeed, according the Einstein’s Principle
of Equivalence the bodies in a space veicule with an ac-
celeration ~a in the absence of a gravitational ﬁeld behave
as the spaceship was at rest or with constant velocity
in a gravitational ﬁeld with acceleration due to gravity
~g = −~a. Taking in account the considerations made and
the equation 4 the weight of a body or the weightlessness
state has nothing to do whether the body is under the
inﬂuence of a gravitational ﬁeld or not. From equation 3
results that if the spaceship is accelerating uniformly out
of the inﬂuence of a signiﬁcant gravitational ﬁeld, that
is, ~g = ~0, the weight of a body carried by the vehicle is

~P = −m~a,

(4)

that is, the weight force is opposite to the net force act-
ing on the body and it is equal to the product of the
In conclusion, the
body’s acceleration and mass, m~a.
force the bodies exert on their support (weight force) or
their absence does not requires the presence of the ab-
sence of a gravitational ﬁeld. In the case of the presence
of a gravitational ﬁeld the force the bodies exert on their
supports depends also on characteristics of the relative
motion between the bodies and their supports.

As already mentioned the bodies in the interior of a
spacecraft orbiting a celestial body, such as the Inter-
national Space station (ISS) around the Earth, are in a
state of imponderability because they do not exert any
contact action on the other bodies. The weightlessness
present several challenges to the human organism which
was designed to be live in a gravity environment and also
makes several of the mundane human actions, such as to
walk, virtual impossible. Because in the interior of the
station there are no upward and downward convection
currents of particles and gas this has several eﬀects on the
human breathing system. The weightlessness also inter-
feres with cardiovascular system, with the heart beating
faster because there’s less resistance to the blood ﬂow.
It is not possible to walk in weightlessness environment
because the astronauts feet are not constrained to the
station pavement their feet action (weight force) on the
surface of the station is null. There is no normal reaction
force and therefore the friction force is zero.
It is the
friction force between the pavement and the astronauts
feet that gives rise to the reaction force needed to walk.
This can also lead to the muscles atrophy, blood pump
system malfunction and diﬃcult breathing.

Several plans have been proposed to create “artiﬁcial
gravity” in orbiting devices. The most popular plan to
produce “artiﬁcial gravity” in vehicles designed to remain
in orbit or stay in out space for a long period of time are
to set the spaceship into rotation with an angular veloc-
ity ω around its central axis. The bodies at any point at
a distance r from the rotation axis will experience a cen-
tripetal acceleration a = ω2r. The weight of the bodies
on the outer rim of the spaceship opposes the centripetal
force and its intensity is given by P = mω2r.

V.

IMPONDERABILITY AND

MICROGRAVITY

In free fall all parts of an object accelerate uniformly
and thus a human or other body would experience no
weight, assuming that there are no tidal forces [10]. The
experience of no weight, by people and objects, is known
as imponderability, weightlessness or zero gravity, al-
though micro-gravity is often used to describe such a con-
dition. Excluding spaceﬂight (orbital ﬂight), weightless-
ness can be experienced only brieﬂy, around 30 seconds,
as in an airplane following a ballistic parabolic path. In
spaceships the state of imponderabilidade or weightless-
ness can be experienced for extended periods of time if
the ship is outside the Earth’s or other planet’s atmo-
sphere and as long as no propulsion is applied and ve-
icule is not rotating about its axis because the bodies in
it interior are not constrained to be in contact with other
bodies or the station walls or ﬂoor. In particularly, the
astronauts are not pulled against the station pavement
and, therefore, their bodies actions on the surface of the
station are null. In real free fall situations the tidal ef-
fects of the gravity on the bodies, although small, are
equivalente to a small acceleration and the bodies are
said to be in a “microgravity” environment because the
weightlessness sensation is not complete.

The sate of imponderability experienced in orbiting
spacecrafts is not as consequence of the small value of
the acceleration due to the gravity because the distance
from the Earth. Weightlessness is a consequence of the
body and the spaceship accelerations to be only due to
gravity. The gravity acts directly on a person and other
masses just like on the vehicle and the person and the
ﬂoor are not pushed toward each other. On the contrary,
contact forces like atmospheric drag and rocket thrust
ﬁrst act on the vehicle, and through the vehicle on the
person. As a consequence the person and the ﬂoor are
pushed toward each other, giving rise to the weight force.
As mentioned the term microgravity is usually used
instead of weightlessness to refer the environment within
orbiting spacecraft. The use of the term micro-gravity
without specifying its exact meaning can strengthen the
misconceptions associated to weight and gravitational
force because the term “micro” could lead to the idea
that acceleration due to gravity is very small because the
distance from Earth. To the contrary, the acceleration

5

of the gravity due to the Earth gravitational interaction
is around 8.4 m s−2 at 400 km of height. Even it value
at the distance of the Moon orbit is 2.63×10−3 m s−2,
although in these regions the acceleration due to Sun’s
gravity is near twice this value (≈ 5.8 × 10−3 m s−2).
True Earth micro-gravity, g ≃ 1 × 10−6 m s−2, can be
only experienced at locations as far oﬀ as 17 times the
Earth-Moon distance.

The term microgravity is more appropriate than “zero
weight” or “zero-gravity” in the case of orbiting space-
crafts because weightlessness is not perfect. Here the
term microgravity does not mean the acceleration due to
gravity was strongly reduced but solely that its eﬀects
on the bodies within the vehicle were substantially re-
duced. The term microgravity is used for the scientists
to characterize the residual acceleration experienced by
the bodies in the interior of the spacecraft as a conse-
quence of forces between the bodies within the space-
ship, the gravitational tidal forces acting on the bodies
and spacecraft and the atmosphere dragging force. These
forces induce in the bodies acceleration of intensities of
some µm s−2, giving rise to the use of the term “micro-
gravity”. For uncrewed spaceships free falling near the
Earth it is possible to obtain 1 µg; for crewed missions is
diﬃcult to achieve less than 100 µg. The main reasons
are: i) the morphology of the Earth induce local gravita-
tional variations; ii) the gravitational eﬀects of the other
celestial bodies, especially the Moon and the Sun, which
depend on their relative position relatively to the Earth;
iii) the acceleration due to gravity decreases one part per
million for every 3 m increase in height (in an orbiting
spaceship the required centripetal force and hence the
acceleration due to gravity is higher at the far side than
at the nearest side of the ship relatively to the Earth);
iv) although very thin, at for example 400 km of height,
the atmosphere gradually slows the spacecraft.

VI. CONCLUSION

The identiﬁcation of weight force as the force of grav-
ity is misleading and lacks logic from the perspective of
the present knowledge. In the operational deﬁnition dis-
cussed the weight of a body is the action force the body
exerts on the surface of another body that it is in con-
tact with, and depends on their relative motion. Having
in mind that the concept of weight is not fundamental
in Physics, the physics learning would beneﬁt if the use
of the vocable weight is avoided. One advantage would
be the rupture of the common sense identiﬁcation be-
tween mass and weight force concepts.
It is expected
that this analysis will motivate physics instructors and
authors, as well as the scientiﬁc community, to replace
the gravitational deﬁnition of weight by the operational
one, although its efective drooping is preferable.

Acknowledgments

dre Laugier for their comments and manuscript revision.
The author acknowledges the improvements that resulted
from further discussions with other colleagues.

The author is grateful to Professor Robertus Potting,
Dr. Paulo S´a, Dr. Jos´e Rodrigues, and Dr. Alexan-

6

[1] I. Galili, “Weight versus gravitational force: historical
and educational perspectives,” Int. J. Sci. Educ. 23, 1073-
1093 (2001).

[2] Z. Gurel and H. Acar, “Research into Students’ Views
About Basic Physics Principles in a Weightless Envi-
ronment,” The Astronomy Education Review 2, 65-81
(2003).

[3] M. D. Sharma, R. M. Millar, A. Smith, and I. M.
Sefton, “Students’ Understandings of Gravity in an Or-
biting Space-Ship,” Research in Science Education 34,
267-289 (2004).

[4] R. A. Serway, Physics for Scientists and Engineers with
modern physics (Saunders College Publishing, Philadel-
phia, CA, 1996) page 113.

[5] H. D. Young and R. A. Freedman, University Physics
with modern physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA,
2000) page 362.

[6] Rsolution de la 3e CGPM, “Dclaration relative l’unit de

masse et la dﬁnition du poids; valeur conventionnelle de
gn,” Comptes rendus de la 3e CGPM, 70 (1901).

[7] J. B. Marion and W. F. Hornyak, General Physics with
Bioscience Essays (John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY,
1985).

[8] T. Van Flandern e X. S. Yang, “Allais gravity and pen-
dulum eﬀects during solar eclipses explained,” Phys. Rev
D 67, 022002 (2003); C. S. Unnikrishnan, A. K. Mohap-
atra, e G. T. Gillies, “Anomalous gravity data during the
1997 total solar eclipse do not support the hypothesis of
gravitational shielding,” Phys. Rev D 63, 062002 (2001).
adopt-
weight,”

“Advantages
L. Figueiredo,
[9] J. M.
ing
deﬁnition
operational
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0505193.

the

of

of

[10] The tidal force are secondary eﬀects of the forces of grav-
ity due to Earth inhomogeneities and to the other celes-
tial objects gravity.

