5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Conceptual and Epistemological discussions on Quantum Mechanics in a Virtual
Laboratory

F. Ostermann and S. D. Prado
Instituto de F´ısica, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 91501-970 Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We argue here for a more conceptual or qualitative approach in the introductory teaching of
Quantum Physics which is built on the basis of epistemological and ontological discussions and as
such is a valuable tool mainly in the initial and continued formation of school teachers. We illustrate
our point with the analysis of undulatory and corpuscular phenomena of a single photon in a virtual
Mach-Zehnder Interferometer - an experimental setup similar to double slits device but simpler -
using key ideas of the most known interpretations of quantum formalism, including the many worlds
interpretation.

I.

INTRODUCTION

There are several factors prompting new strategies in the teaching of physics. First, the upsurge in interest in
questions concerning fundamental aspects of Quantum Physics which has been stimulated by the experimental progress
of the last two decades. It is now becoming possible to apply Quantum Mechanics(QM) particularly in the ﬁelds of
Computater Science and Cryptography1. There is then a need for introducing the teaching of Quantum Mechanics
for people with little or no background in Physics. For this technological motivation some authors2,3 suggest teaching
students just enough operational quantum mechanics to understand and develop algorithms in quantum computation
and quantum information theory. Second, there are initiatives of introducing quantum mechanics in the upper
secondary school4,5 based on the fact students should have some understanding of how fundamentally this part of
physics diﬀers from classical physics. Finally, some authors point towards a greater focus on conceptual understanding
and the cognitive skills6 required to understand and apply physics concepts and the use of technology as a teaching
tool to revert the decline in the number of students choosing physics as a major ﬁeld of study7.

Our claim here is that special attention has to be given to problems of conceptual understanding and interpretation
of Quantum Physics since students from other careers or Physics teachers have not enough time in their standard
courses to devote a great deal of eﬀort to trying to understand the formal structure of quantum theory. The long
training in the quantum formalism is a requisite for any theoretical physicist8, but the formalism can not be alone
a tool in teaching introductory quantum mechanics in more general situations. Also, a conceptual approach as an
introduction to the formalism should be used as a motivation even in regular physics courses. By formalism or formal
structure we mean the theory’s mathematical structures that is well supported by experimental evidence, while an
interpretation of quantum mechanics is an attempt to answer what exactly quantum mechanics is talking about.

For our purposes we have to be more precise about the kind of picture an interpretation provides. Like other
theories, Quantum Physics can be formalized in terms of several axiomatic formulations. Accordingly to Jammer9,
we can distinguish at least two components in a physical theory T: (1) an abstract formalism F and (2) a set of
correspondence rules R. The formalism F, the logical backbone of the theory, is an axiomatized deductive calculus in
general devoid of any empirical sense. Although the formalism might contain words like particles and state that may
suggest physical reality, these terms do not have any other meaning besides the place they occupy in the context of
F. For F to be physically meaningful, some formula need to be correlated with observable phenomena and empirical
operations. These correlations are expressed through correspondence rules R. F without R is a game without physical
context. We denote FR the formalism F when entwined by the correspondence relations R. It is the interpretation
of FR which gives rise to the philosophical problems like the ontological problem of physical reality. As an example
of FR in QM, there is the statistical interpretation introduced by Max Born in 1926. This interpretation relates the
wavefunction modulus squared to probability densities of ﬁnding an electron, for example, in a particular region of
space.
It relates the abstract elements of the theory, such as the wavefunction, to operationally deﬁnable values,
such as probabilities. This interpretation is a consensus among physicists, since predictions obtained via this rule are
in agreement with experiments to an excellent degree of accuracy10. Actually, it is not the teaching of this kind of
interpretation which is embodied in the theory we will explore in this paper.

There is another class of interpretation in QM which is not an FR. These are lines of philosophical thoughts or
school of thoughts that coexist. Each one has elements that escape from a complete and detailed description of an
experiment and that are not, by any means, veriﬁable in laboratory, at least immediately, since they all predict the
same result for a given experiment1. These interpretations deal with the ontology of QM, that is, with the nature
attributed to a quantum object: corpuscular, undulatory or dualist (wave and particle) and with epistemological
attitudes: realist (there is a world independent of an observer who perceives it) or positivist (all our knowledge

2

derives from our senses). The diﬃculties about interpretations in QM are twofold, to say the least: ﬁrst, it is about
the way the theory is related to the physical phenomena and second, it is still missing an appropriate ontology.

The Copenhagen interpretation still appears to be the most popular one among scientists11, but it is also true
that most physicists consider non-instrumental questions (in particular ontological questions) to be irrelevant to
physics or even that an interpretation is nothing more than a formal equivalence between sets of rules for operating
on experimental data, thus suggesting that the whole exercise of interpretation is unnecessary12. As evidenced by
Jammer9, the success of QM has lead the majority of physicists to be more interested in practical problems or
applications in such a way that it is not an exaggeration to say that most of the textbooks deal almost exclusively
with one or two diﬀerent formalisms used to solve speciﬁc problems, leaving no room to epistemological questioning.
They fall back to the famous view of Paul Dirac: “Shut up and calculate” attributed to Richard Feynman13.

If teaching were to be based only on the formal aspects of QM, we would never have to face the problems with
interpretation. These diﬃculties seem to appear justly where concepts like understanding and meaning are required14.
A more conceptual and qualitative approach of QM is a really valuable tool for the initial and continued formation
of school teachers. Also, possible didactic transpositions to the introduction of QM on a pre-university level depend
on a solid conceptual background that can only be built on the basis of epistemological and ontological discussions.
The conceptual and the epistemological are intertwined when it is asked what QM could represent for our worldview.
The conception of quantum objects - which can be illustrated by a simple question about the nature of a photon -
can only be made in the light of philosophical posture which, if not explicit, can drive to ingenuous or uncritical views
or to the idea that only a single interpretation is possible. Moreover, students’ own epistemological views should not
be neglected, since some of the diﬃculties they face in understanding QM concepts are of philosophical nature15.
In conclusion, any attempt of conceptual discussion on QM brings forth elements of its epistemology, which if not
present, makes the understanding devoid of any meaning.

This paper is organized as follows: in section II one ﬁnds introductory notes of four lines of interpretations of QM.
It is not our primary objective in this paper to discuss the interpretations of QM in full detail, but to illustrate their
use as a way of enriching the teaching of QM; in section III interpretations of interference phenomena in a virtual
Mach-Zehnder Interfermometer available on the worldweb16 are discussed and ﬁnally, in section IV one ﬁnds some
concluding remarks.

II.

INTERPRETATIONS OF QM

One of the main diﬃculties one ﬁnds in teaching introductory QM is to bring together, in terms of understanding,
antagonist ideas like the concept of wave - a non-localized phenomena - and the concept of particle - an entity.
Although the undulatory theory of light describes the interference pattern in the famous Young experiment with
coherent superposition, Einstein’s explanation for the Photoeletric Eﬀect requires light to be composed of indivisible
corpuscles of light called photons. Moreover, analogous double slit experiment for electrons, neutrons and more
recently molecules like the C60-Fullerene17 also exhibit interference fringes. Then, to explain these results it is
necessary to recall de Broglie’s Postulate that states that microscopic particles can also behave like waves sometimes.
This double character is widely known as wave-particle duality and it is mostly associated with light18.

There are no classical counterparts to this phenomenon and the result of a detection or measurement can present
diﬀerent epistemological views although they are internally consistent. To give a highlight to these diﬀerences in
i) Undulatory Interpreta-
a virtual experiment (section III), we employ a few key points of four interpretations:
tion or Schr¨odinger wavefunction, ii) Complementarity Principle or School of Copenhagen, iii) Hidden-variables or
Dualist-realist Interpretation and iv) Many Worlds Interpretation. To partly justify our choices, we have taken into
consideration the fact that the Many-worlds interpretation is currently in the media and that throughout much of the
twentieth century Copenhagen Interpretation has had obvious majority acceptance among physicists11,13.

i) Undulatory Interpretation (a realist interpretation proposed by E. Schr¨odinger in 1926) - When Schr¨odinger pos-
tulated the equation known as Schr¨odinger Equation and its boundary conditions in 1926, he established a formalism
in terms of wavefunctions (or states) Ψ that have identical or similar situations in Classical Mechanics9. For didactic
reasons this formalism has been widely adopted in textbooks since then. In this interpretation, physical reality is at-
tributed to the state independently of any measurement and without any additional hypothesis that there is anything
else besides the quantum formalism. However, the state is not a directly accessible reality, but under Born’s guidance,
it establishes probabilities that evolve over time just like wavefunctions. Ψ is the central object in this interpretation
that presents no diﬃculties in explaining undulatory phenomena. In short, the photon is taken as a wavepacket.

ii) Complementarity Principle or School of Copenhagen (a dualist-positivist interpretation formulated by N. Bohr
and W. Heisenberg in 1927) - Despite an extensive literature which refers to the Copenhagen interpretation19, the
original formulation has led to several variants, making it diﬃcult to establish how exactly this interpretation is stated.
For our purposes, we can say that the Principle of Complementarity formulated by Bohr in 1927 establishes that it is

3

not possible, in a single experiment, a corpuscular and an undulatory description simultaneously. This interpretation
is considered dualist-positivist since it admits the wave-particle duality, but it also emphasizes that the theory can
only explain the results of experiments that should be predicted, and therefore additional questions are not scientiﬁc
but rather philosophical. In contrast to Schr¨odinger undulatory interpretation, the state here is a mere mathematical
instrument that permits predictions of measurement, but it is not provided with any physical reality.

iii) Hidden-variables (a dualist-realist interpretation proposed by L. de Broglie in 1925 and reformulated by D.
Bohm in 1952) - This is an interpretation of realistic content in which a quantal system is described not only by its
state Ψ, but also with the help of additional hidden variables labelled by a parameter Λ that contain information on
the particle: energy, position and velocity. The state Ψ is a guide-wave or a ﬁeld of quasi-probabilities that drives the
particle9. Ψ and Λ together establish where a photon will be detected, for instance. Brieﬂy, the photon is a particle
to which is associated a guide-wave.

iv) Many Worlds Interpretation (a realist interpretation proposed by H. Everett III in 1957) - This is essentially
an interpretation classiﬁed as undulatory-realist. Its origin is historically related to the development of Relativistic
Quantum Theory where the idea of a wavefunction for the whole universe (an isolated system) has posed some diﬃ-
culties to the dualist prevailing interpretations. It was Hugh Everett III who proposed an idea that in a measurement
all possible outcomes of the observable are obtained simultaneously, but in parallel worlds - these worlds are complex
subsystems causally connected that can be forced to interfere with one another. In this interpretation one does not
recur to the postulate of wavefunction collapses, diﬀerently from all the undulatory interpretations we have previously
mentioned. As a realist undulatory interpretation, the photon is again considered a wavepacket.

III.

INTERPRETATIONS OF A VIRTUAL EXPERIMENT

The Mach-Zhender Interferometer (MZI) sketched in ﬁgure (1) is an experimental device totally analogous to the
double slit experiment where it is possible to observe wave interference. It has been mentioned quite often in the
introductory QM literature, given its usefulness as a pedagogical tool16,20,21.
It is composed of two half-silvered
mirrors or beam splitters that transmit 50% of incident light (upper arm) and reﬂect the other half (lower arm), plus
two usual mirrors and a screen. When a laser source is active a pattern of rings can be seen. It is relevant to recall
two diﬀerent regimes here: the classical regime described by the undulatory theory of light that one would obtain
in any conventional teaching laboratory with a He-Ne laser18 and the quantal regime, in which the beam intensity
is diminished at the level of emission of a single photon at a time - a monophotonic regime. This is the regime our
It is worth to say this simulator16 oﬀers a much wider number of experiments with
discussions are centered on.
light and photons that can be discussed in a classroom. We have selected two of the most simple cases to show how
interpretations allied to virtual simulations can be a powerful tool in teaching eﬀectiveness.
Undulatory pattern
As the number of photons that have left the single photon source one at a time increases, a pattern of rings is gradually
built on the screen (ﬁgure (1) on the left).

The interesting results from the QM view emerge in the limit of one photon at a time. In this case, detection
is punctual and restricted to certain places over the screen. QM formalism establishes that the half-silvered mirror
nearest to the source places the photon in a superposition of states - the state describing a photon running along the
upper arm and the state for running along the lower arm. As the chances of being reﬂected or transmitted are the
same, the two states are equally probable in terms of Born Postulate.

In the classic experiment (laser source), when light passes through MZI onto a screen, alternate bands of bright and
dark regions are produced. These can be explained as areas in which the light waves reinforce or cancel. With a single
photon source only one photon enters the interferometer each time. In performing the experiment, a photon hits the
screen one at a time. However, when one totals up where the photons have hit, one will see interference patterns that
appear to be the result of interfering waves even though the experiment dealt with one particle at a time.

i)Undulatory Interpretation - The photon is a wavepacket that is divided in transmitted and reﬂected parts in the
ﬁrst half-silvered mirror (mirror nearest to the single photon source). These two waves travel along upper and lower
arms accumulating phases to recombine again in the second half-silvered mirror in a constructive or a destructive
superposition that determines where the photon hits the screen. The detection over the screen is still punctual,
as if the photon were a corpuscle, but this detection does not represent any diﬃcult for this interpretation, since
a wavefunction collapse is assumed in the process of measurement (interaction with the screen). So, the detection
on the screen happens only in regions where waves satisfy the condition of constructive interference. Within this
interpretation questioning the way a photon is travelling is nonsense.

ii) Complementarity Principle - The result of the virtual experiment shows a pattern of interference so the photon
behaved as a wave. It does not even make sense to ask what a photon is before it hits the screen. Physics is the
science of outcomes of measurement processes and speculation beyond that is not justiﬁed. The act of measuring

4

causes an “instantaneous” collapse of the wavefunction. This means that the measurement process randomly picks
out exactly one of the two possibilities allowed for by the wavefunction.

iii) Hidden-variables - In this interpretation there is not any diﬃcult about the fact that detection on the screen
is punctual. The undulatory behavior and corpuscular characteristics are all together in the description of the
experiment.
In the MZI, the wavepacket is partially transmitted and partially reﬂected in the ﬁrst half-silvered
mirror. Just like in the undulatory interpretation, these waves will recombine again after they reach the second
half-silvered mirror in a way that constructive or destructive interference will determine the probabilities that the
photon will be detected on a particular region of the screen. However, the particle photon will follow one of the two
arms according to hidden variables - this information is not accessible in the experiment. The detection will happens
at those places where waves interfere constructively.

iv) Many worlds Interpretation - When a photon reaches the ﬁrst half-silvered mirror the world splits into two
identical new ones - one with the photon travelling in the upper arm while in the other, the photon goes along the
lower arm. Observer in one world ignores the simultaneous existence of the other which is unaccessible unless there
are interference of one with another. For that to happen, all atoms, subatomic particles, photons and other degrees
of freedom have to be in the same state, meaning that they have to be in the same place or to have a signiﬁcant
superposition. This superposition condition is made through the second half-silvered mirror. So, after a passage
through the second mirror, a photon will be detected only in regions of constructive interference on the screen.
Corpuscular behavior
With a detector at the upper arm, there is a click in the detector or a photon hitting the screen. After many photons
have gone through the interferometer the pattern built up on the screen is corpuscular (ﬁgure 1 on the right).

i)Undulatory Interpretation - The photon that enters the MZI splits into a transmitted wave that follows the upper
arm and a reﬂected wave that follows the lower arm, so that its behavior is described by a non-localized wave function
which is travelling through both arms at the same time. However, a measurement forces the wavepacket to collapse
and the detection happens in the detector where a collapse of the wavefunction is likely.

ii) Complementarity Principle - In the virtual experiment, a photon is detected in the counter or it hits the screen.
Then, as the result of the experiment shows, the photon behaved like a particle that had been transmitted or reﬂected
in the ﬁrst mirror with equal probabilities.

iii) Hidden-variables - In this interpretation the wave-guide or associated wave that travels with the photon divides
itself into a transmitted and a reﬂected part in the ﬁrst half-silvered mirror but the photon follows one of the two
trajectories. The wave-guide dictates where the photon will be detected. Again, there are some diﬃculties in explaining
a corpuscular pattern without taking into account the peculiarities of the measurement process or wavefunction non-
local collapses.

iv) Many worlds Interpretation - In this interpretation, the world is split into two when a photon reaches the ﬁrst
mirror. In this way, if the photon is detected in one of the arms in one world, it hits the screen in a second world,
but this result in unaccessible to the former observer, just as the photon hitting the detector is a result unaccessible
to the second observer. The photon is still a wavepacket, but no interference fringes are observed. The addition of
a detector in one of the arms destroys the perfect match of all degrees of freedom that should be in superposition to
show interference fringes.

IV. FINAL REMARKS

The strangeness of QM instigates questions that varies from a lack of a proper language - words that have yet to be
invented - to describe microscopical scale behavior to the need of a non-classical logic - a quantum logic8,22. Exclusively
undulatory interpretations show some diﬃculties in explaining corpuscular phenomena just like a exclusively corpus-
cular interpretation should face diﬃculties in explaining an interference pattern. The complementarity interpretation
combines both characteristics - undulatory and corpuscular - but in a way that one excludes the other. Although the
many worlds interpretation gets rid of wavefunction collapses, it implies the existence of parallel universes that are
connected only weakly through interference phenomena8.

It has to be stressed that our point here is not to be in favor of one particular interpretation over another but to
advocate that more conceptual and qualitative approaches built on the plurality of interpretations are pedagogical
tools in the introductory teaching of QM. Besides the fact that for many students the formalism without some
interpretation remains abstract mathematics that is very unlikely to remain in the long run, it is also a relief for
many students to ﬁnd out that their own epistemological views may be shared by many famous scientist. Recent polls
in classrooms (motivated by11) have shown that students voluntarily join themselves in groups in support of one or
another interpretation. The concepts they have assimilated (or not) are evidenced when groups debate in favor of
their choices. Also, in favour of a more conceptual and qualitative approach in introductory courses, is the fact that
students meet in class themes like parallel universes that are often in the media or the worldweb and are not or are

5

FIG. 1: Virtual Mach-Zhender Interferometer using a single photon source (free code16). On the left, an undulatory pattern is
clearly seen after 3,419 photons were emitted. On the right, with an additional detector in the upper arm 6,415 photons built
up a corpuscular pattern. 3,184 photons were detected and 3231 hit the screen.

scarcely presented in textbooks. The discussion of interpretations allied to a virtual experiment16 of the photon in
an MZI is an important contribution to the literature devoted to initial and continued formation of Physics teachers.
This is a current research project in Education of Contemporary Physics and Epistemological Foundations. It is

partially supported by CNPq. We thank SR Dahmen for English improvements.

1 Zeilinger, A., “On the Interpretation and Philosophical Foundation of Quantum Mechanics”, Vastakohtien todellisuus, (1996)

Helsinki University Press.

2 Mermin, N. D.,“From Cbits to Qbits: Teaching computer scientists quantum mechanics”, Am. J. Phys., 71 (2003) 23–30.
3 Grau, B. C., “How to Teach Basic Quantum Mechanics to Computer Scientists and Electrical Engineers”, IEEE Transactions

4 Olsen, R. V., “Introducing quantum mechanics in the upper secondary school: a study in Norway”, International Journal

on Education, 47 (2004) 220–226.

of Science Education, 24 (2002) 565–574.

5 Michelini, M., et al., “Proposal for quantum physics in secondary school”, Physics Education, 35 (2000) 406–410.
6 Kalkanis, G., Hadzidake, P., Stavrou, D., ”An Instructional Model for a Radical Conceptual Change Towards Quantum

Mechanics Concepts”, Science Education, 87 (2003) 257–280.

7 Thacker, B. A., “Recent advances in classroom physics”, Reports on Progress in Physics, 66 (2003) 1833–1864.
8 Deutsch, D., The Fabric of Reality, Penguin Books (1997).
9 Jammer, M., The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics. A Wiley-Interscience Publication, USA, (1974).
10 Zeilinger, A., “A Foundational Principle for Quantum Mechanics”, Foundations of Physics, 29(1999) 631–643.
11 Tegmark, M., “The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics: Many Worlds or Many Words?”, Fortschr. Phys., 46 (1998)

855–862.

12 Fuchs, C., Peres, A., “Quantum theory needs no ‘interpretation”, Physics Today, 53 (3) (2000) 70–71.
13 Mermin, N. D., “Could Feynman Have Said This?”, Physics Today, 57 (5) (2004) 10–11.
14 Bastos Filho, J.B., “Epistemological Problems of the Reality, Comprehensibility and Causality in Quantum Theory”, Revista

Brasileira de Ensino de F´ısica, 25 (2) (2003) 125–147 (in Portuguese).

15 Lising, L., Elby, A., “The impact of epistemology on learning: A case study from introductory physics”, Am. J. Phys., 73

(2004) 459–463.

16 M¨uller, R., Wiesner, H., “Teaching quantum mechanics on an introductory level”, Am. J. Phys., 70 (2002) 200–209.

(simulator in http://www.physik.uni-muenchen.de/didaktik/Computer/interfer/interfere.html)

17 Arndt, M. et al., “Wave-particle duality of C60”, Nature, 401 (1999) 680–682.
18 Eisberg & Resnik, Quantum Physics of Atoms, molecules, solids, nuclei and particles, (1974) John Wiley & Sons.
19 Bunge, M., “Twenty-ﬁve centuries of quantum physics: From Pythagoras to us, and from subjectivism to realism”, Science

& Education, 12 (2003) 445–466.

20 Pessoa Jr,. O., “Interferometry, interpretation, and intuition: a conceptual introduction to quantum physics”, Revista

Brasileira de Ensino de F´ısica, 19 (1) (1997) 27–48. (in Portuguese)

21 Pessoa Jr., O., in Conceitos de F´ısica Quˆantica, Livraria da F´ısica (2003) S˜ao Paulo (in Portuguese).
22 Tegmark, M., Wheeler, J. A., “100 Years of Quantum Mysteries”, Scientiﬁc American, 284 (2001) 68–75.

