Scientiﬁc-Methodical Journal of Physics 30(48), b. 1, 16-22 (2005) (Soﬁa, in Bulgarian) http://www.physica.hit.bg

Quantization of conductivity of nanotechnological point contact. Simple derivation of
the Landauer formula

T. Mishonov∗ and M. Stoev†
Department of Theoretical Physics, Faculty of Physics,
University of Soﬁa St. Kliment Ohridski,
5 J. Bourchier Boulevard, BG-1164 Soﬁa, Bulgaria
(Dated: March 24, 2008)

A simple methodical derivation for Landauer quantization of the conductivity is derived as a
simple consequence of the Bohr quantization laws. The level of explanation corresponds to high-
school level of Physics education and can be used as popular lecture for students. The purpose of
the work is to introduce students in an achievement of nano-technology which is relevant to the
future electronics. Using only the fundamental laws of quantization students can understand a
contemporary experimental research and to follow future development in the ﬁeld.

5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 01.40.Fk, 73.63.Nm, 73.63.Rt

I.

INTRODUCTION

The permanent miniaturization in the electronic tech-
nology leads to the need of mentioning the quantum
eﬀects, while exploring the electron transfer in nano-
structures. For example in the common copper cables
the electrons are moving the same way as in a bulk poly-
crystalline metal, but when the wideness of the conduc-
tor is in the sub-micron area, there are observed quantum
eﬀects. In these extremely thin wires, or as they are usu-
ally called nano-wires, the electron moves by the length
of the conductor like a wave; the wideness of the wire
must be less than 100 nm. We must calculate the cur-
rent, caused by diﬀerent types of electron waves, which
are conveyed through the nano-wire the same way as the
television signal is transferred through the coaxial ca-
ble. When the nano-wires are small enough and are very
precisely made, the electron diﬀusion is low enough and
we can think of them like “ﬂying” through the whole
wire with a constant velocity v and momentum p. This
kind of movement is called ballistic, like a free ﬂying bul-
let. The problem of calculating the electric conductiv-
ity of a nano-wire, connecting two bulk conductors as
is shown on Fig. 1, was solved before nearly half a cen-
tury by Rolf Landauer, who worked then in IBM. The
predicted by Landauer quantization of the conductivity
was demonstrated very precisely by a split gate ﬁeld ef-
fect transistor1,2,3, shown schematically on Fig. 2. This
theory is used for the analysis of the work of sub-micron
nano-structures, as the whole contemporary electronics
are based on the nano-technology. In leading electronic
companies there were made fundamental explorations of
the properties of nano-structures in diﬀerent conditions;
for example, there was examined their behavior in very
low temperatures. The purpose of the present work is to
describe the experiments1,2,3 and to make a simple devia-
tion of the Landauer’s formula, using only the fundamen-
tal principles of Physics, formulated by Niels Bohr. For
understanding the deviation is necessary only familiarity
with the atomic model of Bohr, which is already taught
in the high-school level of education. That is why our

FIG. 1: One dimensional (1D) channel connecting two bulk
two-dimensional (2D) conductors. Applied voltage creates
current and the conductivity is quantized.

work may be used by teachers, who want to show their
classes a new material from the contemporary Physics,
but some pupils may understand the present work them-
selves. Usually while analyzing some occurrences the ac-
tion of the border is too low to be assumed. For example
the heat capacity of a ring and a cylinder made from the
same material is practically equivalent. That is why it’s
understandable that we will use the conclusion of a help-
ing problem to analyze the conductivity of a nano-wire.
This helping solution concerns electrons, circulating on a
nano-ring. Instead of exploring a ﬂow of electrons, trans-
ferred in a nano-wire from the negative electrode. We
will concentrate on electrons, winding in one direction
on a sub-micron conductive ring with radius r. After the
analysis of the reference between the current and the po-
tential we will “cut” the ring and will apply the results
for the analysis of the conductivity of nano-technology

2

FIG. 2: Energy quantization when electrons circulate around
a ring with radius r. Due to Bohr laws the angular electron
momentum is quantized. This leads to velocity and energy
quantization. Open circles presents empty electron orbitals.
Filled circles denote double electron occupied states. The
electrons moving in right direction have a maximal energy.

FIG. 3: Conductivity σ of the ﬁeld eﬀect transistor versus
gate voltage Ug. Increasing the voltage opens new electron
channels. Every open electron channel gives one conductivity
quantum 2e2/h to the whole conductivity which creates the
height of the steps.

point contacts.

II. REALIZATION OF THE EXPERIMENT

Let us describe shortly the realization of the one-
dimensional electron conductor by semi-conductive nano-
structures. Decreasing the dimensionality is achieved in
two separate stages, and technologically the most impor-
tant step is the establishing of two-dimensional electron
gas 2DEG. For that reason there are used laminar semi-
conductive structures. A thin coat of GaAs is placed in
AlGaAs. Closely to that coat the bulk AlGaAs is alloyed
in a very thin area with Si. The electron leaves the Si
donors and fall into the potential hole of GaAs. In this
situation their wave-functions are just standing waves,
like the tremble of a violin string. But in the ﬂat of
the interface the electrons move like free two-dimensional
particles and their wave-functions are ﬂat waves. In dif-
ferent words, we can assume that in the thin coat the
electrons are soaring like seagulls above the surface of the
sea. Their dissipation on the distant ionized Si donors is
low and the conductivity of the 2DEG is very high. The
density of this depraved electron gas is very high, and
we have a two-dimensional metal when the temperature
is low. This metal is very well insulated from the semi-
conductor, in which it’s situated. For that structure the
Pauli prohibition is valid and the electrons ﬁll all the elec-
tron states to some highest possible energy Emax, called
Fermi energy, as it is schematically depicted on Fig. 3.
The mentioned above ﬁlling of electron position is analo-

gous to the ﬁlling with water of all the volumes in Earth,
beneath the sea level and that is why the phrase Fermi sea
is usually used. In our case the sea is two-dimensional.
The technological problem is to create one-dimensional
channel between two seas of that kind. For this purpose
one split-gate of two gold electrodes is used, evaporated
on a semi-conductor hetero-structure. That is how we
create a ﬁeld eﬀect transistor, demonstrated on Fig. 2.
The source and the stock have an Ohm connection with
the 2DEG. When we put a strongly negative potential
on the gate, the electrons below it disappears, ejected
awry by the Coulomb repulsive force of the gate. That is
how the connection between the two sees is interrupted
and the transistor is bung and stopped. When we de-
crease the force of rejection by changing the gate volt-
age the contact between the Fermi seas is recovered and
the electrons run from one sea, to the other through the
narrow one-dimensional channel, created under the split-
gate. In this phase of their transfer, the electrons have
almost one-dimensional motion - like waves in a waveg-
uide. They do not diﬀuse, but ﬂy like bullets. That is
why we call that condition a Ballistic regime. The wave-
function of the electrons are ﬂat waves stretched by the
length of the channel, and in the perpendicular direction
they are standing waves. The ﬁlling of the electron states
depends on the potential, so the gate voltage determines
the number of the open electron channels. Each of these
channels gives one quantum of conductivity to the whole
conductivity of the nano-technology point contact. Now
we can understand the step-looking nature of the rela-
tion between the conductivity and the gate voltage in
the low-temperature range, shown on Fig. 4.Each step

The index n means that we respect the quantum prop-
erties of the electron. The integer n shows us how many
wavelengths of the electron λe = 2π~/p can be put to-
gether in perimeter of the circle 2πr = nλe. According
to the Bohr’s law the angular momentum is quantized
mvr = n~,
(2)
where ~ = 1.055 × 10−34 Js is the Plank’s constant and
the integer n is called magnet quantum number in the
atomic physics, m is the eﬀective mass of the electron in
the crystal grid. From Bohr’s law we can calculate the
velocity:

And we can put the results back in the formula, applied
to the formula for the current Eq. (1).

vn =

~

mr

n.

In =

e~
2πmr2 n.

The quantization of the velocity causes quantization of
the kinetic energy too

En =

mv2

n =

1
2

1
2

~2
mr2 n2.

This formula explains the energetic spectrum of an elec-
tron, winding on a circle with a ﬁxed radius, graphically
shown on Fig. 3. Its now easy to calculate the whole cur-
rent, caused by all the electrons, circulating in one direc-
tion v > 0, assuming tat all the electron states with en-
ergy in the range from E = 0 to E = Emax are ﬁlled with
exactly 2 electrons each (with spin “up” and “down”).
According to the Pauli’s principle of prohibition each
electron state can be ﬁlled only with one electron with
certain spin and from the equation about the spectrum
its obvious, that the maximal energy Emax can be param-
eterized with one big integer N or with an item, having
the character of electric potential U

Emax =

1
2

~2
mr2 N 2 = eU.

The whole current is equal to the sum of all the electron
currents

3

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

FIG. 4: Conductivity σ versus gate voltage Ug at diﬀerent
temperatures.
Increasing the temperature smears the steps
of conductivity quantization. At high temperatures the con-
ductivity quantization disappear.

means that one more one-dimensional channel has been
opened between the Fermi seas. Increasing the temper-
ature means that the steps become smoothed-out and
indistinct, see Fig. 5;freezing brings us more step-looking
ﬁgure. The height of the step may be computed with ele-
mentary knowledges. These calculations were realized in
the next part of this work. If we want to be more accu-
rate we have to take into account currents in the opposite
directions, when U is a small diﬀerence between the lev-
els of the Fermi seas, but the result remains the same.
That is all we will say about the realization of the exper-
iment. In the next section the Landauer formula will be
deviated, describing the quantization of the conductivity.
After that we will describe the inﬂuence of the diﬀerent
temperatures to the conductivity of the nano-technology
point contact.

III. DEVIATION OF THE LANDAUER
FORMULA

I = 2

In.

N

Xn=0

As we had already mentioned, we will analyze a mental
experiment with electrons, winding on a circle with ra-
dius r, like the atomic model of Bohr. That experiment
will help us to solve our problem. When an electron cir-
culates with velocity v the period of its round is 2πr/v
(time is equal to the path divided by velocity). And the
average current In is simply the electron charge e divided
by the period (by deﬁnition the current is the charge per
unit time)

In other words, a sum through all the electron states
ought to be made. We can use the formula for the arith-
metic progression for big enough numbers N ≫ 1

N

Xn=1

n = 1 + 2 + 3 + · · ·+ N =

N (N + 1)
2

≈ N 2
2

≫ 1. (8)

We apply this formula for to the calculation of the cur-
rents Eq. (7), expressed by Eq. (4)

In =

evn
2πr

.

(1)

N

N

I = 2

In = 2

Xn=0

Xn=0

e~

2πmr2 n =

2e~
2πmr2

N (N + 1)
2

. (9)

The integer N is much bigger than 1, so in a good ap-
proximation we may assume that N (1 + 1/N ) ≈ N and
there we have

I = 2

e
2π~ (cid:18)

~2N 2
2mr2 (cid:19)

.

(10)

Here the expression in the brackets is the highest possible
energy of the electrons mentioned in Eq. (6). Now we
have the opportunity to express the current by an electric
potential

I =

2e2
2π~ U =

2e2
h

U = σU,

(11)

following the tradition we have used the old Plank con-
stant h = 2π~. By deﬁnition the conductivity σ is the
current, divided to the voltage σ = I/U . In this whole
calculation we assume that the regime of the electrons,
transferred through the ring is ballistic, where the elec-
tron diﬀusion is neglected. That is why the electron
wavelength have to be shorter than the average free path
of the electron. The result we achieved is applicable for
short enough nano-wires, including point-contacts too,
where the one-dimensional movement is in a very slight
area. Now we have the Landauer formula, describing the
quantization of the conductivity of one-dimensional con-
ductor.

σ0 =

2e2
h

=

1
12906 Ω

= 77.5 µSm.

(12)

In the realistic nano-technology point-contacts the con-
ductivity is achieved as a result of a great number of such
one-dimensional channels and to calculate the whole con-
ductivity, we ought to multiply the conductivity quantum
σ0 by the number of the opened one-dimensional electron
channels K

σ = Kσ0 = K

(13)

2e2
h

.

IV. THE INFLUENCE OF FINITE
TEMPERATURE

Lets research the results, achieved by realizing the ex-
periment.
In this work there was used the transistor,
shown on Fig. 2. The temperature, in which the measure-
ments were made is close to the absolute zero T = 0.6 K.
Measuring the voltage, the conductivity can be calcu-
lated for diﬀerent values of the negative gate potential
Ug, applied to the point contact. A simple parallel can
be made, concerning the negative voltage, which can help
the reader to understand the graphical relation between
σ and Ug, shown on Fig. 4. The applied negative gate
voltage can be assumed as a wideness of the point con-
tact. This parallel was explained and used yet in the
second section. Increasing Ug means the point contact
becomes narrower. Therefore, by changing the gate volt-
age we can increase or decrease the conductivity of the

4

nano-technology point contact, as we act on its wideness.
That is how this simple analogy between electrical poten-
tial and wideness helps us to reduce our problem to the
simple model of an usual Ohm’s conductor.

The conductivity is shown in units 2e2/h. It’s inter-
esting, that the conductivity is not increasing linearly
with the accretion of the wideness of the point contact,
but, as there was already mentioned, the function has a
strange vision, it increases in some portions, steps or, as
we call them - quants, each of these leading to increas-
ing σ with 2e2/h. When Ug = −2.2 V the conductivity is
zero. This means that there is no current transferred and
that the point contact is stopped. In other words while
Ug = −2.2 V the wideness of the gate is zero and the
circuit is ceased, because all the electrons from the con-
tact are ejected awry due to the electric rejection forces.
The quantization of the conductivity of the unit shown
on Fig. 2 in the mentioned conditions can be detected
in the range from Ug = −0.3 V to Ug = −2.2 V, when
the circuit is disconnected. In this range the conductiv-
ity changes altogether 16 times, and each of these por-
tions is equal to 2e2/h. The graphics also shows that the
quantization of the conductivity is not entirely sharp and
distinct, the steps are a little bit rounded. The reason for
that indeﬁnite vision of the function is the resistance of
the 2DEG zones, which approximately measures 400 Ω.
Furthermore it is possible to see that the higher is the
conductivity, the smoother is the function. The expla-
nation for this occurrence in that the 2DEG zones resis-
tance becomes a bigger part of the whole resistance of the
circuit, as the resistance of the point contact decreases.
Now we have the relation σ/Ug entirely explained for
T = 0.6 K. A very interesting question is to explore the
same experiment made in the conditions of some diﬀer-
ent temperatures T. The graphic showing the changes
of σ as a function of Ug is shown on Fig. 5. This time
there are demonstrated the measured values for diﬀerent
temperatures: 0.3 K, 0.6 K, 1.6 K, 4.2 K. Obviously the
quantization of the conductivity tends to disappear when
increasing the temperature. Even when T = 4.2 K it is
really hard to see it. We have already considered all of
the most interesting and important aspects of the quan-
tization of the conductivity of the nano-technology point
contacts. Now we ought to mention one very important
detail about this problem. We have already understood
where the Ohm’s resistance appears in the point contact,
but our work would be incomplete if we overpass the
question where the Ohm’s heating becomes; we ought
to mention something about the inconvertible character
of the point contact. The electrons pass through the
gate in ballistic regime, so there is no heat emitted. The
heat, actually, is generated when the electrons transfer
from the ﬁrst Fermi sea to the other through the one-
dimensional channel and they begin to hit into the sur-
rounding walls. The situation when an electron is coming
into a sea through the point contact reminds the model
of the black body radiation. Exactly as the beam of light,
fallen through the narrow hole into the box cannot went

out, exactly the same situation we have with the electron,
fallen into the second 2DEG zone. It cannot get back to
the ﬁrst Fermi sea through the point-contact. Therefore
the irreversibility of the process of transferring electrons
through nano-technology point contacts appears in the
non-elastic hits, which the electrons bear when coming
to the second, lower level Fermi sea. This process is just
the same as the heating of water, which overﬂows from
one reservoir to another. In the present work we have
solved a contemporary quantum problem, although the
results, necessary for the interpretation of the experimen-

tal data were achieved with elementary methods, taught
in the high-school level of Physics education.

5

Acknowledgments

One of the authors (TM) is thankful to T. Teodosiev
for invitation this work to be presented at the school in
Kazanlak and to H. Hristov for the interest and support.

∗ E-mail: mishonov@phys.uni-soﬁa.bg
† E-mail: martin˙stoev@abv.bg
1 B.J. van Wees, H. van Houten, C.W.J. Beenaker,
J.G. Williamson, L.P. Kouwenhoven, D. van der Marel,
and C.T. Foxon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 848 (1988).

2 B.J. van Wees, L.P. Kouwenhoven, E.M.M. Willems,
C.J.P.M. Harmans,
van Houten,
J.G. Williamson, and C.T. Foxon, Phys. Rev. B 43,
12431 (1991).

J.E. Mooij, H.

3 L.P. Kouwenhoven, “Transport of Electron-Waves and
Single-Charges in Semiconductor Nanostructures”, Ph.D
Thesis Technische Universiteit Delft (1992); Chap. I.

V. TRANSLATION IN SLOVAK LANGUAGE:
´UVOD

Nesut´ala miniaˇturiz´acia v elektronike prinudzuje k
tomu, aby boli kvantov´e efekty vypoˇc´itan´e, poˇcas
v´yskumu nano-strukt´ur.
Napr´yklad v obyˇcajnych
meden´ych kabloch elektr´oni sa pohybuj´u presne tak isto,
ako v objemnom polykriˇst´alnom kove. Keˇd ale ˇsirka
voidˇca je v submikr´onnom rozsahu, sa zjavuj´u kvantov’e
efekty. V t´ychto mimoriadne tenk´ych k´abloch, zvyˇcajne
az´yvan´e nano-k´able, elektr´oni sa pohybuj´u po d´lˇzke
voidˇca ako vlna; the ˇsirka k´abla mus´i by´t menˇsia neˇz
100 nm. Mus´ime vypoˇc´itaˇt elektrick´y pr´ud, spˆosoben´y
rozliˇcn´imi tipmi elektr´onnych v´ln, ktor´e sa prenaˇsaj´u cez
nano-k´abel t´im ist´im spˆosobom, ako sa prenaˇsa telev´izn´y
sign´al cez koaxi´aln´y k´abel. Keˇd s´u nano-k´able dostatoˇcne
mal´e a s´u prec´izne vyroben´e, rozptylovanie elektr´onov je
dostatoˇcne mal´e a mˆoˇzeme o n’ich uvaˇzova´t ako “leti-
ace” cez cel´u d´lˇzku k´abla s konstantnou rychlos´tou v
a momentom p. Tento spˆosob pohybu sa naz´yva bali-
stick´y, ako vystrlen´a gu´lka. ´Uloha pre vypoˇcit´avanie kon-
duktivity nano-k´abla, sp´ajajuc´a dvoch objemn´ych voidˇc,
ako je iluˇstrovan´e na Fig. 6, bola vyrieˇsen´a pred e´ste
pribl´iˇzne p´ol storoˇc´im ot Rolfa Landauera, ktor´y vt-
edy pracoval pre IBM. Predznamenan´a od Landauera
qantiz´acia konduktivity bola Demon´strovan´a velmi pre-
cizne od tranzistora s rozˇstiepen´im gejtom1,2,3, de-
monˇstrovan´y schematicky na Fig. 7. T´ato te´oria sa
pouˇz´iva pri analizovan´i Submikr´onn´ych nano-strukt´ur,
kedˇze cel´a dneˇsn´a elektronika sa opi´era na nano-

FIG. 5: Jednodimenzi´aln´y (1D) kan´al sp´ajajuc´i dva objemn´e
dvojdimenzi´aln´e (2D) konduktori. Pridan´e nap atie vyvol´ava
pr´ud a konduktivita je kvantizovan´a.

ˇstrukt´ure. V niektor´ych ved´ucich elektronick´ych ﬁrm´ach
boli Uroben´e fundament´aln´e sk´umania vlastnost´i nano-
strukt´ur pri rˆoznych podmi´enkach; napr´yklad, bolo
vysk´uman´e ´ich chovanie pri ve´lmi n´izk´ich teplot´ach.
Cie´l nasleduj´uceho materi´ala e op´ysa´t experimenti1,2,3
a vyvyn´u´t jednoduch´y v´yvod Landauerovej
formuli,
for-
s pomocou len element´arn´ych principov fyziky,
mulov´an´e od Nielsa Bohra. Pre pochopenie v´yvoda je
potrebn´e len poznanie poznanie Bohrov´eho atomn´eho
modela, Ktor´y sa uˇz nieko´lko desa´troˇc´i vyuˇcuje na
gymnazi´alnej ´urovni. S tochto dˆovodu san aˇs´a pr´aca
moˇze pouˇz´iva´t ot uˇcitelov, ktor´y by chceli demonˇstrova´t
svoj´im ˇzijakom nov´y material z dneˇsnej fyzky; niek-
tor´y ˇzijaci by mohly nasledduj´ucu pracu pochopy´t aj
samostatne. Zviˇcajne pri sk´uman´i nejak´eho javu vpliv
hranice je pr´iliˇs mal´I, aby bol zdˆorazˇnovan´y a t´im p´adom
sa nepoˇc´ita. Napr´iklad tepeln´a kapacita prstena a cilin-
dra, vyroben´ych s toho ist´eho materi´alu je prakticky rov-
nak´a. V tak´om pr´ipade je pochopiteln´e, ˇze pouˇzijeme

6

FIG. 6: Realiz´acia 1D vodiˇca (bodov´eho kontaktu) pomo-
cou tranzistora s rozˇstiepen´im gejtom. Zlat´i gejt odpudzuje
elektr´oni z dvojdimenzi´alneho elektronn´eho plynu (2DEG) v
´uzkej GaAs v´rstve. ´Urovne µ1 a µ2 Fermiho mˆor s´u rˆozliˇcn´e.

FIG. 7: Kvantiz´acia energije elektr´onov, cirkulujuc´imi po
okruhu s r´adiusom r. Poˇdla Bohrov´ych z´akonov uhlov´y mo-
ment elektr´onu je kvantizovan´i. S toho je spˆosobena kvan-
tiz´acia aj r´ychlosti aj energie. Pr´azdn´e kr´uˇzki demonˇstruj´u
pr´azdn´e elektr´onn´e orbit´ali. Pln´e kr´uˇzki ukazuj´u dvojito za-
ujat´e ´urovˇne. Elektr´ony zprava maj´u maxim´aln´u energiju.

rieˇsenie pomocn´eho pr´iklada pre an´alizu konduktiv-
ity nano-k´abla.ento pomocn´y pr´iklad spoˇc´iva v tom,
roby´t v´poˇcti pre elektr´oni, cirkuluj´uce po nano-prstene,
namiesto sk´umania potok elektr´onou, “preli´etaj´ucich”
cez nano-k´abel, od negat´ivneho elektr´odu k posit´ivnemu.
Mi sa s´ustrdime na elektr´oni, cirkuluj´uce v jednom
smere po nano-prstne s radiusom r. Keˇd uˇz budeme
ma´t anal´izu vz´tahu elektrick´eho pr´udu k napetiu mi
“rozreˇzeme” prsteˇn a vyuˇzijme v´ysledky pre konduktiv-
itu nano-technologickych bodovych kontaktov.

VI. REALIZ ´ACIA EXPERIMENTA

V nasleduj´ucich riadkoch op´iˇseme nark´atko re-
aliz´aciu jednomern´eho elektr´onov´eho vodiˇca pomocou
polovodiˇcov´ych nanostrukt´ur. Zn´iˇzenie dimensionality
je dosiahnut´e v dvoch otdieln´ych f´azach, a z techno-
logick´eho h´ladiska najdˆoleˇzitejˇsI prechod je vytv´aranie
dvoi-dimenzi´alneho elktronn´eho plinu 2DEG. Z tochto
dˆovodu sa pouˇz´ivaj´u lamin´arn´e polovodiˇcov´e strukt´ury.
Tenk´a v´rstva GaAs sa postavuje do AlGaAs. Bl´izko
tejto v´rstvy sa objemn´y AlGaAs is alloyed in a very
thin area with Si. Elektr´on vybieha z Si donorou a
pad´a do potency´alnej jamy GaAs. V tejto situ´acie ´ich
vlnov´e funkcie s´u jednoducho stoj´ace vlny, ako tie, ˇco sa
vytv´araj´u pri chveniu struni husliˇciek. V ploˇsine prostre-
dia sa ale elektr´oni pohybuj´u ako v´olne dvoj-dimenzi´aln´e
ˇcastice a ´ich vlnov´e funkcie s´u plosk´e vlny. S in´imi slo-
vami, mˆoˇzeme poˇc´ita´t, ˇze elektr´oni sa vzn´aˇsaj´u ako ˇcajky
nad morskou h´ladinou. ´Ich rozpt´ilenie na vzdialenych
j´onizovanych Si donoroch je velmi mal´e a preto kon-

duktivita 2DEG-u je velmi vysok´a. Pltnos´t tohto elek-
tronn´eho plinu je velk´a, a moˇzeme uvaˇzova´t, ˇze m´ame
dvoj-dimenzi´aln´i kov pri n´isk´ych teplot´ach. V ktorom je
umiestnen´i. Pre t´uto ˇstrukt´uru Pauliho z´abrana ´uˇcinkuje
a vˇsetky elektr´oni vyp´lˇnaj´u vˇsetky elektr´onn´e ´urovne po
nejak´u maxim´aln´u moˇzn´u energiu Emax, zvanou Fermiho
energia, ako je schematicky uk´azan´e na Fig. 3.

Spomenut´e predtim zap´lˇnanie lektr´onnych poz´icii je
analogick´e zap´lˇnaniu pr´azdnych medzier na zemnom
povrchu vodou po ´uroveˇn morskej hladiny; z tohto dˆovdu
sa ˇcasto pouˇz´iva fr´aza Fermiho more. V naˇsom pr´ipade
more je dvojdimenzi´alne. Technologick´y probl´em je vy-
roby´t jednomern´y kan´al medzi dvomi podobn´imi morami.
Na dosiahnutie tohto cie´la je pouˇzit´y rozˇstiepen´y gejt
z dvoch zlat´ych elektr´od, vyparen´y na polovodiˇcov´u
heterostrukt´uru. T´ato metoda na v´yrobu tranzistora
s rozˇstiepen´im gejtom sa pouˇz´iva a je demonˇstrovan´a
S´orce a stok maj´u ohmov´e spojenie s s
na Fig. 7.
2DEG. Keˇd gejtu prid´ame silne negat´ivn´i potency´al,
elektr´oni pod n´im zmizn´u, vytlaˇcen´e nabok coulom-
bov´imi odpudzuj´ucimi salami gejtu. T´imto spˆosobom
sa spojenie medzi dvoma morami preruˇs´i a transistor
sa uzpch´a. Keˇd siluodpudzovania zmenˇs´ime, zmenen´im
gejtov´e napetie kontakt medzi Fermi morami sa znovu
vytv´ara a elektr´oni prechadzaj´u z jedn´eho mora do
druh´eho cez ´uzky jednodimenzi´alny kan´al, vytvoren´y pod
rozˇstiepen´im gejtom. V tejto f´aze transf´eru elektr´ony
maj´u skoro jednosmern´y spˆosob pohybu - ako vlny vo vl-
novode. Oni sa nerzptluju, ale letia ako n´aboje. Z tohto
dˆovodu vol´ame tento tip pohybu balistick´y reˇz´im. Vl-

7

(16)

(17)

(18)

FIG. 8: Konduktivita σ tranzistora oproti gejtov´eho volt´aˇza.
Zv´yˇsenie napetia otv´ara nov´e elektr´onn´e kan´ali. Kaˇzd´i
elektr´onn´i kan´al d´ava o jeden kondukt´ivn´y kvantum 2e2/h
celej konduktivite, a vˇdaka tomu sa vytv´ara v´yˇska schodou.

FIG. 9: Konduktivita σ oproti gejtov´emu volt´aˇzu Ug pri
rˆozn´ych teplot´ach. Zv´yˇsenie teploti rob´y schodi kvantiz´acie
hladˇsie. Pri vysok´ich teplot´ach kvantiz´acia konduktivity
mizne.

nov´e funkcie s´u plosk´e vlny, rozsahuj´uce sa pozd´lˇz kan´ala,
v perpendikul´arnej rovine s´u to stojat´e vlny. Zaplnenie
elktr´onn´ych ´urovn´i z´aleˇzi od potency´alu, takˇze gejtov´y
volt´aˇz urˇcuje poˇcet otvoren´ych elektr´onn´ych kan´alov.
Kaˇzd´y z t´ychto kan´alou d´ava jeden kuantum konduk-
tivity k celej konuktivity nano-technologick´eho bodov´eho
kontaktu. Teraz uˇz mˆoˇzeme pochopi´t “schodovit´y”
charakter vzh´ladu rel´acie medzi konduktivitou a gej-
tov´im nap at´im pri n´isk´ych teplot´ach, zaobrazenou na
Fig. 9. Kaˇzd´y “schod” znamen´a, ˇze je otvoren´y ˇdalˇs´i
jednomern´y kan´al medzi Fermiho morami.
Zv´yˇsenie
teploty prid´ava “schodom” hladkejˇs´i v´yzor. Postupne
sa oni stan´u neodhaliteln´imi (Fig. 10); ochl´adzanie
n´am prin´aˇsa zdˆoraznenejˇsie schodito vyzeraj´ucu ﬁguru.
V´ysˇska schodou mˆoˇze by´t vypoˇc´itan´a s element´arnimi
poznatkami. Tieto kalkul´acie s´u realizovan´e v nasle-
duj´ucej sekcie tohto textu.

Aby sme boli prestn´i by sme museli poˇc´ita´t aj elek-
trick´e pr´udi, prebiehaj´uce v opaˇcnom smere, vtedy, keˇd
U je mal´y rozdiel medzi rovniskami Fermiho morami;
nez´avislo ot toho v´ysledky zost´avaj´u tie ist´e. To je
vˇsetko, ˇco povieme o realiz´acie experimenta. V nasle-
duj´ucej sekcie bude predstaven´y v´yvod na Landauerov´u
ˇDalej
formulu, opysuj´ucu kuantiz´aciu konduktivity.
ocharakterizujeme vplyv zmeny teploty na konduktivitu
nano-technologick´eho bodov´eho kontaktu.

periment n´am pomˆoˇze pri rieˇseniju naˇsej ´ulohy. Keˇd
sa elektr´on toˇc´i s r´ychlos´tou v peri´oda jeho ot´aˇcky je
2πr/v (ˇcas sa vyjadruje ako prejden´a cest, rozdelen´a na
r´ychlos´t). Stredn´y elektrick´y pr´ud In je proste n´aboj
elektr´ona e rozdelen´i na peri´odu (deﬁn´icia pre elektrick´y
pr´ud je prebehl´i n´aboj za urˇcit´y ˇcas)

In =

evn
2πr

.

(14)

Index n znamen´a, ˇze reˇspektujeme kvantov´e vlastnosti
elektr´onu. Cel´a ˇcislica n ukazuje kolko kr´atd´lˇzka vlny
elektr´onu λe = 2π~/p sa uch´adza v perimeter kruhu
2πr = nλe. Pod´la Bohrovho z´akona Uhlov´y moment
je kvantizovan´y

mvr = n~,

(15)

kde ~ = 1.055 × 10−34 Js je Plankov´a konˇstanta a cel´a
ˇcislica n m´a n´azov magnetov´e kvantov´e ˇc´islo v ´atomovej
fyzike, m je efekt´yvna hmotnos´t elektr´onu v kristal-
ickej ˇstrukt´ure. Z Bohrovho z´akona mˆoˇzeme vypoˇc´ita´t
r´ychlos´t:

V´ysledki mˆoˇzeme pouˇzi´t vo formule o eletrickom pr´ede
Eq. (14).

vn =

~

mr

n.

In =

e~
2πmr2 n.

VII. V ´YVOD FORMULI

Uˇz sme spomenuli, ˇze budeme analizova´t myslen´y
experiment s elektr´onmi, cirkuluj´ucimi po okruhu s
r´adiusom r, ako v ´atomovom modele Bohra. Teneto ex-

Kvantiz´acia r´ychlosti spˆosobuje kvantiz´aciju kinetickej
energie tieˇz

En =

mv2

n =

1
2

1
2

~2
mr2 n2.

Cel´i pr´ud je suma zo vˇsetk´ych elektr´onnych pr´udov

σ = Kσ0 = K

(26)

2e2
h

.

T´ato formula opisuje energetick´y spektruim elektr´ona,
Toˇciacim sa po kruhu s ﬁxovan´im r´adiusom, graﬁcky
uk´azanom na Fig. 8. Vypoˇcit´avanie cel´eho pr´udu,
spˆosoben´eho vˇsetk´imi elektr´onmi, kr´uˇziacimi v jednom
smere v > 0, uˇz neni pobl´em, povaˇzuj´uc, ˇze vˇsetky
elektr´onne ´urovne v interv´ale od E = 0 da E =
Emax s´u zaplnen´e s presne dvomi elektr´onmi kaˇzd´a (zo
spinom “hore” a “dolu”). Pod´la Pauliho z´abrane kaˇzd´a
elektr´onna ´urovevn mˆoˇze by´t zaplnen´a len s jedn´ym
elektr´onom s dan´im spinom a z formuli o spektre je jasn´e,
ˇze maxim´alna energia Emax mˆoˇze y´t parametrizovan´a s
jednou ve´lkou celou ˇcislicou N alebo s ˇclenom, maj´ucim
rozmernos´t elektrick´eho potenci´alu U

Emax =

1
2

~2
mr2 N 2 = eU.

I = 2

In.

N

Xn=0

(19)

(20)

S in´imi slovami, mus´i sa sumova´t cez vˇsetky elektr´onne
´urovˇne. We Mˆoˇzeme pouˇzi´t formulu o aritmetickej
progr´esie pre dostatoˇcne ve´lk´e ˇc´islo N ≫ 1

N

Xn=1

n = 1+2+3+· · ·+N =

N (N + 1)
2

≈ N 2
2

≫ 1. (21)

Pouˇzijeme t´uto formulu pre kalkul´aciu pr´udov Eq. (20),
vyjadren´imi ˇcrez Eq. (17)

N

N

I = 2

In = 2

Xn=0

Xn=0

e~

2πmr2 n =

2e~
2πmr2

N (N + 1)
2

.

(22)
Cel´a ˇcislica N je ov´la veˇcˇsia ako 1, takˇze s dostatoˇcnou
presnos´tou mˆoˇzeme prija´t, ˇze N (1 + 1/N ) ≈ N a
dostaˇneme

I = 2

e
2π~ (cid:18)

~2N 2
2mr2 (cid:19)

.

(23)

V´yraz v z´atvork´ach je maxim´alna moˇzn´a energia
elektr´onov, spomenut´ich v Eq. (19).
Teraz m´ame
moˇznos´t vyjadri´t pr´ud s pomocou elektrick´eho po-
tency´alu

I =

2e2
2π~ U =

2e2
h

U = σU,

(24)

Pod´la trad´icie sme pouˇzili star´u Plankov´u konˇstantu
h = 2π~. Pod´la deﬁn´icie, konduktivita σ sa rov´na pr´udu,
rozdelen´emu nap atiu σ = I/U . V celej kalkul´acii sme
poˇc´itali s t´im, ˇze reˇz´im elektr´onov, pren´aˇsan´ych cez
prestenovidny voidˇc, je balistick´y. Pri tomto reˇz´ime
elektr´onne rozpt´ilnie je zanedbateln´e a preto d´lˇzka vlny
elektr´onov mus´i by´t menˇsia ako stredn´y vˆonly priebeh

8

elektr´onu. V´ysledok, ktori sme dosiahli je moˇzn´e pouˇzi´t
pre dostatoˇcne kr´atke nano-k´able a tak tieˇz bodov´e kon-
takty, kde sa prechod uskutoˇcˇnuje pomocou jednodi-
menzi´aln´eho pohybu. Teraz uˇz m´ame Landauerov´u
formulu, opisuj´ucu kvantiz´aciu konduktivity jednodi-
menzi´aln´eho voidˇca.

σ0 =

2e2
h

=

1
12906 Ω

= 77.5 µSm.

(25)

Vre´alnom nano-technologickom bodovom kontakte je
konduktivita dosiahnut´a s pomocou ve´lk´eho mnoˇzstva
podobn´ych jednodimenzi´aln´ych kan´alov a pre v´ypoˇcet
celej konduktivity mus´ime n´asoby´t kvantum konduktiv-
ity σ0 s poˇctom otvoren´ych jednodimenzi´aln´ych kan´alov
K

VIII. VPLYV TEPLOTI NA KONDUKTIVITU

Presk´umajme v´ysledky, dosiahnut´e pri realiz´acii exper-
imentu. V naˇsej pr´aci sme pouˇzili transistor, uk´azan´i na
Fig. 7. Teplota, pri ktorej boli uskutoˇcˇnen´e merania je
bl´izka k absolutnej T = 0.6 K. Dost´avaj´uc ainform´aciu
o volt´aˇze z pr´borov mˆoˇzeme lahko vypoˇc´ita´t konduktiv-
itu pre rˆozne ve´lkosti negat´ivneho gejtov´eho volt´aˇzu Ug,
priloˇzen´emu k bpdpv´emu kontaktu. S t´imto negat´ivnim
voltaˇzom sa mˆoˇze uroby´t jednoduch´a anal´ogia, ktor´a
n´am pomˆoˇze pochopi´t graﬁck´u s´uvislos´t medzi σ a Ug,
uk´azan´u na Fig. 9. Pridan´y gejtov´y potencial mˆoˇze by´t
prijat´y ako ˇs´irka gejtu. T´ato anal´ogia uˇz bola vyuˇzit´a v
druhej sekcie. Zveˇcˇsenie Ug Znamen´a, ˇze sa bodov´y kon-
takt stane uzˇs´im. To znamen´a, ˇze menenie negativn´eho
nap atia na gejte moze spˆosoby´t sp´ad, alebo zviˇsenie
konduktivity nano-technologick´eho bodov´eho kontaktu,
zmenen´im jeho ˇs´irky. Takto t´ato jednoduch´a anal´ogia
medzi potency´alom a ˇs´irkou n´am umoˇznila redukovanie
naˇsej ´ulohy k prost´emu modelu obyˇcajn´emu Ohmov´emu
voidˇcu.

Konduktivita je predstaven´a v jednotk´ach 2e2/h. Za-
ujmav´e je, ˇze sa konduktivita nezvyˇsuje line´arne s
line´arn´im zveˇcˇsen´im ˇs´irky bodov´eho kontaktu, ale, ako
sme uˇz op´islai, t´ato funkcia m´a zvl´aˇstni vzh´lad; konduk-
tivita sa zveˇcˇsuje na urˇcit´ich porci´ach, d´ozach, naz´yvan´e
kvanti. Kaˇzd´y z n´ich zv´iˇsuje konduktivitu σ o 2e2/h.
Keˇd Ug = −2.2 V konduktivita je nulov´a.
S toho
vypl´iva.
ˇze ˇziadn´i pr´ud neprech´adza a bodov´y kon-
takt je uzatvoren´i. S in´imi slovami keˇd Ug = −2.2 V
ˇs´irka gejtu je nulov´a a re´taz je preruˇsen´a, rpeto ˇze
vˇsetky elektr´ony z kontaktu s´u vytlaˇcen´e nabok ot elek-
trick´ych odpudzujuc´ich s´il. Kvantiz´acia konduktivity
of pr´istroja, uk´azanom na Fig. 7 v spomenut´ich pod-
mienkach m´oˇze by´t detektovan´a v hraniciach d Ug =
−0.3 V do Ug = −2.2 V, keˇd je re´taz preruˇsen´a. v
t´ychto hraniciach sa konduktivita men´i dokopy 16 kr´at,

a kaˇzd´a z porcii sa rovn´a 2e2/h. Graﬁka taktieˇz ukazuje,
ˇze kvantiz´acia konduktivity neni celkom prudk´a a presn´a,
“schody’ s´u trochu obl´e. Pr´iˇcina pre tento neide´alni
vzh´lad funkcie je elektrick´y 2DEG z´on, ktor´y je pribliˇzne
400 Ω. ˇDalej mˆoˇzeme spozorova´t, ˇze ˇc´im je viˇsˇsia kon-
duktivita, t´im je funkcia oblejˇsia. Vysvetlenie pre tento
jav n´ajdeme v opore 2DEG z´on, ktor´i sa stane veˇcˇsiou
ˇciastkou cel´eho odporu re´taze, kv´oli zn´iˇzeniu rezisten-
cie bodov´eho kontaktu. Teraz uˇz m´ame pomer σ/Ug
vyjasnen´i pre T = 0.6 K. Ve´lmi zaujimav´a ´uloha je
presk´uma´t ten ist´y experiment, proveden´i pri rˆoznych
teplot´ach T. Graﬁka, zobrazuj´uca zmeny σ ako funk-
cia Ug je uk´azan´a na Fig. 10. Tento kr´at s´u tam zo-
brazen´e zmeran´e hodnoty pre rˆozne teploti: 0.3 K, 0.6 K,
1.6 K, 4.2 K. Zrejme kvantiz´acia konduktivity postupne
mizne so zv´yˇsen´im teploty. Eˇste pri T = 4.2 K je uˇz len
´taˇzko rozl´iˇsiteln´a. Uˇz sme ukonˇcili s op´isna´im veˇczˇsinu z
najdˆoleˇzitejˇs´ich a najzaujimavejˇs´ich aspect´ov kvantiz´acie
konduktivity nano-technologick´eho bodov´eho kontaktu.
Teraz by sme chceli op´isa´t jeden ve´lmi dˆoleˇzit´i detail,
t´ikajuc´i s´a tejto pr´ace. Uˇz sme op´isali kde vznika Ohmova
rezistencia v naˇsom pr´ibori, ale naˇs´a pr´aca by bola ne-
pln´a, keby sme vynechali ot´azku kde rpesne sa Ohmov´e
zahrievanie prejavuje; na tomto mieste by sme chceli
spomen´u´t nieˇco o neobratimosti bodov´eho kontaktu, Pri
zv´iˇsen´i entropie. Elektr´oni prech´adzaj´u cez gejt v bali-

9

stickom reˇz´ime, takˇze tu sa teplota nevyl´uˇcuje. Teplota
sa vlastne prejavuje pri prechode elektr´onov z jedn´eho
Fermi mora do druh´eho cez jednodimenzi´alni kan´al a
zaˇc´inaj´u sa udiera´t do okoln´ich stien.
Situ´acia, pri
ktorej jeden elektr´on vch´adza do mora cez bodov´i kontakt
napom´ina model vysielania uplne ˇciern´eho telesa. Presne
tak isto ako l´uˇc svetla, padaj´uci cez ´uzki otvor do ˇskatule
ju uˇz nemˆoˇze opusti´t, aj elektr´on, preˇsiel do druhej
2DEG z´ony ju uˇz nemˆoˇze opusti´t cez jednodimenzi´aln´i
kan´al. Neobratnos´t procesu prenosu elektr´onov cez
nano-technologick´y kontakt sa prejavuje pr´ave v neela-
stick´ych ´uderoch, ktor´e elektr´ony pon´aˇsaj´u keˇd prejdu
do druh´eho, nizˇsieho Fermiho mora. Tento process je
naplno identick´y so zahrievan´im vody, ktor´a sa prelieva
z jedn´eho rezervo´aru do druh´eho. V naˇsej pr´ace sme
vyrieˇsili jedn´u zaujimav´u ´ulohu z aktu´alnej fyziky, aj
keˇd v´ysledki, potrebn´e pre anal´izu exˇsperiment´ln´ych d´ata
sme dosiahli s lement´arnimi met´odami, vyuˇcovan´imi v
strdnoˇskolskej ´urovni vyuˇcovania z fyziky.

Acknowledgments

Jeden z autorou (TM) ˇdakuje T. Teodosievovi za poz-
vanie pre predn´aˇsanie tohto textu v ˇskole v Kazanlaku a
H. Hristovi za z´aujem a podporu.

