Misconceptions in Halliday, Resnick and Walker’s textbook

Marcelo Samuel Berman

Editora Albert Einstein Ltda and

Av. Candido Hartman 575, #17, Ed. Renoir,

Bairro Champagnat, 80730-440 - Curitiba - Pr - Brazil

Abstract

Eleven misconceptions involving Relativity, Gravitation and Cosmology are exposed, that ap-

peared in the textbook: Fundamentals of Physics, 7th Edition, by Halliday, Resnick and Walker,

Willey, New York (2005), or other companion textbooks.

5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Misconceptions in Halliday, Resnick and Walker’s
textbook

Marcelo Samuel Berman

Introduction

By perusing several University Physics textbooks [1], [2], [3], [4], I was astonished with

the inclusion in those textbooks of misconceptions dealing with Relativity, Gravitation and

Cosmology. I have to confess that all the cited textbooks can be recommended for freshman

University students and the overall picture is that the books cited are all excellent, except

for what we point out below.

The misconceptions and the corrections

1. ”Time is relative so there is not some master grandfather clock that controls time in

the Universe”.(sic)

[The comoving cosmic time is such a master clock; when I say that the Universe is 14

billion years old, this is absolute time. A comoving observer is always at rest relative to the

matter in its neighborhood. All the literature in Cosmology is based in such observers].

2.”The laws of Physics are the same for all inertial observers”. (sic)

[Einstein outlined his theory with the use of tensor notation and four dimentional space-

time; only when the laws are cast in tensor notation, and in 4D spacetime, the laws of Physics

retain the same form for all observers. In three-dimensional space and common elementary

mathematics, the laws of Physics can be very awkward depending on the observer. For

instance, the Maxwell equations of electromagnetism can be very complicated for an observer

moving relative to another at rest.].

3.”You deﬁne relativistic 3-momentum, and then you assume conservation when there

are no forces”. (sic)

[In fact, the concept of force must be generalized from Newtonian Physics into Special

Relativity, so that, the relativistic force is equal to the proper time derivative of relativistic

linear momentum, but the textbooks forget to generalize the 2nd. law.].

2

4.”Today, when atomic clocks are transported from one place to another, only the time

dilation of Special Relativity is to be always taken into account.” (sic)

[Because diﬀerences in gravitational potential also afect measures of time, the diﬀerence

in gravitational potential is also to be taken into account.].

5.”Inertial reference systems are those where Newton´s laws are valid.” (sic)

[Newton’s laws are only valid for low speeds and weak gravitational ﬁelds, so that, the

deﬁnition of inertial systems of references is to be taken much care.].

6.”Special Relativity is not Classical Physics.” (sic)

[Classical physics means Non-Quantum Physics; so that, Special Relativity and General

Relativity, along with the Electromagnetism, are all Classical Theories.].

7.”The principle of equivalence states that gravitation and acceleration are equivalent.”

(sic)

[This is only valid at a given point and its inﬁnitesimal neighbourhood. There is no point

in substituting a gravitational acceleration for, say, a centripetal acceleration. Both may

be numericaly equal in a certain point of space; nevertheless, the gravitational acceleration

decase with the inverse square of distance, while the centripetal one increases with distance

so that, if they are equal in one point they may be diﬀerent in other locations.].

8.”Newtonian Physics deals with low speeds.” (sic)

[It should be always remembered that it is only valid for weak gravitational ﬁelds. If the

speeds are not low, but the gravitational ﬁeld is weak, Special Relativity is to be taken into

account; if the gravitational ﬁeld is intense, General Relativity must play a rˆole].

9.”Edwin Hubble studied distant galaxies.” (sic)

[In fact the linear relation is valid for not too distant galaxies, which were those he could

observe in the year 1929].

10.”The principle of equivalence says that a homogeneous gravitational ﬁeld is completely

equivalent to a uniformly accelerated reference frame.” (sic)

[This is correct, but represents a trivial consequence of the true principle].

11.”The gravitational ﬁeld is an example of a vector ﬁeld.” (sic)

[Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity, is based on the assumption that the gravita-

tional ﬁeld is represented by a metric tensor, which represents the potentials of gravitation.].

3

Even good and recommendable textbooks should make an eﬀort to bring a correct picture

also in Relativity, Gravitation and Cosmology: what we commented in this paper should be

taken as an alert on otherwise high praised books.

[1] Halliday, D.; Resnick, R.; Walker, J. - ”Fundamental University Physics”- 7th. edtn.,

[2] Young, H.D.; Freedman, R.A. - ”University Physics” - 11th. edtn. of Sears and

Zemansky, Addison-Wesley, San Francisco, (2004).

[3] Tipler, P.A.; Mosca, G. - ”Physics” - 5th. edtn., W. H. Freeman, New York, (2004).

[4] Resnick, R.; Halliday, D.; Krane, K.S. - ”Physics” - 5th. edtn., Willey, New York,

Conclusions

References

Willey, New York, (2005).

(2002).

Acknowledgment

I thank Prof. M.M. Som and F.M. Gomide for conversations on the subject of this paper.

4

