5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
1
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Bringing Science into Schools through
Astronomy. Project ASTRO, Tucson.

Caroline Barban1 & Herv´e Dole2

1 Instituut voor Sterrenkunde, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200 B,
3001 Leuven, Belgium
2Institut d’Astrophysique Spatiale, bˆat. 121, Universit´e Paris Sud 11, 91405 Orsay, France

Abstract: We report our experience in bringing science into US and French classrooms. We partici-
pated in the US scientiﬁc educational program Project ASTRO. It is based on a partnership between
a school teacher and an astronomer. They together design and realize simple and interesting scientiﬁc
activities for the children to learn and enjoy science. We present four hands-on activities we realized
in a 4th-grade class (10 yr-old kids) in Tucson (USA) in 2002-2003. Among the covered topics were:
the Solar System, the Sun (helioseismology) and the Galaxies. We also present a similar experience
done in two classrooms in 2005, in Chˆatenay-Malabry (France) in partnership with an amateur as-
tronomy association (Aph´elie), and discuss future activities. This is a pleasant and rewarding activity,
extremely well appreciated by the children and the school teachers. It furthermore promotes already
at a young age the excitement of science, and provides concrete examples of the scientiﬁc methodology.

1

Introduction

Many astrophysicists worldwide have experienced the joy of talking about the physical Universe
and their fascinating work to the public, in conferences or in schools. They might have then
felt the enthusiasm and the great demand from children, their teachers and parents to talk
about science. The scientiﬁc education, an important cornerstone in modern societies, faces,
nevertheless, several diﬃculties in practice despite national requirements for science classes.
The diﬃculties to teach science in schools (for students younger than 17) are sometimes related
to the teachers’ lack of conﬁdence in their own expertise. Science might appear complex, too
conceptual and not enough concrete to some teachers and students. The lack of motivation
might also be an issue. There is thus a clear need to bring science in the classroom, so that
more teachers and students can enjoy it. We describe our involvement in diﬀerent educational
programs in the USA and in France to promote science among teachers and students.

2 Project ASTRO, Tucson

Project ASTRO1 was developed in 1994 by the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc. The
goal of this program is to improve science education in the classroom from the ﬁrst year of

1http://www.astrosociety.org/education/astro/project astro.html

elementary school to the last year of high school (6 to 17 yr-old). Project ASTRO is based
on a partnership between a teacher and an astronomer. The astronomer commits to visiting
the teacher’s classroom at least four times during the school year. The main focus of Project
ASTRO is hands-on activities related to astronomy that put students in the position of acting
like scientists. Each year about 1000 partnerships bring science through astronomy to ∼100,000
students over 12 project ASTRO sites across the USA.

We were part of Project ASTRO in Tucson2 during the 2002-2003 school year. We were
paired with a 4th grade teacher (10 yr-old kids) at the Sewell Elementary School in Tucson
(Arizona, USA). The topics of the activities were chosen in consultation with the teacher. We
designed ourselves these activities, but extensively used existing material from the book3 “The
Universe at your ﬁngertips”, and were inspired by some NASA Education web sites. We decided
to focus on a few simple concepts only in each one-hour visit. The typical visit starts with an
introductory 10-minute slide show, and is followed by 40 minutes of hands-on activity. The last
10 minutes are used for a debrieﬁng and questions. We put online4 all our material.

• First visit: ”Who is an astronomer”
Our ﬁrst visit to the classroom is dedicated to talk about who an astronomer is and what an
astronomer does. We ﬁrst ask the children to draw what they think an astronomer is, and then
we use the drawings to address the misconceptions they might have about this special job. It
is a good opportunity to mention that an astronomer, thus a scientist, is not always an old
man! We also tell the students that an astronomer does not work every night by looking the
sky with the eyes on a telescope. We introduce them to the concept that observation, careful
analysis, modeling, theory and simulation complement each other and are required to address
a scientiﬁc question.

• Second visit: ”The Solar System”
The goal of this activity is to learn the diﬀerent planets of our Solar System and the relative
sizes of the planets. Each kid makes a sphere of the proper diameter with clay. We then put
together this clay Solar System, describe each Planet’s average temperature and emphasize the
diversity of planet sizes (Fig. 1). We also explore the physical diﬀerences between gaseous vs
telluric planets, and discuss the diﬀerences between the Planets, the Sun and the stars.

• Third visit: ”The Music of the Sun”
This activity, dealing with the Sun and helioseismology, illustrates that we can get informations
about the interior of an object by ”listening” to it. The students have to probe three “mystery
boxes”. We ask them to shake each box to study its content. They estimate if the content is
light or heavy, composed of small or large pieces, in small or large number. They write their
observations in a table. We put rice, small rocks, and a tennis ball in each box, respectively. We
then explain that helioseismology uses the Sun’s vibrations (like music) to probe its interior.
This activity shows that it is possible to talk about complex subjects in a simple way (Fig. 2).
The last part is an illustration of the Doppler shift (also used in helioseismology): listening to
the sound emitted by an object allows one to determine if it is moving or not. We use a bell
for this purpose. We ﬁrst introduce them to the bell’s sound when it is still, but also when it
is rapidly spinning – the beating eﬀect is then easily heard. Then the students close their eyes,
and we ask them to guess, while listening the sound, if the bell is spinning or not.

2http://www.noao.edu/education/astro/ It is managed in Tucson by the Education and Outreach depart-

ment of the NOAO (National Optical Astronomy Observatory).

3http://www.astrosociety.org/education/astro/astropubs/astropubs.html
4http://lully.as.arizona.edu/∼hdole/vulgarisation/ProjectAstro200203/

Figure 2: Helioseismology activity: probing
the mystery boxes.

Figure 1: Solar System activity: comparison
of the Planet’s sizes.

Figure 3: Galaxy activity: classifying the
galaxies in the Hubble Deep Field.

• Fourth visit: ”The Galaxies”
The goal of this activity is to have the children realize the diversity of the galaxies and their
incredible quantity. Using images of the famous Hubble Deep Field, the students sort the
bright sources in the images by shape and color. They separate foreground stars from far-away
galaxies, and get to realize that the galaxies have various shapes and colors, mainly due to
their diﬀerent content and evolution stage (Fig. 3). Then, on a small image cell, they have
to count the galaxies. With the appropriate provided number to multiply with, they have an
estimate (lower limit) of the number of visible galaxies in the universe. Classifying the galaxies
was a success, but the counting part proved to be too complicated for this level, since orders
of magnitude and powers of ten are not well understood.

3 Our Other Experiences in France

There are many other ways to bring science into schools. As members of the amateur astronomy
association Aph´elie5 (near Paris, France), we are used to receiving lots of requests from schools
to come and talk about astronomy. In May 2005, we visited two classrooms6 in two of Chˆatenay-
Malabry’s schools located in socially disfavored areas. The level is CE2 and CM2 (8 and 10
yr-old, respectively). We wanted to apply the concept of a Project ASTRO visit. We choose
to try “the Venus topography box” activity from the Project ASTRO book3, in agreement
with the teachers. The goal is to show how scientists get information about the surface of a
planet hidden by a thick atmosphere (this could also apply to Titan). After an overview of
the Solar System, we tell the children that ESA wants to send a spacecraft to Venus and needs
their help to choose the best landing site. The surface is modeled inside a shoe box, hidden

5http://www.astrosurf.com/aphelie
6http://lully.as.arizona.edu/∼hdole/vulgarisation/ecoles/

Figure 4: Venus topography box activity:
probing the hidden surface.

Figure 5: Venus topography box activity: at
the end, comparing the measurements (color
map) and the real Planet surface model.

by a cover. By probing the holes with a color-encoded stick, the students draw a topographic
map of the modeled Venus surface (Fig. 4 & 5). Fig. 5 shows the model crater (top left) and
the beautiful result, the crater appearing in pink-orange in the topographic map (lower right).
We then asked each student to present in front of the class their best landing site, if any. This
activity is very interesting because it deals with diﬀerent concepts: variety in the Solar System,
thick atmospheres, remote information gathering (e.g radar technique), contour map. During
this activity the students really act like scientists by getting the data, and then analyzing,
interpreting and presenting them.

4 Conclusion

Some professional astrophysical institutions are also involved in bringing science into the class-
rooms through speciﬁc educational programs for the teachers, like the Observatoire de Paris7
(dedicated workshops, summer schools, observations, ...) or the Universit´e Paris Sud 11. There
are also many successful programs like “la main `a la pˆate8”, Hands-On-Universe8, or the CLEA8,
among others.

Finally, we want to emphasize that visiting schools, discussing with the teachers, interacting
with the students, and designing such educational projects is a rewarding, interesting and very
useful activity. Astronomy is a very eﬃcient way to teach science. Furthermore this is less
time-consuming that one might think. We warmly recommend that our colleagues try to be
involved in such activities, on their own or by joining an existing program in their country.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Connie Walker (NOAO), Project ASTRO (ASP), Pam Williams (Sewell Elementary),
GONG/National Solar Observatory, MIPS/Steward Observatory/University of Arizona. We also
warmly thank Marc Bottineau (for the 15 boxes !) and the Aph´elie members involved in this activity,
Fabrice Krot and the Maison des Sciences de Chˆatenay-Malabry, as well as S´ebastien Vilain-Derouen
(´ecole ´el´ementaire T. Masaryk) and Claude Mallet (´ecole ´el´ementaire L. De Vinci).

7http://www.obspm.fr/∼webufe
8http://www.lamap.fr/
http://www.ac-nice.fr/clea/

–

http://www.handsonuniverse.org/

and

http://fhou.cicrp.jussieu.fr/

–

