5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
1
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Compton eﬀect: interacting particles or
interacting waves.

McGill 06/05

Oscar F. Hern´andez[1]
oscarh@physics.mcgill.ca
Physics Department, McGill University,
3600 University St.,
Montr´eal, Qu´ebec, Canada, H3A 2T8.

Abstract: Traditional textbook explanations of the Compton eﬀect treat the photon
electron interaction as a particle collision. This explanation is a pedagogical disaster,
implying that sometimes interactions are particle-like whereas quantum mechanics
always demands that they be wave-like; a photon wavefunction evolves according to
a wave equation until its collapse at measurement. If this is so why then does the
classical radiation wave equation fail to predict the Compton eﬀect? We address
these issues and propose a clearer explanation.

Traditional quantum mechanics textbook present the Compton eﬀect as proof
that the photon is a particle that carries momentum. The correct value of the Comp-
ton shift to longer wavelength is derived by applying relativistic two-body kinematics
with the photon and electron treated as particles. This traditional explanation states
wavelenght shift occurs from ”individual photons scattering elastically oﬀ individual
electrons”[2]. That the photon and the electron must be treated as particles when
they scatter from each other means that any interaction between a photon and
an electron necessarily collapse their wavefunctions. Yet X-ray diﬀraction treats
photons as waves that interfere even after scattering from atoms’ electrons. Their
wavefunctions only collapse after they have been measured at a photographic plate.
In fact since no measurement occurs during the collision, the Compton eﬀect’s
photon electron interaction should be analysed as the scattering of photon plane
waves from an (approximately stationary) electron. Since both classical electro-
magnetism and quantum mechanics are wave theories that conserve energy and
momentum one is led to wonder why classical radiation theory does not correctly
predict the Compton eﬀect. Classical electromagnetism is Lorentz invariant and
electromagnetic waves do carry momentum and energy through the Poynting vec-
tor. With this reasoning it is puzzling why one does not derive a Compton-like
eﬀect if one treats the electron as a relativistic point particle scattering radiation.
The reason is that in classical radiation the missing energy-momentum taken up

1

by the recoiling electron is distributed throughout the entire wave. When the wave
reaches our detector it all carries part of the entire energy-momentum. However
in a quantum theory, this is where a measurement is taking place. In other words
this is where a low intensity wave collapses into one particle. The entire missing
energy and momentum must now be carried by this one photon since the rest of
the wavefunction is now zero in the rest of the 4π solid angle encompassed by our
detector.

This explanation is very diﬀerent from the traditional one where the photon’s
wavefunction collapses at the interaction point not at the detector. The traditional
explanation gives the impression that sometimes interactions take place as particles
and sometimes as waves. Which point of view to take remains a mystery. The
explanation proposed here removes the mystery from it all. In the quantum world
all interactions happen as waves. Particle interpretations occur only in the detector.
If this proposed explanation is correct we should be able to pinpoint the quantum
explanation where the observed particle number enters in. If this number is one we
recover the Compton eﬀect. If this number is taken to inﬁnity we recover classical
radiation theory, i.e. Thompson scattering.

We begin by considering the scattering of two wave packets. Regardless of
whether we are working within quantum mechanics or a classical wave theory such
as electromagnetism, the deﬁnition of the diﬀerential cross section is the same. De-
tectors in both cases detect energy. The energy deposited in the detector can be
interpreted as a wave intensity or as a particle’s quanta of energy. Energy ﬂow
can refer to classical energy ﬂow or particle number ﬂow. The ﬂow through a sur-
face is given by the relevant current conservation equation; the continuity equation
in classical electromagnetism or the probability conservation equation in quantum
mechanics. The scattered energy into a particular solid angle per unit time, is pro-
portional to the incident energy passing through a unit area per unit time. The
proportionality constant is deﬁned as the diﬀerential cross section:

dσ
dφdΩ

=

[scattered energy]/[(solid angle)(time)]
[incident energy]/[(area)(time)]

This cross section formula can be factorized into two parts; a density into ﬁnal
states part ρ(E), and a transition matrix element part | hα| T |βi |2.
In quantum
mechanics this factorized formula goes by the name of Fermi’s Golden Rule, but it’s
validity is beyond quantum mechanics and is true for all wave phenomena, be they
quantum waves or classical waves.

dσ
dφdΩ

= ρ(E) × | hα| T |βi |2

The density into ﬁnal states includes the number of particles we are trying to
detect and their kinematics. The transition matrix element is what is calculated
in time dependent perturbation theory. This contains the dynamical details of the

(1)

(2)

2

interactions. The important point is that the Compton eﬀect depends on the density
of states, i.e. the kinematics, not the dynamical details of the interaction. It is the
density of ﬁnal states that will change depending on whether we are trying to detect
one photon versus many (i.e. a wave).
If the density of states is for one photon
and one electron we will recover the Klein-Nishina formula for the Compton eﬀect.
If the density of states is for many many photons and one electron, we recover
Thompson formula for the scattering of radiation by a free electron. In other words
the quantum mechanical wave representing many photons can now be interpreted
as a classical wave.

It is easy to understand why the many particle limit is equivalent to the low
energy limit usually quoted in texts as a way of recovering Thompson scattering
from Compton scattering. The kinematics in the density of states depends on the
number of ﬁnal particles. The initial scattering is always represented by two wave
packets. Hence the kinematics of energy-momentum conservation will always be
equivalent to that of two particles (a photon and an electron) scattering into N ﬁnal
particles. If N is large then the particles individual energy must necessarily be small
since the initial energy remains constant.

Acknowledgements: I would like to thank Guy Moore for valuable discussions
and Jim Cline for proofreading the text.

References

[1] Permanent Address: Marianopolis College, 3880 Cˆote-des-Neiges, Montr´eal,

Qu´ebec, Canada H3H 1W1

[2] S. Gasiorowicz Quantum Physics [John Wiley & Sons, 2003] p7.

3

