5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
1
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

DRAFT: SUBMITTED TO AJP

Designing Eﬀective Questions
for Classroom Response System Teaching

Ian D. Beatty,∗ William J. Gerace, William J. Leonard, and Robert J. Dufresne
Scientiﬁc Reasoning Research Institute & Department of Physics
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003-9337 USA
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Classroom response systems (CRSs) can be potent tools for teaching physics. Their eﬃcacy,
however, depends strongly on the quality of the questions used. Creating eﬀective questions is
diﬃcult, and diﬀers from creating exam and homework problems. Every CRS question should have
an explicit pedagogic purpose consisting of a content goal, a process goal, and a metacognitive
goal. Questions can be engineered to fulﬁl their purpose through four complementary mechanisms:
directing students’ attention, stimulating speciﬁc cognitive processes, communicating information
to instructor and students via CRS-tabulated answer counts, and facilitating the articulation and
confrontation of ideas. We identify several tactics that help in the design of potent questions,
and present four “makeovers” showing how these tactics can be used to convert traditional physics
questions into more powerful CRS questions.

PACS numbers: 01.40.Fk, 01.40.Gm, 01.50.Ht

I.

INTRODUCTION

Electronic classroom response systems (CRS) such as
eInstruction CPS, InterWrite (formerly EduCue) PRS,
and H-ITT can be powerful tools in the service of physics
instruction.[1–6] They are merely tools, however, not a
“magic bullet.” To signiﬁcantly impact student learn-
ing, a CRS must be employed with skill in the service of
sound, coherent pedagogy. This is not easy.

In a research project entitled Assessing-to-Learn, we
helped high school teachers learn to teach physics with a
CRS and studied their progress and diﬃculties.[7–9] We
have also used a CRS in our own university physics teach-
ing, helped others learn to do so, and designed and tested
CRS questions for more than ten years.[1] Our experience
spans a broad array of contexts: high school classes, in-
troductory univerisity classes for non-science and science
majors, upper-level university classes for physics majors,
and workshops for in-service physics teachers and for sci-
ence graduate students. We’ve used a CRS with classes
ranging in size from fewer than twenty to over two hun-
dred students. We’ve taught traditional physics material,
and also “conceptual” physics for non-scientists, general
science, and science pedagogy.

We can state unequivocally that learning to operate
the technology is the easiest part of becoming facile with
CRS-based instruction. More diﬃcult challenges include
creating and adapting suitable questions, cultivating pro-
ductive classroom discourse, and integrating CRS use
with the rest of the course, with curricular materials,
and with external constraints.[9]

Many who try teaching with a CRS discover that cre-

∗Electronic address: beatty@physics.umass.edu; URL: http://
umperg.physics.umass.edu

ating or ﬁnding “good” questions is more diﬃcult than
it at ﬁrst appears. The characteristics of eﬀective CRS
questions are quite diﬀerent from those of good exam
questions, homework problems, and in-class worked ex-
amples. The vast archives of questions and problems that
instructors accumulate over years of teaching, or ﬁnd in
standard textbooks, therefore oﬀer little assistance to the
new CRS user. Few collections speciﬁcally designed for
CRS-based teaching exist.

One relatively widely-known collection of CRS ques-
tions is that contained in Eric Mazur’s book Peer
Instruction.[3] Mazur has popularized CRS use in physics
instruction, and the questions in his book make a useful
starting point. However, we have found this collection
to be insuﬃcient for two reasons. One reason is that the
questions have been designed to support Mazur’s par-
ticular goals for CRS use, and are not optimal for the
more ambitious approach we use and advocate. Mazur’s
Peer Instruction method consists of brief lecture-style
presentations on key points of physics, each followed by a
short conceptual question. Students are asked to formu-
late their own answers and then convince their peers of
the correctness of their answer. Mazur argues that this
process “forces students to think though the arguments
being developed, and. . . provides them (as well as the
teacher) with a way to assess their understanding of the
concept” (Ref. 3, p. 10). He also suggests that knowl-
edge “diﬀuses” among the students, helping to spread
correct ideas.

While this way of using a CRS is viable and valu-
able, we ﬁnd that even more dramatic improvements
in teaching and learning can occur by inverting the
paradigm. Rather than following mini-lectures with
CRS-based quizzing, we use a CRS-powered “question
cycle” as the core of in-class instruction, making question
posing, pondering, answering, and discussing the vehicle
of learning. Micro-lectures are injected only occasionally

and when immediate circumstances warrant. Further-
more, we use a CRS to develop more than just concep-
tual understanding. We also target the development of
cognitive skills, analysis and problem solving ability, and
productive student metacognition about physics, learn-
ing, and thinking. Our approach, called Question-Driven
Instruction, is summarized below in Subsection II A and
described in more detail elsewhere.[1, 8, 10, 11]

The other reason that the questions in Peer Instruction
and similar collections are insuﬃcient (although useful) is
that instructors cannot use a question eﬀectively if they
do not appreciate its goals and design logic. They often
fail to take advantage of the question’s latent potential
or unwittingly sabotage its eﬀect. Instructors who would
use a CRS well need a generalized understanding of what
makes CRS questions succeed or fail, how to evaluate
questions, and how to invent or adapt questions to meet
their personal situation, objectives, and style. To put
it bluntly, instructors should know how to create and
modify, not just use, CRS questions. Although a few
isolated question-design techniques have been developed
and publicized,[12] we are aware of no comprehensive or
systematic framework for developing and evaluating CRS
questions.

This paper addresses that need. Section II summa-
rizes our vision of the central role that CRS use can play
within physics instruction, and lays out a framework for
thinking about and designing CRS questions. Section III
describes a selection of speciﬁc tactics that can be em-
ployed when designing questions. Section IV presents
four “makeovers”: examples of traditional physics ques-
tions, together with improved variations that implement
some of the tactics of Section III. Section V summarizes
the paper and oﬀers some closing comments.

II. THEORY: GOALS AND MECHANISMS

A general framework for thinking about question de-
sign must address the role questions will play within a
course, the speciﬁc goals a question can be designed to
attain, and the various mechanisms by which it can at-
tain them.

A. Role: What Part do Questions Play?

We advocate a model of CRS-based teaching that we
call Question-Driven Instruction (QDI). In this model,
posing questions via CRS does more than augment tra-
ditional instruction: it forms the very core of the instruc-
tional dynamic. Our primary in-class goal is not to “lec-
ture” or present information. Rather, we seek to help
students explore, organize, integrate, and extend their
knowledge. Students receive their primary exposure to
new material from textbooks, multimedia, and other out-
of-class resources.

2

FIG. 1: The question cycle used for Question-Driven Instruc-
tion with a classroom response system.

In-class activity is organized around a question cycle
(Fig. 1).[8] We begin the cycle by presenting a question
or problem to the class, generally without preamble, and
allow a few minutes for students to discuss it in small
groups. Typically, students within a group will argue
their various opinions and intuitions, work out a solution
if required, and continue discussing and elaborating until
satisﬁed with their answer. Students then key in their re-
sponses. We view and display an instant histogram show-
ing the class-wide distribution of responses. Without re-
vealing which responses are superior, we then moderate
a class-wide discussion, asking for volunteers to explain
the reasoning behind each. With deft management, this
process can be turned into a lively interchange of ideas
and arguments between students. Based on the thinking
students reveal during discussion, we can follow up with
general observations, a brief micro-lecture, a related CRS
question, or whatever else is necessary for closure; at this
point, a few well-chosen comments can often precipitate
signiﬁcant learning. We typically repeat the entire cycle
three or four times per 50-minute class.

Three aspects of the cycle are worth stressing here.
First, questions are presented to students in a way that
encourages signiﬁcant cogitation, rather than just mem-
ory recall or execution of practiced skills. Second, ques-
tions are accompanied by extensive discussion: within
small groups before answers are collected, and by the
whole class afterward. Third, the instructor continually
probes for and adjusts to the students’ learning needs—a
practice we call “agile teaching.”

TABLE I: “Habits of mind” that expert physicists possess
and students should develop.

Advanced

Basic
Seek alternative representations Generate multiple solutions
Compare & contrast
Explain, describe & depict
Predict & observe
Extend the context
Monitor & reﬁne communication Think about thinking & learning

Categorize & classify
Discuss, summarize & model
Strategize, justify & plan
Reﬂect & evaluate

B. Goals: What Should the Question Accomplish?

We strongly believe that every CRS question used in
class should serve an explicit pedagogic objective. By
“pedagogic objective,” we mean more than just a par-
ticular piece of physics content. For maximum beneﬁt,
we maintain that every question should have a threefold
purpose consisting of a content goal, a process goal, and
a metacognitive goal.

Content goal: A question’s content goal

is deter-
mined by answering the question, “What piece(s) of sub-
ject material do we want to illuminate?” This dimension
of a question’s purpose is the most obvious, and needs lit-
tle discussion other than to suggest that concepts, princi-
ples, and their interrelationships make the best fodder for
productive questions. Since QDI cannot explore all as-
pects of a subject in the classroom time allotted a typical
course, we focus question cycle iterations on the foun-
dational ideas, core principles, crucial distinctions, and
conceptual organization of the material at hand. With
a robust understanding of these, students are well pre-
pared to learn advanced topics and special cases through
reading and homework assignments.

Process goal: A question’s process goal is chosen by
answering the question, “What cognitive skills do we
want students to exercise?” If the content goal refers
to what physics material students must use to answer the
question, the process goal refers to how they must use it.
One might also call a process goal a “cognitive goal.”

In addition to knowledge about physics, expert physi-
cists possess a wide range of skills that make their knowl-
edge useful in various situations. We have identiﬁed
twelve habits of mind that successful physicists practice
and that students should be encouraged to develop.[8]
For convenience, we separate them into “basic” and “ad-
vanced” sets, summarized in Table I. A question’s pro-
cess goal can be characterized by the habits of mind it
exercises.

A crucial activity for students to engage in, spanning
and integrating many habits of mind, is analysis: under-
standing a situation by identifying the essential concepts
and their relationships, and reasoning with these to draw
conclusions.[13] The practice of analysis develops robust
conceptual understanding and connects it to successful
problem-solving ability. As part of their process goal,
questions should frequently require students to perform

3

qualitative analysis in pursuit of an answer.

Metacognitive goal: A question’s metacognitive goal
is chosen by answering the question, “What beliefs about
learning and doing physics do we wish to reinforce?” Ev-
erything that occurs within a course expresses, explicitly
or implicitly, a perspective on physics, thinking, learn-
ing, teaching, and how the educational “game” should
be played. To cite just a few of the many issues this in-
cludes: Is physics about memorizing and applying rules
and equations, or about reasoning and making sense of
the physical world? Should students study and work in
isolation, or is learning a cooperative and social process?
Is attention to detail important, or is getting the general
idea suﬃcient? Should conscientious and able students
expect to understand material the ﬁrst time it is pre-
sented, or is confusion, resolution, and multi-pass learn-
ing necessary? How much self-directed activity should
learning physics require? The answers to these questions
may be obvious to most instructors, but they are not to
students; consistency of message is crucial.

The more constructive students’ metacognitive per-
spective is, the more eﬃciently they can learn what we
are trying to teach. By inﬂuencing their perspective,
we can signiﬁcantly enhance learning in our courses, and
help to prepare students for future learning throughout
and beyond school. And recent thinking on the transfer
of knowledge suggests that “preparation for future learn-
ing” is the most durable learning outcome our instruction
is likely to achieve.[14, 15]

C. Mechanisms: How Can a Question Accomplish
its Goals?

A QDI question can fulﬁl its pedagogic purpose by
way of four diﬀerent general mechanisms or “channels”:
through focusing students’ attention by posing the ques-
tion, through stimulating cognitive processes as students
ponder the question, through feedback provided to stu-
dents and instructor by collective viewing of the response
histogram, and through articulation and confrontation of
ideas during discussion.

Questions can have a very powerful eﬀect on students
merely by being posed and pondered. The ﬁrst two mech-
anisms can be thought of as “What are they thinking
about?” and “How are they thinking about it?” A ques-
tion can direct students’ attention to speciﬁc facts, fea-
tures, ideas, conﬂicts, or relationships, bringing issues to
conscious awareness. Sometimes merely looking at an
idea, or looking at it from the right angle, is enough to
spark understanding. Other times, it is a necessary but
insuﬃcient ﬁrst step. Also, a question can stimulate stu-
dents to exercise speciﬁc cognitive processes: habits of
mind and the general practice of analysis. No question
can force students to engage in any particular cognitive
process, of course; mental engagement is always volun-
tary. However, the design of a question can necessitate
certain processes to reach a successful answer, and can

make the need for certain processes relatively obvious.

The third and most obvious mechanism by which a
CRS question can serve pedagogic ends is by communi-
cating information about student responses. By seeing
the histogram of answers entered, the instructor learns
about students’ understanding, and students learn about
If this information is not
their classmates’ thinking.
merely noted, but actually used by the instructor or
students to make subsequent teaching and learning deci-
sions, then response system use constitutes formative as-
sessment: assessment to enhance, rather than evaluate,
learning. And formative assessment is perhaps the most
eﬀective instructional “innovation” ever studied.[16–20]
Inter-student and student-instructor discussion is the
fourth mechanism by which questions can fulﬁl their de-
sign objectives. The discussion that accompanies use of
a question—within small groups before answering and
class-wide after the histogram is displayed—is crucial to
eﬀective QDI. One reason is that the act of articulat-
ing beliefs, perceptions, assumptions, expectations, un-
derstanding, and reasoning is inherently valuable to stu-
dents. Thinking is often ill-formed, nebulous, and incon-
sistent. When a student must cast such thinking into
language, especially the precise language of physics, such
deﬁciencies become evident and must be redressed.

Another reason is that discussion involves a confronta-
tion of diﬀerent perceptions, diﬀerent analyses, and dif-
ferent conclusions. Exposing students to their class-
mates’ thinking challenges their own and promotes learn-
ing. Arguing and reconciling diﬀerences promotes yet
more. Telling students what to think is notoriously inef-
fective; eliciting their thinking, confronting it with alter-
natives, and seeking resolution works better.

Yet another reason is that whole-class discussion can
reveal to the instructor far more about students’ under-
standing and diﬃculties than any single histogram, no
matter how informative the question’s distracters. We
use these discussions to actively inform ourselves of the
nature and causes of our students’ errors. This also is a
kind of formative assessment.

III. TACTICS: IMPLEMENTING THE THEORY

The previous section presented a general framework
for thinking about the design of questions for Question-
Driven Instruction using a classroom response system.
In this section, we present some speciﬁc tactics (listed in
Table II) that can be used to implement the framework.
These are merely a helpful, representative set; others cer-
tainly exist. They have been grouped according to which
of the four mechanisms of eﬀect they employ. Our con-
vention is to present tactic names in italics and habits
of mind “in quotes.” (Some habits of mind are also tac-
tic names; the formatting indicates which is meant in a
particular context.) For many of the tactics, we have
indicated which of the makeovers in Section IV employ
them.

4

TABLE II: Question design tactics.

Tactics for directing attention and raising awareness:
Remove inessentials
Compare & contrast
Extend the context
Re-use familiar question situations
Oops-go-back
Tactics for stimulating cognitive processes:
interpret representations
Compare & contrast
Extend the context
Identify a set or subset
Rank variants
Reveal a better way
Strategize only
Include extraneous information
Omit necessary information
Tactics for formative use of response data:
Answer choices reveal likely diﬃculties
Use “none of the above”
Tactics for promoting articulation discussion:
Qualitative questions
Analysis & reasoning questions
Multiple defensible answers
Require unstated assumptions
Trap unjustiﬁed assumptions
Deliberate ambiguity
Trolling for misconceptions

A. Tactics for Directing Attention and Raising
Awareness

Removing inessentials from a question is a general,
obvious, and often neglected tactic for focusing students’
attention where we want it. By this, we mean removing
anything inessential to the instructor’s pedagogic pur-
pose for the question (not necessarily to the students’
eﬀorts to answer it). For example, we avoid having po-
tentially distracting features in the question’s situation
or potentially distracting steps in the thinking students
must do to reach an answer. A question with a quan-
titative point, for example, is only weakened by requir-
ing quantitative calculations that may distract students
and divert their cognitive resources. Makeover C in Sec-
tion IV demonstrates this tactic.

Compare and contrast is another tactic for directing
attention and awareness. By having students compare
two things, their attention will naturally be drawn to the
diﬀerences between them. One way to implement this is
to pose a question that has students comparing multiple
situations—physical arrangements, processes, conditions,
etc.—to categorize or order them. Another is to describe
a situation and ask about the eﬀect of changing some
aspect of it. A third is to present a sequence of two or
more CRS questions, in which the situations are iden-
tical but the query varies, or in which the same query
is made about slightly diﬀerent situations. Makeover A
demonstrates a question comparing two situations.

Extending the context of a known idea or skill is a
habit of mind, and also a valuable question design tactic.
By asking a familiar question about an unfamiliar situ-
ation, students’ attention is drawn to the ways in which
the new situation diﬀers from known ones and to the rel-
evance of these diﬀerences, and broadens students’ com-
prehension of the relevant ideas. Students expand their
understanding of concepts beyond the limited scope they
are initially encountered in by seeing them in varied con-
texts. For example, when students begin to grasp the
procedure for ﬁnding the normal force of an object on a
ﬂat horizontal surface, tilt or curve the surface. When
they assimilate that, add additional forces on the object
or give it a nonzero acceleration. Makeover A incorpo-
rates this tactic by asking a linear dynamics question
about a situation generally used for rotational dynamics.
Re-using familiar question scenarios also has its
place. Reading, digesting, and interpreting a question
statement requires nontrivial cognitive resources from
students—resources that could be spent on understand-
ing the points we want to make with the question. The
tactic of removing inessentials helps reduce this “cogni-
tive load” eﬀect, as does building new questions from sit-
uations and systems students have already come to terms
with. Use of the extending the context and re-using fa-
miliar question scenarios tactics should be balanced: in
general, new ideas should be introduced in familiar ques-
tion contexts, while somewhat familiar ideas should be
explored and developed in novel contexts.

Oops-go-back is an awareness-raising tactic involving
a sequence of two related questions. The ﬁrst is a trap:
a question designed to draw students into making a com-
mon error or overlooking a signiﬁcant consideration. The
instructor allows students to respond, and then moves to
the second question without much discussion. The sec-
ond causes students to realize their mistake on the ﬁrst.
When students are “burned” this way by a mistake and
discover it on their own, they are far more likely to learn
from it than if they are merely warned about it in advance
or informed that they have committed it. A simple exam-
ple, suitable early during coverage of kinematics, would
be to ask students for the velocity of some object moving
in the negative direction or in two dimensions, with pos-
itive scalar answer choices including the object’s speed,
and also “None of the above.” Many, insuﬃciently at-
tuned to the distinction between speed and velocity, will
erroneously select the speed. Then, a second question
asks about the object’s speed, causing many students to
consider how this question diﬀers from the previous and
realize their error.

This can be a subtle technique, so we will present a
second, less trivial example.
If we ask the question in
Fig. 2a, many students will erroneously answer “45 de-
grees.” Without discussion, we then present the question
in Fig. 2b. Many will realize that the answer to this one
is “45 degrees,” be bothered by this, reconsider how the
ﬁrst question diﬀered, and realize that they had neglected
the cannon’s velocity relative to the ground. While an-

5

FIG. 2: A question pair exemplifying the oops-go-back design
tactic.

swering the ﬁrst question, they had unwittingly answered
the second.

B. Tactics for Stimulating Cognitive Processes

Speciﬁc question design tactics for stimulating cogni-
tive processes are as varied as the spectrum of thinking
skills they target. The fundamental rule is to ask ques-
tions which cannot be answered without exercising the
desired habits of mind, and to avoid excess baggage that
might distract students from the need to exercise them.
Certain types of problems are helpful in this regard.

Many students are inordinately attached to algebraic
representations of physics concepts, relationships, and
situations and do not fully appreciate the utility of “al-
ternative” representations such as graphs, free body and
vector diagrams, and even verbal descriptions. Questions
that require students to interpret representations are
useful for remedying this and for developing the habit of
mind “seek alternative representations.” The tactic is
implemented by providing necessary information or an-
swer options in such an alternative representation. For
example, one might describe an object’s motion with a
graph and then ask a question about its behavior that
requires students to recognize and interpret the informa-
tion latent in aspects of the graph, such as a slope or the
area under a curve. Alternatively, one might ask them to
verbally describe the meaning of a mathematical equa-
tion, or to choose which of a set of vectors best describes
some quantity. Makeover D does not require this of stu-
dents, but it does rely on the tactic for the “surprise”
solution revealed during discussion (cf. reveal a better

way, below).

The compare and contrast and extend the con-
text tactics for focusing students’ attention, described
above, are also useful for developing the habits of mind
of those names. These are powerful question types with
multiple beneﬁts.

Some habits of mind are easy to target. “Categorize
and classify” is promoted by presenting students with a
set of situations, objects, processes, or other things and
asking them to identify a set or subset meeting some
criterion, or to rank variants according to some quality.
Constrain the solution is a tactic for exercising the
habit of mind “generate multiple solutions.” This can be
a “positive constraint” directing students to solve a prob-
lem via some particular approach (e.g., “use the work-
energy theorem”), or a “negative constraint” directing
students not to use some particular approach (e.g., “do
it without solving for the acceleration”). Merely giving
such a directive gets students to consider their activity
from a strategic perspective.

Reveal a better way is another,

less direct tac-
tic for strengthening “generate multiple solutions.” One
presents a question which students are likely to solve by a
valid but diﬃcult, tedious, error-prone, opaque, or other-
wise non-optimal path. Then, during discussion, one can
suggest a dramatically more elegant or simple solution.
Makeover D is a classic example of this tactic.

Strategize only is a tactic for strengthening the habit
of mind “strategize, justify and plan.” It is implemented
by presenting a problem and asking students to iden-
tify the principle(s) and approach that would be most
useful for reaching a solution, without actually solving
the problem. This teaches students to think explicitly
about problem solving and the set of strategies available
to them. (The “justify” portion of that habit of mind
is naturally developed during discussion of students’ rea-
soning.) Makeover C demonstrates this.

Include extraneous information and omit neces-
sary information are other tactics useful for develop-
ing “strategize, justify and plan.” They push students to
consider explicitly what information is necessary to com-
plete a strategy, rather than assuming every question pro-
vides exactly what is required and nothing more. (Note
that include extraneous information is not inconsistent
with remove inessentials, since deliberately extraneous
information can be essential to the pedagogic purpose of
the question. It is extraneous to students, but not to the
instructor.)

Similar tactics can be imagined for other habits of
mind. Once one has decided to target a speciﬁc cogni-
tive facility and has escaped from the trap of always using
standard calculate-an-answer questions, creating suitable
question types is generally straightforward.

Cognitive processes are targeted not just by the in-
trinsic construction of the question, but also by class-
room interaction surrounding its use. Reveal a better
way, described above, relies on this. “Monitor and re-
ﬁne communication” is exercised any time communica-

6

tion within the classroom is explicitly discussed, perhaps
after students have misinterpreted a question or a state-
ment by the instructor. Similarly, “think about thinking
and learning” (metacognition) is stimulated whenever the
instructor asks students to explicitly consider their own
thinking processes and learning behaviors.

C. Tactics for Formative Use of Response Data

As described above, the third general mechanism by
which questions can fulﬁll their design objectives is by
providing information to the instructor and students
through the histogram of students’ responses. To provide
maximally useful information to the instructor, ques-
tions should be designed so that answer choices reveal
likely student diﬃculties: common errors, misunder-
standings, and alternative assumptions and interpreta-
tions. That way, by glancing at the histogram, we can
quickly detect whether a particular one of these is preva-
lent in our class and decide whether to address it.
In
general, a response histogram is most useful to students
and instructor when the spectrum of answers chosen is
broad rather than narrowly peaked around one choice.
(One exception is the ﬁrst question of an oops-go-back
pair, for which having a majority of students fall into the
“trap” can be desirable.)

When interpreting students’ responses, one must re-
member that any given answer can almost always be
reached by more than one path or argument. Thus, hav-
ing students explain their answers is vital. For this reason
among others, we usually open the whole-class discussion
for a question by proceeding systematically down the an-
swer list, asking for (or cajoling) volunteers to present a
rationale for each. We maintain a “poker face” through-
out. After a student has argued for a particular answer,
we ask if anyone has a diﬀerent reason for the same an-
swer.

We frequently include “none of the above” (or
“not enough information”) as an answer choice, so as
to learn about responses we might not have anticipated.
We make this the “correct” or best answer often enough
that students learn to take it seriously (often for omit
necessary information, described above) and don’t as-
sume that they have made a mistake if they don’t agree
with one of the other options oﬀered.

D. Tactics for Promoting Articulation, Conﬂict
and Productive Discussion

We said earlier that the fourth mechanism of ques-
tion eﬃcacy—discussion—has students learn by articu-
lating their thinking, confronting each others’ thinking,
and resolving diﬀerences. It also provides the instructor
with valuable information about students’ understand-
ing, confusions, progress, and predilections. Not all ques-
tions lead to equally productive discussion. Questions

that are most useful for this tend to be quite diﬀerent
from standard exam-type questions.

Qualitative questions are usually superior to quan-
titative ones for promoting articulation and argument.
Quantitative questions lure students into thinking in
terms of numbers, variables, and equations, which are
diﬃcult to communicate and discuss; qualitative ques-
tions promote discussion in terms of concepts, ideas, and
general relationships. The ﬁnal question versions in all
four makeovers of Section IV are qualitative.

Analysis and reasoning questions, requiring signif-
icant decision-making by students, similarly lead to bet-
ter discussion and more valuable articulation than those
requiring calculation or memory recall. (They also pro-
mote the development of analytic skills.) Makeovers B
and C introduce elements of analysis, and D is a good
analysis question (although it may initially seem like a
straightforward algebra problem to students).

Questions with multiple defensible answers are
useful for sowing dissension and generating productive
discussion. Perhaps more than one answer is viable de-
pending on how one chooses to interpret the question, or
on what assumptions one consciously or unconsciously
makes. Makeover B exempliﬁes this.

Similarly, one can design questions that require un-
stated assumptions, trap unjustiﬁed assumptions,
or contain deliberate ambiguity. In addition to pro-
moting disagreement and therefore proﬁtable discussion,
these have the beneﬁt of sensitizing students to the mul-
tiple interpretations possible for many situations, to the
importance of assumptions in physics reasoning, and to
the criteria physicists use when evaluating assumptions.
Makeover D introduces an unstated assumption (leading
to multiple defensible answers).

Trolling for misconceptions is another useful tactic:
engineering questions that deliberately catch students in
likely misconceptions or undesirable “alternative concep-
tions.” Such questions further the content goal of help-
ing students become aware of and escape the particular
misconception, improving their physics knowledge. They
further the metacognitive goal of putting students on the
alert for misconceptions in general. They also tend to
promote argument, sometimes impassioned. Makeovers
A and B both target speciﬁc misconceptions.

How one conducts class discussion can be more impor-
tant to the quality of the discussion than what questions
are used. Emphasizing cogency of reasoning over cor-
rectness of results is crucial, as is stressing that the only
“bad” answer is one that does not reﬂect a student’s ac-
tual thinking. Other, more speciﬁc tactics for moderating
discussion exist, but are outside the scope of this paper.

IV. EXAMPLES

Abstract advice, divorced from concrete examples, can
be diﬃcult to implement. In this section we present four
“makeovers”: case studies in which a traditional question

is improved by incorporating some of the QDI question
design tactics into it. Each is accompanied by a discus-
sion of which tactics have been implemented.

7

A. Newton’s Second Law

Fig. 3a shows a straightforward question on Newton’s
Second Law in one dimension. The variant in Fig. 3b
requires the same content knowledge, but incorporates
the tactic of trolling for a misconception to promote dis-
agreement and argumentation. A common misconcep-
tion among novice physics students is that τ = Iα some-
how supersedes or modiﬁes F = ma. By displaying the
surface features of a rotational dynamics problem, this
question will lure many students into the trap of think-
ing that because the disk rotates, some of the force is
“used up” and the resulting linear acceleration will be
less than Newton’s Second Law alone would predict. Al-
though requiring only Newton’s Second Law in one linear
dimension, the question would be appropriate for use af-
ter rotational dynamics has been introduced.

Note that the question wording does not explicitly ask
for the linear acceleration of the disk. Most likely, some
students will assume that the question is asking for angu-
lar acceleration and choose the “cannot be determined”
answer. This allows the instructor to stress that “accel-
eration,” unqualiﬁed, means “linear acceleration.” If a
large enough fraction of the class answers this way, we
recommend clarifying the point, and then starting over
without further discussion and allowing students to re-
answer so that the question’s primary intent can be re-
alized. (To make the variant more eﬀective at trapping
this error, the disk’s radius can be given, and some an-
swer choices in appropriate units for angular acceleration
can be provided.)

Fig. 3c shows a variant incorporating yet more ques-
tion design tactics. Compare and contrast is used to fo-
cus students’ attention on the eﬀect of rotational mo-
tion on linear acceleration, and to practice the “compare
and contrast” habit of mind. This variant is a qualita-
tive question that trolls for the same misconception and
interpretation error as the previous variant, but more ef-
fectively. It is a powerful tool for pushing students to ar-
ticulate an intuitive misconception and to realize, wrestle
with, and resolve the contradictions it leads to. (With
deft handling, an instructor can use it to compare and
contrast the ideas of force and acceleration with work
and energy: although the two disks experience the same
force and have the same acceleration, one gains more ki-
netic energy than the other in a given time interval.)

The variant would have been eﬀective, and simpler, if
the three answer choices were “aA < aB,” “aA = aB,”
and “aA > aB.” Both are implementations of rank vari-
ants. However, the set of distracters provided in variant
b helps the instructor distinguish between students who
think the disk will accelerate more slowly when rotating
and those who think it will spin without translating at

8

FIG. 4: Two variants of a question on identifying forces.

between two separated bodies.

As written, the question is not bad, but it could be
better. Consider the variant in Fig. 4b. It is still quali-
tative and trolls for the same misconception. However, it
is open-ended and has students enumerate the forces (a
modiﬁcation of identify a set or subset) to unearth other,
perhaps unanticipated misconceptions and errors. For
example, one might discover that some students count
the “net force” alongside other forces.

More importantly, it employs the multiple defensible
answers tactic: choices 4 through 8 are all justiﬁable, de-
pending on whether one treats the interaction between
the plane and block as one contact force or as two (fric-
tion and normal), whether one neglects buoyancy and
drag due to air, whether one includes “silly” but real
forces like the gravitational eﬀect of the moon, etc. (In
fact, from a microscopic perspective, one can argue for an
uncountably large and ﬂuctuating number of forces due
to molecular collisions.) This could also be considered
an implementation of the require unstated assumptions
or deliberate ambiguity tactics. Knowing what answer a
student has picked conveys little information about their
degree of understanding or about speciﬁc confusions they
may have. Instead, the question serves to get students
thinking about which forces are present without prompt-
ing them with speciﬁc forces. Then, during whole-class
discussion, the instructor can ignore the answers chosen
and instead discuss various possible forces in turn, argu-

FIG. 3: Three variants of a question on Newton’s Second Law
in one dimension.

all, making use of answer choices reveal likely diﬃculties.

B.

Identifying Forces

Fig. 4a shows a question targeting students’ ability to
identify the forces on a body. The question’s content
goal is to have students appreciate that apart from grav-
ity (and other “action at a distance” forces not encoun-
tered during introductory mechanics), all forces acting
on a body are caused by interactions with other bodies
in direct contact with it. This is a qualitative question
that trolls for the misconception that contact forces can
be “transmitted” through an intermediate body to act

ing whether or not each merits counting.

This variant also addresses additional content goals.
During discussion, the instructor can model a general
procedure for identifying the forces on a body, and illumi-
nate the various choices and conventions involved in iden-
tifying a “force” (for example, the convention of treating
one contact force between two surfaces as two distinct,
orthogonal forces: the “normal” and “friction” forces).
In addition, the question makes an excellent platform for
discussing the role of assumptions and approximations
in physics and helping students learn when to include or
neglect various forces.

In our minds, perhaps the most powerful aspect of this
variant is its eﬀectiveness at achieving the metacogni-
tive goal of communicating to students that they should
be concerned with reasoning, learning, and the cogency
of their answers, and not with the correctness or incor-
rectness of any particular answer choice. Most students
are deeply attached to the notion that every question
has a “right” or “best” answer. We have found that the
only way to make students abandon this and really focus
on reasoning is to use questions like 4b, for which it is
patently obvious that several answers are defensible and
can be “correct” or “incorrect” depending on the argu-
ment behind them.

C. Energy and Angular Motion

Fig. 5a shows a question that helps students integrate
their knowledge by requiring a mix of energy and angular
motion ideas. To answer the question correctly, students
must recognize the need for conservation of energy, apply
it, and relate linear to angular motion.

The variant in Fig. 5b improves on the original by in-
corporating several question design tactics. Since the
question’s primary content goal is to develop students’
ability to recognize the need for two diﬀerent strategic
steps using physics from two distinct topic areas (energy
conservation and relating linear to angular motion), this
variant is a qualitative question that removes inessentials
to focus students’ attention more eﬀectively; students
rarely pay suﬃcient attention to high-level, strategic as-
pects of problem solving when embroiled in equation ma-
nipulation. It uses the strategize only tactic. The ques-
tion’s phrase “most eﬃciently” can be considered a delib-
erate ambiguity: is eﬃciency deﬁned in terms of number
of lines of calculation required, number of principles in-
volved, intricacy of thought entailed, or something else?
Does eﬃciency depend on the skills of the learner? (If the
question initiates a class-wide discussion of “eﬃciency”
in problem solving, so much the better.)

D. Kinematics

Fig. 6a is a relatively straightforward kinematics ques-
tion. It is nontrivial, in that students aren’t given the ac-

9

FIG. 5: Two variants of a question on strategic choices in
problem solving.

celeration and must determine it ﬁrst before calculating
the distance traveled. Alternatively, students can deter-
mine the average velocity and multiply that by the time.
The question requires some strategic decision-making.

The variant in Fig. 6b is similar in content.

If ap-
proached algebraically,
it is also similar in diﬃculty.
However, this variant is a qualitative question, making
it more amenable to analysis and reasoning and more
suitable for discussion. By omitting the statement “As-
suming a constant acceleration,” we have employed the
require unstated assumptions tactic (and multiple defen-
sible answers as a result) and opened up the possibility
of discussing whether and how the constancy of the ac-
celeration matters.

More interestingly, this variant permits the instructor
to reveal a better way of answering the question. Assume
constant acceleration and sketch a graph of velocity vs.
time. By identifying the area under the line (the time
integral) with the distance traveled, one can use simple
geometry to see that when the marble has slowed to half
its original velocity, it has traveled three-quarters of the
distance it will cover before coming to rest. If it reaches
half speed after 20 cm/s, it must stop at 4/3 that dis-
tance, which is before the end of the felt. This alter-
nate solution involves interpreting representations, and
the variant is a better analysis and reasoning question

10

and thinking to classmates and to the instructor. And
discussion, both small-group and whole-class, can impact
students and inform the teacher as students struggle to
articulate and defend their thinking and confront others’
perceptions, interpretations, assumptions, and reasoning.
Questions can be deliberately engineered for maximal
learning, and we have identiﬁed some tactics such as re-
move inessentials, compare and contrast, interpret repre-
sentations, and strategize only that can be used in the
design of powerful questions. Often a question in the
“standard” style can be improved through minor mod-
iﬁcations that take advantage of one or more of these
tactics.

Even with an explicit framework such as the one pre-
sented here, designing eﬀective questions is challeng-
ing and time-consuming, and—like any other nontriv-
ial skill—requires practice. A repository of well-designed
questions can be quite helpful, and we have made many of
our questions available through both a public website[21]
and an annotated commercial product.[22] However, to
teach most eﬀectively with another person’s questions,
one should understand the goals and design logic of each
one.[9] The framework herein helps to analyze existing
questions as well.

We reiterate that well designed questions are merely a
tool, one component of the QDI approach. Pedagogy—
how the instructor uses questions to interact with stu-
dents in the classroom—is more important.[8, 10, 11]
Nevertheless, lack of eﬀective questions can be a seri-
ous and frustrating barrier to teachers seeking to learn
and practice QDI. We believe the framework and ques-
tion design tactics presented here can help overcome this
barrier.

Although a classroom response system is a tremen-
dously useful tool for implementing QDI, it is not essen-
tial to the philosophy underlying QDI. Many of the ideas
presented here can be productively employed without
technology, especially in small, highly interactive classes.
QDI is a type of formative assessment. By is very
nature, formative assessment tends to be self-correcting:
the feedback it provides to the practitioner about student
learning can, if studied attentively, reveal implementa-
tion weaknesses and improve practice over time. There-
fore, our most important piece of advice regarding QDI
is to pay critical attention to what happens when you do
it. Your students are your best teachers.

Acknowledgments

Ideas and perspectives presented in this paper have
been developed during research projects supported by
U.S. National Science Foundation grants DUE-9453881,
ESI-9730438, and ROLE-0106771.

FIG. 6: Two variants of a kinematics question.

than variant a.

V. SUMMARY & REMARKS

In the Question Driven Instruction approach, using a
classroom response system to pose, collect answers for,
and discuss questions forms the core of in-class instruc-
tion. The success of the approach depends in part on
the quality of the questions used. Eﬀective questions
should be designed with an explicit, threefold pedagogic
objective consisting of a content goal, a process (cogni-
tive) goal, and a metacognitive goal. The content goal
is the topic material to be addressed; it should generally
be conceptual and foundational in nature, and should
frequently integrate ideas from various portions of the
curriculum. The process goal is the set of cognitive skills
to be developed, and can be thought of in terms of twelve
“habits of mind” and the general practice of qualitative
analysis. The metacognitive goal is the perspective about
learning or physics to be reinforced.

A question can fulﬁl its threefold pedagogic objective
through four complementary mechanisms. The posing of
the question can focus students’ attention on particular
issues. Students’ pondering of the question can stimu-
late particular cognitive skills. Displaying the answer his-
togram can convey information about student knowledge

11

[1] R. J. Dufresne, W. J. Gerace, W. J. Leonard, J. P.
Mestre, and L. Wenk, “Classtalk: A classroom commu-
nication system for active learning,” J. Comput. High.
Educ. 7, 3 (1996).

[2] R. Hake, “Interactive-engagement vs. traditional meth-
ods: A six-thousand-student survey of mechanics test
data for introductory physics courses,” Am. J. Phys. 66,
64 (1998).

[3] E. Mazur, Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual (Prentice

Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1997).

[4] W. R. Penuel, J. Roschelle, V. Crawford, N. Shechtman,
and L. Abrahamson, “CATAALYST workshop report:
Advancing research on the transformative potential of
interactive pedagogies and classroom networks,” Work-
shop Report P14566, SRI International (2004).

[5] J. Roschelle, W. R. Penuel, and L. Abrahamson, “The
networked classroom,” Educational Leadership 61, 50
(2004).

[6] D. Zollman and N. S. Rebello, “The Evolving Classroom
Response System at KSU: Classtalk, PRS, PDAs,” 130th
National Meeting of the American Association of Physics
Teachers (Albuquerque, NM, 2005).

[7] R. J. Dufresne and W. J. Gerace, “Assessing-to-Learn:
Formative assessment in physics instruction,” Phys.
Teach. 42, 109 (2004).

[8] R. J. Dufresne, W. J. Gerace, J. P. Mestre, and
W. J. Leonard, “ASK-IT/A2L: Assessing student knowl-
edge with instructional technology,” Technical Report
UMPERG-2000-09, University of Massachusetts Physics
Education Research Group (2000).

[9] A. Feldman and B. Capobianco, “Real-time formative
assessment: A study of teachers’ use of an electronic
response system to facilitate serious discussion about
physics concepts,” Annual Meeting of the American Ed-
ucational Research Association (Chicago, IL, 2003).
[10] I. D. Beatty, “Transforming student learning with
classroom communication systems,” Research Bulletin
ERB0403, Educause Center for Applied Research (2004).
[11] I. D. Beatty, W. J. Leonard, W. J. Gerace, and R. J.
Dufresne, “Question Driven Instruction: Teaching sci-
ence (well) with an audience response system,” in Au-
dience Response Systems in Higher Education: Applica-
tions and Cases, edited by D. A. Banks (Idea Group Inc.,

Hershey, PA, in press).

[12] P. Li, N. W. Reay, and L. Bao, “Eﬀects of in-class polling
on student performance in learning physics,” 129th Na-
tional Meeting of the American Association of Physics
Teachers (Sacramento, CA, 2004).

[13] W. J. Leonard, W. J. Gerace, and R. J. Dufresne,
“Analysis-Based Problem Solving: Making analysis and
reasoning the focus of physics instruction,” Technical
report UMPERG-2001-12, University of Massachusetts
Physics Education Research Group (2001). Published
in Spanish as “Resoluti´on de Problemas Basada en el
An´alisis: Hacer del an´alisis y del razonamiento el foco de
la ense˜nanza de la f´isica,” Ense˜nanza de las Ciencias 20
(3, November): 387–400 (2002).

[14] J. D. Bransford and D. Schwartz, “Rethinking transfer:
A simple proposal with multiple implications,” in Re-
view of Research in Education, edited by A. Iran-Nejad
and P. D. Pearson (American Educational Research As-
sociation, Washington, D.C., 1999), vol. 24, pp. 61–100.
[15] J. D. Bransford, A. L. Brown, and R. R. Cocking, How
People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School (Na-
tional Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1999).

[16] B. Bell and B. Cowie, “The characteristics of forma-
tive assessment in science education,” Sci. Educ. 85, 536
(2001).

[17] P. Black and D. Wiliam, “Assessment and classroom
learning,” Assessment in Education: Principles, Policy
and Practice 5, 7 (1988).

[18] P. Black and D. Wiliam, “Inside the black box: Rais-
ing standards through classroom assessment,” Phi Delta
Kappan 80, 139 (1988).

[19] C. Boston, “The concept of formative assessment,” Tech-
nical Report ED470206, ERIC Clearninghouse on Assess-
ment and Evaluation (2002).

[20] E. H. Hobson, “Formative assessment: An annotated bib-

liography,” Clearing House 71, 123 (1997).

[21] I. D. Beatty, Assessing-to-Learn project website (2000),

<http://A2L.physics.umass.edu/>.

[22] I. D. Beatty, W. J. Leonard, and W. J. Gerace, Assessing-
to-Learn in the Classroom (Thomson Learning, 2005),
<http://physics.brookscole.com/a2lc>.

