5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
2
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Gravitational Waves: new observatories for new astronomy

Louis J. Rubbo, Shane L. Larson, Michelle B. Larson, and Kristina D. Zaleski
Center for Gravitational Wave Physics, The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802

February 2, 2008

1

Introduction

Nearly ninety years ago, Albert Einstein made a startling discovery with general relativity, his newly
published relativistic description of gravity: gravity can propagate in waves and carry information
from one place in the Universe to another, just like photons.
It was simple to calculate that
these waves would be very weak, and they were generally dismissed as being unobservable and
thus unimportant as an experimental probe of general relativity. Other experiments, such as the
deﬂection of starlight, were easily detectable with early 20th century technology, and helped pave
the way for the acceptance of general relativity as the correct, modern description of gravity.

Now, almost a century later, technology has caught up with theory, and the detection of gravi-
tational waves is no longer an implausible dream. Large gravitational-wave observatories are being
built to listen for faint echoes of gravitational waves that have propagated across the far reaches of
the Universe to us here on Earth. The detection of gravitational waves from dynamic astrophysical
systems will provide astronomers with unprecedented information about the Universe, yielding in-
formation that is unaccessible using traditional electromagnetic observations. Gravitational waves
will allow the detailed study of dark compact objects, such as black holes, or the interiors of
supernova, or possibly the formation of the Universe itself.

This article reviews the current status of gravitational wave astronomy and explains why as-
tronomers are excited about the new generation of gravitational wave detectors. As part of the
review we compare and contrast gravitational radiation to the more familiar electromagnetic ra-
diation. We discuss the current indirect experimental evidence for gravitational waves, and how
current and future gravitational wave detectors will operate as our newest telescopes are pointed
at the skies.

2 Multi-spectrum Astronomy

Electromagnetic astronomy makes leaps and bounds in sensitivity and angular resolution by con-
structing new, more capable observatories on the ground and in space. New technology, such as
adaptive optics and interferometry, help advance our ability to observe the Cosmos. However,
despite our best eﬀorts, there are regions of the Universe that will forever remain shrouded to
electromagnetic telescopes because matter impedes the propagation of light to our detectors on or
near the Earth.

In some instances, simply changing the wavelength of light allows us to see through intervening
matter. This is the case with the Milky Way where vast clouds of dust and gas in the plane of
the galaxy block visible light emission from the galactic center, but infrared light is able to get

1

through. There are other cases, however, where photons of any wavelength cannot escape because
the matter is too dense. At the core of a supernova, beneath the collapsing envelope of the stellar
atmosphere, photons are trapped by the sheer density of matter. Some time after the star explodes,
and the expanding shell of gas is thrown oﬀ, the remnants of the star expand to a less dense state.
At this point the photons ﬁnd themselves free to travel through space and be received on Earth as
messengers from the explosion. A similar fate befalls photons originating within the ﬁrst 300,000
years after the Big Bang. During this era the Universe was also very dense, and no form of light
could propagate freely. Every photon was perpetually tangled in a sea of dense matter, bouncing
around like a ﬂy in a maze of window panes. As the Universe expanded it became less dense,
and eventually the photons were able to propagate freely. The transition point is known as the
“recombination curtain”, and the free streaming photons associated with this era are collectively
known as the Cosmic Microwave Background.

These kinds of dense environments deﬁne the limits of our vision using electromagnetic tele-
scopes. Photons will never arrive from the core of a supernova or from a time before the recombi-
nation curtain. It would be great if there was a way to see into these super dense regions, analogous
to seeing the center of the galaxy in infrared. Fortunately there is: we can look in gravitational
waves.

Unlike electromagnetic radiation, gravitational radiation interacts weakly with matter. Grav-
itational waves propagate through space freely, taking little notice of the environments they pass
through. Gravitational waves are generated by dynamic and energetic motion of matter, as one
might ﬁnd in the core of a collapsing star or in the very early Universe. Most importantly, they
carry information about times and places in the Cosmos that we have no other ways to probe.
Detecting gravitational radiation will reveal for the ﬁrst time the secrets of environments which
have to date been the realm of theoretical calculations and speculation.

In addition to probing environments too dense for light to escape, gravitational waves will
provide insight into astronomical systems too compact and dim to resolve with current telescopes.
Observations of bumps on neutron stars, stellar mass objects orbiting super-massive black holes,
or the ﬁnal merger of two stellar remnants are all well outside the capabilities of even the most
advanced electromagnetic telescopes. By contrast, these systems should be detectable with high
conﬁdence in gravitational waves, and will provide information that is unobtainable by any other
means.

3 New Eyes on the Universe

Photons love interacting with matter. On the up-side, this makes them easy to gather with tele-
scopes (made of matter), but on the down-side, photons are easily distracted by intervening matter
during their ﬂight to Earth. In contrast, gravitational waves interact very poorly with matter. As
a result, gravitational waves make a great probe of the Universe, but they present a signiﬁcant
challenge to designing an astronomical instrument (made of matter) which can sense their passing.
We have strong indirect evidence for the existence of gravitational waves from electromagnetic
observations of the Hulse-Taylor binary pulsar and others like it. In the early 1970’s, the team of
Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor used radio observations to measure a decrease in the orbital period
for the binary pulsar PSR 1913+16. Subsequently they showed that the energy loss associated with
the orbital decay rate was consistent with the emission of gravitational waves. For their discovery,
Hulse and Taylor won the 1993 Nobel Prize in physics.

Indirect evidence is not the same as having direct observations, and a direct detection of grav-
itational waves has not yet been made. If we are to detect gravitational waves directly, we need

2

Table 1: A representative list of gravitational wave detectors either operational now or in their
developmental phase.

Type

Location

Detector
EXPLORER Resonant Bar Geneva, Switzerland
ALLEGRO
NAUTILUS
AURIGA
TAMA
LIGO

Resonant Bar Baton Rouge, LA, USA
Resonant Bar Rome, Italy
Lengaro, Italy
Resonant Bar
Interferometer Mitaka, Japan
Interferometer Livingston, LA, USA

Operational
1984
1986
1994
1997
1999
2002

GEO 600
VIRGO
LISA

Hanford, WA, USA
Interferometer Hannover, Germany
Interferometer Cascina, Italy
Interferometer

Space

2002
2005
∼2014

to ﬁrst understand what must be measured. Gravitational waves are oscillations that stretch and
squeeze the fabric of spacetime in a characteristic way that reﬂects the motion of the emitting sys-
tem. Similar to electromagnetic radiation, gravitational waves come in two ﬂavors, or polarizations.
These polarization states are referred to as plus (+) and cross (×) after the pattern of stretching
and squeezing they impose on matter that they pass through. The gravitational waves bathing the
Earth are expected to be extremely weak. A strong gravitational wave is only expected to stretch
(or squeeze) spacetime by the width of an atomic nucleus over a distance of ﬁve million kilometers!
Detecting its presence will be like looking for an atom-size change in distance between the ends of
a ruler thirteen times as long as the distance between the Earth and the Moon!

Direct detection of something as weak as a gravitational wave requires a not-so-conventional
observatory. Gravitational wave detectors fall into two broad categories: resonant bar and interfer-
ometric detectors. Bar detectors listen for gravitational waves by monitoring acoustic modes in an
isolated metallic bar. When a gravitational wave with a frequency similar to the resonant frequency
of the bar stretches and squeezes the bar, it will “ring”. Joseph Weber (1919 - 2000) brought the
ﬁrst bar detector online in the 1960’s and today there are several operating around the world. In
Table 1 we present a representative list of detectors currently in use.

Interferometric detectors operate on the principle that a gravitational wave stretches and
squeezes spacetime, changing the proper distance between two ﬁxed masses when it passes by.
A passing gravitational wave is detected by noting a change in the interference pattern created
when laser light from two diﬀerent arms of the interferometer is recombined. The interference pat-
tern change occurs when the light travel time of the laser in one arm changes relative to the other.
In the United States, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) operates
two sites, a 4 km arm interferometer in Livingston, LA, and two interferometers (4 km and 2 km)
in Hanford, WA. Several interferometric gravitational wave detectors are now in operation (see
Table 1) and currently approaching sensitivities that should make a direct detection in the near
future.

Work is also progressing on a space-based mission to detect gravitational waves in a lower
frequency range than ground based detectors. The Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) is
a joint NASA-ESA mission currently scheduled to launch around 2014. LISA will operate as an
interferometric gravitational wave detector, but with arms that are ﬁve million kilometers long!

3

Diﬀerent gravitational wave detectors will detect sources in diﬀerent gravitational wave fre-
quency bands. LIGO is sensitive to high frequency gravitational waves (around 1000 Hertz, with
wavelengths of 300 km), while LISA will be sensitive to lower frequency gravitational radiation
(around 1 milliHertz or wavelenghts of 300 million km). In this way, gravitational wave detectors
will probe diﬀerent aspects of the universe, much like traditional telescopes do when observing, for
example, in infrared or radio.

4 Gravitational Wave Astronomy

Gravitational wave astronomy is a new and vibrant ﬁeld of observational astronomy, just entering
an era where detectors capable of detecting signals from space are becoming operational. At the
end of 2005, the LIGO detectors will begin their ﬁrst year long science run at their target design
sensitivity, giving us our ﬁrst deep probe of the Cosmos in gravitational waves. Our expectation is
that the deep reaches of space are alive with gravitational wave signals from black holes, neutron
stars, supernovae and other highly energetic events, and within the next decade we will be detecting
them on a regular basis.

The current generation of gravitational wave observatories is only our ﬁrst step toward looking
at the Universe with new eyes and ears, in much the same spirit as Grote Reber’s ﬁrst radio antenna
or Isaac Newton’s ﬁrst reﬂecting telescope. As with all branches of astronomy, new windows on
the Universe resolve old debates about the nature of distant astrophysical systems, and pose new
mysteries and questions about the Cosmos. Gravitational wave astronomy is expected to be no
diﬀerent.

Select Introductory Gravitational Wave Resources

• Einstein’s Unﬁnished Symphony: Listening to the Sounds of Space-Time, Marcia Bartusiak,

Joseph Henry Press (2000), Berkley Books (2003).

• Ripples in Spacetime, W. Wayt Gibbs, Scientiﬁc American, April 2002.

• Catch a Gravitational Wave, Marcia Bartusiak, Astronomy, October 2000.

• Teaching Einstein to Dance: The Dynamic World of General Relativity, Adam Frank, Sky

and Telescope, October 2000.

• A Prehistory of Gravitational Waves, Daniel Kenneﬁck, Sky and Telescope, October 2000.

• LIGO: An Antenna Tuned to the Songs of Gravity, Gary H. Sanders and David Beckett, Sky

and Telescope, October 2000.

This work was supported by the Center for Gravitational Wave Physics (NSF) grant PHY-01-14375.

4

