5
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
0
1
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

0.1 Charges on the Strings: a new twist to the old prob-

lem

Peretz D. Partensky , Graduate Group in Biophysics, University of Califor-
nia, San Francisco. Email: ppartens@itsa.ucsf.edu

Michael B. Partensky , Department of Chemistry, and the Rabb School of
Continuing Studies, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA Email: partensky@gmail.com
1

0.1.1 Introduction

A popular problem [?] of calculating the equilibrium state in a system of two
charged particles suspended on strings conventionally deals with mutually re-
pelling charges (Fig. 1, a). The students are typically asked to ﬁnd the equilib-
rium separation s between the charges or a related quantity such as the deﬂection
angle. In this paper, we are slightly modifying this problem by considering two
opposite and therefore attracting charges (Fig. 1, b). Now, in order to gener-
ate an equilibrium state at ﬁnite distance s, we suspend the charges at a ﬁnite
initial separation, rather than from the same point. One might expect that the
problem with opposite charges is just a routine extension of the original one. It
turns out however, that this is not case. The discussion leading to the solutions
introduces a catastrophic behavior typically avoided in high school physics.

Fig. 1

Figure 1 : Equilibrium state of two charges suspended on strings.
(a)
illustrates the conventional problem with two identical charges (b) illustrates
the modiﬁed problem with two opposite charges suspended at ﬁnal separation
s0 The corresponding force diagram is shown for q > 0.

0.1.2 Problem
Two identical and oppositely charged 2 particles, +q and −q, are suspended on
two strings at an initial separation s0. The mass of each particle is m and the
length of the string is l. For simplicity, assume that l >> s0 . This means that
α can be treated as a small angle.

(A) Find how incrementing charge value q starting from q = 0 aﬀecs the
distance s between the particles while neglecting the size of the particles. This
is known as a point charge approximation.

(B) Now, view each particle as a point charge surrounded by an insulated
hard spherical shell of radius R. How is the equilibrium relation s(q) aﬀected
by R?

(C) Compare the ”forward” process (when q is incremented from q = 0) with
the ”reverse” (discharge) process when q is decremented from the large values
to q = 0.

1Correspondence address.
2Opposite charges of the (conductive) balls can be maintained by connecting them to the

poles of a battery, or to the opposite plates of a capacitor.

1

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.1.3 Solution

The equilibrium state of a system is deﬁned by a force balance condition. There
are three forces acting upon each charge: the linear tension of the string, T , the
force of gravity mg (where g is free acceleration) and the electrostatic force of
attraction Fc. These forces are illustrated for one of the charges in Fig.1b. The
electric force is determined by Coulomb’s law

where k is the electrostatic constant (9 109 N m2/C2) and s is the separation
between the charges. The condition that the net force vanishes results in the
vector equation ~T + m~g + ~Fc = 0. Splitting this into horizontal and vertical
components yields the equations T sin(α) = Fc and T cos(α) = mg Dividing
the ﬁrst by the second, we get:

Fc = k

q2
s2

tan(α) =

Fc
mg

Formally this is identical to the equilibrium condition of the prototype prob-
lem [?]. However, if we now rewrite the equation in terms of the variable s
features which are particular to our problem are revealed. To express tan(α)
through s, we notice that sin(α) = (s − s0)/2l. Recalling that α is a small angle
we may write tan(α) ≈ sin(α) = (s − s0)/2l. Using this and Eq.1, Eq.2 can be
rewritten as

(s − s0)s

= 2k

2

lq2
mg

The problem can be solved generally in dimensionless units 3 . However,
since it is more traditional to use numerical examples for high school physics,
further analysis we choose l = 1 m, m = 10−3 kg, s0 = 0.2 m. The other
constants are g = 9.8 m/s2 and k = 9109N m2 /C2.

Eq.3 completely describes the dependence s(q) as requested in part A of
the problem. However, the solution of this equation is not as trivial as for
the prototype case. To illustrate how, we solve Eq.3 graphically by choosing
diﬀerent separations 0 < s < s0 and determining the corresponding q
from the equation. A related problem along with a pedagogical justiﬁcation of
the graphical approach can be found in Can a Spring Beat the Charges? [?]

Fig. 2

3To simplify the form of Eq.3, we can divide both sides of the equation by s3

duce a new “scaled” dimensionless distance z = s/s0 and charge
conveniently grouped as γ = qmgs3
0/2kl with units of charge. This handy substitution gives:
z2(1 − z) =
q 2. This equation can be generally solved for any system in dimensionless units
of charge and distance. Details pertaining a speciﬁc system could then obtained by using the
e
numeric parameter values to ﬁnd s0 and γ and rescaling z(

q ) back to s(q).

e

0 and intro-
q = q/γ with all constants

e

2

Figure 2 : The green and red curves combine to form the plot of equilibrium
distance dependence on charge, s(q). The point where the two branches meet is
labeled c = (qcr, scr) and is termed the critical point. Note, s is positioned along
the vertical axis which is the conventional way of presenting s(q) dependence.
Points a-e and the interconnecting paths will be referenced in the discussion.

The solution is shown in Fig.2. We can now ask, what is the equilibrium
separation for any given value of q ? Surprisingly, for 0 < q < q cr the graph
gives two possible answers, represented by the green and red branches of the
curve, while for q>qcr there are no solutions at all, i.e. s(q) does not penetrate
in that region. qcr denotes the boundary point between two regions where there
is only one solution and scr is the corresponding separation. Which of two
solutions found in the region 0 < q < qcr is “real”? In the next section it will be
explained that these are the points on the green branch. The smaller equilibrium
separations s<scr, i.e. the red branch, correspond to points of maxima of the
underlying energy function and are therefore unattainable. We will also discover
that this red branch becomes useful in the analysis of hysteresis (in answering
the question C of the problem).

Let’s now examine the physical eﬀects of varying the charge q in closer de-
tail. As charge q grows from 0 (the ”forward” process), the slope s(q) becomes
progressively steeper as demonstrated by the green curve. Finally, when q ap-
proaches the critical value qcr∼ 25 .4 nC the slope of s(q) becomes vertical (see
c in Fig.2 ).

What is the signiﬁcance of this point for our system? At this critical point,
the equilibrium disappears and the charges suddenly collapse. The distance
between the charges changes instantly from 13.4 cm (point c) to 0 (point e′).

The point charge approximation leads to a non-physical consequence. After
the charges collapse, they stay intact attracted by an inﬁnite force. The only
way to separate them is to reduce q to zero, and thereby entirely cancel the
electrostatic attraction. While the point charge model is a useful approximation
to get a grip on general qualitative behavior, in application to the collapsed state
it becomes unrealistic.

Even the microscopic charges of interest, such as the ions or charged amino-
acids in proteins, have ﬁnite size which prevents them from a complete collapse.
To treat the collapsed state and the related behavior more realistically, we should
assign ﬁnite sizes to our charges. We avoid some additional complications, such
as discharge through contact, by assuming each charge is surrounded by a rigid
insulating shell of ﬁnite radius R. This was the reasoning behind part B of the
problem.

If the spheres have ﬁnite radii R, their closest possible separation is 2R.
Consequently, the length of the collapse in such a system decreases from scr to
scr −2R. As an example, the collapsed state forR = 2 cm is represented in Fig.2
by the blue line d‘dseparated from point c by a vertical step = 13.4 − 4 = 9.4cm.
From this, one can see that for R ≥ scr/2 the catastrophe disappears entirely
because the shells prevent the system from entering the critical range. In such
a case, increasing q leads to continuous displacement of the charges until their
surfaces come into contact. The described behavior is the answer to question

3

B.

So far, we have approached the solution of the problem, but some questions
remain unanswered. For instance, we still have to justify our neglect of the red
curve and also explain the absence of equilibrium distances for q > qcr. This
will be done in the next section with the assistance of an energy function.

Energy and Stability
To understand the diﬀerence between the locally stable (green, upper branch
in Fig.2 ) and unstable (red, lower branch) equilibrium states better, it is use-
ful to analyze the energy proﬁles of the system. Given that the string is not
stretchable, the potential energy U of the system consists only of Coulombic
and gravitational components. One can express the total potential energy as
U = 2mgl [1 − cos(α)] − kq2/s. Recalling

that

is small and using the approximations cos(α)˜1−α2/2 and α˜ sin(α) =

(s − s0)/2l, we get

U (s, q) =

(s − s0) − k

(4)

mg
4l

q2
s

Fig. 3
Figure 3 : Energy proﬁles for diﬀerent values of q.

Using the numeric values of the constants, and choosing representative values
of q, we plot the energy proﬁles U (s, q) in Fig.3. For 0 < q < q cr, U (s, q) has
a maximum at smaller s and a minimum at larger s. The points of minima
describe locally stable equilibrium states because small disturbances result in
a restoring force. In contrast, maxima points are unstable because the system
moves away from equilibrium after a small disturbance. This explains why the
red branch was discarded in the preceding discussion.

For q = qcr both solutions merge forming the inﬂection point, also termed
neutral equilibrium. The equilibrium disappears entirely for q¿qcr because cor-
responding energy curves do not have a minima. (See curve 4 in Fig.3.)

What is the cause of this anomaly? Let us note the diﬀerent character of
the forces. The horizontal component of tension varies almost linearly with α
and correspondingly with s, whereas the Coulomb force is proportional to the
inverse square of the separation s. The Coulomb force tends steeply to inﬁnity
as separation distance goes to 0. Consequently, for every q 6= 0 there exists
a separation below which the Coulombic attraction will always overwhelm the
counteracting tension force. This “equiforce” boundary separation coincides
with the points of energy maxima and provides a physical interpretation of the
red branch.

Also note, as q grows, the region where the electric force overwhelms the
horizontal tension widens until it engulfs the entire range at some value of
q which is exactly the point qcr. Above that, the only possible equilibrium
corresponds to the collapsed state. So it is this diﬀerence between the behaviors
of the two forces that causes the catastrophe.

4

Irreversibility and Hysteresis
We still did not answer the question C of the problem. So far we have
been assuming that q was incremented starting from an initial value of 0 and
separation s0. But what if we reverse the process by starting from the collapsed
state at charge value q ≥ q cr, and then decremented q to q = 0 ? At what point
would the charges separate?

This question has already been addressed for the case of point charges—a
complete discharge is required for separation. We have also mentioned that
when the shell radius R ≥ scr/2, the catastrophe and corresponding collapse
disappear.

Thus, it only remains to consider radii 0 < R < scr

2 . Let’s pick a represen-
tative value of R/ = 2 cm and repeat the analysis of energy proﬁles familiar from
the previous section. Note, the equilibrium separation in the collapsed state is
−→
F total = ~T +m~g+ ~Fc = 0 leading
no longer determined by the original condition
−→
to Eq.3. Rather, the non-zero force
F total attracting the charges is balanced
here by the repelling force due to rigidity of the shells.

Fig. 4

Figure 4 : Presented are snapshots of energy proﬁles in three progressive
stages of discharge. The plots are restricted to the accessible region s ≥ s col .
Initially, the system is in the collapsed state and at charge qcr. The yellow bar
represents the hard shell repulsion maintaining a lower bound on the separation
distance at scol = 2R′ = 4 cm. Blue dot is the proverbial ball residing in
a potential well. The cartoon depicts the uncollapse which happens when q
approaches quc.

Consequently, the condition for separation is when the net attractive force
−→
F total pressing the shells against each other vanishes. Obviously, this condition
leads exactly to Eq.3. However, now it should be treated diﬀerently. Instead of
ﬁnding an equilibrium separation for a ﬁxed q, we use it to ﬁnd a q value for
which the force at a ﬁxed separation s = 2R vanishes.

For our example case of scol = 4 cm, the quc determined by Eq.3 corresponds
to the intersection point between the horizontal line s = scol and the curve s(q)
(see Fig. 2, point d ).

This result can be explained using the energy proﬁles in Fig. 4. Proﬁle
1 corresponds to the collapsed state at q = qcr. The attraction between the
charges is compensated by contact repulsive force (see the yellow wall). The dip
in the energy proﬁle at distances close to scol, creates an eﬀective energy well
which stabilizes the system.

Proﬁle 2 illustrates how a decrease in the charge to 22 nC makes the energy
well trapping the system more shallow while still keeping the charges together.
Reducing q further eventually leads to the scenario of proﬁle 3. When
quc ∼ 12.4 nC is reached, the slope of the energy function at scol becomes
horizontal. This means that the attractive force keeping the spheres together
vanishes and the charge ﬁnds itself on the top of an energy hill. In other words,

5

the equilibrium becomes unstable, so the charge rolls down to the stable en-
ergy well. This transition corresponds to the vertical line d′b connecting the
red (maximum) and green (minimum) equilibrium positions in Fig.2. Since it
is sudden, we term it an uncollapse 4.

Fig.2 outlines the charging cycle for R = 2 cm with the path abcd’da. The
vertical segment cd’ corresponds to the collapse, when separation suddenly
changes from 13.4 to 4 cm. Additional charging will not change the separation.
Decrementing q after the collapse initially keeps the charges at ﬁxed separation
4 cm, until qucl ∼ 12.4nC is reached (segment d′d). After that point, s under-
goes a vertical transition, an uncollapse, from the red to the green branch, db.
Further decreases in q will move charges apart along the green branch.

To extract a general principle from this example, we note that in the presence
of catastrophe, the forward (charging) and reverse (discharging) behaviors are
diﬀerent. This irreversible behavior is called hysteresis. It is very common in
many physical phenomena associated with instabilities, phase transitions and
catastrophes.

0.2 Conclusion

The solution of the conventional problem of identical suspended charges q de-
scribes a continuous relation between the equilibrium state and the value of
Increasing q leads to a monotonic increase of the deﬂection angle α. For
q.
large values of q the angle asymptotically approaches π/2 and the separation
s correspondingly approaches 2l. Such behavior, when equilibrium properties
smoothly depend on external parameters (pressure, charge, temperature, etc.)
can be considered normal [?] and is typical for practically all the equilibrium
problems encountered in high school physics.

However, the real world is full of examples when smooth variation of external
parameters results in sudden catastrophic change of equilibrium properties. The
colloquialism, “the straw that broke the camel’s back”, expresses exactly this
idea. These sorts of phenomena are directly related to physical catastrophes,
instabilities and phase transitions.

As we can see, a generalization of the aforementioned problem for the case
of opposite charges immediately results in catastrophic behavior. At a certain
value of q the equilibrium suddenly disappears, and system undergoes a sharp
and discontinuous transition to a new equilibrium state. Usually, analysis of
the catastrophic behavior requires very complex physics and mathematics. The
discussion presented here and in references [?, ?] demonstrates that in some cases
4In fact the uncollapse can occur before quc is reached. As we learned from energy proﬁles
(Fig.3&4 ) for every q between qcol and qcr there exists a second energy well corresponding to
the locally stable equilibrium distance expressed by the green branch of Fig.2 and separated
from the collapsed state by the presence of a barrier. This is an analog of the chemical
activation energy barrier useful for understanding various molecular processes. A suﬃcient
perturbation due to thermal, mechanical or electrical ﬂuctuations could knock the system out
of the collapsed state and into this stable well. In general, the ﬂuctuations tend to narrow the
hysterisis.

6

it can be accomplished with analytical tools available to high school physics
students.

In this paper, we have also introduced the concept of hysteresis which is
another feature of catastrophic behavior. It was shown that equilibrium sepa-
ration between the charges for a given q value can depend on charging history.
We demonstrated that in some cases the same value of q, depending on how it
was reached, can correspond either to a comparatively large separation or to a
collapsed state where charges are stuck together. We believe guided investiga-
tion of the aforementioned phenomena can result in interesting student research
projects.

7

