5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
2
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Is it time for a science counterpart of the Benezet–Berman mathe-
matics teaching experiment of the 1930’s?
Sanjoy Mahajan,1 University of Cambridge hhttp://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/sanjoyi
Richard R. Hake,2 Indiana University hhttp://www.physics.indiana.edu/˜hakei

Based on an invited poster presented at the Physics Education Research Conference 2000: Teacher
Education hhttp://www.sci.ccny.cuny.edu/˜rstein/perc2000.htmi

Abstract. Should teachers concentrate on critical thinking, estimation, measurement, and graphing rather
than college-clone algorithmic physics in grades K–12?3 Thus far physics education research oﬀers little
substantive guidance. Mathematics education research addressed the mathematics analogue of this question
in the 1930’s. Students in Manchester, New Hampshire were not subjected to arithmetic algorithms until
grade 6. In earlier grades they read, invented, and discussed stories and problems; estimated lengths, heights,
and areas; and enjoyed ﬁnding and interpreting numbers relevant to their lives. In grade 6, with 4 months of
formal training, they caught up to the regular students in algorithmic ability, and were far ahead in general
numeracy and in the verbal, semantic, and problem solving skills they had practiced for the ﬁve years before.
Assessment was both qualitative – e.g., asking 8th grade students to relate in their own words why it is ‘that
if you have two fractions with the same numerator, the one with the smaller denominator is the larger’; and
quantitative – e.g., administration of standardized arithmetic examinations to test and control groups in the
6th grade. Is it time for a science counterpart of the Benezet/Berman Manchester experiment of the 1930’s?

1 Rote learning: Opium for the mind

Traditionally taught science and mathematics teach little except obedience. Here are examples for
the skeptical. This gem is discussed by Alan Schoenfeld (1987):

One of the problems on the NAEP [National Assessment of Educational Progress] secondary math-
ematics exam, which was administered to a stratiﬁed sample of 45,000 students nationwide, was
the following: An army bus holds 36 soldiers. If 1128 soldiers are being bused to their training site,
how many buses are needed?

Seventy percent of the students who took the exam set up the correct long division and performed
it correctly. However, the following are the answers those students gave to the question of ‘how
many buses are needed?’: 29% said...31 remainder 12; 18% said...31; 23% said...32, which is correct.
(30% did not do the computation correctly).

It’s frightening enough that fewer than one-fourth of the students got the right answer. More
frightening is that almost one out of three students said that the number of buses needed is ‘31
remainder 12’. [emphasis added]

Mathematics has no meaning for most students; it is a sequence of mysterious steps, which the
clever or obedient quickly master to score high on examinations. More disturbing than mindless
mathematics are examples showing that students are not bothered by nonsense. An example from
Schoenfeld (1991) shows the trouble:

In his dissertation research, Kurt Reusser . . . (Reusser 1988). . . asked 97 ﬁrst and second grade
‘There are 26 sheep and 10 goats on a ship. How old is the
students the following question:

1. Supported by the Gatsby Charitable Foundation.
2. Partially supported by NSF Grant DUE/MDR-9253965
3. For non-US readers: Children begin kindergarten (grade K) roughly at age 5 and ﬁnish the highest grade (12)

roughly at age 18.

1

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

captain?’ Seventy-six of the 97 students ‘solved’ the problem, providing a numerical answer by
adding 26 and 10.

School aggravates the problem. Into sets of problems worked by school children, Radatz (cited in
Schoenfeld (1989)) inserted non-problems such as the following (in its entirety!):

Mr. Lorenz and 3 colleagues started at Bielefeld at 9 a.m. and drove the 360 km to Frankfurt, with
a rest stop of 30 minutes.

The percentage of students who answer such non-problems increases consistently from kindergarten
through 6th grade. The more time students spend in rote learning, the more brain-dead they become.

The problem is international. One of the authors (SM) gave this problem to a sample of physics
majors at the University of Cambridge:

Two people are on opposite sides of a rotating merry-go-round. One throws a ball to the other. In
which frame of reference is the path of the ball straight when viewed from above? Choices: (a) the
earth, (b) the merry-go-round, (c) both, or (d) neither.

Only 58% of physics majors answered correctly; of whom only 40% were sure of their answer. The
success rate did not increase with more years of studying physics. It seems that even very talented
physics students depend on rote learning.4

2 Benezet’s (1935a, 1935b, 1936) curriculum

Etta Berman, a teacher who worked under Benezet as a K-12 teacher in Manchester, and researched
the Benezet method for her master’s thesis (Berman 1935), reports an interview in which Benezet
commented with characteristic pungency:

We have been chloroforming children’s reasoning powers. We have been drilling them in formulae
and tables to the detriment of their reasoning ability. (Berman 1935, p. 45)

Berman summarized Benezet’s views as:

. . . greater intellectual powers can be secured by warding oﬀ material which makes for mental
stunting and substituting in its place content in which the children ﬁnd enjoyment, as well as
things common to their understanding, experience, and environment.

. . . formal arithmetic drilled before the child’s reasoning powers are developed is one of the under-
lying causes for stunted reasoning powers. (Berman 1935, p. 46)

In two sentences Benezet described his method:

Teachers were told to soft-pedal the mechanical arithmetical drills and to concentrate on reasoning,
estimation, and on self-expression. They were asked to give the children a great number of books
to read, and to encourage oral English in telling the story of these books. (Berman 1935, p. 46)

Students learnt mathematics in context.5 First-graders meet small numbers:

This instruction is not concentrated into any particular period or time but comes in incidentally in
connection with assignments of the reading lesson or with reference to certain pages of the text.

Second graders make friends with larger numbers (their readers are longer):

If any book used in this grade contains an index, the children are taught what it means and how to
ﬁnd the pages referred to. Children will naturally pick up counting in the course of games which
they play.

4. More details of the questions and answers are on the web at hhttp://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/sanjoyi.
5. A warning to those thinking of trying the method or of criticizing it for avoiding all arithmetic: ‘Some teachers,
new in the experiment, have steered clear of all arithmetic but Mr. Benezet’s idea is really to teach any arithmetic
as the need comes up but not on the plane of formal drill.’ (Berman 1935, p. 48)

2

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Table 1. Benezet’s curriculum.

Grade

Mathematics ideas

1
2

3
4

5B

5A

6
7

8B
8A

Numbers < 100; comparison: more, less, higher, lower
Telling time (hours and half-hours) page numbers; using an index.

Bigger numbers: license plates, house numbers.
Inch, foot, yard. Estimating lengths. Square inch, square foot.

Counting by 5’s, 10’s, 2’s, 4’s, and 3’s (mentally), leading to those multiplication
tables. Estimation games; always writing estimate before checking. Fractions by
pictures.
Multiplication table.

Formal arithmetic, but estimate ﬁrst then check.
Lots of mental arithmetic without reference to paper or blackboard.

More mental arithmetic.
Reasons for processes. Explaining how to attack problems.

The principle of learning in context continues through the entire curriculum. A short summary of
each year’s curriculum is in Table 1; detailed descriptions are in (Benezet 1935b).

3 Assessment

Benezet combined qualitative and quantitative assessment, the better to convince people who accept
one or other kind of evidence.

As a qualitative assessment, he asked students questions that appear ridiculously easy:

The distance from Boston to Portland [Maine] by water is 120 miles. Three steamers leave Boston,
simultaneously, for Portland. One makes the trip in 10 hours, one in 12, and one in 15. How long
will it be before all 3 reach Portland? (Benezet 1936)

In the regularly taught 9th grade, 6 out of the 29 students (!) got it right. In the experimental 2nd
grade, all students got it right. Benezet does not say what answer the regularly taught 9th-grade
students gave, but the example of sheep and goats suggests that it was probably 37.

Benezet also asked students to explain their thinking:

I was trying to get the children to tell me, in their own words, that if you have two fractions with
the same numerator, the one with the smaller denominator is the larger.

From the regularly taught 8th grade, he got: ‘The smaller number in fractions is always the larger’,
and ‘The denominator that is smallest is the largest.’

Etta Berman, in her Masters thesis (1935) on the Benezet experiment, used numerous quantitative
assessments:

verbal: antonyms, synonyms, alphabet, analogies, anagrams
mathematical: word problems, single- and multidigit addition and multiplication; subtrac-
tion, addition, multiplication, and division of fractions; long division
everyday knowledge:
rates, and discounts

‘common sense’; typical prices (e.g. of gasoline and coal), interest

3

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

In formal arithmetic, the experimental students caught up to the regular ones in only 4 months
during the 6th grade. As Berman concluded with academic understatement: ‘The results of this
study cast doubt upon whether we are justiﬁed in devoting ﬁve years to the drilling of formal
arithmetic’ (Berman 1935, p. 40). The experimental students instead got years of extra practice in
reading, writing, and thinking:

In one [traditionally taught] fourth grade I could not ﬁnd a single child who would admit that he
had committed the sin of reading. I did not have a single volunteer, and when I tried to draft them,
the children stood up, shook their heads, and sat down again. In the four experimental fourth
grades the children fairly fought for a chance to tell me what they had been reading. The hour
closed, in each case, with a dozen hands waving in the air and little faces crestfallen, because we
had not gotten around to hear what they had to tell. (Benezet 1935a)

4 Teaching for transfer

The examples of the army buses and of the steamers going to Portland show that traditionally
In traditional
taught students cannot use their knowledge except in rote, classroom problems.
mathematics teaching, the applications are similar to one another, so the ideas common to all
the applications include much besides the essentials. Thus the student cannot easily abstract
the essential, transferable ideas (Figure 1). For an idea to transfer, students must apply it in
widely diﬀering contexts. Bransford, Brown, and Cocking (1999, ch. 3) give a valuable discussion
of transfer; see especially the references on how ‘contrasting cases’ enhance transfer (p. 48). By
having students read stories, poems, and adventures, by having them read geography and history,
and by having them invent their own stories, Benezet introduced students to a vast diversity of
mathematical applications. In this rich environment, students learnt mathematical skills useful well
beyond the classroom.

T

C

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Why ‘knowledge’ from traditional mathematics teaching does not transfer. (a) Ideas
used in an application, showing contingent, contextual ideas (C) and essential ideas (T), the ones of
general use that you would like students to transfer automatically to other contexts. (b) Traditional
course with two applications. The contexts are similar, so the intersection of the two applications
(shaded area) includes much more than the essentials of the transferable ideas (darker shaded area).
(c) Teaching for transfer. Here the contexts are diverse, so the intersection is mostly the essentials
of the ideas.

5 Mathematical proﬁciency

In a recent National Research Council report, Adding It Up: Helping Children Learn Mathematics,
(2001) advise revamping P–8 (ages 3–12) mathematics education so that all
Kilpatrick et al.

4

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

students attain ‘mathematical proﬁciency’:

skill in carrying out procedures ﬂexibly, accurately, eﬃciently, and

conceptual understanding: comprehension of mathematical concepts, operations, and rela-
tions
procedural ﬂuency:
appropriately
strategic competence: ability to formulate, represent, and solve mathematical problems
adaptive reasoning: capacity for logical thought, reﬂection, explanation, and justiﬁcation
productive disposition: habitual inclination to see mathematics as sensible, useful, and
worthwhile, coupled with a belief in diligence and one’s own eﬃcacy

According to committee chair Jeremy Kilpatrick (as quoted by Mervis 2001):
‘We want to move
past the . . . [‘Math Wars’]. . . debate over skills versus understanding. It’s not one or the other. The
point is that both are needed, and more, to learn and understand mathematics.’

Berman’s (1935) study suggests that Benezet’s 8th-grade students possessed far greater mathemat-
ical proﬁciency in the above sense than did regularly taught students. Perhaps the Math Wars can
end in a Treaty of Benezet, in the spirit of Adding It Up, and acceptable to both sides, e.g., to
the ‘Mathematically Correct’ hhttp://mathematicallycorrect.comi and the ‘Mathematically Sane’
hhttp://mathematicallysane.comi.

The requirements for mathematical proﬁciency given by Kilpatrick et al. (2001) are consistent with
Benezet’s curriculum (Table 1); they complement the Benezet/Swartz physics topics (Tables 2 and
3); and they mesh with the features of science literacy listed by Arons (1990).

A physics counterpart of the Benezet experiment could include a huge variety of ideas. In Table 2
we sketch a possible curriculum.

6 Physics

Grade

1–8

Table 2. A possible physics curriculum.

Physics and mathematics ideas

Benezet’s mathematics program as a basis. Add physical quantities to it: angles,
volumes, weight (mass), force (estimating only), density as students learn division,
energy, power. All quantities are related to everyday experience: density of rocks,
volume of houses, power required in climbing stairs or cycling, power in the falling
water at Niagara Falls.

Proportional reasoning and scaling: ‘If you double the side of a cube, what happens
to the volume?’ Use scaling throughout, starting in grade 4, with the introduction
of square measure, and emphasize it especially in grade 8.

9-11

Gravitation, motion of planets by hand simulation to develop a tick-by-tick model of
how Newton’s second law works. Dimensions, units, dimensional analysis to guess
formulae. Springs, waves, sound, music, pressure. Matter is made of atoms. This
order would ﬁt with a physics-ﬁrst curriculum (Livanis 2001) as suggested by Leon
Lederman (1999).

12

Begin exact calculations, including conservation laws.

5

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Qualitative assessment could include estimation problems:

How many miles must I run to burn oﬀ the calories from a candy bar?
How high can animals jump as a function of size?
Why are hummingbirds so tiny?
Estimate for your country the fractional change in the average miles per gallon (or km/liter)
of gasoline used by automobiles if the speed limit is changed from 55 mph (or 88 km/hr)
to 75 mph (or 120 km/hr).

High-school students could try to ﬁnd ﬂaws in perpetual-motion machines. Here are two such
machines:

1. Bouncing. A ball bounces elastically oﬀ a wall (in one dimension): It strikes and rebounds
with velocity V and energy is conserved. In a reference frame that moves with the initial
velocity of the ball, the ball before the bounce has velocity 0; and after the bounce, velocity
2V . In this frame, energy is not conserved. Are you worried?

2. Buoyancy.

H2O

Hg

The ﬁgure shows a cross-section of a long trough, showing a cylinder free to rotate about
the spindle at its center, but not free to move oﬀ axis. The mercury and water are kept
from mixing by an impermeable membrane. The upward arrows show the buoyant forces
on each half of the cylinder, with the mercury’s contribution greater than the water’s by
a factor of 13 (the density ratio). So the spindle should rotate and, by symmetry, keep
rotating. Perpetual motion?

After completing Table 2, we stumbled across an editorial by Cliﬀ Swartz (1993). Swartz suggests
topics (Table 3) for K–12 science education that seem compatible with the physics and mathematics
ideas of Table 2. His description of how to chose the important topics reminds us of Benezet:
Here are some samples of my proposed standards for physics topics. . . The theme is that. . . all physics
standards K–12 should emphasize the quantitative. . . I mean dealing with the size of things, relating
numbers to measurable and measured magnitudes, necessarily therefore paying attention to signif-
icant ﬁgures and knowing how to do order-of-magnitude, zeroing-in calculations. . . my elementary-
school science standards involve only topics and experiences that are literally tangible. The change
to abstraction should be proceed only during junior high, in general to be introduced only after
concrete examples. . . The National Committee, NSTA, AAAS, Albert Shanker, and everyone else is
making lists of standards. Physics teachers should produce their own list before some power from
on high congeals a new federal dogma in our name.

What is the relationship of the Benezet/Swartz material in Tables 2 and 3 to the physical-science
portion of the National Science Education Standards (National Research Council 1996a) shown in
Table 4? The Benezetian items in Tables 2 and 3 are concrete examples of general categories in
Table 4. In our view, Tables 1 and 2 may give teachers a clearer idea of possible nuts and bolts for
a worthwhile K–12 science and mathematics education.

6

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Table 3. Possible topics for K–12 suggested by Swartz (1993).

Grade

Physics and mathematics topics

1–6

Use standard measuring tools.

Students measure their foot lengths, then organize and interpret a class distribution
graph.

Students time their pulses, plot a distribution of class results, and make comparisons
with results of before and after physical exercise.

Select the needed apparatus and make all the measurements, calculations, and
graphs to determine who runs faster in their class, tall kids or short kids.

7–9

Use standard measuring tools.

Use wire, battery, and bulb with the right tools and connectors to make the bulb
light.

With a convex lens as a magniﬁer, produce both real and virtual images.

Measure the volume and mass of an object and calculate its density.

Measure work input and output of a simple machine.

Use echoes to measure the speed of sound.

10–12 Use standard measuring tools.

Given the mass of a pollutant in a quantity of water, calculate the degree of pollution
in parts per million.

Organize the history of the universe on a power-of-ten map.

Characterize the electromagnetic spectrum in terms of wavelengths, frequencies,
and photon energies, doing necessary calculations and examples to illustrate each
regime.

Use Archimedes’ principle to explain how a boat ﬂoats.

After considering Benezet’s articles, the late Arnold Arons (2000) wrote to us:

I have looked at the Benezet papers, and I ﬁnd the story congenial. The importance of cultivating
the use of English cannot be exaggerated. I have been pointing to this myself since the ’50’s, and
am delighted to ﬁnd such explicit agreement. I can only point out that my own advocacy has had
no more lasting eﬀect than Benezet’s. You will ﬁnd some of my views of this aspect in my 1959
paper . . . (Arons 1959). . . on the Amherst course. . . . It is worth noting that what Benezet was doing
70 years ago could now be done even more eﬀectively because of the existence of excellent science
and social studies curricula. . . (Arons 1993, 1997, 1998). . . that would provide rich opportunity for
invoking and applying just the kind of thinking, reasoning, and interpretation that Benezet was
advocating and for which he had to invent his own illustrations. [emphasis added]

Consistent with Arons’s emphasis, Appendices I and II provide post-1930’s resources and references,
respectively, that may assist a Benezetian overhaul of K–12 science education. Many of the listed
items are taken from Hake (2000a), which has even more resources and references.

Quantitative assessment could include various ‘Classroom Assessment Techniques’ (NISE 2001) and
diagnostic tests of conceptual understanding (Hake 2001b, NCSU 2001). Unfortunately, there are,

7

Table 4. Physical science portion of the National Science Education Standards
(National Research Council 1996a, Table 6.2, p. 106).

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Grade

Physical science standards

K–4

Properties of objects and materials.

Position and motion of objects.

Light, heat, electricity, and magnetism.

5–8

Properties and changes of properties in matter

Motions and forces

Transfer of energy

9–12

Structure of atoms

Structure and properties of matter

Chemical reactions

Motions and forces

Conservation of energy and increase in disorder

Interactions of energy and matter

as far as we know, few research-based diagnostic tests for the measurement of science understanding
in grades K–10.

7 So what?

Sixty years ago, in a small New England mill town, a creative superintendent made mathematics
meaningful for students. Students today still leave traditional mathematics and science classes with
almost no conceptual understanding of the subjects and little ability to solve real-world problems.
For too long the pioneering experiment of Benezet has been ignored by the education community.

We hope the reader will forgive the length of following quotation, which describes teaching that
we all can admire. Berman attended a demonstration lesson in which Benezet taught one of the
experimental classrooms:

. . . the children were on their feet every chance they could possibly get to tell all they knew. They
were free to think and, indeed, made the most of every opportunity. One could see mental expansion
in actual operation, and also observe satisfactions register, when accredited with right answers or
worthwhile opinions[,] for every second brought something to challenge their interests, and which
they had to reach high to get. The teachers present saw no parasites but rather children who
were taking a delight in independent intelligent thinking. These children were very much alive and
their was not a single instance of a child being self-conscious or wishing to be over-looked. These
children were free and unhampered by formal procedure and were ﬁnding themselves a part of the
great world and scheme of things in which their knowledge and opinions mingled with those of
older folks. They were transmitting and acquiring knowledge, and by means of directed guessing,
when in doubt, were developing judgment. These children of a sixth grade were, indeed, laying the
foundation for worthwhile thinking and judgment which is so essential to intelligent citizenship.
These active and thinking individuals not only transmitted and received knowledge but also lived

8

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

and felt the things they talked about because they were being brought up on Mr. Benezet’s formula
for intellectual curiosity. [emphasis original] (Berman 1935, p. 50)

So YES! It is time for a science counterpart of the Benezet–Berman math experiment of the 1930’s.
Why not give it a try in your classroom?

8 Acknowledgements

We are indebted to David Brown, Jack Lochhead, and the late Arnold Arons for valuable comments
on the work of Benezet.

9 References

Arons, A.B. (1959). Structure, methods, and objectives of the required freshman calculus-physics
course at Amherst College. American Journal of Physics 27(9): 658–666.
Arons, A.B. (1990). A Guide to Introductory Physics Teaching. Wiley. Reprinted with minor up-
dates as Teaching Introductory Physics (Wiley, 1997), which also contains Homework and Test
Questions for Introductory Physics Teaching (Wiley, 1994) along with a new monograph Intro-
duction to Classical Conservation Laws. Both the 1990 and 1997 versions contain ‘Achieving
wider scientiﬁc literacy’ (Chapter 12), with Arons’s twelve ‘marks of sicnetiﬁc literacy’. These
12 marks are also online in Hake (2000b), pp. 5–7.

Arons, A.B. (1993). Uses of the past: reﬂections on United States physics curriculum development,

1955 to 1990. Interchange 24(1&2): 105–128.

Arons, A.B. (1997). Improvement of physics teaching in the heyday of the 1960’s. In J. Wilson
(ed.), Conference on the introductory physics course on the occasion of the retirement of Robert
Resnick, Wiley, pp. 13–20.

Arons, A.B. (1998). Research in physics education: The early years. In T.C. Koch and R.G.

Fuller, eds., PERC 1998: Physics Education Research Conference Proceedings 1998, online at
hhttp://physics.unl.edu/perc98i.

Arons, A.B. (2000). Private communication to R.R. Hake (30 June).
Benezet, L.P. (1935a). The Teaching of Arithmetic I: The Story of an Experiment. Journal
of the National Education Association 24: 241–244 (November). Reprinted in the Human-
istic Mathematics Newsletter 6: 2–14 (May 1991) and on the web at the Benezet Centre
hhttp://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/sanjoy/benezeti.

Benezet, L.P. (1935b). The Teaching of Arithmetic II: The Story of an Experiment. Journal
of the National Education Association 24: 301–303 (December). Reprinted in the Human-
istic Mathematics Newsletter 6: 2–14 (May 1991) and on the web at the Benezet Centre
hhttp://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/sanjoy/benezeti.

Benezet, L.P. (1936). The Teaching of Arithmetic III: The Story of an Experiment. Journal of the
National Education Association 25: 7–8 (January). Reprinted in the Humanistic Mathematics
Newsletter 6: 2–14 (May 1991) and on the web at the Benezet Centre hhttp://www.inference.
phy.cam.ac.uk/sanjoy/benezeti.

Berman, Etta (1935). The Result of Deferring Systematic Teaching of Arithmetic to Grade Six as
Disclosed by the Deferred Formal Arithmetic Plan at Manchester, New Hampshire. Masters
Thesis, Boston University, USA.

Bransford, J.D., A.L. Brown, and R.R. Cocking (eds.) (1999). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Ex-
perience, and School. National Academy Press. Online at hhttp://www.nap.edu/catalog/6160.
htmli.

9

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Hake, R.R. (2000a). Is it ﬁnally time to implement curriculum S? AAPT Announcer 30(4): 103.

Online at hhttp://www.physics.indiana.edu/˜hakei.

Hake, R.R. (2000b). The general population’s ignorancce of science-related societal issues: A

challenge for the university. AAPT Announcer 30(2): 105. Online at hhttp://physics.indiana.
edu/˜hakei.

Hake, R.R. (2001b). Suggestions for administering and reporting pre/post diagnostic tests. Unpub-

lished. Online at hhttp://physics.indiana.edu/˜hakei.

Kilpatrick, J., J. Swaﬀord, and B. Findell, eds. 2001. Adding It Up: Helping Children Learn
Mathematics. National Academy Press. Prepublication copy online at hhttp://www.nap.
edu/catalog/9822.htmli.

Lederman, L.M. (1999). A science way of thinking. Education Week 16 June, hhttp://www.edweek.

org/ew/1999/40leder.h18i.

Livanis, O. (2000). Physics First Home Page; hhttp://members.aol.com/physicsﬁrst/i
Mervis, J. (2001). Math education: Academy report aims to quiet debate. Science 291: 808 (2
February). Reports on the National Research Council report of Kilpatrick et al. (2001).
National Research Council (1996a). National Science Education Standards. National Academy

Press. hhttp://books.nap.edu/catalog/4962.htmli.

NISE [National Institute for Science Education] (2001). hhttp://www.wcer.wisc.edu/NISEi: Field-

tested Learning Assessment Guide (FLAG): For Science, Math, and Engineering Instruc-
tors. hhttp://www.wcer.wisc.edu/nise/cl1/ﬂag/ﬂaghome.aspi, especially Introduction to CAT’s
[Classroom Assessment Techniques] at hhttp://www.wcer.wisc.edu/nise/cl1/ﬂag/cat/catframe.
aspi.

NCSU [North Carolina State University] (2001). Physics Education R & D Group, Assessment

Instrument Information Page, online at hhttp://www.ncsu.edu/per/TestInfo.htmli.

Radatz, H. (1983). Untersuchungen zum L¨osen eingekleideter Aufgaben. [Studies of solving math-

ematical tasks] Journal f¨ur Mathematikdidaktik 3: 205–217.

Reusser, Kurt (1988). Problem Solving beyond the Logic of Things: Contextual Eﬀects on Under-

standing and Solving Word Problems. Instructional Science 17: 309–38.

Schoenfeld, Alan (1987). What’s all the fuss about metacognition? In Cognitive Science and

Mathematics Education, Alan Schoenfeld, ed. (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum).

Schoenfeld, Alan H. (1989). Teaching mathematical thinking and problem solving. In Lauren B.
Resnick and Leonard B. Klopfer, eds., Toward the Thinking Curriculum: Current Cognitive
Research, Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development [ASCD], Alexandria, VA.
Schoenfeld, Alan H. (1991). On Mathematics as sense-making: An informal attack on the unfortu-
nate divorce of formal and informal mathematics. In J.F. Voss, D.N. Perkins, and J.W. Segal,
eds., Informal Reasoning and Education, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 311–344.

Swartz, C.E. (1993). Editorial: Standard reaction. Physics Teacher 31: 334–335.

10 Appendix I

Resources for a Benezetian overhaul of K–12 science education.
(A slash ’/’ occurring outside a URL h. . .i means ‘click on the following text’.)
AAHE’s CASTL (2001). Carnegie Academy for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Programs

for K–12; online at hhttp://www.carnegiefoundation.org/CASTL/k-12/index.htmi.

AAPT’s Physical Science Resource Center hhttp://www.psrc-online.org/i.
Active Learning Problem Sets (ALPS)

hhttp://www.physics.ohio-state.edu/˜physedu/people/vanheu/index.htmli.

10

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Active Physics hhttp://www.psrc-online.org/i /Curriculum/High School/Comprehensive Curric-

ula/; also hhttp://www.its-about-time.com/htmls/index3.htmli.

ActivPhysics hhttp://www.physics.ohio-state.edu/˜physedu/people/vanheu/index.htmli.
Alive Education.net hhttp://www.alincom.com/educ/sci.htmi ‘Excellence in Internet Education’.
The Coalition for Education in the Life Sciences [CELS], a ‘national coalition of professional societies

in the biological sciences that have joined together in an eﬀort to improve undergraduate
education in the life sciences’ at hhttp://www.wisc.edu/cels/i.

Comprehensive Conceptual Curriculum for Physics (C3P) hhttp://www.udallas.edu/physics/i.
Constructing Ideas in Physical Science hhttp://cipsproject.sdsu.edu/i.
Constructing Physics Understanding (CPU) hhttp://cpuproject.sdsu.edu/CPUi. See also

hhttp://learningteam.org/i /CPU.

Cooperative Group Problem Solving hhttp://www.physics.umn.edu/groups/physed/i.
Dewey web sites: (a) by Craig Cunningham hhttp://cuip.uchicago.edu/˜cac/dewey.htmli. (b)

Center for Dewey Studies hhttp://www.siu.edu/˜deweyctr/i (c) Hoover’s Teacher Ed Pages –
Links to the World of John Dewey hhttp://www.cisnet.com/teacher-ed/dewey.htmli

Educational Development Center hhttp://www.edc.org/i. ‘Founded in 1958 when a group of

scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology joined forces with teachers and technical
specialists to develop a new high school physics curriculum, PSSC Physics.’

Eison, J.A. et al. Bibliography of Active Learning in Science. At

hhttp://www.cte.usf.edu/resources/res def.htmli.

Event-Based Science: ‘A new way to teach science at the middle school level’. hhttp://www.mcps.

k12.md.us/departments/eventscience/i.

Exemplary & Promising Science Programs. US Deptartment of Education. hhttp://www.ed.

gov/oﬃces/OERI/ORAD/KAD/expert panel/newscience progs.htmli.

Experiment Problems hhttp://www.physics.ohio-state.edu/˜physedu/people/vanheu/index.htmli.
The Exploritorium Institute for Inquiry hhttp://www.exploratorium.edu/IFI/index.htmli.
Exploritorium Inquiry Bibliography: Professional Development Design Seminar Guide to Articles

and Readings hhttp://www.exploratorium.edu/IFI/resources/biblio.htmli.

Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics – Science Education Department hhttp://cfa-www.

harvard.edu/cfa/sed/projects.htmli.
Hands On Physics hhttp://hop.concord.org/i.
Insights, Center for Science Education hhttp://www.edc.org/CSE/i, developers of Insights: An

Inquiry-Based Elementary School Science Curriculum (K–6)
hhttp://www.edc.org/CSE/imd/insights3.htmli and Insights: An Inquiry-Based, Middle School
Science Curriculum hhttp://www.edc.org/CSE/imd/insights2.htmli.
Lederman Science Center at Fermilab hhttp://www-ed.fnal.gov/ed lsc.htmli.
Logo Foundation hhttp://lcs.www.media.mit.edu/groups/logo-foundation/index.htmli. According
to Harold Abelson, ‘Logo is the name for a philosophy of education and a continually evolving
family of programming languages that aid in its realization.’

Mechanical Universe hhttp://www.projmath.caltech.edu/mu.htmi.
Minds On Physics hhttp://umperg.physics.umass.edu/projects/MindsOnPhysics/defaulti.
Modeling Instruction Program hhttp://modeling.la.asu.edu/modeling.htmli.
NSF Review of Instructional Materials for Middle School Science
hhttp://www.nsf.gov/pubs/1997/nsf9754/nsf9754.htmi.

Paideia Program hhttp://www.paideia.org/i.

11

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Peer Instruction and Concept Tests hhttp://galileo.harvard.edu/i.
Physics InfoMall hhttp://learningteam.org/i.
Physics by Inquiry hhttp://www.phys.washington.edu/groups/peg/pbi.htmli
Physics Instructional Resource Center hhttp://pira.nu/i.
Physics Resources and Instructional Strategies for Motivating Students (PRISMS) hhttp://www.

prisms.uni.edu/i.

Physics Teachers Resource Agents (PTRA) hhttp://www.aapt.org/programs/ptra/ptra.htmli.
Powerful Ideas in Physical Science hhttp://www.psrc-online.org/i /Curriculum/College–University

/Pre-service Teacher Education.

SEPUP Modular Materials hhttp://www.lhs.berkeley.edu/SEPUP/general.htmli. For a discussion

see Wilson & Davis (1994), pp. 205–210.

Science Activities Manual: K–8 hhttp://www.utm.edu/departments/ed/cece/SAMK8.shtmli.
Science Helper K–8 hhttp://learningteam.org/i:

Funded by the Carnegie Corporation of New York, and created by a team of leading
teachers, specialists, and administrators, Science Helper K–8 CD-ROM oﬀers 919 lesson
plans which are the culmination of 15 years of development, ﬁeld-testing and reﬁnement.
The lesson plans represent seven of the most eﬀective and inﬂuential science curricula
ever written – COPES, ESS, ESSP, MINNEMAST, SAPA, SCIS, and USMES. You can
easily locate the lesson you’re looking for by grade level, subject, process skill, keyword
or content... then print it out. All in all, Science Helper is the single most eﬀective, most
comprehensive way to expand your K–8 science program immediately.

Socratic Dialogue Inducing (SDI) Labs hhttp://www.physics.indiana.edu/˜sdii.
Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking hhttp://www.vernier.com/cmat/tst.htmli.
Tutorials in Physics hhttp://www.phys.washington.edu/groups/peg/tut.htmli.
Workshop Physics hhttp://physics.dickinson.edu/i /Workshop Physics.
Workshop Science hhttp://physics.dickinson.edu/i /Workshop Science Project.

11 Appendix II

References for a Benezetian overhaul of K–12 science education6
AAAS (1989) [American Academy of Arts and Sciences]. Science for All Americans: A Project 2061
Report on the Literacy Goals in Science, Mathematics, and Technology. American Association
for the Advancement of Science.

AAAS (1993). Benchmarks for Science Literacy: Project 2061. American Association for the

Advancement of Science.

AAAS (1998). Daedalus 127(4). For a description see hhttp://daedalus.amacad.org/inprint.htmli.

Contains essays by researchers in education and by historians of more rapidly developing
institutions such as power systems, communications, health care, and agriculture. Sets out to
answer a challenge posed by Kenneth Wilson:

If other major American ‘systems’ have so eﬀectively demonstrated the ability to change,
why has the educational ‘system’ been so singularly resistant to change? What might the
lessons learned from other systems’ eﬀorts to adapt and evolve, have to teach us about
bringing about change – successful change – in America’s schools?

See also hhttp://www.physics.ohio-state.edu/˜redesign/i.

6. A * preceding a reference indicates that the reference is also given in Section 9.

12

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Adey, P.S. (1999). The Science of Thinking and Science for Thinking: A Description of Cognitive
Acceleration through Science Education (CASE). UNESCO, International Bureau of Educa-
tion, Switzerland. Online at
hhttp://www.ibe.unesco.org/International/Databanks/Innodata/inograph.htmi.

Adler, M.J. (1977). Reforming Education: The Opening of the American Mind. Macmillan.
Allen, D.E. (1997). Bringing Problem-Based Learning to the Introductory Biology Classroom. In
A.P. McNeal and C. D’Avanzo, eds., Student-Active Science: Models of Innovation in College
Science Teaching, Saunders. Online at
hhttp://www.saunderscollege.com/lifesci/studact/chapters/ch15.htmli.

Allen, D.E. and B. Duch (1998). Thinking Towards Solutions: Problem-Based Learning Activities

for General Biology. Saunders.

Allen, D.E., B.J. Duch, and S. E. Groh (1996). The power of problem-based learning in teaching

introductory science courses. New Directions for Teaching and Learning 68: 43–52.

American Mathematical Society Staﬀ, American Institute of Physics Staﬀ, American Chemi-
cal Society (2001). The Best of Wonder Science: Elementary Science Activities, Volume 2.
Wadsworth Publishing. Recommended by Hubisz et al. (2001).

Anderson, L.W. and D.R. Krathwohl (2000). Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching, and Assessing: A

Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives. Longman.

Anderson, J.R. (1999). Cognitive Psychology and Its Implications. 5th ed. Especially the chapter

on ‘Cognitive Development’. W.H. Freeman.

Ansbacher, T. (2000). An interview with John Dewey on science education. Physics Teacher

38(4): 224–227. A thoughtful and well-researched treatment showing the consonance of Dewey’s
educational ideas – as quoted straight from Dewey’s own writings, not from the views of
sometimes confused Dewey interpreters – with the thinking of most current science-education
researchers, including your friendly authors.

Apelman, M. (1993). Co-creating primary curriculum: Boulder Valley schools. In E. Jones, ed.,
Growing Teachers: Partnerships in Staﬀ Development (National Association for the Education
of Young Children). Online at hhttp://www.clas.uiuc.edu/fulltext/cl01141/ch6.htmli.

Apelman, M., D. Hawkins, and P. Morrison (1985). Critical Barriers Phenomenon in Elementary
Science. University of North Dakota, Center for Teaching and Learning. See also Hawkins
(1974c).

*Arons, A.B. (1959). Structure, methods, and objectives of the required freshman calculus-physics

course at Amherst College. American Journal of Physics 27(9): 658–666.

Arons, A.B. (1960). The New high school physics course: A report on PSSC. Physics Today, June,

pp. 20–25.

With teachers’ guide.

Arons, A.B. (1977). The Various Language: An Inquiry Approach to the Physical Sciences. Oxford.

Arons, A.B. (1990). A Guide To Introductory Physics Teaching, Wiley. Reprinted with minor
updates in Teaching Introductory Physics (Wiley, 1997), which also contains Homework and
Test Questions for Introductory Physics Teaching (Wiley, 1994) along with a new monograph
Introduction to Classical Conservation Laws.

Arons, A.B. (1991). Guiding insight and inquiry in the introductory physics lab. Physics Teacher

31: 278–282 (May).

*Arons, A.B. (1993). Uses of the past: reﬂections on United States physics curriculum development,

1955 to 1990. Interchange 24(1&2): 105–128.

*Arons, A.B. (1997). Improvement of physics teaching in the heyday of the 1960’s. In J. Wilson
(ed.), Conference on the Introductory Physics Course on the Occasion of the Retirement of
Robert Resnick, Wiley, pp. 13–20.

13

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

*Arons, A.B. (1998). Research in physics education: The early years. In T.C. Koch and R.G.

Fuller, eds., PERC 1998: Physics Education Research Conference Proceedings 1998, online at
hhttp://physics.unl.edu/perc98i.

Arons, A.B. (1999). Development of energy concepts in introductory physics courses. American

Journal of Physics 67(12): 1063.

Arons, A.B. (1999). Closet foot-pounders? American Journal of Physics 67(6): 468.
Arons, A.B. and R. Karplus (1976). Implications of accumulating data on levels of intellectual

development. American Journal of Physics 44(4): 396.

Asimov, I. and R.A. Galant (1973). Ginn Science Program. Ginn & Company. For elementary
schools – many volumes, out of print. Recommended by Hubisz et al. (2001): ‘Has what is
missing from most of the books in this report.’

Aubrecht, G.J. (1991). Is there a connection between testing and teaching? Journal of College

Science Teaching 20: 152–157.

Ausubel, D.P. (2000). The Acquisition and Retention of Knowledge. Kluwer.
Ball, D.L. and H. Bass (2000). Interweaving content and pedagogy in teaching and learning to
teach: Knowing and using mathematics. In J. Boaler, ed., Multiple Perspectives on Mathematics
Teaching and Learning (Ablex), pp. 83–104.

*Benezet, L.P. (1935, 1936). The Teaching of Arithmetic I, II, III: The Story of an Experiment.
Journal of the National Education Association 24(8): 241–244 (1935); 24(9): 301–303 (1935);
25(1): 7–8 (1936). The articles (a) were reprinted in the Humanistic Mathematics Newsletter
6: 2–14 (May 1991); (b) are on the web along with other Benezetia at the Benezet Centre
hhttp://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/sanjoy/benezet/i.

*Berman, Etta (1935). The Result of Deferring Systematic Teaching of Arithmetic to Grade Six as
Disclosed by the Deferred Formal Arithmetic Plan at Manchester, New Hampshire. Masters
Thesis, Boston University, USA.

Black, P. and D. Wiliam (1998). The black box: Raising standards through classroom assessment.

Phi Delta Kappan, October, online at hhttp://www.pdkintl.org/kappan/kbla9810.htmi:

Firm evidence shows that formative assessment is an essential component of classroom
work and that its development can raise standards of achievement, Mr. Black and Mr.
Wiliam point out. Indeed, they know of no other way of raising standards for which such
a strong prima facie case can be made.

Bloom, B.S. (1984). The 2-sigma problem: The search for methods of group instruction as eﬀective

as one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher 13(6): 4–16.

Bohren, C.F. (1991). What Light Through Yonder Window Breaks?: More Experiments in Atmo-

Bohren, C.F. (2001). Clouds in a Glass of Beer: Simple Experiments in Atmospheric Physics.

spheric Physics. John Wiley.

Dover.

*Bransford, J.D., A.L. Brown, and R.R. Cocking (eds.) (1999). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Ex-
perience, and School. National Academy Press. Online at hhttp://www.nap.edu/catalog/6160.
htmli.

Brown, D. E. (1993). Refocusing core intuitions: A concretizing role for analogy in conceptual

change. Journal of Research in Science Teaching 30(10): 1273–1290.

Brown, D.E. (2000). Merging dynamics: An integrating perspective on learning, conceptual change,
and teaching, and its implications for educational research. Paper presented at AERA 2000,
New Orleans. Online at hhttp://faculty.ed.uiuc.edu/debrown/merge/i.

Brown, J.S., A. Collins, and P. Duguid (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning.

Educational Researcher 18(1): 34–41. Online at
hhttp://www.ilt.columbia.edu/ilt/papers/JohnBrown.htmli.

14

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Bruer, J.T. (1994). Schools for Thought: A Science of Learning in the Classroom. MIT Press.
Bruer, J.T. (1997). Education and the brain: A bridge too far. Educational Researcher 26(8): 4–16.
Bruer, J.T. (1999). In search of. . . brain-based education. Phi Delta Kappan, May, p. 648. Online

at hhttp://www.pdkintl.org/kappan/kbru9905.htmi.

Bruer, J.T. (1999). The Myth of the First Three Years. Free Press. See also hhttp://www.jsmf.

org/zarticles&pap/John/myth of the ﬁrst three years.htmi

Bunge, M. (1998). Philosophy of Science: From Explanation to Justiﬁcation. Science & Technology

Bunge, M. and N. Mahner, ed. (2001). Scientiﬁc Realism: Selected Essays of Mario Bunge.

Series, Transaction Pub.

Prometheus Books.

Butterworth, B. (1999). What Counts: How Every Brain Is Hardwired for Math. Free Press, New

York. Published in England as The Mathematical Brain, Macmillan, London, 1999.

Bybee, R.W. (1991). Planet Earth in Crisis: How Should Science Educators Respond? American

Biology Teacher 53(3): 146–153.

Bybee, R.W. (1993). Reforming Science Education: Social Perspectives & Personal Reﬂections.

Teachers College Press.

of Physics 67(12): 1045.

Chabay, R.W. and B.A. Sherwood (1999). Bringing atoms into ﬁrst-year physics. American Journal

Chin, C. and D.E. Brown (2000). Learning in science: A comparison of deep and surface approaches.

Journal of Research in Science Teaching 37: 109–138.

Clement, J.M. (2000). Using physics to raise thinking skills. AAPT Announcer 30(4): 81.
Collins, A. J.S. Brown, and S. Newman (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching students the
craft of reading, writing, and mathematics. In L.B. Resnick, ed., Knowing, Learning, and
Instruction: Essays in Honor of Robert Glaser, Erlbaum, pp. 453–494.

Cooper, J., and P. Robinson (1998). Small group instruction in science, mathematics, engineering,

and technology: A discipline status report and teaching agenda for the future. Journal of
College Science Teaching, May, pp. 383–388.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Literacy and intrinsic motivation. Daedalus 119(2): 115–140.

The chief impediments to learning are not cognitive. It is not that students cannot learn;
it is that they do not wish to. If educators invested a fraction of the energy they now spend
trying to transmit information in trying to stimulate the students enjoyment of learning,
we could achieve much better results.

D’Avanzo, C. and A.P. McNeal, eds. (1997). Student-Active Science: Models of Innovation in

College Science Teaching. Saunders. Saunders is advancing education reform: (a) ‘professionals’
may order a free copy by calling +1 800.782.4479; (b) the entire book will soon be available
electronically as an Adobe Acrobat portable document ﬁle! hhttp://www.saunderscollege.
com/lifesci/studact/i.

Dewey, J. (1996). Collected Works of John Dewey, 1882–1953 . Southern Illinois University Press.

On CDROM; for information see hhttp://www.siu.edu/˜deweyctr/index.htmli.

Dewey, J. (1997). Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education.

Dewey, J. (1997). Experience and Education. Macmillan.
Dewey, J. and R.D. Archambault (ed.) (1983). John Dewey on Education. University of Chicago

Dewey, J. and Jo Ann Boydston (contributor) (1980). The School and Society. Southern Illinois

Simon & Schuster.

Press.

University Press.

15

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Dewey, J., L. Hickman, T.M. Alexander (eds.) (1998). The Essential Dewey: Pragmatism, Educa-

tion, Democracy. Indiana University Press.

Dewey, J. and P.W. Jackson (illustrator) (1991). The School and Society and the Child and the

Curriculum. A Centennial Publication; University of Chicago Press.

diSessa, A.A. (1987). The third revolution in computers and education. Journal of Research in

Science Teaching 24: 343–367.

diSessa, A.A. (2000). Changing Minds: Computers, Learning, and Literacy. MIT Press.
Dobey, D.C., R.J. Beichner, and S.L. Raimondi (1998). Essentials of elementary science. Allyn &

Bacon. Recommended by Hubisz et al. (2001).

Druckman, D. and R.A. Bjork, eds. (1994). Learning, Remembering, and Believing: Enhancing
Human Performance. National Academy Press. See especially the Epilogue, ‘Institutional
Impediments to Eﬀective Training’.

Duckworth, E., J. Easley, D. Hawkins, and A. Henriques, eds. (1990). Science Education: A

Minds-on Approach for the Elementary Years. Erlbaum.

Duckworth, E. (1996). The Having of Wonderful Ideas and Other Essays on Teaching and Learning.

Teachers’ College Press.

Elby, A. (1999). Another reason that physics students learn by rote. Physics Education Research

supplement 1 to the American Journal of Physics 67(7): S52–S57.

Elmore, D.A. , S.E. Olsen, and P.M. Smith (1998). Reinventing Schools: The Technology is Now.

National Academy Press. Available only on the web at
hhttp://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/techgap/pdf.htmli.

Epstein, J. (1997/8). Cognitive development in an integrated mathematics and science program.

Journal of College Science Teaching, December 1997 and January 1998, pp. 194–201.

Ericsson, K.A., R.T. Krampe, and C. Tesch-Romer (1993). The role of deliberate practice in the

acquisition of expert performance. Psychological Review 100(3): 363–406.

Ericsson, K.A. and N. Charness (1994). Expert performance, its structure and acquisition. American

Ericsson, K.A. and J. Smith, eds. (1991). Toward a General Theory of Expertise: Prospects and

Psychologist 49: 725–747.

Limits. Cambridge University Press.

Ericsson, K.A, ed. (1996). The Road to Excellence: The Acquisition of Expert Performance in the

Arts and Sciences, Sports, and Games. Erlbaum.

Fawcett, H.P. (1938). The Nature of Proof: A Description and Evaluation of Certain Procedures
Used in a Senior High School to Develop an Understanding of the Nature of Proof. Teachers’
College Press. It was the 1938 Yearbook of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
and is now available from them as H.P. Fawcett, The Thirteenth Yearbook: The Nature of
Proof, 1995. For a discussion of Fawcett’s brilliant work see Schoenfeld (1991).

Fisher, K.M., J.H. Wandersee, and D. Moody (2000). Mapping Biology Knowledge. Kluwer.
Fiske, E.B. (1992). Smart Schools, Smart Kids. Touchstone.
Flener, F. (2001). A geometry course that changed their lives: the guinea pigs after 60 years.
Talk presented on the work of Fawcett (1938) at the National Council of Teachers of Mathe-
matics on 6 April 2001, Orlando, Florida. Online at hhttp://groups.yahoo.com/group/math-
learn/ﬁles/NatureOfProof.txti. Unfortunately, one must either be a subscriber to math-learn
hhttp://groups.yahoo.com/group/math-learni or else sign in as a subscriber to access the talk.
Ford, K.W. (1989). Guest Comment: Is physics diﬃcult? American Journal of Physics 57(10): 871–
872. For quotes from this insightful piece regarding physics in the early grades see Hake (2000):

Physics is diﬃcult in the same way that all serious intellectual eﬀort is diﬃcult. Solid
understanding of English literature, or economics, or history, or music, or biology or physics

16

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

does not come without hard work. But we typically act on the assumption (and argue to our
principals and deans) that ours is a discipline that only a few are capable of comprehending.
The priesthood syndrome that ﬂows from this assumption is, regrettably, seductive. . . If
physics is not more diﬃcult than other disciplines, why does everyone think that it is?
To answer indirectly, let me turn again to English. Six-year-olds write English and (to
pick a skilled physicist writer) Jeremy Bernstein writes English. What separates them? A
long, gradual incline of increased ability, understanding, and practice. Some few people,
illiterates, do not start up the hill. Most people climb some distance. A few climb as far as
Bernstein. For physics, on the other hand, we have fashioned a cliﬀ. There is no gradual
ramp, only a near-vertical ascent to its high plateau. When the cliﬀ is encountered for the
ﬁrst time by 16- or 17-year olds, it is small wonder that only a few have courage (and
the skill) to climb it. There is no good reason for this diﬀerence of intellectual topography.
First-graders could be taught some physics. . . (Hammer 1999). . . , second-graders a little
more, and third-graders still more. Then for the eleventh- or twelfth-grader, a physics
course would be a manageable step upward. Some might choose to take it, some not, but
few would be barred by lack of ‘talent’ or ‘background’. [Our italics.]

Forman, G. and P.B. Pufall, eds. (1988). Constructivism in the Computer Age. Erlbaum.
French, A.P. (1997). The Nature of Physics. In Tiberghien, A., E.L. Jossem, and J. Barojas, eds.,
Connecting Research in Physics Education with Teacher Education, International Commission
on Physics Education. Online at hhttp://www.physics.ohio-state.edu/˜jossem/ICPE/B1.htmli.

Fullan, M.G. (1991). The New Meaning of Educational Change. Teachers’ College Press.
Fuller, R.G. , R. Karplus, and A.E. Lawson (1977). Can physics develop reasoning? Physics Today,

February, pp. 23–28.

pp. 43–47.

Fuller, R.G. (1982). Solving physics problems – how do we do it? Physics Today, September,

Fuller, R.G. (1993). Millikan lecture 1992; Hypermedia and the knowing of physics: Standing upon

the shoulders of giants. American Journal of Physics 61(4): 300–304.

Karplus, R. (2001). A Love of Discovery: Science Education and the Second Career of Robert

Karplus, R.G. Fuller, ed., to be published.

Gardner, H. (1985). The Mind’s New Science: A History of the Cognitive Revolution. Basic Books.

See especially ‘Jean Piaget’s Developmental Concerns’, pp. 116–118.

Gardner, H. (1985). Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences. Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1991). The Unschooled Mind: How Children Think & How Schools Should Teach.

Basic Books. Especially Chapter 2, ‘Conceptualizing the Development of Mind’.

Gardner, H. (1999). The Disciplined Mind: What All Students Should Understand. Simon &

Schuster.

Gardner, H. (2000). Intelligence Reframed: Multiple Intelligences for the 21st Century. Basic Books.
D. Gentner and A.L. Stevens, eds. (1983). Mental Models. Erlbaum.
Goldberg, F. and S. Bendall (1995). Making the invisible visible: A teaching/learning environment
that builds on a new view of the physics learner. American Journal of Physics 63: 978–991.

Goodland, J.I. (1990). Teachers for Our Nation’s Schools. Jossey–Bass.
Goodland, J.I. (1994). Educational Renewal: Better Teachers, Better Schools. Jossey-Bass.
Goodstein, D. (2000). The Coming Revolution in Physics Education. APS News, June. Online at

hhttp://www.aps.org/apsnews/0600/060017.htmli.

Haber-Schaim, U., J.H. Dodge, R. Gardner, E.A. Shore (1991). PSSC Physics. Kendall/Hunt. See

Arons (1960) and Swartz (1999) for reviews.

17

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Haber-Schaim, U., R. Cutting, H.G. Kirksey, H. Pratt (1999). Introductory Physical Science. 7th
ed. Science Curriculum Inc. hhttp://www.sci-ips.com/i. See Raloﬀ (2001) for a review; also
mentioned but not reviewed by Hubisz et al. (2001).

Hake, R.R. (1987). Promoting student crossover to the Newtonian world. American Journal of

Physics 55(10): 878–884.

Hake, R.R.. (1992). Socratic pedagogy in the introductory physics lab. Physics Teacher 30: 546–552.

Version updated 27 April 1998, online at hhttp://physics.indiana.edu/˜sdi/i.

Hake, R.R. (1998a). Interactive-engagement vs traditional methods: A six-thousand-student survey
of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. American Journal of Physics 66: 64–74.
Online at hhttp://www.physics.indiana.edu/˜sdi/i.

Hake, R.R. (1998b). Interactive-engagement methods in introductory mechanics courses. Online
at hhttp://www.physics.indiana.edu/˜sdi/i and submitted on 19 June 1998 to the Physics
Education Research Supplement to AJP (PERS). See especially footnotes #39 on the Socratic
method, #57 on classroom communication systems, and #66 on sources of conceptual questions
and problems.

Hake, R.R. (1999). REsearch, Development, and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education:

A Web Guide for Non-Biologists (REDCUBE). Online at hhttp://www.physics.indiana.
edu/˜redcubei.

*Hake, R.R. (2000a). Is it ﬁnally time to implement curriculum S? AAPT Announcer 30(4): 103.

Online at hhttp://www.physics.indiana.edu/˜hakei.

*Hake, R.R. (2000b). The general population’s ignorancce of science-related societal issues: A

challenge for the university. AAPT Announcer 30(2): 105. Online at hhttp://physics.indiana.
edu/˜hakei.

Hake, R.R. (2001a). Lessons from the physics education reform eﬀort. Accepted for publication in

Conservation Ecology. Online at hhttp://www.physics.indiana.edu/˜hakei.

*Hake, R.R. (2001b). Suggestions for administering and reporting pre/post diagnostic tests. Unpub-

lished. Online at hhttp://physics.indiana.edu/˜hake/i.

Hammer, D. (1995). Epistemological considerations in teaching introductory physics. Science

Education 79: 393–413.

Hammer, D. (1997). Discovery learning and discovery teaching. Cognition and Instruc. 15(4): 485–

529. Abstract Online at hhttp://www.physics.umd.edu/perg/cpt.htmli.

Hammer, D. (1999). Physics for ﬁrst-graders? Science Education 83(6): 797–799. Online at

hhttp://www.physics.umd.edu/perg/cpt.htmli.

Hammer, D. (2000). Student resources for learning introductory physics. Physics Education Re-

search, supplement 1 to the American Journal of Physics 68(7): S52–S59.

Hammer, D. (2001). Teacher inquiry. To appear in J. Minstrell and E. van Zee, eds., Teaching
and Learning in an Inquiry-Based Science Classrooom. (Also to appear in the Paper Series of
the Center for the Development of Teaching at EDC, in Newton, MA.) Pre-publication draft
online at hhttp://www.physics.umd.edu/perg/cpt.htmli.

J. Handlesman, B. Houser, and H. Kriegel (1997). Biology Brought to Life: A guide to teaching

students to think like scientists. Times Mirror Higher Education Group.

Hargan, J.D.D. and M.S. Rivkin (1999). Science Experiences in the Early Childhood Years: An

Integrated Approach. Prentice–Hall. Recommended by Hubisz et al. (2001).

Harte, J. (1988). Consider a Spherical Cow: A Course in Environmental Problem Solving. University

Hawkins, D. (1974a). On Living in Trees. In The Informed Vision: Essays on Learning and Human

Science Books.

Nature (Agathon Press).

18

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Hawkins, D. (1974b). Messing about in science. In The Informed Vision: Essays on Learning and

Human Nature (Agathon Press).

Hawkins, D. (1974c). Critical barriers to science learning. Online at hhttp://www.exploratorium.

edu/IFI/resources/museumeducation/criticalbarriers.htmli.

Hawkins, D. (2001). The Roots of Literacy. University of Colorado Press.
Hazen R.M. and J. Treﬁl (1991). Science Matters: Achieving Scientiﬁc Literacy. Doubleday.
Heibert, J., T.P. Carpenter, and E. Fennema (1997). Making Sense: Teaching and Learning

Mathematics With Understanding. Heinemann.

Heller, K.J. (1999). Introductory physics reform in the traditional format: an intellectual framework.

APS Forum on Education Newsletter, Summer. Online at
hhttp://webs.csu.edu/˜bisb2/FEdnl/heller.htmi.

Heller, K.J. (2001). The time has come to make teaching a real profession. APS Forum on

Education Newsletter, Spring. Online at hhttp://www.aps.org/units/fed/index.htmli. Suggests
raising K–12 teacher’s average salary so as to equal mechanical engineer’s average salary, with
a Fermi-problem estimated cost of about 450 billion over 10 years. A similar proposal and cost
estimate was made by Langenberg (2000).

Herron J. D. and S.C. Nurrenbern (1999). Chemical education research: Improving chemistry

learning. Journal of Chemical Education 76(10): 1353–1361.

Hestenes, D. (1992). Modeling games in the Newtonian world. American Journal of Physics

60(8): 732–748.

Hillocks, G. (1999). Ways of Thinking, Ways of Teaching. Teachers’ College Press.
Hobson, A. (2000/2001). Teaching relevant science for scientiﬁc literacy. Journal of College Science

Teaching, December 2000/January 2001.

Hobson, A. (1999). Physics: Concepts and Connections. Prentice–Hall.
Holton, G. (1998/99). The New Imperative for Science Literacy. Journal of College Science

Teaching, Dec. 1998/January 1999, 181–185.

Holton, G. and S.G. Brush. (2001). Physics, the Human Adventure: From Copernicus to Einstein

and Beyond. Rutgers University Press.

Hubisz, J.L. et al. (2000?). Review of Middle School Physical Science Texts. Online at hhttp://www.

science-house.org/middleschool/reviews/i.

Hubisz, J.L. et al. (2001). Report on a study of middle school science texts. Physics Teacher

39(5): 304–309.

If good materials are to be used, we must bring them to the attention of teachers and
administrators. Our two year search, unfortunately, has led us to say that the available
text books are not the tools that will eﬀect a change in the way physical science is taught
in the middle schools of the United States. [emphasis added]

With seeming inconsistency, Raloﬀ (2001) reports that

. . . Hubisz. . . would have liked to include the book . . . Haber-Schaim et al. (1999) – an
‘available’ textbook. . . in his recent review of science texts ‘because it would have allowed
us to say something really positive.’ But since it was not among the top dozen sellers, it
didn’t make the cut.

See especially ‘Suggestions for Middle School Teachers’.

Hurd, P.D. (1994). New minds for a new age: Prologue to modernizing the science curriculum.

Science Education 78(1): 103–116.

Hurd, P.D. (1997). Inventing Science Education for the New Millennium. Teachers’ College Press.
Hurd, P.D. (2000). Transforming Middle School Science. Teachers College Press.

19

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Inhelder, B., D. DeCaprona, and A. Cornu-Wells (1987). Piaget Today. Psychology Press.
Inhelder, B. and J. Piaget (1958). Growth of Logical Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence: An

Essay on the Construction of Formal Operational Structures. Basic Books.

Jungck, J.R. (1972). The Three I’s: Interdisciplinary, Investigative, and Independent study. In R.K.
Gibbs and P.A. Taylor, eds., How Ought Science Be Taught?, MSS Educational Publishers,
pp. 209–210.

Jungck, J.R. (1985). A Problem Posing Approach to Biology Education. American Biology Teacher
47(5): 264–266. Reprinted in S. Brown and M. Walter, eds., Problem Posing: Reﬂections and
Applications, Erlbaum, 1993.

Jungck, J.R. and N.S Peterson (1988). Problem-posing, problem-solving, and persuasion in biology

education. Academic Computing 2(6): 14–17, 48–50.

Kaput, J.J. (1992). Technology and mathematics education. In D.A. Grouws, ed., Handbook of

Research on Mathematics Teaching and Learning, Macmillan.

Karplus, R. (1977). Science teaching and the development of reasoning. Journal of Research in

Science Education 14: 169.

Kessler, J.H., A. Benbrow, and T. Sweitzer (1996). The Best of Wonder Science: Elementary
Science Activities. Delmar Thomson Learning. Recommended by Hubicz et al. (2001).

Kindﬁeld, A.C.H. (1994). Assessing understanding of biological processes: Elucidating students

models of meiosis. American Biology Teacher 56(6): 367–371.

King, J.G. (2001). ‘Observation, experiment, and the future of physics’: John G. King’s acceptance
speech for the 2000 Oersted medal presented by the American Association of Physics Teachers,
18 January 2000. American Journal of Physics 69(1): 11–25. From the abstract:

Looking at our built world, most physicists see order where many others see magic. This
view of order should be available to all, and physics would ﬂourish better in an appreciative
society. Despite the remarkable developments in the teaching of physics in the last half
century, too many people, whether they’ve had physics courses or not, don’t have an inkling
of the power and value of our subject, whose importance ranges from the practical to the
psychological. We need to supplement people’s experiences in ways that are applicable to
diﬀerent groups, from physics majors to people without formal education. I will describe
and explain an ambitious program to stimulate scientiﬁc, engineering, and technological
interest and understanding through direct observation of a wide range of phenomena and
experimentation with them. For the very young: toys, playgrounds, kits, projects. For older
students: indoor showcases, projects, and courses taught in intensive form. For all ages:
more instructive everyday surroundings with outdoor showcases and large demonstrations

Kohn, A. (1999). Punishment By Rewards: The Trouble with Gold Stars, Incentive Plans, A’s,

Praise, and Other Bribes. Houghton Miﬄin.

Kolb, D.A. (1984). Experiental Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning and Development.

Prentice–Hall.

Langer, E.J. (1997). The Power of Mindful Learning. Addison–Wesley.
Langenberg, D.N. (2000). Rising to the challenge. Thinking K–16 4(1): 19. Online as ‘Honor in the

Boxcar’ hhttp://www.edtrust.org/main/reports.aspi:

. . . on average, teacher’s salaries ought to be about 50% higher than they are now. Some
teachers, including the very best, those who teach in shortage ﬁelds (e.g., math and science)
and those who teach in the most challenging environments (e.g., inner cities) ought to have
salaries about twice the current norm. . . Simple arithmetic applied to publicly available
data shows that the increased cost would be only 0.6% of the GDP, about one-twentieth
of what we pay for health care. I’d assert that if we can’t bring ourselves to pony up that
amount, we will pay far more dearly in the long run.

20

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Lave J. and E. Wenger (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge

University Press.

Laws, P. (1997). Millikan lecture 1996: Promoting active learning based on physics education

research in introductory physics courses. American Journal of Physics 65(1): 13–21.

Lawson, A.E. (1993a). Deductive reasoning, brain maturation, and science concept acquisition: Are

they linked? Journal of Research in Science Teaching 30(9): 1029–1052.

Lawson, A.E. (1993b). Neural principles of memory and a neural theory of analogical insight.

Journal of Research in Science Teaching 30(10): 1327–1348.

Lawson, A.E. ed. (1993c). Special issue on the role of analogy in science and science teaching.

Journal of Research in Science Teaching 30(10): 1211–1364.

Lawson, A.E., W.P. Baker, L. DiDonato, M.P. Verdi, and M.A. Johnson (1993). The role of physical
analogues of molecular interactions and hypothetico-deductive reasoning in conceptual change.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching 30(9): 1073–1086.

Lawson, A.E. (1994). Epistemological foundations of cognition. In D. Gabel, ed., Handbook of

Research on Science Teaching and Learning, Macmillan.

Lawson, A.E. (1995). Science Teaching and the Development of Thinking. Wadsworth Publishing.
See especially Appendix C, ‘What is Science’ by R.P. Feynman; Appendix F, ‘Classroom Test
of Scientiﬁc Reasoning’; and the excellent bibliography.

Lawson, A.E. (1999). What should students learn about the nature of science and how should we

teach it? Journal of College Science Teaching 28(6): 401.

Layman, J. W., G. Ochoa, and H. Heikkinne (1996). Inquiry and Learning: Realizing Science
Standards in the Classroom. College Entrance Examination Board. Online at hhttp://www.
nap.edu/readingroom/books/rtmss/7.19.htmli.

*Lederman, L.M. (1999). A science way of thinking. Education Week, 16 June. hhttp://www.edweek.

org/ew/1999/40leder.h18i.

*Livanis, O. (2000). Physics First Home Page. hhttp://members.aol.com/physicsﬁrst/index.htmli.
Lochhead, J. (2000). Thinkback: A User’s Guide to Minding the Mind. Erlbaum. See also at

hhttp://www.whimbey.com/Books/Thinkback/thinkback.htmi

Ma, L. (1999). Knowing and Teaching Elementary Mathematics: Teachers’ Understanding of
Fundamental Mathematics in China and theUnited States. Erlbaum. For a review of see R.
Askey, American Educator, Fall 1999; on the web at the back-to-basics site ‘Mathematically
Correct’ hhttp://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/mathman/i.
Marshall R. and M. Tucker. (1992). Thinking for a Living. Basic Books.
McDermott, L.C. (1990). A perspective on teacher preparation in physics and other sciences: The

need for special science courses for teachers. American Journal of Physics 58: 734–742.

McDermott, L.C. (1991). Millikan lecture 1990: What we teach and what is learned: Closing the

gap. American Journal of Physics 59(4): 301–315.

McDermott, L.C. (1993). Guest comment: How we teach and how students learn – a mismatch?

American Journal of Physics 61(4): 295–298.

McDermott, L.C. (2000). Oersted medal lecture: Research – key to student understanding. AAPT

Announcer 30(4): 88.

McDermott L.C. and Redish E.F. (1999). RL-PER1: Resource letter on physics education re-
search. American Journal of Physics 67(9): 755–767. Online at hhttp://www.physics.umd.
edu/rgroups/ripe/perg/cpt.htmli.

Mervis, J. (2001). Math education: Academy report aims to quiet debate. Science 291: 808 (2
February). Describes a panel report by the National Academy of Sciences hhttp://www.nap.
edu/catalog/9822.htmli on the ‘skills versus understanding’ wars in mathematics education.

21

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

The article quotes the chair of the panel, Professor Jeremy Kilpatrick of the University of
Georgia:

We want to move past the debate over skills versus understanding. It’s not one or the other.
The point is that both are needed, and more, to learn and understand mathematics.

Mestre, J.P. (1991). learning and instruction in pre-college physical science. Physics Today

44(9): 56–62.

Traditional teaching practices only poorly reﬂect what is known about the learning process.
To improve science education, teachers and scientists must take note of the implications
of cognitive science.

Mestre, J. and J. Touger (1989). Cognitive research – what’s in it for physics teachers? Physics

Teacher 27: 447–456.

Minstrell, J. (1989). Teaching science for understanding. In L.B. Resnick and L.E. Klopfer, eds.,
Toward the Thinking Curriculum: Current Cognitive Research. Association for Supervision and
Curriculum Development [ASCD] Yearbook.

Moore, J.A. (1993). We need a revolution – teaching biology for the twenty-ﬁrst century. Bioscience

Moore, J.A. (1993). Science as a Way of Knowing: The Foundations of Modern Biology. Harvard

43(11): 782–786.

University Press.

Moyer, A.E. (1982). John Dewey on physics teaching. Physics Teacher 20(3): 173–175.
*NISE [National Institute for Science Education] (2001). hhttp://www.wcer.wisc.edu/NISEi: Field-

tested Learning Assessment Guide (FLAG): For Science, Math, and Engineering Instruc-
tors. hhttp://www.wcer.wisc.edu/nise/cl1/ﬂag/ﬂaghome.aspi, especially Introduction to CAT’s
[Classroom Assessment Techniques] at hhttp://www.wcer.wisc.edu/nise/cl1/ﬂag/cat/catframe.
aspi.

National Research Council (1989). Everybody Counts: A Report to the Nation on the Future of
Mathematics Education. Mathematical Sciences Education Board and the Board on Mathe-
matical Sciences. Online at hhttp://www.nap.edu/catalog/1199.htmli.

National Research Council (1990). Fulﬁlling the Promise: Biology Education in the Nation’s Schools.

National Academy Press. For a description see
hhttp://www.nap.edu/bookstore/isbn/0309051479.htmli.

*National Research Council (1996a). National Science Education Standards. National Academy

Press. hhttp://books.nap.edu/catalog/4962.htmli.

National Research Council (1996b). Resources for Teaching Elementary School Science. National

Academy Press. Online at hhttp://www.nap.edu/catalog/4966.htmli.

National Research Council (1997a). Introducing the National Science Education Standards, Booklet.

National Academy Press. Online at hhttp://books.nap.edu/catalog/5704.htmli.

National Research Council (1997b). Improving Teacher Preparation and Credentialing Consistent
with the National Science Education Standards: Report of a Symposium. National Academy
Press. Online at hhttp://books.nap.edu/catalog/5592.htmli.

National Research Council (1997c). Science Teaching Reconsidered: A Handbook. National Academy

Press. Online at hhttp://books.nap.edu/catalog/5287.htmli.

National Research Council (1997d). Science for All Children: A Guide to Improving Elementary
Science Education in Your School District. National Academy Press. Online at hhttp://books.
nap.edu/catalog/4964.htmli.

National Research Council (1997e). Preparing for the 21st Century: The Education Imperative.

National Academy Press. Online at hhttp://books.nap.edu/catalog/9537.htmli.

22

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

National Research Council (1998a). Resources for Teaching Middle School Science. National

Academy Press. Online at hhttp://books.nap.edu/catalog/5774.htmli.

National Research Council (1998b). Every Child a Scientist: Achieving Scientiﬁc Literacy for All.

National Academy Press. Online at hhttp://books.nap.edu/catalog/6005.htmli.

National Research Council (1999a). Global Perspectives for Local Action: Using TIMSS to Improve
U.S. Mathematics and Science Education. National Academy Press. Online at hhttp://www.
nap.edu/catalog/9605.htmli.

National Research Council (1999b). Improving Student Learning: A Strategic Plan for Educa-
tion Research and Its Utilization. National Academy Press. Online at hhttp://books.nap.
edu/catalog/6488.htmli.

National Research Council (1999c). Selecting Instructional Materials: A Guide for K–12 Science.

National Academy Press. Online at hhttp://books.nap.edu/catalog/9607.htmli.

National Research Council (1999d). Designing Mathematics or Science Curriculum Programs: A
Guide for Using Mathematics and Science Education Standards. National Academy Press.
Online at hhttp://books.nap.edu/catalog/9658.htmli.

National Research Council (2000a). Educating Teachers of Science, Mathematics, and Technology:
New Practices for the New Millennium. National Academy Press. Online at hhttp://www.nap.
edu/catalog/9832.htmli.

National Research Council (2000b). Steve Olson and Susan Loucks-Horsley, eds. Committee on
the Development of an Addendum to the National Science Education Standards on Scientiﬁc
Inquiry, National Research Council. Inquiry and the ‘National Science Education Standards’:
A Guide for Teaching and Learning. National Academy Press. Online at hhttp://books.nap.
edu/catalog/9596.htmli.

National Research Council (2001a). Committee on Development of an Addendum to the Na-
tional Science Education Standards on Science and Technology. Science and Technology and
the National Science Education Standards: A Guide for Teaching and Learning. National
Academy Press. Final forthcoming / no prepublication copies for sale; see hhttp://books.nap.
edu/catalog/9833.htmli.

National Research Council (2001b). J. Myron Atkin, Paul Black, and Janet Coﬀey, eds. Class-
room Assessment and the National Science Education Standards: A Guide for Teaching and
Learning. National Academy Press. Final forthcoming / no prepublication copies for sale; see
hhttp://books.nap.edu/catalog/9847.htmli.

National Research Council. (2001c). Committee on Understanding the Inﬂuence of Standards
in Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education, Iris R. Weiss, Karen S. Hollweg, and
Gail Burrill, eds. Considering the Inﬂuence: A Framework for Research on the Eﬀects of
Nationally Developed Mathematics, Science, and Technology Education Standards. National
Academy Press. Final forthcoming / no prepublication copies for sale; see hhttp://books.nap.
edu/catalog/10023.htmli.

National Science Foundation (no date). Inquiry: Thoughts, Views, and Strategies for the K–5

Classroom. Online at hhttp://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2000/nsf99148/htmstart.htmi.

Nelson, C.E. (1989). Skewered on the unicorn’s horn: The illusion of tragic tradeoﬀ between content
and critical thinking in the teaching of science. In L.W. Crow, ed., Enhancing Critical Thinking
in the Sciences, Society for College Science Teachers/National Science Teachers Association,
pp. 17–27.

Nelson, C.E. (1994). Critical thinking and collaborative learning. New Directions for Teaching and

Learning 59: 45–58.

Nelson, C. (2000). Bibliography: how to ﬁnd out more about college teaching and its scholarship: A
not too brief, very selective hyperlinked list; college pedagogy is a major area of scholarship!.
hhttp://php.indiana.edu/˜nelson1/TCHNGBKS.htmli.

23

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Neuschatz, M. (1999). What can the TIMSS teach us? Science Teacher 66(1): 23–26.
*NCSU [North Carolina State University] (2001). Physics Education R & D Group, Assessment

Instrument Information Page, online at hhttp://www.ncsu.edu/per/TestInfo.htmli.

Novak, G. M., E.T. Patterson, A.D. Gavrin, and W. Christian. (1999). Just in Time Teaching.

Prentice–Hall. For a description see hhttp://webphysics.iupui.edu/jitt/jitt.htmli.

Novak, J.D., (1998). Learning, Creating, and Using Knowledge: Concept Maps as Facilitative Tools

in Schools and Classrooms. Erlbaum.

Novak, J.D., J.J. Mintzes, and J.H. Wandersee, eds. (1998). Teaching Science for Understanding –

A Human Constructivist View. Academic Press.

Nuﬃeld Foundation (1999). Beyond 2000 – Science Education for the Future. Nuﬃeld Foundation,
UK. Produced by prominent UK science educators; makes 10 major recommendations for the
future direction of science education. Online at
hhttp://www.kcl.ac.uk/depsta/education/be2000/index.htmli.

Paulos, J.A. (1992). Beyond Numeracy: Ruminations of a Numbers Man. Vintage Books.
Perkins, D. (1992). Smart Schools: Better Thinking and Learning for Every Child. Free Press.
Perry, W.G. (1970). Forms of Intellectual and Ethical Development in the College Years: A Scheme.

Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.

Pinker, S. (1999). How the Mind Works. Norton. See also hhttp://web.mit.edu/bcs/pinker.htmli.
Polya, G. (1954). Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning (2 volumes). Volume I: Induction and
Analogy in Mathematics. Volume II: Patterns of Plausible Inference. Princeton University
Press. At a higher level than Polya (1957); his most brilliant books on mathematics teaching
and thinking.

Polya, G. (1957). How to Solve It: A New Aspect of Mathematical Method. Princeton University

Press.

Polya (1962, 1965). Mathematical Discovery: On Understanding, Learning, and Teaching Problem
Solving (2 volumes). Wiley. Almost as good as Polya (1954) and contains his famous ‘Ten
Commandments for Teachers’ (p. 116).

Polya, G. (1965). Let Us Teach Guessing (60-minute videotape). Mathematical Association of

America. Available from hhttp://www.maa.org/pubs/books/ltg.htmli.

*Radatz, H. (1983). Untersuchungen zum L¨osen eingekleideter Aufgaben. [Studies of solving math-

ematical tasks] Journal f¨ur Mathematikdidaktik 3: 205–217.

Raloﬀ, J. (2001). Where’s the book? Science education is redeﬁning texts. Science News 159(12)
(March 24). Online at hhttp://www.sciencenews.org/20010324/bob12.aspi (second in a two-
part series on middle-school science curricula). This article extols Haber-Schaim et al. (1999):

Common to the origin of many of these. . . (newer science education programs). . . is funding
from the NSF. Explains Janice Earle, a senior program director. . . (at NSF). . . qualifying
projects must now exhibit ‘a coherent content. . . aligned with national standards’, foster
critical thinking and problem solving, and be grounded in research on how children learn.
Moreover, NSF recommends that any new curriculum be developed by teams of practicing
scientists, engineers, and mathematicians, along with classroom teachers. ‘I would be sur-
prised if most textbooks were developed like that,’ Earle says. They aren’t. One exception,
however, is (Haber-Schaim et al. 1999). . . notes Uri Haber-Schaim, one of this textbook’s
authors. Launched in 1967, the book brieﬂy became a top selection for eighth- and ninth-
grade classrooms. Developed with NSF funding, the book was initially issued by a big
publisher, but sales dropped when newer texts entered the ﬁeld. In the early 1990’s, the
company decided not to publish further editions but permitted Haber-Schaim to pick up
rights to the book. His ﬁrm, Science Curriculum Inc. of Belmont, Mass., now produces it.
Unlike other science texts for early adolescents, Haber-Schaim says, ‘we very thoroughly

24

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

ﬁeld-tested our experiments in classrooms over a period of 2 years. We even ﬁeld-tested ev-
ery homework question. . . (Among extollers). . . of the book is John L. Hubisz . . . He would
have liked to include the book in his recent review of science texts. . . hhttp://www.aapt.
orgi ‘because it would have allowed us to say something really positive.’ But since it was
not among the top dozen sellers, it didn’t make the cut.

Rath, A. and D. E. Brown (1996). Modes of engagement in science inquiry: A microanalysis of
elementary students’ orientations toward phenomena at a summer science camp. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching 33: 1083–1097.

Redish, E.F. (1994). Implications of cognitive studies for teaching physics. American Journal
of Physics 62(9): 796–803. Online at hhttp://www.physics.umd.edu/rgroups/ripe/perg/cpt.
htmli.

Redish, E.F. (1999). Millikan lecture 1998: Building a science of teaching physics. American Journal

of Physics 67(7): 562–573. Online at hhttp://www.physics.umd.edu/rgroups/ripe/perg/cpt.
htmli.

Reif, F. (1995). Millikan lecture 1994: Understanding and teaching important scientiﬁc thought

processes. American Journal of Physics 63(1): 17–32.

Reif, F. (1999). Thermal physics in the introductory physics course: Why and how to teach it from

a uniﬁed atomic perspective. American Journal of Physics 67(12): 1051–1062.

Resnick, L.B. and M.W. Hall (1998). Learning organizations for sustainable education reform.

Daedalus 127(4): 89–118.

*Reusser, Kurt (1988). Problem Solving beyond the Logic of Things: Contextual Eﬀects on Under-

standing and Solving Word Problems. Instructional Science 17: 309–38.

Sadler P.M. and R.H. Tai. (1997). The role of high-school physics in preparing students for college

physics. Physics Teacher 35(5): 282–285.

Salinger, G.L. (1991). The materials of physics instruction. Physics Today 44(9): 39–45.

The mathematics and science communities are redeﬁning what students should know and
how they should learn it. Much new instructional material is available embodying the new
reforms.

Sarason, S.B. (1993). The Case for Change: Rethinking the Preparation of Educators. Jossey–Bass.
Sarason, S.B. (1996). Revisiting ‘The culture of the school and the problem of change’. Teachers’

College Press.

Schneps, M.H. and P.M. Sadler (1985). Private universe project. Harvard–Smithsonian Center for

Astrophysics, Science Education Department.
hhttp://cfa-www.harvard.edu/cfa/sed/resources/privateuniv.htmli.

Schwartz, R.B. (1999). Lessons from TIMSS. Hands On 21(1): 4. hhttp://www.terc.edu/handson
Issues/s98/schwartz.htmli. Hands On is a publication of TERC [Technical Education Research
Center] hhttp://www.terc.edui. Schwartz is president of ACHIEVE (2001), and on the faculty
of the Harvard Graduate School of Education.

Shapiro, I., C. Whitney, P. Sadler, and M. Schneps (1997). Simple Minds. Harvard–Smithsonian
Center for Astrophysics, Science Education Department, Media Group. hhttp://www.learner.
org/catalog/science/mooo/i and hhttp://www.learner.org/catalog/science/mooo/mooodes.
htmli.

Simon, H.A. (1998). What we know about learning. Journal of Engineering Education 87(4): 343–

348.

Schoenfeld, A.H. (1985). Mathematical Problem Solving. Academic Press.
*Schoenfeld, Alan (1987). What’s all the fuss about metacognition? In Cognitive Science and

Mathematics Education, Alan Schoenfeld, ed. (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum).

25

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

*Schoenfeld, Alan H. (1989). Teaching mathematical thinking and problem solving. In Lauren B.
Resnick and Leonard B. Klopfer, eds., Toward the thinking curriculum: Current cognitive
research, Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development [ASCD], Alexandria, VA.
Schultz, T. (2001). Science Education Through the Eyes of a Physicist. National Academy Of
Sciences/National Research Council. Online at hhttp://www.nas.edu/rise/backg2d.htmi.
Sizer, T.R. (1985.) Horace’s Compromise: The Dilemma of the American High School. Houghton

Miﬄin.

Sizer, T.R. (1992). Horace’s School: Redesigning the American High School. Houghton Miﬄin.
Sizer, T.R. (1996). Horace’s Hope: What Works for the American High School. Houghton Miﬄin.
Sizer, T.R. and N.F. Sizer (1999). The Students Are Watching: Schools and the Moral Contract.

Beacon Press. See also hhttp://www.essentialschools.org/i.

Slavin, R.E. (1994). Cooperative Learning: Theory, Research and Practice. Allyn & Bacon.
Springer, L., M.E. Stanne, and S.D. Donovan (1999). Undergraduates in science, mathematics,
engineering, and technology: a meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research 69(1): 21–51.
Abstract online at hhttp://www.aera.net/pubs/rer/abs/rer691-3.htmi.

Stein, S.K. (1996). Strength in Numbers: Discovering the Joy and Power of Mathematics in

Sternberg, R.J. (1995). In Search of the Human Mind. Harcourt Brace. Especially ‘Evaluation of

Everyday Life. John Wiley.

Piaget’s Theory’, pp. 427–428.

Stevenson H.W., and J.W. Stigler (1992). The Learning Gap: Why Our Schools are Failing and

What We Can Learn from Japanese and Chinese Education. Summit Books.

Stigler, J.W. and J. Hiebert (1997). Understanding and Improving Classroom Mathematics In-
struction: An Overview of the TIMSS Video Study. Phi Delta Kappan, September. Online at
hhttp://www.pdkintl.org/kappan/kstg9709.htmi.

Stigler, J.W. and J. Hiebert (1999). The Teaching Gap. Free Press. See also hhttp://www.lessonlab.

com/teaching-gap/i. Contains an illuminating analysis of TIMSS videotapes.

Swartz, C.E. (1969). Measure and ﬁnd out: A quantitative approach to science. Scott, Foresman, &
Company. 3 volumes. Recommended by Hubisz et al. (2001): ‘Has what is missing from most
of the books in this report’.

Swartz, C.E. (1986). Elementary-school science by a quantitative approach. Unnpublished.
Swartz, C.E. (1991). The physicists intervene. Physics Today 44(9): 22–28.

For over 150 years American physicists have been making forays into elementary and high
school science teaching. Their novel approaches have usually worked–but the results have
always been short-lived.

*Swartz, C.E. (1993). Editorial: Standard reaction. Physics Teacher 31: 334–335.
Swartz, C.E. et al. (1999). Survey of high-school texts. Physics Teacher 37(5): 283–296.
Swartz C.E. and T. Miner (1998). Teaching Introductory Physics: A Source Book. Springer-Verlag.
For a description see hhttp://www.springer-ny.com/catalog/np/apr98np/1-56396-320-5.htmli.
Schwartz, B.B. and J.J. Wynne (1991). Pre-college physics education programs from the research

community. Physics Today 44(9): 48–54.

Physicists from professional societies, the national laboratories and industry run many
active programs for teachers and students of pre-college physics.

Tyack, D. and L. Cuban (1995). Tinkering Toward Utopia: A Century of Public School Reform.

Uno, G.E. (1994) (principal author). Developing Biological Literacy. Biological Sciences Curriculum

Harvard University Press.

Study [BSCS], Kendall/Hunt.

26

Benezet–Berman mathematics teaching experiment

Uno, G.E. and R.W. Bybee (1994). Understanding the dimensions of biological literacy. BioScience

Uno, G.E. (1992). Co-author and editor of Biological Science: An Ecological Approach (BSCS text).

44(8): 553–557.

7th edition. Kendall/Hunt.

Uno, G.E. (1984). Investigating the Human Environment: Land Use (BSCS text). Kendall/Hunt.
Uno, G.E. (1988). Teaching College and College-Bound Biology Students. American Biology

Teacher 50(4): 213–216.

von Glasersfeld, E. (1997). Homage to Jean Piaget (1896-1982). Irish Journal of Psychology
18(2): 293–. Online at hhttp://www.oikos.org/Piagethom.htmi and maybe at hhttp://www.
umass.edu/srri/vonGlasersfeld/onlinePapers.htmli.

Wells, M., D. Hestenes, and G. Swackhamer (1995). A modeling method for high school physics
instruction. American Journal of Physics 63(7): 606–619. Online at hhttp://modeling.la.asu.
edu/modeling/MalcolmMeth.htmli.

West, L.H.T. and A.L. Pines, eds. (1985). Cognitive Structure and Conceptual Change. Academic

Press.

in 1929.

Whimbey, A. and J. Lochhead (1999). Problem Solving and Comprehension. 6th edition. Erlbaum.

See also at hhttp://www.whimbey.com/Books/psc6/psc6.htmi.

Whimbey, A., J. Lochhead, and P.B. Potter (1999). Thinking Through Math Word Problems:
Strategies for Intermediate Elementary School Students. Erlbaum. See also at hhttp://www.
whimbey.com/Books/thinking/thinking.htmi.
Williams, P.H. (1993). Bottle Biology. Kendall/Hunt.
Whitehead, A.N. (1967). The Aims of Education, and Other Essays. Free Press. Originally published

Wiggins, G. and J. McTighe (2005). Understanding by Design. 2nd, expanded edition. Association
for Supervision and Curriculum Development [ASCD]. See also hhttp://authenticeducation.
orgi.

Wilson K.G. and B. Daviss (1994). Redesigning Education. Henry Holt. See also at hhttp://www-

physics.mps.ohio-state.edu/˜kgw/RE.htmli.

Wyckoﬀ, S. (2001). Changing the culture of undergraduate science teaching. Journal of Col-
lege Science Teaching 30(5): 306–312. Figure 2 shows pre/post Lawson-reasoning test [Law-
son(1995/99)] results for 584 students in a ‘Biology 100’ class that ‘demonstrates’ a 41% gain
in students reasoning abilities. For related work see Clement (2000) and Adey (1999).

Zollman, D.A. (1996). Millikan lecture 1995: Do they just sit there? Reﬂections on helping students

learn physics. American Journal of Physics 64(2): 114–119.

27

