Abstract.

E-mail: vguerra@alfa.ist.utl.pt

consistent with Special Relativity?

Rodrigo de Abreu and Vasco Guerra†
Departamento de F´ısica, Instituto Superior T´ecnico, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal

5 Is the assumption of a special system of reference
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

In a previous work we have shown that the null result of the Michelson-Morley
experiment in vacuum is deeply connected with the notion of time. The same is true
for the the postulate of constancy of the two-way speed of light in vacuum in all
frames independently of the state of motion of the emitting body. The argumentation
formerly given is very general and has to be true not only within Special Relativity
and its ‘equivalence’ of all inertial frames, but as well as in Lorentz-Poincar´e scenario
of a preferred reference frame. This paper is the second of a trilogy intending to revisit
the foundations of Special Relativity, and addresses the question of the constancy
of the one-way speed of light and of the diﬀerences and similarities between both
scenarios. Although they manifestly diﬀer in philosophy, it is debated why and how
the assumption of a “special system of reference experimentally inaccessible” is indeed
compatible with Einstein’s Special Relativity, as beautifully outlined and discussed
by John Bell [1]. This rather trivial statement is still astonishing nowadays to a
big majority of scientists. The purpose of this work is to bring such assertion into
perspective, widening the somewhat narrow view of Special Relativity often presented
in textbooks.

PACS numbers: 01.55; 03.30

† Also at Centro de F´ısica dos Plasmas, I. S. T., 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 2

1. Introduction

In 2005 the whole world celebrated the 100th anniversary of Albert Einstein’s annus
mirabilis. Of course the articles Einstein published in 1905 had a marked inﬂuence on
Physics and Philosophy. But, more important, Einstein’s thoughts and his works keep
feeding the scientiﬁc community, promoting debates, eventually some controversy, and
compelling a permanent and comprehensive discussion of the foundations of physics.
Among the many events that took place during 2005, European Journal of Physics
published a focus section on “Einstein and a Century of Time” [2], to which we have also
contributed [3], conﬁrming that Einstein’s article “On the electrodynamics of moving
bodies” [4] keeps inspiring innovative reﬂections on Special Relativity.

In our previous contribution [3] we have shown that the roots of both the null result
of Michelson-Morley experiment and of the postulate of the constancy of the two-way
speed of light in vacuum in all inertial frames, independently of the state of motion
of the emitting body, rest ﬁrmly on the very notion of time.
In particular, we have
explained that both can be obtained under three very reasonable assumptions: i) that
all good clocks can be used to measure time, independently of the periodic physical
phenomena they are built upon; ii) that time is measured in the same way in all inertial
frames, i.e., if a particular clock can be used to measure time in the “rest system”, a
similar clock can be used to measure time in “moving” inertial frames; iii) that a limit
speed exists in the “rest system”. We noted in [3] that the arguments given are valid
both in the pre-relativistic Lorentz-Poincar´e scenario of a preferred reference system and
within Einstein’s relativity and its “equivalence” of all inertial frames. It is now time
to address the question of a possible constancy of the one-way speed of light, which
appears to be related to diﬀerences between these two scenarios.

Our reﬂection is essentially motivated by John Bell’s analysis from [1]. He has

noted the following (italics added in one sentence).

it seems to me, that this primitive attitude,
Many students never realize,
admitting a special system of reference which is experimentally inaccessible, is
consistent.
(...) The approach of Einstein diﬀers from that of Lorentz in two major ways.
There is a diﬀerence of philosophy, and a diﬀerence of style.
The diﬀerence of philosophy is this. Since it is experimentally impossible to
say which of two uniformly moving systems is really at rest, Einstein declares
the notions of ‘really resting’ and ‘really moving’ as meaningless. For him only
relative motion of two or more uniformly moving objects is real. Lorentz, on
the other hand, preferred the view that there is indeed a state of real rest,
deﬁned by the ‘aether’, even though the laws of physics conspire to prevent us
identifying it experimentally. The facts of physics do not oblige us to accept one
philosophy rather than the other. And we need not accept Lorentz’s philosophy
to accept a Lorentzian pedagogy.
Its special merit is to drive home lessons
that the laws of physics in any one reference frame account for all physical

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 3

phenomena, including the observations of moving observers.

From our experience, this is not a question of students only, as most scientists never
realize it either. It is striking the unease revealed by many colleagues when discussing
the foundations of Special Relativity and confronted with the compatibility between
Einstein’s results – based on the notion of relative motion – and the existence of a
preferred reference frame – with its associated idea of absolute motion.

Due to the subject in question, it has to be clearly said this is not any kind of
anti-relativistic paper. In our journey into the foundations of Special Relativity, our
aim is simply to use Lorentz’s philosophy to explore the simple example of time dilation
and to consider the constancy of the one-way speed of light, in such a way that no
doubts can subsist on the formal compatibility of Lorentz and Einstein philosophies in
what concerns the description of the physical phenomena. For this reason, the paper is
written in a language corresponding to Lorentz’s philosophy.

The structure of the article is as follows. In the next section the Lorentz-Poincar´e
view is established, together with its “natural” way of clock synchronization and the
corresponding laws for transformation of coordinates between inertial frames. Time
dilation is illustrated in this framework. Sections 3 and 4 introduce a formal Galileo
transformation and the Lorentz transformation, respectively. The description of time
dilation is made again with the help of these transformations of coordinates. In section
5 the question of the constancy of the one-way speed of light is discussed, using
all the previously presented coordinate transformations. As they describe one and
the same reality, they are obviously all mathematically equivalent, thus emerging the
compatibility between Einstein and Lorentz-Poincar´e views in physical terms, although
not in philosophical ones. Finally, the last section summarizes the main conclusions of
this work.

2. External synchronization and the synchronized transformation

Within Lorentz-Poincar´e view, the “rest system” is the system in which the one-way
speed of light in empty space is c in any direction, independently of the velocity of the
source emitting the light. This system is unique. For the point we are trying to make
here, it is irrelevant if this system is experimentally inaccessible or not, as the discussion
is essentially an academic discussion of principles, and not of direct practical interest.
Let us assume for now we do know which is the “rest system”. The consequence of not
knowing it does not change the conclusions of this work and is examined in section 6.
The clocks from the “rest system” can be synchronized with the usual Einstein
procedure involving light rays [4], since the one-way speed of light is known in this
system. Next, in order to perform time measurements in a “moving” inertial frame (a
frame moving with constant speed in relation to the “rest system”), it is necessary to
synchronize the “moving” clocks. This cannot be done in the way used in the “rest
system”, since in the “moving” frame the one-way speed of light is not known (recall
we are using the language of Lorentz’s philosophy!). Nevertheless, it can easily be

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 4

Figure 1. Synchronization of clocks in a moving system: the moving clocks D and E
are synchronized with the help of the previously synchronized clocks at rest A and B.

done with the help of the clocks “at rest”, because these clocks have already been
synchronized. Hence, the “moving” clocks can be synchronized simply by ajusting
them to zero whenever they ﬂy past a clock “at rest” that shows zero as well. From
that moment on the “moving” clocks remain synchronous between themselves, thus
establishing the common time of the “moving system” (in order not to charge the
notation, we will from now on drop the“” signs in the words “rest” and “moving”).
Evidently, this synchronization procedure is not the standard one. We shall not start
here any discussion around the “conventionality of synchronization”, which has ample
literature available and is only brieﬂy addressed bellow. A more comprehensive analysis
of the subject is left for our ﬁnal paper.

Let S denote the rest system and S′ the moving one. For simplicity, assume the
axis of both frames are aligned, and that the origin of S′ moves along the x-axis of S
with a certain speed v, in the positive direction. The primed and non-primed quantities
correspond to measurements made with the rulers and clocks of S′ and S, respectively.
The synchronization procedure just delineated corresponds simply to the statement that
t = 0 implies t′ = 0, as it is shown in ﬁgure 1. Of course this synchronization method is
an external one, as noted by Mansouri and Sexl in [5], since to synchronize the clocks
from S′ one has to use the clocks from S.

The phenomenon of time dilation can be deduced in the usual way, such as presented
in the classic textbooks from Feynman [6] or Serway [7], using a light clock placed in S′
aligned along the y-axis. The well-known result

with

∆t = γt′ ,

γ =

1
1 − v2
c2

,

q

(1)

(2)

expresses the fact that “moving clocks run slower”. Each of the moving clocks
experiences time dilation. Referring to ﬁgure 1, if v = 0.6c (so that γ = 1.25) and

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 5

Figure 2. Evolution of the situation from ﬁgure 1 after 10 milliseconds. All times in
the ﬁgure are expressed in ms.

if the distances between clocks A and B and between clocks B and C are the same, L,
and equal to 1800 km, the situation depicted in ﬁgure 1 evolves to the one depicted in
ﬁgure 2 at t = 10 ms. Always within Lorentz’s philosophy, the eﬀect is considered to be
induced by absolute motion and clearly there is no reciprocity of time dilation.

The phenomenon of space contraction can be deduced as well in the usual way,

using a light clock placed in S′ aligned along the x-axis. The well-known result

L′ = γL ,

expresses the fact that “moving rulers are shorter”. Referring to ﬁgures 1 and 2, the
distance in S′ between clocks D and E is L′ = γL = 1.25 × 1800 km = 2250 km.
Again, the eﬀect is considered to be induced by absolute motion and clearly there is no
reciprocity of space contraction.

The transformation of coordinates between S and S′ can now be readily obtained.
If the origins of both frames are considered to be at clocks A and E, the position x′ of
clock D in S′ is simply given by

x′ = L′ = γL = γ(x − vt) ,

being x its position in S. Consequently, the relations between space and time coordinates
providing the translation from the description in the rest system to the one in a moving
frame are just given by

(3)

(4)

(5)

x′ = γ(x − vt)
t
t′ =
γ

,

where γ is given by equation (2) and v is the absolute speed (i.e., the speed measured
in the rest system) of the moving frame.

Expressions (5) form the synchronized transformation and are very adequate to
analyses made within Lorentz’s philosophy. They were obtained by Mansouri and Sexl
in 1977 [5] and have been emphasized by Franco Selleri since 1996 [8, 9], who named

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 6

them as inertial transformations. Interestingly enough, the synchronized transformation
is not symmetrical, as the inverse transformation, expressing x′ and t′ as functions of x
and t, is given by,

(x′ + γ2vt′)

x =

1
γ
t = γt′ .

(6)
Notice that the position of the origin of S, x = 0, is given in S′ by x′ = −γ2vt′. This
means that S′ sees S passing with speed v′ = −γ2v, and not just −v as one could think
at ﬁrst sight. One factor γ accounts for the fact that rulers are shorter in S′, while the
second γ factor comes from the fact that clocks run slower there.

It is not diﬃcult to derive that if an object goes with absolute speed w, then its
relative speed, wv, in relation to a frame S′ moving with absolute speed v, is given by

wv = γ 2(w − v) =

w − v
1 − v2
c2

.

(7)

(8)

Thus, it is possible to calculate the one-way speed of light in a moving frame. If a light
ray is emitted and travels in the positive direction of the x-axis, we know it propagates
in the rest system with speed c, independently of the speed of the source emitting the
ray. In S′, the one-way speed of this light ray is given by (7) with w = c,

v = γ 2(c − v) .
c +

If the light ray is emitted in the negative direction of the x-axis, w = −c and its speed
is given, in absolute value, by
c −
v = γ 2(c + v) .

(9)

Therefore, following Lorentz’s philosophy, in the moving frame the one-way speed of
light is not the same in diﬀerent directions and c −
is always bigger than c. And yet the
v
two-way speed of light is always c, as the reader can easily verify.

Besides absolute time dilation and absolute space contraction, the synchronized
transformation exhibits as well absolute simultaneity. How can these statements be
compatible with Special Relativity? The answer is given in the next two sections.

3. A formal Galileo transformation

Once the eﬀects of time dilation and space contraction have been obtained, we can do
something rather funny: since it is known that moving clocks run slower, it is easy to
“correct” the mechanisms of these clocks, so that they do not get delayed! It is enough
to tell the moving clocks D and E to mark always a factor γ in advance of what they
would mark without correction.

Suppose, for simplicity, that one “tic-tac” of the clocks in S corresponds to “1
second” (in S). Since in the present example γ = 1.25, one can simply deﬁne one tic-tac
from the clocks in S′ as to be 1.25 seconds in S′. That being so, if t ′
G denotes the “time”

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 7

Figure 3. “Time dilation” with synchronized Galilean clocks. All times expressed in
“miliseconds”.

given by these corrected clocks – that we shall name Galilean clocks – then we simply
have

t ′
G = t ,

(10)

exactly as in the standard Galileo transformation. With Galilean clocks, the situation
represented in ﬁgures 1 and 2 is now depicted in ﬁgure 3. Galilean time appears to be
an absolute time, since it is the same in all inertial frames.

Of course ﬁgures 1 and 2 show precisely the same reality as ﬁgure 3, which is simply
described in a diﬀerent way. Nothing prevents the observers in S′ from describing all
events using Galilean clocks. There are a couple of problems, though. The ﬁrst one
is that a clock working in a certain frame cannot be taken to another frame and be
It will mark wrong Galilean times. Before it can be used it
expected to work well.
must be corrected with the appropriate γ factor, corresponding to the speed of the new
frame. Only then it can be utilized as a Galilean clock. The second question is related

′
G = L ,

L

vG =

∆xG
∆tG

.

vG = w − v ,

c +
G = c − v

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 8

to the meaning of the quantities measured with Galilean clocks. Time itself, for a start.
“Time” given by Galilean clocks can be simply called “time”, but of course this does not
correspond to our intuitive notion of time and may originate some misunderstandings.
What has been done with clocks and time intervals can be done with rulers and
lengths. We know that moving rulers are shorter.
It is thus possible to correct the
moving rulers so that they do not give shorter lengths. It is enough to tell the moving
rulers to mark always a factor γ less than what they would mark without correction.
If a working ruler is taken from S to S′, the mark for “1 meter” should be replaced by
1/γ meters. That being so, if L ′
G denotes the “length” given by these corrected rulers –
that we shall name Galilean rulers – then we simply have

exactly as in the standard Galileo transformation. Once more, nothing prevents the
observers in S′ from describing all events using Galilean rulers. This does not change
the reality of what is being observed.

It is still possible to deﬁne a Galileo speed, vG, as the “speed” measured with

Galilean clocks and Galilean rulers,

From the expressions given in section 2, it is easy to show that the “Galileo speed” of an
object whose absolute speed is w, measured in an inertial frame S′ going with absolute
speed v, is just given by

as in Galileo transformation. The “Galileo speeds” of light are therefore

and

c −
G = c + v ,

(15)
for light rays propagating in the direction of the movement of S′ and in the opposing
direction, respectively. With Galilean clocks and Galilean rulers, the transformation of
coordinates between S and S′ reduces formally to the Galileo transformation,

x ′
G = x − vt
t ′
G = t ,
where v is the absolute speed of S′.

It may be somehow surprising that this Galileo transformation is mathematically
equivalent to the synchronized transformation (5). Hence, in some sense it does not
matter which of the transformations is used to describe the same reality. If we know the
Galilean coordinates of a certain event, then we can immediately know its synchronized
coordinates, and vice-versa, as long as the absolute speed of the moving frame is known.

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(16)

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 9

The important question is not to assign an erroneous meaning to the measurements that
are being made.

Two peculiarities of the Galileo transformation are still very interesting to note. The
ﬁrst one is that, contrary to the synchronized transformation, Galileo transformation is
symmetrical. As a matter of fact, the quantities in Einstein’s frame can be expressed as
a function of the Galilean ones by inverting (16), resulting

x = x ′
t = t ′

G + vt ′
G .

G

(17)

G = −vt ′

This set of equations is the same as (16), simply interchanging the roles of the quantities
in both frames and replacing v by −v. The position of the origin of S, x = 0, is given
G, so that S′ sees S passing with Galileo speed −v. In what concerns
in S′ by x ′
“Galileo speeds”, there is no diﬀerence in the ways “S sees S′” and “S′ sees S”. The
second observation is that if a second inertial frame S′′ goes with absolute speed w, then
the transformation of Galilean coordinates between S′ and S′′ takes the same form as
between the rest system and a moving inertial frame,
x ′
G + vGt ′′
G = x ′′
G = t ′′
t ′
G ,

(18)

G

vG = w − v being the relative Galileo velocity between both moving frames. These two
facts could eventually suggest all moving inertial frames are equivalent to the rest system
and only relative motion is of importance. If that would be the case, the rest system
would not be a privileged frame after all. But this “equivalence” is purely formal. It
emerges as a consequence of using Galilean clocks and rulers.

4. The Lorentz transformation

According to Lorentz’s philosophy, all the remarks made in the previous section for the
formal Galileo transformation can be made for the Lorentz transformation. The latter
provides only another way to relate the space and time coordinates of the rest system S
to the ones of a moving inertial frame S′, but does not have any fundamental privileged
role. Once the clocks in both frames have been synchronized as described in section 2,
the Lorentz transformation can be easily obtained by “correcting” in a particular way
the time readings of the moving clocks.

In the previous section Galileo transformation was attained by deﬁning shorter
seconds for the moving clocks. Now the rhythm of the clocks will not be changed, only
the clocks will start from a diﬀerent condition. Instead of adjusting the moving clocks
to mark t′ = 0 when t = 0 (see ﬁgure 1), we shall do that to one clock of S′ only, which
identiﬁes the position x′ = 0. The remaining moving clocks will be delayed by a factor
that is proportional to their distance x′ to the reference position x′ = 0, which is given
by v
c2 x′ (if x′ is negative, this corresponds actually to advancing the clock). We shall

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 10

denote the clocks altered in this way by Lorentzian clocks, and their time readings, t ′
L,
by Lorentzian times. We thus have
L = t′ −
t ′

(19)

v

c2 x′ ,

Why, following Lorentz’s philosophy, should someone be interested in “de-synchronizing”
clocks according to (19) is related to the problem of performing an internal
“synchronization” of the moving clocks. This will be fully clariﬁed in the last paper
of this trilogy. Anyway, as it is well known, the resulting Lorentz transformation
(see below) is the natural transformation of coordinates used assuming an equivalence
between all
Again we shall drop the “” signs in the word
“synchronization”, which from now on denotes the external synchronization delineated
in section 2.

frames.

inertial

Referring to ﬁgure 1, suppose clock E deﬁnes the position x′ = 0. Then, clock E
marks t′ = 0 when t = 0. Since clock D is located at x′ = 2250 km and v = 0.6c, it must
be delayed (v/c2)x′ = (0.6/c) × 2250 × 103 ≃ 0.0045 s = 4.5 ms. Therefore, at t = 0
clock D reads t ′
L = −4.5 ms. Notice that the moving clocks D and E are exactly equal
to clocks at rest A, B and C, only they are not synchronized as to mark all t = t ′
L = 0 at
some arbitrary instant. The situation is shown in the upper part of ﬁgure 4. Since the
moving clocks are precisely the same as in ﬁgures 1 and 2, they exhibit strictly the same
time dilation as shown in those ﬁgures. Their rhythms are aﬀected by time dilation
exactly as before. The only diﬀerence is that now their starting condition was set in
a diﬀerent way. Hence, when 10 ms have passed in S, only 8 ms elapsed in S′. More
precisely, at t = 10 ms clocks D and E mark t ′
L = 0 + 8 = 8
ms, respectively, as represented in ﬁgure 4.

L = −4.5 + 8 = 3.5 ms and t ′

With Lorentzian times, the expressions for transformation of coordinates between
the rest system and the moving frame are easily found by substituting t′ and x′ given
by the synchronized transformation (5) into (19). The Lorentz transformation is ﬁnally
obtained,

(cid:19)
with γ given by (2) and v denoting the absolute speed of S′.

As with “Galileo speed” (12), it is possible to deﬁne an Einstein speed (this speed
could be named “Lorentz speed” as well; however, we prefer to call it Einstein speed,
since it was deﬁned and used by Einstein in his theory of relativity), vE, as the “speed”
measured with Lorentzian clocks (and ordinary rulers),

(20)

(21)

x′ = γ(x − vt)
v
t ′
c2 x
L = γ

t −

(cid:18)

,

vE =

∆x
∆tL

.

The time interval is calculated as the diﬀerence of the “time reading of a clock located
at arrival position” with the “time reading of a clock located at departure position”.
Since Lorentzian clocks are de-synchronized, “Einstein speeds” are of course diﬀerent
from the “true speeds” (which can be calculated by v = ∆x/∆t when the time intervals

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 11

Figure 4. Time dilation with de-synchronized and equal clocks. All times expressed
in milliseconds.

and distances are measured with synchronized clocks and ordinary rulers, respectively).
Nevertheless, two-way speeds of any object are the same with both types of clocks, since
they are measured with one clock only and, that being so, any de-synchronization of
distant clocks has no eﬀect in the measurements.

Finally, the “Einstein speed” vE, measured in a frame moving with absolute speed

v, of an object which has absolute speed w, is
wv
1 − vwv
c2

w − v
1 − vw
c2

vE =

=

.

The “Einstein speed” of light, cE, exhibits a very interesting property. As a matter of
fact, since the absolute speed of light is always c, cE is obtained directly from (22) with
w = c:

cE =

= c .

c − v
1 − v
c

(22)

(23)

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 12

Therefore, the “Einstein speed” of light is always c in any moving inertial frame,
independently of the speed of the moving frame.

Notice that the remarks made about Galilean times, lengths and speeds can be
repeated here. Of course ﬁgures 1 and 2, 3, and 4, show precisely the same reality, which
is simply described in a diﬀerent way. Even assuming Lorentz’s philosophy, nothing
prevents the observers in S′ from describing all events using Lorentzian clocks. But this
has to be done with care. For instance, two clocks placed in distinct locations working
well in a certain frame cannot be “transferred” to another frame and be expected to
work well. They will mark wrong Lorentzian times. Before they can be used they must
be corrected with the appropriate de-synchronization factors. Only then they can be
utilized as Lorentzian clocks.

It may be somewhat surprising that the Lorentz transformation (with its associated
“relativity of simultaneity”, “relativity of time dilation” and “relativity of space
is mathematically equivalent to the synchronized transformation (5).
contraction”!)
That being so, any phenomenon described by the Lorentz transformation can be described
as well by the synchronized transformation, which is the natural transformation of
coordinates in the Lorentz-Poincar´e scenario of a preferred frame. As a matter of fact,
if we know the Lorentzian coordinates of a certain event, then we can immediately
know its synchronized coordinates, and vice-versa, as long as the absolute speed of the
moving frame is known. Reality is obviously independent of the choice of coordinates
made to describe it. The important question is not to assign an erroneous meaning to
the measurements that are being made.

As with the formal Galileo transformation,

the Lorentz transformation is
symmetrical (in what concerns “Einstein speeds”, there is no diﬀerence in the ways
“S sees S′” and “S′ sees S”) and the transformation of coordinates between two moving
inertial frames takes the same form as between the rest system and a moving inertial
frame (with vE in the place of v). But in Lorentz’s philosophy this equivalence is purely
formal. It simply emerges as a consequence of using Lorentzian clocks.

5. The one-way speed of light

The discussions about the “constancy” of the one-way speed of light in all frames can
now be easily understood. Not only it is necessary to be careful with what is meant by
“constancy” (see [3]), but also with what is meant by “speed”! This should be already
clear and can be illustrated without eﬀort with a simple example.

Suppose that the moving frame S′

is equipped with all three types of clocks
previously introduced (synchronized, Galilean and Lorentzian), and that at t = 0 a
light ray is emitted from point E to point D, as shown in ﬁgure 5. At what instant
does the light ray reach D? In the “rest system”, S, light propagates with speed c,
independently of the velocity of the source emitting the light. Since clock D advances
with speed v, the relative speed (in S) of light and the clocks in D is c − v, so that light
takes t = L/(c − v) ≃ 1800 × 103/(0.4 × 3 × 108) = 0.015 s. Therefore, when the light ray

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 13

Figure 5. Speed, “Galileo speed” and “Einstein speed”. A light ray departs from
point E towards D at t = 0...

reaches D, the synchronized clocks in S mark 15 ms. During this time interval, clocks
at D have advanced a distance vt ≃ (0.6 × 3 × 108) × (15 × 10−3) = 2.7 × 106 m, i.e.,
one and half times the distance between clocks B and C. It is still desirable to know
which time readings the moving clocks show. The synchronized clocks are aﬀected by
time dilation, hence marking t′ = t/γ = 15/1.25 = 12 ms. Galilean clocks have been
corrected for the time dilation factor, and simply mark the same time as the rest clocks,
tG = 15 ms. Finally, each of the Lorentzian clocks has advanced the same 12 ms as the
synchronized clocks. That being so, Lorentzian clocks E and D mark 0+12 = 12 ms and
−4.5 + 12 = 7.5 ms, respectively. The situation corresponding to the arrival of the light
ray at D is represented in ﬁgure 6. Now, what is left is to check the “speeds” of light
measured with the diﬀerent sets of clocks, according to the deﬁnition of speed as ratio
between the “length of the trip” with diﬀerence of the “time reading of a clock located
at arrival position” with the “time reading of a clock located at departure position”. In
S, the speed of light is of course c,

vS =

(1800 + 2700)km
(15 − 0)ms

= 3 × 108m/s = c .

In S′ the speed of light should be given by equation (8), γ 2
v (c − v) = 1.252 × (0.4c) =
0.625c ≃ 1.875 × 108 m/s. Do the synchronized clocks from ﬁgures 5 and 6 provide this
value? Indeed, since the distance light travels in S′ is just L′ = 2250 km,

(24)

(25)

vS′ =

2250km
(12 − 0)ms

= 1.875 × 108m/s .

With Galilean clocks and rulers, the “Galileo speed” of light is given by (14), vG =
c − v = 0.4c ≃ 1.2 × 108 m/s. Is that really so? Since Galilean rulers are corrected for

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 14

Figure 6. ... and arrives at point D at t = 15 ms. All times in the ﬁgure are expressed
in milliseconds.

space contraction, L ′
5 and 6 is in fact

G = L = 1800 km and the “Galileo speed” calculated from ﬁgures

Finally, “Einstein speed” of light is obtained from the two ﬁgures as

vG =

1800km
(15 − 0)ms

= 1.2 × 108m/s .

vE =

2250km
(7.5 − 0)ms

= 3 × 108m/s ≡ c ,

(26)

(27)

in accordance with the result (23). Notice that clock D is showing only 7.5 ms at the
arrival of the light signal, but it was clock E (and not D) that was marking t ′
L = 0 at
the departure of the signal. Once more, it is meriting to emphasize that there is one and
the same reality – in this example a light ray emitted from point E to point D – that
is simply being described in three diﬀerent ways. This reality is of course independent
from the chosen description: they are all mathematically equivalent and it is easy to
pass from one description to another.

What this example teaches us is the following: ﬁrst, that the constancy of the
one-way speed of light is a trivial statement regarding the “Einstein speed” of light;
and second, that such constancy is fully compatible with a non-constant one-way
speed of light as measured with the synchronized clocks. The Lorentz and Einstein
philosophies correspond to assigning the word “time” to the time coordinates given by
the synchronized transformation and by the Lorentz transformation, respectively. The
philosophies are diﬀerent, but they are fully compatible in physical terms.

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 15

6. Summary and conclusion

The compatibility between Special Relativity and Lorentz-Poincar´e view of a preferred
reference system experimentally inaccessible was shown to hold and exempliﬁed with
the case of time dilation. The consistency of both scenarios is thoroughly discussed in
[10], where many other classic examples are illustrated, such as the “reciprocity” of time
dilation and space contraction, the “relativity of simultaneity”, the twin paradox, the
problem of Bell’s accelerating spaceships, the propagation of spherical electromagnetic
waves and the electric ﬁeld of a moving point charge.

The key point is that reality can be described in many diﬀerent ways, for instance
using “synchronized”, “Galilean” or “Lorentzian” clocks, which are all mathematically
equivalent. However, a change in the description does not change reality itself. The
question of the “constancy” of the one-way “speed” of light is essentially an issue of
language, related to which description is being used. Therefore, when presenting or
discussing Special Relativity we must keep in mind the precise meaning in which words
like “speed” and “simultaneity” are used. Notice that this remark goes deeper than the
conventionalist thesis and a vision of physics based on operationalism. Together with a
discussion of the Principle of Relativity, these matters will be the subject of our third
and ﬁnal paper on the foundations of Special Relativity.

The (eventual) impossibility of detecting experimentally the “rest system” does
not change anything in Lorentz’s philosophy. Within its framework, one would simply
have to admit he does not know the “absolute speed” of an object, but this does not
promote the “Einstein speed” to the status of “true speed”. They remain diﬀerent
notions. Consequently, the scenario of a preferred frame keeps being consistent even if
this frame cannot be identiﬁed, although its usefulness can be questioned.

A very nice article with a message relatively similar to the one conveyed here
was published by Leubner and coworkers in 1992 [11]. After developing a non-
standard synchronization, which they named “everyday synchronization” (and actually
corresponds to the synchronized transformation for the particular case v = −c), they
conclude:

After these educational beneﬁts of studying the set of standard ‘relativistic
eﬀects’ also in everyday coordinates, we are of course happy to drop
again ‘everyday’ synchronization before proceeding to less elementary aspects
For these aspects, we certainly prefer the more
of relativistic physics.
symmetric coordinate representations of expressions resulting from Einstein
synchronization, but on purely practical grounds, and not on philosophical
ones.

We subscribe both Bell’s and Leubner’s ideas, and hope in the near future
physics textbooks will regularly include an analysis of Lorentz’s philosophy and of its
consistency, assuming without any prejudice that “the facts of physics do not oblige
us to accept one philosophy rather than the other”. Regardless of the philosophy
adopted, such approach has various pedagogical advantages. Eventually, practical and

Is the assumption of a special system of reference consistent with Special Relativity? 16

even philosophical arguments can be invoked in favor of one philosophy. But, for strong
and elegant they may be, they remain practical and philosophical ones.

References

[1] Bell J S, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, 1988

[2] Raine D J 2005, editor, Einstein and a Century of Time, Eur. J. Phys. 26.

[3] Guerra V and de Abreu R 2005, Eur. J. Phys. 26 S117.

[4] Einstein A 1905, in Stachel J, editor, Einstein’s Miraculous Year (Princeton University Press

1998).

[5] Mansouri R and Sexl R U 1977, General Relativity and Gravitation 8 497.

[6] Feynman R P, Leighton R B and Sands M 1979, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, 13th edition

(Addison-Wesley Publishing Company).

[7] Serway R A and Beichner R J 2000, Physics For Scientists and Engineers with Modern Physics,

5th edition (Saunders College Publishing).

[8] Selleri F 1966, Found. Phys. 26 641.

[9] Selleri F 2005, Found. Phys. Lett. 18 325.

[10] de Abreu R and Guerra V 2005, Einstein’s Lost Frame, extra]muros[, Lisboa, 2005 (in print).

[11] Leubner C, Auﬁnger K and Krumm P 1992, Eur. J. Phys. 13 170.

