Observations on teaching ﬁrst-year physics

Sanjoy Mahajan

Cavendish Laboratory
Astrophysics
University of Cambridge
Cambridge CB3 0HE
England
sanjoy@mrao.cam.ac.uk

Abstract. Highly successful students, as measured by grades and by scores on the Force Concept
Inventory, still struggle with fundamental concepts in mathematics and physics. These diﬃcul-
ties, which turn physics into parrot learning and include confusing velocity and acceleration or
being unable to reason with graphs, are revealed by problems requiring estimation and conceptual
reasoning. I discuss these problems, the diﬃculties that they reveal, and suggest possible remedies.

I gave tutorials to ten students taking the ﬁrst-year (IA) physics course at Cambridge University.
The students – diligent, curious, and a joy to teach – had studied physics in high school for years and,
as measured by grades and by scores on the Force Concept Inventory, with great success. However,
using problems requiring estimation and conceptual reasoning (collected in the Appendix), I found
that they struggle with fundamental concepts in mathematics and physics. These diﬃculties – such
as confusing velocity and acceleration or being unable to reason with graphs – prevent them from
understanding or appreciating the beauty of physics, and force them into rote or parrot learning.
Physics becomes a game of memory and formula juggling. We can avoid this disastrous result by
teaching students how physicists think: how we approximate and reason in unfamiliar situations.
Section 4 contains suggestions in this direction.

1 Physics diﬃculties

Students live in the pre-Newtonian world and do not understand acceleration; they confuse New-
ton’s second law and third laws; they ﬁnd circular motion confusing; and they cannot make or
reason with freebody diagrams (diagrams of one object – the free body – in which every other
object is replaced by a force on the free body).

Such diﬃculties go unnoticed because students can solve many standard problems in spite
of the diﬃculties; they are talented and have memorized rules that are often true. For example,
students know that in circular motion some force will be F = mv2/r, if only because that formula
is highlighted in the textbook section on circular motion. They are not sure of the force’s direction
or cause, but problems often specify F , m, and r, and ask for v. Simple algebra yields v, whether
or not the student understands the cause or direction of the force.

Copyright c
(cid:13)
3.0. See the ﬁle COPYING in the source code.

1998–2005 by Sanjoy Mahajan. Licensed under the Open Software License version

5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1.1 Aristotelian thinking: The Force Concept Inventory

Perhaps the most fundamental physics misconception is confusion acceleration with velocity: Stu-
dents believe that zero velocity implies zero acceleration and therefore zero net force. This belief
is an example of Aristotelian, or more precisely, of pre-Newtonian thinking.

Such beliefs are tested for by the Hestenes–Halloun Force Concept Inventory (FCI) [3], which
contains 30 multiple-choice questions requiring no calculation but rather a solid understanding of
Newtonian principles. For example, one question asks about a truck (lorry) colliding with a small
car: How does the force on the truck from the car compare with the force on the car from the
truck? The typical answer, which reveals that students do not understand the third law, is that
the truck exerts more force than the car exerts. Many American physics departments use the FCI
before and after a semester of ﬁrst-year mechanics (which is roughly at the level of British A-level
physics). Typical pre-instruction scores for American students range around 50% but that number
varies greatly among universities. Hestenes and Halloun state that scores of 60% indicate entry
into Newtonian thinking, and that scores above 85% indicate ‘conﬁrmed Newtonian think[ing]’ [2].
I gave the FCI to my ten students as their ﬁrst assignment before lectures began. The lowest score
was 25/30 (83%) and the average was 27.5/30 (92%); one student had a perfect score of 30/30.
The students did extremely well on this measure.

1.2 Beyond the Force Concept Inventory

Yet I doubted this conclusion for a number of reasons. First, on the diﬃcult questions (such as
the truck question), students who answered it correctly often circled and then scribbled out one
or two wrong answers before choosing the correct answer. Second, I realized how late in my study
of physics I had sorted out the diﬀerence between Newton’s second and third laws: only when I
helped to teach ﬁrst-year physics as a graduate student.

The FCI is too easy for Cambridge students; they study physics and mathematics for many
years in high-school, far more than American students: In high school the Cambridge students
take A-level Mathematics, Physics, and Further Mathematics (and often Chemistry). Each A-level
course, which takes up one-third or one-fourth of a student’s time for the last two years of high
school, is equivalent to perhaps 1.5 Advanced Placement exams.

So, as part of the weekly tutorial work, I assigned free-response problems that required New-
tonian thinking. Problem 15, for example, asks about skiing downhill holding a pendulum (the
problems are collected in the Appendix). A few students correctly guessed that, without friction,
the bob in case 1 points perpendicular to the hill. I say ‘guessed’, because none produced a free-
body diagram or other convincing argument. All except one student said that the pendulum points
directly downwards in case 3, when the skier is motionless at the top of her path. One student
realized that in each case the pendulum points perpendicular to the hill; he was the only student
to realize that velocity was independent of acceleration. He also had the only perfect score on the
FCI.

Problem 12, about a bouncing steel ball, brought out the same diﬃculty. The freebody dia-
grams were correct for cases 1 and 2, but were wildly incorrect for case 3 (when the ball is motionless
as it rebounds). A typical diagram had a downwards gravitational force of mg balanced by an up-
wards ‘reaction’ force of R = mg. The most common justiﬁcation for R = mg was that the velocity
is zero, so the body must be in equilibrium; another justiﬁcation was that most reaction forces
met in A-level problems were equal to mg (see Section 3). This ‘zero velocity implies zero force’
v, rather than the Newtonian law F = ma.
reasoning illustrates the pre-Newtonian belief F

∝

2

One student realized that the upwards force had to be larger than mg, otherwise the ball would
never leave the ground, but even he said that R was only 2mg. In the tutorial we estimated the
upwards force by modelling the steel ball as a springy cube; all the students were surprised to ﬁnd
that R
10000mg. To get a feel for these magnitudes, students could study such systems in their
laboratory courses.

∼

1.3 Newton’s second and third laws

Students also have diﬃculty distinguishing Newton’s second from Newton’s third law. Most of
the diﬃculty results because students do not understand the third law. Problem 4 asks students
to prove that a composite object has weight equal to the sum of the individual objects’ weights
(for a two-object system). None of the students provided a proof, and their explanations confused
the second and third laws. I therefore assigned the problem again, giving more instructions, as
Problem 8. (The diﬃculty with proof is a mathematical trouble, and the topic of Section 2.1.)

Students stated that the force of their hand on the book equals the weight of the book, ‘because
of action–reaction’. They did not realize that they had implicitly invoked equilibrium and must
therefore use Newton’s second law to conclude that the two forces on the same object are equal
and opposite. Students were surprised to ﬁnd that the gravitational force of the book on the earth
is the third-law counterpart to the weight of the book. They do not understand the third law as a
statement about interactions, so they see any pair of equal and opposite forces as a third-law pair.
I often asked students to discuss a law for a candidate force:

F = k

s1s3
2
r4 ,

where s1 and s2 are charges, analogous to mass or electric charge, and k is the constant that makes
the dimensions correct. Could such a force exist? Students are pleasantly surprised that the third
law forbids such forces because its force pairs are not equal and opposite.

1.4 Heavier objects fall faster

The classic Aristotelian belief is that heavier objects fall faster than lighter objects. Surely three
hundred years after Galileo showed otherwise, students no longer share this belief? Unfortunately,
many do, but the belief shows up only in novel situations. Students know that if a stone and a
cannonball fall, they should say that both objects hit the ground ‘at the same time’; if they have
been carefully taught, they might even say ‘roughly at the same time’. They also know what to
say about two objects sliding down an incline, that mass is irrelevant. However, when the problem
includes the novel eﬀect of rolling (yet more trouble with circular motion!), many students have no
practiced Newtonian answer to quote, and reveal their gut-level Aristotelian belief. For example,
in Problem 23, about objects rolling down a plane, some students reasoned that an object with a
large moment of inertia, such as a disc, rolls faster than an object with a small moment of inertia,
such as a solid sphere. Two students argued that ‘moment of inertia is analogous to mass, and
heavier objects fall faster than lighter objects’ ! I could not agree with the analogy, but I admired
its boldness.

The way that rehearsal hides this misconception reminds me of the theory of the English
accent: that if you step on an Englishman’s toes in the middle of the night, he’ll shout at you in
an American accent. On this view, the one true accent is American. An English accent is just an
act, a mask dropped upon surprise. Similarly, the students’ response that ‘all objects fall at the
same speed’ is carefully rehearsed. It falls away when we step on their toes by asking about it in a
novel context, whereupon they reveal their true belief, that heavier objects fall faster.

3

1.5 Centrifugal force

Students think that circular motion implies a centrifugal force. I asked students to draw a freebody
diagram for an amusement park ride. In this ride, you stand against the edge of a cylindrical cage
that spins rapidly; eventually the ﬂoor drops away. But, voil`a, you remain against the wall. This
ride is the subject of a typical high-school physics problem: Find the angular velocity such that
a person does not slide down the wall. Students solve it correctly, because they need only know
that some radial force is F = mv2/r (never mind in what direction it points) and that the friction
force is µF . However, when they draw a freebody diagram, their confusion is evident. A typical
diagram is Figure 1. Students insert the centrifugal force, because some force is ‘throwing the
person outwards (which is why you feel pressed against the wall).’

rotation
axis

Freaction

Fcentrifugal

friction

mg

Figure 1. Freebody diagram for amusement park ride.

1.6 Freebody diagrams

The trouble with acceleration and confusion about third-law pairs means that students cannot
make freebody diagrams. In answers to Problem 4 (standing on a scale with a book in hand), most
students drew book, person, and scale with no separations, and drew ambiguous contact forces
on the border between objects. These diﬃculties are typical when students ﬁrst learn freebody
I had to explain that freebody diagrams are diagrams of one object (or of one
diagrams [1].
composite object) – the free body – with other objects replaced by a force on the free body.

If students understood this replacement principle – and the idea of system – they would not
double count by inserting centrifugal forces. Only when I asked them what object causes the
centrifugal force did they realize that this force merely labels an actual force and has no separate
existence. Unlike experienced physicists, students do not naturally make freebody diagrams to
analyze confusing situations. None of the students made a freebody diagram for Problem 15 (skier
holding a pendulum), even the students who drew the correct pendulum positions. In university
physics we need to teach this valuable skill, which is not part of most British school physics curricula
(although it is in most American physics textbooks).

2 Mathematical troubles

Students have many mathematical diﬃculties. They have not been taught how to construct proofs
or how to make educated guesses. They cannot make numerical estimates or reason using graphs.

4

2.1 Proof and guessing

In Section 1.3, I alluded to students’ diﬃculty with proof (Problems 4 and 8 on weighing a composite
object). The solutions had numerous holes, besides the errors in using Newton’s laws. When
confusion between Newton’s second and third laws barred legitimate progress, students assumed the
conclusion. Perhaps school mathematics should reintroduce Euclidean geometry, not to indoctrinate
students with 10,000 theorems about triangles, circles, and diagonals of rhombuses, but to teach
proof. We want students to learn how to distinguish sound from unsound arguments, whether or
not they become mathematicians.

A complementary diﬃculty is fear of guessing. Students have not been taught techniques
for making educated guesses [7]; they are therefore reluctant to guess a solution before solving a
problem exactly. Having have no feel for how a result should turn out, they instead push symbols
around until a reasonable formula appears and declare it to be the answer.

2.2 Heuristic arguments

Students do not know how to tell whether an answer is reasonable. For example, they do not
naturally use heuristics such as checking limiting cases, or use more rigorous methods such as
dimensional analysis. This diﬃculty is related to their reluctance to guess: If students had a clear
idea of what answers might be reasonable, they would ﬁnd it easier to guess an answer.

As practice with heuristic methods, I assigned Problem 2, analyzing the formula for the pro-
jectile range. A few students realized that, for example, v2 results from one v in the ﬂight time and
one v in the horizontal speed. Many, however, refused to make a heuristic analysis, and instead
derived the range formula in the standard way.

Almost everyone is reluctant to make guesses, especially in a supposedly exact subject such
as physics. To overcome this natural reluctance, we must teach students heuristic methods; with
practice, students will develop the courage to use them.

When I explicitly forbade messy calculations and forced students to use intuitive arguments,
many were stumped. Problem 14 asked them to determine, without evaluating any integrals,
whether a spherical shell or a ﬂat disc (same radius and mass) has the larger moment of inertia.
Only one student found a correct argument: squashing the sphere perpendicular to the axis of
rotation, and comparing the squashed mass distribution to the mass distribution of the ﬂat disc.
Some evaluated the integrals, in spite of the instructions. But many evaluated the wrong integral,
ρ(x2 + y2) dV (for rotation about the z-axis). More practice with heuristic

ρr2 dV , rather than

R
arguments, leading to conceptual understanding, would help them set up the correct integral.

R

2.3 Graphical reasoning

Students cannot reason using graphs. The troubles are mathematical and physical. A mathematical
trouble is shown in the answers to Problem 27a (deriving Stirling’s formula). Students correctly
drew a diagram like Figure 2. They then had to decide, ‘Does the integral over- or underestimate
the sum?’ Even with the clear graph that they had drawn, they did not see that the area under the
smooth curve is less than the area under the total rectangles. Instead, this realization came only
by using a calculator to evaluate

7

X1

ln k = 8.52 . . .

5

and ﬁnding it larger than

I cannot quarrel with the answer but the method reveals serious diﬃculty reasoning with graphs.
In a famous example, Wertheimer [9] would ask school students questions like

7

Z
1

ln k dk = 7

(ln 7

1) + 1 = 7.62 . . .

×

−

273 + 273 + 273 + 273 + 273
5

= ?

Some students got the joke and laughed. Some protested that the calculations were too hard. Most
worryingly, some added the 273’s and then used long division to ﬁnd. . . 273. With the answer one
has no quarrel, but like with the logarithm graph, the method reveals a fundamental diﬃculty.

2

1

0

ln k

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

k

Figure 2. Deriving Stirling’s formula.

Students also do not realize the physical implications of a graph. For example, in Problem 26
– about a snooker ball slipping and rolling – they realized that the ball slips for a while, then
eventually rolls, although not all correctly solved for the time t0 until pure rolling. However, their
graphs of center-of-mass velocity v and of scaled angular velocity rω looked like Figure 3. Students
did not realize that the rolling condition, v = rω, requires that the two curves coincide after t0.
This diﬃculty is also related to confusion about rolling motion. Students have memorized v = rω,
but are not sure of its character. They wonder if it is the deﬁnition of ω. It took much discussion
to convince them that v = rω follows from the deﬁnition of rolling: Motion where the point of
contact is motionless. This diﬃculty with the character of v = rω is related to the diﬃculties with
proof. Students rarely know what assumptions a formula requires, or what consequences follow
from a formula.

v0

0

0

v

rω

t0
Time

Figure 3. Snooker ball rolling and sliding.

6

2.4 Number sense and approximations

Perhaps the most serious mathematical diﬃculty is an atrophied number sense and an inability
to approximate. For example, I asked students to estimate √1.2, and most had no idea. After I
prodded them to guess anyway, one said 1.05; one said 1.√2 meaning 1 + √2/10 (at least a creative
answer). Only one student said 1.1, and he was unsure of himself. All the students except the one
who answered correctly had been using calculators since age 11. This other student, who went to
school in Singapore, had not been permitted to use a calculator until the last two years of high
school. Ironically, some students who could not evaluate √1.2 could instantly tell me that √1 + x
is roughly 1 + x/2 by the binomial theorem.

I am not surprised by this lack of number sense. I co-taught a short, intensive physics course
to twenty A-level students; the course is run by Villiers Park, a charity in Foxton. The students,
from all over the United Kingdom, were in their ﬁnal year of high school, taking A-levels in Physics,
Mathematics, and Further Mathematics. Each participating school nominated its best physics stu-
dent, and these students were all talented and curious about physics. Over one-half had interviews
at Cambridge for admission to the Natural Sciences degree (which includes the physics major), and
a signiﬁcant fraction of them will attend Cambridge to study physics. Yet none could estimate
√1.2; one student had trouble working out 120/10.

Following up on approximations, I asked my Cambridge students to estimate ln 1.25. Some said
x,
that there was a series for ln, which they could not remember. Some remembered that ln(1+x)
but could not say why the approximation was plausible. A graphical approximation using the
deﬁnition

≈

ln(1 + x)

1+x

dx
x

,

≡ Z
1

was a new and pleasant surprise for them.

2.5 Mathematics obscuring physics

Mathematics in a derivation often prevents students from understanding physics in the derivation.
For example, in the kinetic-theory derivation of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, a series of ﬂux integrals
simplify to

where ℓ is the mean free path and c is the root-mean-square particle velocity. Students do not
realize that all the ﬁddling with integrals of sines and cosines gives only the factor of 1/3, and
that the factor of ℓc is independent of the angular integrals. Partly, they have not been taught
dimensional analysis, which requires that

D = (dimensionless constant)

ℓc.

×

Partly, they do not understand diﬀusion even in one dimension, where angular factors no longer
torment them. We should spend most of the time on the qualitative reasoning in one dimension,
and assert the result for three dimensions by ﬁat, giving the derivation in Eric Rogers’ classic text,
Physics for the Inquiring Mind (Princeton University Press, 1960). That derivation, also used in
the old Nuﬃeld O-level physics course (for ages 11-15!), uses six swarms of molecules, each marching
along one coordinate direction.

D =

ℓc,

1
3

7

3 Parrot learning

One theme has shown up in many of these examples: A-level learning is parrot learning. Students
memorize rules without understanding their origin or range of validity. As Mark Twain said, ‘It’s
not what I do not know that worries me, it’s what I know that ain’t so.’ Here are a few ‘not-so’
stories, culled from what students believe:

Every normal or reaction force is mg (or, on an incline, mg cos θ). This rule is often true,
but students do not know when, and invoke it as a law of physics. Problem 9 asks what
a scale reads when the scale–person system accelerates down a plane. A few students
correctly reasoned that it reads 3mg/4, but most concluded that the scale reads mg.
In circular motion, there is a centrifugal force mv2/r. Such a force exists in the reference
frame of the moving object, but students use it even in the laboratory frame, and do not
realize that its validity depends on the frame.
Tension is a force. This rule is always wrong; students induce it after seeing many freebody
diagrams in which arrows representing forces are labelled T. I once believed the rule for
the same reason. Now I always label forces produced by tension as FT. The rule causes
trouble when, for example, students analyze a tug-of-war. Two people hold one end each of
a rope and pull with force 100 N; what is the tension in the rope? Some students say zero:
They add the two end forces (to get an alleged force, the tension). Some say 200 N: They
add the force vectors as if they were unsigned scalars. A few say 100 N, without conviction.
We need not explain tension in its full glory as a component of the stress tensor, but we
need to eradicate this rule.
In oscillating motion, acceleration = 0 at the equilibrium position. This rule is correct for
simple harmonic motion, but students apply it too widely. For example, in Problem 5,
asking about pendulum motion, most students stated that the bob was not accelerating
at point C, probably because they had memorized pendulum motion as an example of
simple harmonic motion, and did not pause long enough to think that the bob must have
an inwards acceleration to move in a circle. This diﬃculty is not conﬁned to ﬁrst-year
physics students. At the University of Washington, 0 out of 120 ﬁrst-year physics students
answered it correctly, a result that no longer surprises me; however, only 15% of students
taking their PhD qualifying exams answered it correctly [8]!

H2O

Hg

Figure 4. Perpetual motion.

Buoyancy can be replaced by an upthrust, a vertical force with magnitude equal to the
weight of ﬂuid displaced. This rule is often true, but not in this perpetual-motion machine
of Figure 4. The ﬁgure shows a cross-section of the machine: The circle is a long cylinder,
and the dot at its center is a spindle that allows it only to rotate, not translate. The thick
vertical line is a barrier that prevents the mercury and water from mixing. I explain to
the students why the ﬂuid exerts a torque: The upthrust from the mercury side (longer

8

arrow) is 13 times larger than the upthrust from the water side (shorter arrow), because
mercury is 13 times denser than water. So the spindle rotates: perpetual motion! None of
the students exorcised the perpetual-motion demon without extensive help, because they
do not understand how upthrust or buoyancy is a consequence of pressure forces (which
in this case all act through the spindle and hence provide no torque); instead, upthrust or
buoyancy is a memorized word.

Even when the upthrust rule is true, students do not realize its origin. For example,
in Problem 31, analyzing the isothermal atmosphere, students counted the buoyant force
twice in their freebody diagram for a slab of air (Figure 5). In the ﬁgure, A is the bottom
or top surface area of the slab, and P1A and P2A are the pressure forces. Students realized
that P1 > P2, and solved correctly for the pressure versus height, but did not realize that
the pressure forces already included the upthrust.

P2A

upthrust

mg

P1A

Figure 5. Incorrect freebody diagram for a slab of air. The upthrust
duplicates the result of the two pressure forces.

Many school physics courses do not include Archimedes’ principle; those that do often
simplify the treatment to ‘upthrust’, with no discussion of its origin in pressure forces. The
preceding examples show the danger of such a simpliﬁcation, which provides little scope
for thoughtful physical reasoning.

Parrot learning makes physics into a memory game, and students see physics the way many see
history: as a collection of facts to memorize. Professional historians are repelled by this view of
history, as we are by the same view of physics. Doing and enjoying physics requires understanding
fundamental principles and seeing how they connect with one another.

4 Suggestions

After years of school physics, students should not have the mathematical and physical misconcep-
tions that I have discussed. When they come to university, we should be able to discuss problems
and ideas with them as budding physicists, even if they later specialize in other subjects. We
obviously do not live in such a world; high-school physics does not give students a high level of
mathematical and physical understanding.

We cannot expect any improvement soon. On the contrary, most changes in the school curricu-
lum increase students’ reliance on calculators and reduce the physics and mathematics that they
must know. Furthermore, many teachers, products of the school and university physics-teaching
system (we share a lot of responsibility for the problem), have some of the above misconceptions;

9

every time I teach, I ﬁnd misconceptions in my own thinking. How can students learn what their
teachers do not understand and what their textbooks do not mention?

Instead of compounding the misconceptions, as we traditionally do in university physics teach-
ing, we could remedy the defects. One solution is to teach qualitative physics. By qualitative I
do not mean physics for poets [4]; it is an excellent idea for a course, but it might poorly serve
future scientists. Rather, I mean that we teach dimensional analysis, heuristic methods, graphical
reasoning, and the arts of approximation and guessing: We should teach students how physicists
think.

We can illustrate these methods with applications to everyday physics; for example, to stirring
tea (Problem 36). Students are fascinated by such problems. When I assigned the tea problem, they
gathered in each others’ rooms and spent hours stirring tea and timing the spindown. Such problems
give students a graspable example of a physical concept (in this case, diﬀusion of momentum).
Using everyday examples, students get feedback from the world on the correctness of their physical
picture. When students study waves and oscillations, they can apply their knowledge to the physics
of music, a subject that interests most physics students. Such an approach will inspire students
and encourage them to think like physicists.

I present here a few methods to teach qualitative physics, in order of increasing headache to
implement. A few methods apply more to the British university system, but I have tried to make
most methods of wide applicability.

4.1 Peer instruction

Eric Mazur at Harvard developed a simple method for getting students to think qualitatively:
peer instruction [5, 6]. After explaining a concept, such as buoyancy, he stops and puts on the
overhead projector a multiple-choice question – called a Concept Question – for students to answer
individually. The question is easy for the student who understands the principle; otherwise it takes
a while, longer than Mazur gives them. One buoyancy question is:

Two cups are ﬁlled to the same level with water. One of the two cups has ice cubes ﬂoating
in it. Which cup weighs more?

1. The cup without ice cubes.
2. The cup with ice cubes.
3. The two weigh the same.

To allow no time for useless calculation, Mazur gives students only two minutes. Then he asks
students which choice they picked. After this public commitment, each student spends one or
two minutes convincing her neighbor of her answer – the key to Mazur’s method. In explaining
their choice, students realize what concepts confuse them and begin to sort out their confusions.
And they get interested in the material as they defend their views. The discussion improves their
attention and their intuition.

Mazur breaks lecture into 15-minute blocks; each block has a short explanation and then
time for a Concept Question. But even one question per one-hour lecture (the format used in
Caltech ﬁrst-year physics course) improves students’ attention and understanding. Peer instruction
has several merits. First, it requires no fancy hardware in the lecture theatre (although Mazur’s
classroom has networked palmtop computers for the students to enter answers); I get students to
close their eyes (to prevent the herd eﬀect) and vote by raising hands. Second, anyone can try it,
using either their own questions or the database of ConcepTests in Mazur’s book.

10

4.2 Two-week intensive preparation in the summer

Another possibility is to oﬀer a two-week intensive ‘order-of-magnitude physics’ course for students
before they start their year of physics. Two weeks of intensive teaching is enough time to teach
the main ideas, especially if the rest of the year occasionally uses the ideas taught in the intensive
course. At Villiers Park, I taught qualitative physics for half a week to students in their last year
of high school. The students enjoyed it, and by the end of the session, after they had seen the
principles illustrated with many examples, they grasped the main ideas.

4.3 Vacation study

Or, the regular teaching could remain mostly as it is and instead students could learn qualitative
physics during the breaks between terms. This approach applies especially to British universities
with their short terms and long breaks (especially to Oxford and Cambridge, where terms are
only eight weeks!). With this approach, the examination at the end of the ﬁrst year should contain
questions that require such reasoning, otherwise students might spend the entire vacation recovering
from sleep deprivation rather than also learning physics. Students would need to written material
to learn from, ideally a textbook on approximation and based on the ﬁrst-year physics topics. The
vacation-study approach has pros and cons. On the bad side, it reduces their sleep. Perhaps more
fair is to winnow the standard topics, and use the time saved to teach approximation during the
year. On the good side, it encourages students to learn from textbooks, a skill valuable especially
after they ﬁnish their degree.

4.4 Alter tutorials

In the Oxford and Cambridge system, with tutorial as well as lecture teaching, the lectures could
remain traditional while tutors could teach qualitative physics. In the American system, the sections
could teach qualitative physics, leaving lectures alone. As with the vacation-study approach, the
exam would need to be changed to emphasize the value of qualitative reasoning. Many graduate
students, who are a large fraction of the tutors or section leaders, do not feel conﬁdent teaching
material that they did not learn at university. They would need training.

With proper training, this approach can work well, even if it is used only for one term. I used
it with my students, assigning them the problems in the Appendix and using tutorials to discuss
the diﬃculties. The students and I enjoyed these problems. They prepare students to think like
physicists, although alone they do not prepare students for the ﬁrst-year exam. So I asked students
to use the Christmas vacation to practice old exam problems on the ﬁrst term’s material. The
students were suﬃciently happy with the method to do as I asked, but it requires extra time from
them and their tutors.

4.5 Modify lectures and tutorials

The ﬁrst term, or the ﬁrst year, could teach qualitative physics – in lectures and tutorials. On the
down side, this approach combines the problems of the alter-tutorials approach (training tutors)
with the pain of redoing the lectures. A specially written textbook would be useful here. This
approach, although painful, has the best chance of teaching the physics and mathematics that we
want students to know.

Even with a radical approach of devoting the entire ﬁrst year to qualitative physics, students
would not be harmed by the deemphasis on exact calculations. Those continuing as physics majors
will practice exact analyses in their second and third years; by then their mathematical maturity

11

will be greater and the analyses will not hinder their understanding of physics (what it does in
the ﬁrst year). Students majoring in chemistry, geology, or material science, who will study only
the qualitative physics, will also beneﬁt. A geologist, for example, needs to estimate the relative
contributions of convection and conduction in transporting heat in the mantle more than she needs
In general, non-majors need intuitive
to solve exactly a model that includes only conduction.
understanding of physics more than they need exact calculations.

The diﬃculties that students have with physics and mathematics are soluble. Using the methods
above, I hope that we can introduce students to many years of understanding and enjoying physics.

References

Teacher, 33(8):502–506, 1995.

Teacher, 30:141–151, 1992.

[1] Arnold B. Arons. Teaching Introductory Physics. John Wiley, New York, 1997.

[2] David Hestenes and Ibrahim Halloun.

Interpreting the Force Concept Inventory. Physics

[3] David Hestenes, Malcolm Wells, and Gregg Swackhamer. The Force Concept Inventory. Physics

[4] Robert H. March. Physics for Poets. McGraw–Hill, New York, 1995.

[5] Eric Mazur. Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1997.

[6] Eric Mazur. Understanding or memorizing: Are we teaching the right thing. In Jack Wilson,
editor, Conference on the Introductory Physics Course, pages 113–123, New York, 1997. John
Wiley & Sons.

[7] George Poly`a. Induction and Analogy in Mathematics, volume 1 of Mathematics and Plausible

Reasoning. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1954.

[8] Frederick Reif. Millikan lecture 1994: Understanding and teaching important scientiﬁc thought

processes. American Journal of Physics, 63(1):17–32, 1995.

[9] Max Wertheimer. Productive thinking. Harper, New York, enlarged edition, 1959.

12

Appendix

1 Estimations

I assigned these problems to my students in the ﬁrst term of their ﬁrst year.

a) How many English words can you recognise?

b) How many pieces of mail does the UK postal system carry each day? Estimate the annual
budget of the Royal Mail; check your estimate by looking up a recent Royal Mail budget.

2 Interpreting equations

Here you will study the well-known formula for the horizontal range of a rock. You throw a rock
with velocity v at an angle θ with respect to the ground. Its range is

R =

sin θ cos θ.

2v2
g

(1)

You can increase your conﬁdence in this result in a number of ways (parts a–e). (It may help for
many of the parts to draw a diagram.)

a) Dimensional analysis: Check whether the dimensions are correct.

b) Consider limiting cases (for example, θ = 0). Does the range formula work in these cases?
c) Give a physical argument for why the range contains a factor of v2 (instead of, say, simply v or
1/v or no v at all). (Dimensional analysis, which you did in part a, is a mathematical argument;
in this part, you are asked to reinforce the mathematics with a physical argument.)

d) Give a physical argument for the factor of 2.

e) Give a physical argument for the 1/g factor.

f) To derive (1), you have to neglect many eﬀects (for example air resistance). List as many of
these eﬀects as you can. Let your imagination run; no eﬀect is too small to mention here.

3 Number sense

Without a calculator, estimate
a) √1.3
b) 3√1.6
c) sin 7
d) 1.01100 (Hint: What is ln 1.01?)

4 Scales

You stand on a scale holding a book. You then place the book next to you on the scale. The two
scale readings are of course identical. Of course!? Prove it by using Newton’s laws and drawing
free-body diagrams. Clearly label the third-law pairs (pairs that must be equal and opposite as a
consequence of Newton’s third law),1 and describe each force in words.

1 I avoid using the perhaps more familiar term ‘action–reaction pairs’ because it needlessly

confuses; it implies, wrongly, that one force causes the other.

13

5 Pendulum

The ﬁgure shows a pendulum at ﬁve points in its swing; positions A and E are the extremes of the
motion. On each bob, draw (approximately) the acceleration vector at that point in the swing. If
the acceleration is zero (in which case there is no arrow to draw), simply circle the bob.

A

E

B

C

D

6 Tetrahedron

7 Estimation

8 Scales (again)

In methane, the four hydrogen atoms lie at the corners of a regular tetrahedron, and the carbon
atoms lies at the centre. Where is the centre of a tetrahedron with unit edge length? What is the
bond angle (the angle between two C–H bonds)? (Hint: Make an analogy.)

a) Estimate how thick a layer of rubber is deposited on the road by a car tyre. Comment on your
result.

b) Estimate the world-record speed for cycling and for swimming. (Hint: First estimate how much
mechanical power an athlete can put out.)

You stand on a scale holding a book (for simplicity of diagramming, you balance it on your head).
You then place the book next to you on the scale. The two scale readings are of course identical. Of
course!? Prove the equality by using Newton’s laws and drawing free-body diagrams. The givens
here are your weight and the book’s weight. You are in eﬀect asked to prove that the weight of the
combined you–book object is the sum of the individual weights.

Draw well-separated free-body diagrams. Clearly label the third-law pairs (pairs that must be
equal and opposite as a consequence of Newton’s third law); carefully distinguish uses of Newton’s
second law from Newton’s third law; and describe each force in words. Ensure that your argument
convinces a skeptical reader (perhaps try it on your supervision partner), one who says at every
opportunity ‘Why are those forces equal in magnitude?’, ‘Are you sure it isn’t Newton’s third law
that justiﬁes this step?’, ‘Or maybe it should be Newton’s second law here?’, and so on.

14

9 Skiing

You (tall rectangle, with mass m) stand on a wedge sliding down a frictionless plane, as shown in
the ﬁgure. What weight does the scale (shaded rectangle) read? Use clearly labeled, well-separated
free-body diagrams.

m

30◦

10 Analogy

11 Virtual work

Into how many regions can n planes divide space? Find the maximum number (what conditions
on the planes ensure that the number is a maximum?). For example, one plane divides space into
two regions; two planes divide space into at most four regions (but only three if you are unlucky,
and only two if you are really unlucky). Hint: Play with the one- and two-dimensional versions of
this problem, and then try to generalize the patterns that you ﬁnd.

The mass m1 slides down the plane with constant velocity, and m2 rises with constant velocity (see
the ﬁgure). Use the principle of virtual work to ﬁnd the mass ratio m1/m2. We live as usual in
the make-believe world of physics: The plane is frictionless, the string is massless, and the pulley
is massless and frictionless.

m
1

θ

m2

12 Bouncing ball

You drop a steel ball from a height of one or two metres. It lands on a scale and bounces up to
nearly the original height. (Neglect air resistance.) Draw free-body diagrams for the ball at four
times: (1) whilst you are holding it, (2) whilst it is falling, (3) when it is motionless on the scale
(namely, just as it starts its upwards journey), and (4) whilst it is rising. Indicate qualitatively
the relative magnitudes of the forces. Sketch qualitatively the scale reading as a function of time,
whilst the ball is on the scale.

15

13 Improved petrol

Drivers want a petrol that yields more joules per kilogram than current petrol does. Discuss the
following proposal.

When you accelerate your car from 0 to, say, 15 m s−1, the increased kinetic energy, ∆E1, is
supplied by burning a quantity of petrol. Jack is driving in the opposite direction, at 5 m s−1. From
his point of view, your car was going 5 m s−1 and, after accelerating, is going 20 m s−1. He measures
a change in kinetic energy, ∆E2; and ∆E2 > ∆E1 (check this assertion). The mass of petrol burned
is the same in every reference frame, so Jack measures your petrol to have more energy per unit
mass than you measure it to have. So, the proposal is: To increase the energy content of petrol,
use a moving reference frame.

14 Moments of inertia

Without evaluating any integrals, rank the following objects in order of decreasing moment of
inertia: (1) a solid sphere, (2) a thin ring, (3) a spherical shell, and (4) a thin disc. All objects have
the same mass and radius and are uniform. For each object, the axis of rotation passes through
the centre of mass. For the disc and the ring, the axis is perpendicular to the plane that contains
the disc or ring. Explain your rankings.

15 More skiing

You ski down hill A and up hill B, then ski backwards down hill B and backwards up hill A (see
ﬁgure). There is no friction or air resistance, so the cycle repeats forever and ever. Being a skilled
skier, you don’t need to clutter your hands with poles; instead, from your hand, you dangle a string
with a mass at its end. Draw the direction of the string: (1) as you ski down hill A (square with
1 in it), (2) as you ski up hill B (square with 2 in it), (3) when you are momentarily stopped on
hill B (square with 3 in it), and (4) as you ski backwards down hill B (square with 4 in it). There
is plenty of friction in the oscillations. How does each string’s direction change if there is slight
friction on the slopes?

v = 0

3

4

hill B

2

1

hill A

16

16 Falling moon

The moon is a rock; perhaps large, but it is still a rock. Why doesn’t it fall to the earth, as other
rocks do? Explain quantitatively, perhaps with one or two diagrams.

17 Messy collision

i) A ball comes in from the left and causes a series of collisions; the initial motion is

1

1

1

1

1

2

The number in the circle is the object’s mass (in arbitrary units) and the arrow shows the object’s
velocity (in arbitrary units). All motion is one dimensional, and all collisions are elastic.

Which choice describes the motion after the all the collisions?

a)

b)

c)

d)

1
2

1
3

1
2

1
2

1

1

1

1

1
2

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

1
2

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2
3

3
4

1
2

ii) By transforming to the zero-momentum frame, work out the result of this collision (also one-
dimensional and elastic):

1

1

2

Comment on similarities or diﬀerences with part i.

18 Mathematical conservation

You write a 0 on each vertex of a cube, except for a 1 on one of the vertices. Now you play a game.
At each move, you may add 1 to each of two adjacent numbers (adjacent means connected by an
edge). Your goal is, using a suitable series of moves, to make all vertex labels be multiples of 3. Is
this goal possible? If it is, give the sequence of moves. If it is not, prove the impossibility.

As a pendulum slowly loses energy, the amplitude of its swing decreases. How does the period
change as the amplitude decreases? Is it constant, decreasing, or increasing? Justify your answer.

A uniform sphere, of radius r, has a sphere of radius r/2 cut out of it. The ﬁgure shows a cross
section through the sphere. Where is its centre of mass?

19 Pendulum

20 Centre of mass

r

17

21 Estimation: Oblateness of the earth

Compared to a sphere, the earth is squashed.

a) Why? Should the polar radius or the equatorial radius be the larger?

b) Which physical quantities determine d, the diﬀerence in radii? How can you combine these
quantities into a length (in other words, into an estimate for d)?

c) Use your formula to make a rough numerical estimate of d, and compare it with actual data.

22 Moments of inertia

a) What are the dimensions of moment of inertia?

b) An object has mass M and characteristic length l. The characteristic length is a typical length
in the object, such as a radius or diamater. What is its moment of inertia, up to a dimension-
less constant? Consider a geometrically similar object that is twice as big as this object, in all
its dimensions, and made out of the same material. What is the ratio of moments of inertia:
Ibigger/Ismaller?
c) The moment of inertia of a uniform thin disc is MR2/2, about an axis perpendicular to the plane
of the disc and through its centre. Perhaps using your results from last week, guess a moment
of inertia for a uniform spherical shell with mass M and radius R (axis of rotation through the
centre). Now calculate it and compare with your guess.

23 Rolling

24 Buoyancy

Four objects, made of identical steel, roll down an inclined plane. The objects are (1) a large
spherical shell, (2) a large disc, (3) a small solid sphere, and (4) a small ring. The large objects
have triple the radius of the small objects. Rank the objects in order of decreasing acceleration
down the plane.

A solid iron sphere is ﬂoating in a bath of mercury. You pour water over the sphere and cover it
with water. Does the sphere rise, sink, or stay at the same height?

25 Quadratics by approximation

a) Use the quadratic formula and your calculator to ﬁnd the solutions of 1 + 200000x + x2 = 0.
What goes wrong? Why?

b) Instead, let’s approximate. If x is near zero, which term can you neglect? Solve the simpliﬁed
equation to get a ﬁrst approximation to the smaller root. Call this ﬁrst approximation x1.
c) How can you improve your approximation?

d) If you know one root, how can you easily ﬁnd the other root?

26 Slipping and sliding

You give a snooker ball (mass m and radius r) a horizontal impulse through its centre of mass and
it starts to move with velocity v0. Let µ be the coeﬃcient of sliding friction.
a) At ﬁrst, the ball skids; eventually, at some time t0, it starts to roll. Why? On the same graph,
sketch qualitatively the centre-of-mass velocity v(t) and the scaled angular velocity rω(t) (rather
than ω, because ω and v do not have the same dimensions), label any interesting features, and
explain your reasoning. Be sure to specify your sign convention for ω.

b) Qualitatively, how does t0 depend on m, r, µ, v0, and g? How should the mass distribution
within the ball aﬀect t0? (For example, how should t0 for a spherical-shell ball compare with t0 for

18

a solid-sphere ball?) Based on your qualitative reasoning, guess an expression for t0. Make sure
that your guess has dimensions of time!

c) Now analyse the motion quantitatively. Solve for v(t) and rω(t), and sketch them on the same
graph. What is t0? Compare with your guess in part b, and discuss any diﬀerences.
d) What is the ﬁnal velocity of the ball, v(t0)? What is the ball’s kinetic energy? What fraction of
its initial kinetic energy has it lost?

e) How much work is done by the force of sliding friction? Is your result consistent with the energy
loss from part d?

f) Try it out: Strike a snooker ball as described, and collect whatever data you need to make a
rough estimate of µ.

27 Stirling’s formula

Stirling’s formula says that, for large n,

Here are two ways to derive a rough version of this formula.

n
k=1 log k. Sketch a graph of
a) The ﬁrst version derives an expression for log n!, which is also
n
k=1 log k. As an approximation, replace the sum
log k and mark the area represented by the sum
P
by an integral of log k and evaluate it to get an approximation to log n!. Does the integral over- or
underestimate the sum?

P

b) i) For the second method, begin with a useful trick: diﬀerentiating under the integral sign. You
know that

0 e−t dt = 1 and, by changing variables, that

∞

R

Now diﬀerentiate both sides of this expression n times with respect to a, and show that

√2πn

n!

≈

n

n
e (cid:17)

.

(cid:16)

∞

Z

0

−at dt =
e

1
a

.

∞

Z
0

tne

−t dt = n!.

(2)

(3)

(4)

ii) By approximating the integral (4), you can approximate n!. The integrand is also ef (t)
where f (t) = n log t
t. Sketch f (t) as a function of t. Where is its maximum (call it t0)? For large
n, the exponential of f (t) is even more sharply peaked than f (t) itself; most of the contribution to
ef (t0). What is the resulting approximation?
the integral comes from around t0. Therefore, n!
How does it compare with Stirling’s formula (2)?

−

∼

iii) This last approximation, n!

ef (t0), is dodgy: It neglects the width of the sharply peaked

function ef (t). A more accurate approximation is:

∼

ef (t0)

n!

∼

×

width of peak.

Why? Draw a picture to explain the argument. Estimate the width (there are many reasonable
ways to make this estimate) and reﬁne your estimate from ii. How does it compare with Stirling’s
formula? How could you improve the approximation yet further? If you feel adventurous, derive
the √2π factor.

19

28 Random walks

A confusing feature of a random walk is the presence of square roots: Why in a random walk does
it take on the order of N 2 steps to move a distance N ? Here is one way to understand this bizarre
behaviour. Imagine a particle making a one-dimensional random walk: with equal probabilities, it
moves one step either to the left or to the right. Let dn be its position after n steps, with d0 = 0.
We shall study

, the expected value of d2
n.

a) After 0 steps, the distribution of possible d0 is simple: There is only one possibility, that the
1 or +1, with equal
particle is at the origin. So
probabilities. So

= 0. After 1 step, the particle is at either

d2
0i
h

−

d2
ni
h

d2
1i
h

=

1
2 (cid:8)

(+1)2 + (

1)2

= 1.

−

(cid:9)

Work out the probability distribution for the particle position after 2 steps, and from the distribu-
tion, work out
. Generalise the pattern: After N steps, what is the
expected squared distance

d2
d2
4i
3i
h
h
? Harder: Prove your result.

. Repeat for

d2
2i
h

and

d2
N i
h

? Therefore explain the behaviour mentioned in the introduction.

b) What is

ph
29 Air molecules

d2
N i

a) Estimate the mean free path, l, of air molecules at room temperature. This length is the step
size in a random walk.

b) Roughly how fast does an air molecule move? Call the speed c.

c) What dimensions does a diﬀusion coeﬃcient have? How can you combine c and l into a diﬀusion
coeﬃcient? Estimate the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, D, for air molecules in air (this coeﬃcient is called
the self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient of air). Estimate how long it would take an air molecule to diﬀuse
across a room.

d) Fast pieces of ﬂuid donate momentum to neighbouring slow pieces of ﬂuid; so the fast pieces
slow down, and the slow pieces speed up. The viscosity measures the ease with which the momen-
tum diﬀuses. In air, momentum is diﬀused by particle motion directly: The particles carry their
momentum with them, so viscosity arises from the same physics as does molecular diﬀusion. The
viscosity of air should therefore be related to the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D, which you estimated in
part c. What are the dimensions of viscosity? How can you turn D into a viscosity? Therefore
estimate the viscosity of air, and compare with reality. Why can’t you use the same method to
estimate the viscosity of water?

30 Atmosphere thickness

Here is a crude method to estimate the height, H, of the earth’s atmosphere. The atmosphere does
not end abruptly at H; rather, the density falls gradually to zero. You can think of H as the height
at which the density has fallen by a signiﬁcant fraction. To determine H, mentally launch an air
molecule vertically upwards; how high does it reach (if there is no atmosphere in its way)? The
height of course depends on the launch velocity. How can you choose a reasonable launch velocity?
Get a numerical estimate for the height.

20

31 Atmosphere, take 2

You can also use a more honest method to work out the density versus height in the atmosphere.
Assume that the atmosphere has a uniform temperature. Now work out how the density varies
with height.
(Hint: Consider also how the pressure must vary, and use the ideal gas law to
relate pressure and density.) Your density should have the form of the Boltzmann distribution.
Coincidence? Discuss.

32 Return probability in random walks

From last week: In a one-dimensional random walk, the particle’s rms distance from the origin after
n steps is √n. You can use this result to determine the probability that the particle returns to the
origin (the other possibility is that the particle escapes to inﬁnity and never returns). The particle’s
position is distributed with approximately a Gaussian distribution; the standard deviation is the
rms distance √n.

Approximate the distribution instead as a rectangle of width √n. In other words, replace the
Gaussian distribution by a uniform distribution. So pn, the probability that the particle is at the
origin after n steps, is 1/√n (give or take a constant). What is the expected number of visits to
the origin over all time? What therefore is the probability that the particle returns to the origin?
Extend the argument to two- and three-dimensional random walks. What if anything changes

as you go from one to two to three dimensions?

33 Tricky die (from vac problems)

You roll a 1000-sided die once per second.

a) How long, on average, between rolls of a 1? Answer: 1000 s

b) Your friend Jane walks up and sees you rolling the die. How long does she have to wait, on
average, before a 1 turns up? Answer: 1000 s (careful of the gambler’s fallacy)

c) How long, on average, between the time that she walked up to you and the time that you last
rolled a 1? Answer: 1000 s

Combining the answers to parts b and c, we conclude that a 1 turns up every 2000 s, in

contradiction to part a. How can you resolve the paradox?

In the kinetic theory, you ﬁnd the same paradox. A molecule travels on average a distance
l (the mean free path) before colliding with another molecule. Observe one of the molecules and
be puzzled. How far away, on average, is its next collision? Answer: l, because molecules have no
memory. How far away, on average, was its last collision? Answer: l, because molecules have no
memory. So the mean free path should be 2l.

34 Singing logarithms

Read p. 25 approximating logarithms, and use the method to compute 38 and log10 5. How accurate
are the values? Make up four more computations in which logarithms would aid the computation;
use the method to do the computations.

35 Adiabatic or isothermal sound waves?

Newton was the ﬁrst to work out the speed of sound. He found that cs =
P/ρ. Today we
would deduce the speed by deriving and solving the wave equation, which is a partial diﬀerential
equation for the pressure p(x, t). When Newton derived the speed, regular derivatives were barely
understood and partial derivative were unimagined.

p

Newton’s formula implicitly assumes the compressions and rarefactions that constitute a sound
wave are isothermal. (An adiabatic compression happens too quickly for heat to ﬂow and thereby to

21

36 Teacup spindown

equalise the temperature with the neighbouring rarefaction.) Are the compressions or rarefactions
isothermal or adiabatic?

a) To decide, consider a sound wave with angular frequency ω, which is f /2π. (Angular frequency
usually makes for more accurate estimates than regular frequency does.) Roughly how long does
a compression last? Call this time tc. The size of the compression region is roughly cs/ω, which
is usually called ¯λ. Roughly how long does it take the heat in this region to diﬀuse outside this
region? Call this time td. Hint: In a gas, the molecular-diﬀusion constant D is roughly equal to
the heat-diﬀusion constant κ. Sketch tc and td as functions of ω (on the same graph). What is
special about the intersection frequency (call it ω0)? What is ω0 as a function of κ and cs?
b) From Set 6, Question 4d, you know that κ
found that D
∼
free time, then l

cs, and D
csτ . Use this relation to simplify your expression for ω0.

lcs, where l is the mean free path. Actually, you
κ. If τ is the mean

lc, where c is a typical molecular speed, but c

∼

∼

∼

c) Is a sound wave of frequency f = 256 Hz adiabatic (this tone is roughly middle C)? Therefore
decide whether Newton’s implicit assumption is correct.

∼

d) Now decide experimentally. Compute cs for air at sea level using Newton’s formula. The
adiabatic speed is given by

cadiabatic
s

= √γ cisothermal
s

,

where γ is the ratio of speciﬁc heats cp/cv, which is roughly 1.4 for dry air. How closely do the two
speeds match the actual speed of sound?

You stir your afternoon tea to mix the milk (and sugar if you have a sweet tooth). Once you remove
the stirring spoon, the rotation starts to slow. What is the spindown time τ ? In other words, how
long before the angular velocity of the tea has fallen by a signiﬁcant fraction?

To estimate τ , consider a physicist’s idea of a teacup: a cylinder with height L and diameter
L, ﬁlled with liquid. Why does the rotation slow? Tea near the edge of the teacup – and near the
base, but for simplicity neglect the eﬀect of the base – is slowed by the presence of the edge (the
noslip boundary condition); the edge produces a velocity gradient. Because of the tea’s viscosity,
the velocity gradient produces a force on any piece of the edge; this force tries to spin the piece in
the direction of the tea’s motion. The piece exerts a force on the tea, which is equal in magnitude
and opposite in sense: The edge slows the rotation.

a) In terms of the total viscous force F and of the initial angular velocity ω, estimate the spindown
time. Hint: Consider torque and angular momentum. (Feel free to drop any constants, such as π
and 2, by invoking the Estimation Theorem: 1 = 2.)

b) You can estimate F with the idea that

viscous force

ρν

velocity gradient

surface area.

∼

×

×

(5)

Here ρν is η. The more familiar viscosity is η, known as the dynamic viscosity. The more convenient
viscosity is ν, the kinematic viscosity. (To see why ν might be more convenient than η, work out
the dimensions of ν.) The velocity gradient is determined by the size of the region in which the
the edge has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the ﬂow; this region is called the boundary layer. Let δ be its
thickness. Estimate the velocity gradient near the edge, and use (5) to estimate F .

22

c) Put your expression for F into your earlier estimate for τ , which should now contain only one
quantity that you have not yet estimated (the boundary-layer thickness).

d) You can estimate δ using your knowledge of random walks. The boundary layer is a result of
momentum diﬀusion; just as D is the molecular-diﬀusion coeﬃcient, ν is the momentum-diﬀusion
coeﬃcient. In a time t, how far can momentum diﬀuse? This distance is δ. What is a natural
estimate for t? (Hint: After rotating 1 radian, the ﬂuid is moving in a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
direction than before, so the momentum ﬂuxes no longer add.) Therefore estimate δ.

e) Now put it all together: What is τ ?

f) Stir some tea and estimate τexp. Compare this value with the value predicted by your theory.
10−6 m2 sec−1.
In water (and tea is roughly water), ν

∼

37 Stokes’ law

You can use ideas from the previous problem to derive Stokes’ formula for drag at low speeds (more
precisely, at low Reynolds’ number). Many weeks ago, we derived the result from dimensional
analysis; here you will ﬁnd a physical argument.

Consider a sphere of radius R moving with velocity v. Equivalently, in the reference frame of
the sphere, the sphere is ﬁxed and the ﬂuid moves past it with velocity v. Next to the sphere, the
ﬂuid is stationary. Over a region of thickness δ (the boundary layer), the ﬂuid velocity rises from
R (the most natural assumption) and estimate the
zero to the full ﬂow speed v. Assume that δ
viscous drag force. Compare the force with Stokes’ formula (remember that ρν = η).

∼

23

Symbol
M2
m3
M3
P4
d5
P5
m6
M6
P8

KEY
Interval
Major 2nd
Minor 3rd
Major 3rd
Perfect 4th
Diminished 5th
Perfect 5th
Minor 6th
Major 6th
Octave

Notes
C–D
C–E♭
C–E
C–F
C–G♭
C–G
C–A♭
C–A
C–C

Approximate Logarithms Using Half-Decibels∗

Semitones
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

11
12
17.4
19
24
28
31
34
36
38
40

Interval
M2
m3
M3
P4
d5
P5
m6 = P8
M6 = P8

−
−
P5 + m3

2

P4

·

P8

M3
m3

P8 + P5

·
·
·

·

2
P8
P8 + M3
P8 + P5
P8
M2
−
P8
3
(P8 + P5)
P8 + M3

·

2
2
3

2
·
3
·

Ratio
9/8
6/5
5/4
4/3
√2
3/2
8/5
5/3
9/5
16/9
17/9
2
e
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10.

64
9 ≈

Exact Value
1.122
1.1885
1.259
1.3335
1.4125
1.496
1.585
1.679
1.7783
1.7783
1.8836
1.9953
2.718
2.9854
3.981
5.012
5.9566
7.080
7.943
8.913

10.

≈

≈

103, or 21/12

101/40. By chance 21/12 is the semitone frequency ratio on the
The starting point is 210
equal-tempered scale. Since we know what Pythagorean ratios the equal-tempered intervals are supposed
to approximate, we can approximate logarithms to the base 21/12, and thereby approximate logarithms to
the base 101/40. The ratio column indicates the ratios for perfect Pythagorean intervals, and the exact
value column shows 10semitones/40, to show the accuracy of the method. Note that 10 semitones has two
possible breakdowns into intervals, as P5 + m3 or 2
P4. The second is much more accurate, because in
·
the equal-tempered scale, the perfect intervals come out almost exactly right, at the cost of some error in
the major and minor intervals.

To use the table to compute log10 x, ﬁnd x as a product of ratios, add the number of semitones for
the ratios, and divide by 40 (divide by 2 to get dB). To calculate 10x, multiply x by 40, ﬁnd that value
in the semitones column, and read oﬀ the corresponding ratio. From a few basic Pythagorean ratios and
number of semitones, most of the table is easy to ﬁgure out. The most important to remember one is the
ﬁfth: 7 semitones corresponds to 3/2. For example, from the ﬁfth we can compute the frequency ratio for
a fourth (5 semitones). The two intervals together make an octave, so the product of their frequency ratios
is 2. This means 5 semitones corresponds to 4/3. Many other entries can be worked out similarly.

Some examples (arrows point from the real to the log world):

2

→

10

4
3 (cid:17)

(cid:16)

·

→
5
4 ·

5 =

2

2

·

→

1 octave = 12 semitones = 6 dB = 0.3 decades.

10

P4 = 50 semitones = 40 + 2

P4

10

= 17.78 (exact 17.76).

M3 + 2

P8 = 28 semitones =

or 0.7 decades (14 dB).

·

∗

Method due to the statistician I. J. Good, who credits his father.

·

←

16
9

·

28
40

24

