6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
0
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

S. Rajasekar
Department of Physics, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirapalli – 620 024, Tamilnadu, India∗

P. Philomination
Department of Physics, Sri AVVM Pushpam College,
Poondi, Thanjavur – 613 503, Tamilnadu, India

V. Chinnathambi
Department of Physics, AKGS Arts College, Srivaikundam – 628 619, Tamilnadu, India

In this manuscript various components of research are listed and brieﬂy discussed. The topics
considered in this write-up cover a part of the research methodology paper of Master of Philosophy
(M.Phil.) course and Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) course. The manuscript is intended for students
and research scholars of science subjects such as mathematics, physics, chemistry, statistics, biology
and computer science. Various stages of research are discussed in detail. Special care has been taken
to motivate the young researchers to take up challenging problems. Ten assignment works are given.
For the beneﬁt of young researchers a short interview with three eminent scientists is included at
the end of the manuscript.

I. WHAT IS RESEARCH?

(3) to analyse an event or process or phenomenon to

Research is a logical and systematic search for new
It is an
and useful information on a particular topic.
investigation of ﬁnding solutions to scientiﬁc and social
problems through objective and systematic analysis. It
is a search for knowledge, that is, a discovery of hidden
truths. Here knowledge means information about mat-
ters. The information might be collected from diﬀerent
sources like experience, human beings, books, journals,
nature, etc. A research can lead to new contributions to
the existing knowledge. Only through research is it possi-
ble to make progress in a ﬁeld. Research is done with the
help of study, experiment, observation, analysis, compar-
ison and reasoning. Research is in fact ubiquitous. For
example, we know that cigarette smoking is injurious to
health; heroine is addictive; cow dung is a useful source
of biogas; malaria is due to the virus protozoan plasmod-
ium; AIDS (Acquired Immuno Deﬁciency Syndrome) is
due to the virus HIV (Human Immuno deﬁciency Virus).
How did we know all these? We became aware of all
these information only through research. More precisely,
it seeks predictions of events and explanations, relation-
ships and theories for them.

A. What are the Objectives of
Research?

The prime objectives of research are

(1) to discover new facts

(2) to verify and test important facts

identify the cause and eﬀect relationship

(4) to develop new scientiﬁc tools, concepts and theo-
ries to solve and understand scientiﬁc and nonsci-
entiﬁc problems

(5) to ﬁnd solutions to scientiﬁc, nonscientiﬁc and so-

cial problems and

every day life.

(6) to overcome or solve the problems occurring in our

B. What Makes People do Research?

This is a fundamentally important question. No person
would like to do research unless there are some motivating
factors. Some of the motivations are the following:

(1) to get a research degree (Doctor of Philosophy
(Ph.D.)) along with its beneﬁts like better employ-
ment, promotion, increment in salary, etc.

(2) to get a research degree and then to get a teach-
ing position in a college or university or become a
scientist in a research institution

(3) to get a research position in countries like U.S.A.,
Canada, Germany, England, Japan, Australia, etc.
and settle there

(4) to solve the unsolved and challenging problems

(5) to get joy of doing some creative work

(6) to acquire respectability

(7) to get recognition

∗Electronic address: rajasekar@physics.bdu.ac.in

(8) curiosity to ﬁnd out the unknown facts of an event

(9) curiosity to ﬁnd new things

(10) to serve the society by solving social problems.

Some students undertake research without any aim pos-
sibly because of not being able to think of anything else
to do. Such students can also become good researchers
by motivating themselves toward a respectable goal.

In the words of Prof.P.Balaram [Current Science,
87(2004)1319] Ph.D. degree is a passport to a research ca-
reer. The Ph.D. period often inﬂuence a research scholar
to make or to break in a scientiﬁc career.

C. Importance of Research

Research is important both in scientiﬁc and nonscien-
tiﬁc ﬁelds.
In our life new problems, events, phenom-
ena and processes occur every day. Practically imple-
mentable solutions and suggestions are required for tack-
ling new problems that arise. Scientists have to under-
take research on them and ﬁnd their causes, solutions,
explanations and applications. Precisely, research assists
us to understand nature and natural phenomena.

Some important avenues for research are:

(1) A research problem refers to a diﬃculty which a re-
searcher or a scientiﬁc community or an industry or
a government organization or a society experiences.
It may be a theoretical or a practical situation. It
calls for a thorough understanding and possible so-
lution.

(2) Research on existing theories and concepts help us

identify the range and applications of them.

(3) It is the fountain of knowledge and provide guide-

lines for solving problems.

(4) Research provides basis for many government poli-
cies. For example, research on the needs and desires
of the people and on the availability of revenues to
meet the needs helps a government to prepare a
budget.

(5) It is important in industry and business for higher
gain and productivity and to improve the quality
of products.

(6) Mathematical and logical research on business and

industry optimizes the problems in them.

(7) It leads to the identiﬁcation and characterization
of new materials, new living things, new stars, etc.

(8) Only through research can inventions be made; for
example, new and novel phenomena and processes
such as superconductivity and cloning have been
discovered only through research.

2

(9) Social research helps ﬁnd answers to social prob-
lems. They explain social phenomena and seek so-
lution to social problems.

(10) Research leads to a new style of life and makes it

delightful and glorious .

Emphasizing the importance of research Louis Pasteur
said “I beseech you to take interest in these sacred do-
mains called laboratories. Ask that there be more and
that they be adorned for these are the temples of the
future, wealth and well-being.
It is here that human-
ity will learn to read progress and individual harmony
in the works of nature, while humanity’s own works are
all too often those of babarism, fanaticism and destruc-
tion.” (Louis Paster – article by S.Mahanti, Dream 2047,
p.29–34 (May 2003)).

In order to know what it means to do research one may
read scientiﬁc autobiographies like Richard Feynmann’s
“Surely you are joking, Mr.Feynmann!”, Jim Watson’s
“The double helix”, “Science as a way of life – A biogra-
phy of C.N.R. Rao” by Mohan Sundararajan, etc.

II. RESEARCH METHODS AND RESEARCH
METHODOLOGY

Is there any diﬀerence between research methods and

research methodology?

Research methods are the various procedures,
schemes, algorithms, etc. used in research. All the
methods used by a researcher during a research study
are termed as research methods. They are essentially
planned, scientiﬁc and value-neutral. They include
theoretical procedures, experimental studies, numerical
schemes, statistical approaches, etc. Research methods
help us collect samples, data and ﬁnd a solution to a
problem. Particularly, scientiﬁc research methods call
for explanations based on collected facts, measurements
and observations and not on reasoning alone. They ac-
cept only those explanations which can be veriﬁed by
experiments.

Research methodology is a systematic way to solve
a problem.
It is a science of studying how research is
to be carried out. Essentially, the procedures by which
researchers go about their work of describing, explaining
and predicting phenomena are called research methodol-
ogy. It is also deﬁned as the study of methods by which
knowledge is gained. Its aim is to give the work plan of
research.

A. Importance of Research Methodology

3

in Research Study

(1) Why is a particular research study undertaken?

It is necessary for a researcher to design a methodol-
ogy for the problem chosen. One should note that even
if the method considered in two problems are same the
methodology may be diﬀerent. It is important for the re-
searcher to know not only the research methods necessary
for the research under taken but also the methodology.
For example, a researcher not only needs to know how to
calculate mean, variance and distribution function for a
set of data, how to ﬁnd a solution of a physical system
described by mathematical model, how to determine the
roots of algebraic equations and how to apply a particu-
lar method but also need to know (i) which is a suitable
method for the chosen problem?, (ii) what is the order
of accuracy of the result of a method?, (iii) what is the
eﬃciency of the method? and so on. Consideration of
these aspects constitute a research methodology.

To understand the diﬀerence between research meth-
ods and methodology let us consider the problem of ﬁnd-
ing the roots of the quadratic equation

ax2 + bx + c = 0.

(2) How did one formulate a research problem?

(3) What types of data were collected?

(4) What particular method has been used?

(5) Why was a particular technique of analysis of data

used?

The study of research methods gives training to apply
them to a problem. The study of research methodology
provides us the necessary training in choosing methods,
materials, scientiﬁc tools and training in techniques rel-
evant for the problem chosen.

Assignment:

(1) List out at least 10 methods which you have learned
in your UG and PG courses and write their purpose
or application.

(2) Distinguish between research methods and research

techniques.

The formulas often used for calculating the roots of eq.(1)
are

(3) Distinguish between research methods and research
methodology with an example of your own choice.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

x+ = −

b + √b2
2a
√b2
2a
These formulas are, however,
√b2

x− = −

−

b

4ac. The equivalent formulas are

4ac

,

4ac

−

−

−

·
inaccurate when

b
|

| ≈

x+ =

x− =

2c
−
b + √b2
−
2c

−
√b2

b

−

4ac

4ac

−

,

.

√b2

−

b
|

| ≈

4ac one must proceed with caution to
When
avoid loss of precision. If b > 0, then x+ should be com-
puted with the formula given by eq.(2) and x− should be
computed with the formula given by eq.(3). If b < 0 then
x+ should be evaluated using eq.(4) and x− should be
evaluated using eq.(5). Here the two formulas constitute
the method of ﬁnding roots of the equation of the form
given by eq.(1). If you use the formulas given by eqs.(4–
5) instead of the formulas given by eqs.(2–3) (often used
and familiar to us) to compute the roots then you should
clearly explain why the formulas in eqs.(4–5) were chosen
and why the other formulas given by eqs.(2–3) were not
considered. This is what we mean by a research method-
ology. That is, research methodology tells you which
method or formula or algorithm has to be used out of
the various existing methods or formulas or algorithms.

More precisely, research methods help us get a solution
to a problem. On the other hand, research methodology
is concerned with the explanation of the following:

III. TYPES OF RESEARCH

Research is broadly classiﬁed into two main classes:

1. Fundamental or basic research

2. Applied research

A. Basic Research

Basic research is an investigation on basic principles
and reasons for occurrence of a particular event or pro-
cess or phenomenon. It is also called theoretical research.
Study or investigation of some natural phenomenon or re-
lating to pure science are termed as basic research. Basic
researches some times may not lead to immediate use or
application. It is not concerned with solving any prac-
tical problems of immediate interest. But it is original
or basic in character. It provides a systematic and deep
insight into a problem and facilitates extraction of scien-
tiﬁc and logical explanation and conclusion on it. It helps
build new frontiers of knowledge. The outcomes of basic
research form the basis for many applied research. Re-
searchers working on applied research have to make use
of the outcomes of basic research and explore the utility
of them.

Research on improving a theory or a method is also
referred as fundamental research. For example, suppose

a theory is applicable to a system provided the system
satisﬁes certain speciﬁc conditions. Modifying the theory
to apply it to a general situation is a basic research.

Attempts to ﬁnd answers to the following questions ac-
tually form basic research. Why are materials like that?
What they are? How does a crystal melt? Why is sound
produced when water is heated? Why do we feel diﬃcult
when walking on seashore? Why are birds arrange them
in ‘>’ shape when ﬂying in a group?

Fundamental research leads to a new theory or a new
property of matter or even the existence of a new matter,
the knowledge of which has not been known or reported
earlier. For example, fundamental research on

(1) astronomy may lead to identiﬁcation of new planets

or stars in our galaxy,

(2) elementary particles results in identiﬁcation of new

particles,

(3) complex functions may leads to new patterns or

new properties associated with them,

(4) diﬀerential equations results in new types of solu-
tions or new properties of solutions not known so
far.

(5) chemical reactions leads to development of new
compounds, new properties of chemicals, mecha-
nism of chemicals reactions, etc.

(6) medicinal chemistry leads to an understanding of
physiological action of various chemicals and drugs.

(7) structure, contents and functioning of various parts
of human body helps us identify the basis for cer-
tain diseases.

B. Applied Research

In an applied research one solves certain problems em-
ploying well known and accepted theories and principles.
Most of the experimental research, case studies and inter-
disciplinary research are essentially applied research. Ap-
plied research is helpful for basic research. A research,
the outcome of which has immediate application is also
termed as applied research. Such a research is of prac-
tical use to current activity. For example, research on
social problems have immediate use. Applied research is
concerned with actual life research such as research on
increasing eﬃciency of a machine, increasing gain factor
of production of a material, pollution control, preparing
vaccination for a disease, etc. Obviously, they have im-
mediate potential applications.

Some of the diﬀerences between basic and applied re-
search are summarized in table 1.1. Thus, the central

4

aim of applied research is to ﬁnd a solution for a practi-
cal problem which warrants solution for immediate use,
whereas basic research is directed towards ﬁnding infor-
mation that has broad base of applications and thus add
new information to the already existing scientiﬁc knowl-
edge.

C. Quantitative and Qualitative
Methods

The basic and applied researches can be quantitative or
qualitative or even both. Quantitative research is based
on the measurement of quantity or amount. Here a pro-
cess is expressed or described in terms of one or more
quantities. Qualitative research is concerned with quali-
tative phenomenon involving quality. It is non-numerical,
descriptive, applies reasoning and uses words. Its aim is
to get the meaning, feeling and describe the situation.
We measure and weigh things in the study of substance
or structure. Can we measure or weigh patterns? We
cannot measure or weigh patterns. But to study pat-
terns we must map a conﬁguration of relationships. That
is, structures involve quantities whereas patterns involve
qualities. If one wishes to investigate why certain data
are random then it is a qualitative research. If the aim
is to study how random the data is, what is the mean,
variance and distribution function then it becomes quan-
titative. Explaining how digestion of food takes place in
our body is a qualitative description. It does not involve
any numbers or data and quantities.

The detection of a particular compound is a qualitative
analysis. This can be done by carrying out physical or
chemical tests. Determination of exact amount of a par-

TABLE I: Diﬀerences between basic and applied researches.

Basic research

Applied research

Seeks generalization

Aims at basic processes

Studies individual or speciﬁc
cases without the objective to
generalize

Aims at any variable which
makes the desired diﬀerence

Attempts
things happen

to explain why

Tries to say how things can be
changed

Tries to get all the facts

to correct

Tries
which are problematic

the facts

Reports in technical language
of the topic

Reports in common language

ticular compound present in a volume is essentially quan-
titative analysis. This can be done by volumetric, gravi-
metric and calorimetric methods or instrumental meth-
ods. Experimental and simulation studies are generally
quantitative research.

D. Other Types of Research

Other types of research include action research (fact
ﬁndings to improve the quality of action in the social
world), explanatory research (searching explanations for
events and phenomena, for example ﬁnding answer to
the question why are the things like what they are?), ex-
ploratory research (getting more information on a topic)
and comparative research (obtaining similarities and dif-
ferences between events, methods, techniques, etc.). For
discussion on these types of research see refs.[1–3].

Assignment:

(4) List out at least 10 theoretical and applied methods
which you have learned in your UG, PG courses and
write their features in two or three sentences.

(5) Write at least 20 questions in your subject the in-
vestigation of which forms basic research. Then
point out how many of them have already been
solved and how many were found in applications.

(6) Distinguish between theory and experiment.

(7) Write a note on importance of theory in basic and

applied researches.

(8) Bring out the importance of inter-disciplinary re-

search.

IV. VARIOUS STAGES OF A RESEARCH

Whenever a scientiﬁc problem is to be solved there
are several important steps to follow. The problem must
be stated clearly, including any simplifying assumptions.
Then develop a mathematical statement of the problem.
This process may involve use of one or more mathemat-
ical procedures. Frequently, more advanced text books
or review articles will be needed to learn about the tech-
niques and procedures. Next, the results have to be in-
terpreted to arrive at a decision. This will require ex-
perience and an understanding of the situation in which
the problem is embedded. A general set of sequential
components of research is the following:

1. Selection of a research topic

2. Deﬁnition of a research problem

3. Literature survey and reference collection

4. Assessment of current status of the topic chosen

5

5. Formulation of hypotheses

6. Research design

7. Actual investigation

8. Data analysis

9. Interpretation of result

10. Report

In the following sections the above mentioned various
stages of research are discussed in detail.

•

•

•

V. SELECTION OF A RESEARCH TOPIC AND
PROBLEM

The starting point of a research is the selection of a
research topic and problem. Identifying a suitable topic
for work is one of the most diﬃcult parts of a research.
Before choosing a research topic and a problem the young
researchers should keep the following points in mind.

Topic should be suitable for research.

The researcher should have interest in it.

Topic should not be chosen by compulsion from
some one else.

Topic and problem can be ﬁxed in consultation with the
research supervisor.
In our country often research su-
pervisors suggest a topic and state a problem in broad
view. The researcher has to narrow it and deﬁne it in
operational form. One may ask: Is it necessary that the
topic of a Ph.D. should be diﬀerent from M.Sc. project
and M.Phil dissertation? The answer is not necessary.
If a student is able to get a supervisor working in his
M.Sc.project or M.Phil dissertation topic then it would
save about six months in the duration of his Ph.D. work.

A. Can a Researcher Choose a Topic
by himself ?

A youngster interested to start a research career wishes
to know whether he/she has freedom to do research in the
topic of his/her own interest. The style of research in our
country and various other factors like the infrastructure
facility available in a research institute, time limit, our
commitment to family and social set up hardly allow a
young researcher to choose a topic by himself for his PG
project, M.Phil. dissertation and Ph.D. thesis. How-
ever, many research supervisors give complete freedom
to choose a problem in the topic suggested by him for a
Ph.D. research work. Because the normal time duration
of M.Phil dissertation is about 6-8 months, it is better to
work on the problem suggested by the supervisor.

If a student wishes to do research (for Ph.D. degree)
with fellowship then he cannot have freedom to choose a
topic since he has to work on a project the goal of which
is already deﬁned by the project investigator. On the
other hand, after choosing a topic of his own interest he
has to ﬁnd a supervisor who is working in that topic or
In this case one has severe
interested in guiding him.
limitation in our country for getting a fellowship and for
registering for a research degree. If a student is not very
much particular about the fellowship he has a chance to
do research in the topic of his own interest. A researcher
in India after two years of research experience with few
(two or more) publications can apply for a senior research
fellowship (SRF) to CSIR (Council for Scientiﬁc and In-
dustrial Research) (for details see its and other relevant
web sites). He can prepare a project under the direction
of his Ph.D. supervisor which can lead to a fellowship.
For details see the book ‘How to get scholarships, Fel-
lows and Stipends’ by K.D.Kalaskar (Sultan Chand and
Sons, New Delhi))

Considering the above, a researcher should make-up
his mind so as to work in a topic suggested by the super-
visor. However, a research problem may be chosen by a
researcher himself. This has several advantages. In this
case

•

•

•

the researcher can pursue his/her own interest to
the farthest limits,

there is an opportunity to spend a long time on
something that is a continuous source of his plea-
sure and

the results would prove better in terms of the
growth of the investigator and the quality of the
work.

If the researcher is not interested in the topic and prob-
lem assigned to him but is working on it because of su-
pervisor’s compulsion, then he will not be able to face
and overcome the obstacles which come at every stage in
research.

B. Identiﬁcation of a Research Topic
and Problems

Some sources of identiﬁcation of a research topic and

problems are the following:

(1) Theory of one’s own interest

(2) Daily problems

(3) Technological changes

(4) Recent trends

(5) Unexplored areas

6

(6) Discussion with experts and research supervisor

Suppose one is interested in the theory of nonlinear dif-
ferential equations or quasicrystals or fullerenes. Then he
can ﬁnd a research guide who is working in this ﬁeld or
interested to work in this ﬁeld and then choose a problem
for research.

Our daily experiences and day to aﬀairs have rich open-
ings on various aspects such as the daunting tasks of
AIDS, air pollution, aﬀorestation and deforestation, child
labor, problems of aged citizens, etc.

Technology in various branches of science, business and
marketing changes rapidly. For example, in the early
years, computers were built in larger size with vacuum
tubes. Then evolution in electronic technology replaced
them by integrated circuits. Recently, scientists have de-
veloped quantum dots. Now the interest is in developing
eﬃcient, super-fast and miniaturized computing machine
made up of material whose particle size of the order of
nano (10−9) meter or even smaller. Similarly, another
fascinating topic namely, thin ﬁlm has multiple ﬁelds of
applications. Recent research on fullerenes resulted in
many practical applications.

Choosing a topic of current interest or recent trends
provides bright and promising opportunities for young
researchers to get post-doctoral fellowship, position in
leading institutions in our nation and abroad.

In each subject there are several topics which are not
explored in detail even though the topic was considered
by scientists long time ago. For example, string theory,
quantum computing, nano particles, quantum cloning
and quantum cryptography and gene immunology are
fascinating topics and are in preliminary stages.

The supervisors and experts are working on one or few
ﬁelds over a long time and they are the specialists in the
ﬁeld considered and well versed with the development
and current status of the ﬁeld. Therefore, a young re-
searcher can make use of their expertise in knowing var-
ious possible problems in the topic the solving of which
provide better opportunities in all aspects.

Don’t choose a topic simply because it is fascinating.
In choosing a topic one should take care of the possibil-
ity of data collection, quantity of gain, breadth of the
topic and so on. The topic should not be too narrow.
For example, the study of social status and sexual life
of married couples of same sex (man-man marriage and
woman-woman marriage) is interesting and of social rel-
evance. But the intricate problem here is that we do
not ﬁnd enough number of such couples to study. This
is a very narrow topic at the same time we will not get
enough data to analyze. On the other hand, the changes
in the social life of aravanis in recent times is a valuable
social problem and one can collect enough data.

Further, one has to study advanced level text books
and latest research articles to identify problems.
Is it
necessary to know all the methods, techniques, concepts
in a research topic before identifying a problem for in-
vestigation? This is not necessary. After learning some
fundamental concepts, recent developments and current
trends of a topic, one can identify a problem for research.
Then he can learn the tools necessary to solve it.

C. Deﬁnition and Formulation of a
Problem

After identifying a problem, in order to solve it, it has
to be deﬁned and formulated properly. For this purpose,
one can execute the following.

State the problem in questionnaire form or in an
equivalent form

Specify the problem in detail and in precise terms

List the assumptions made

Remove the ambiguities, if any, in the statement of
the problem

Examine the feasibility of a particular solution

Deﬁning the problem is more important than its solution.
It is a crucial part of the research study and should not
be deﬁned in hurry.

•

•

•

•

•

D. How do you Asses Whether the
Deﬁned Problem as a Good Problem?

A problem in its ﬁrst deﬁnition may not be appealing.
It may require redeﬁnition in order to make it a good
problem. That is, by suitably rewording or reformulating
the chosen problem, it can be made to meet the criteria
of a good problem. This is also important to solve the
problem successfully. To this end a researcher can ask a
series of questions on the problem. Some are:

(1) Is the problem really interesting to him and to the

scientiﬁc community?

(2) Is the problem signiﬁcant to the present status of

the topic?

frame?

(3) Is there suﬃcient supervision/guidance?

(4) Can the problem be solved in the required time

(5) Are the necessary equipment, adequate library and

computational facilities, etc. available?

If the answers to these questions are satisfactory, then the
researcher can initiate work on the chosen problem. In
addition, discuss the problem with the current doctoral
students and obtain the scope of the problem and other
related aspects.

E. How are these Questions Important
and Relevant to a Researcher?

7

The researcher should be interested on the problem for
the reasons mentioned earlier at the end of the Sec.(V A).
The problem should also be interesting to the supervisor
so that the researcher can get the necessary guidance
from him. Otherwise sometimes the researcher may ﬁnd
it very diﬃcult to convince the supervisor on the im-
portance and signiﬁcance of the results obtained. More
importantly, the problem must be of interest to scien-
tiﬁc community and society. If not then the researcher
will ﬁnd great diﬃculty to publish his ﬁndings in reputed
journals and convince the funding agency.

Next, the status of the problem, particularly the im-
portance of ﬁnding its solution should match with the
current status of the ﬁeld. But, if the problem investi-
gated is of not much interest to science and society then
publications will become useless to him in his research ca-
reer. Speciﬁcally, they cannot help earn a post-doctoral
fellowship, respectability and a permanent job in an in-
stitution.

A researcher needs proper guidance and encourage-
ment from the supervisor regularly. This is important
for keeping the research in right track, to overcome the
diﬃculties which come at various states of research and
also to have moral support. A researcher should avoid
working under the guidance of a supervisor having seri-
ous health problems or family problems, committed his
large time to administrative work and strong involvement
in nonacademic matters.

Another important point is that before initiating re-
search work on a problem, a rough estimate on costs and
time required to complete the work must be made. A
problem suitable for Ph.D. degree should not be taken
for M.Phil. degree. A problem suitable for M.Phil. de-
gree is not appropriate for Master’s degree. If the col-
lection of data or resources or related information takes
many years, then the topic is obviously inappropriate for
Ph.D. degree. Controversial subjects should not be cho-
sen. Problems that are too narrow or too vague should
be avoided.

Finally, the researcher must make sure that the neces-
sary experimental setup and materials to perform the ac-
tual research work are available in the department where
research work is to be carried out. Without these, if
the researcher initiated the work and has gone through
certain stages of work or spent one or two years in the
problem then in order to complete the task he would
be forced to buy the materials and instruments from his
personal savings.

(5) proceedings of conferences, workshops, etc.,

VII. REFERENCE COLLECTION

8

various trends and phases in the chosen topic and famil-
iarize with characteristic precepts, concepts and interpre-
tations. Further, it can help us formulate a satisfactory
structure of the research proposal.

Because a Ph.D. thesis or M.Phil. dissertation is a
study in depth aiming contribution to knowledge, a care-
ful check should be made to ensure that the proposed
study has not previously been performed and reported.
The earlier studies which are relevant to the problem cho-
sen should be carefully studied. Ignorance of prior stud-
ies may lead to a researcher duplicating a work already
carried out by another researcher. A good library will be
of great help to a researcher at this stage. One can visit
nearby research institutions and avail the library facility.
Review the latest research papers and Ph.D. theses to
acquire recent trends.

As soon as the survey of available source begins, the
preparation and collection of references preferably with
annotations should be undertaken. The important source
of reference collection is the journal called Current Con-
tents. This comes once in a week. It is available in hard
copy and also in ﬂoppy diskette. Almost all the universi-
ties and institutions buy this document. It contains the
table of content of research journals and magazines in
various subjects.
It provides title of articles, names of
the authors, date of publication, volume number, start-
ing page number of the articles and address of the author
from whom one can get the reprint of the article. If the
title of the article indicates that the paper is in the topic
of one’s interest then he can take a copy of the article if
the journal is available in the local library. Otherwise,
he can get it from a document delivery service centre.
For example, in India INFLIBNET provides this service
through six institutions. For details visit the following
web sites:

http://web.inﬂibnet.ac.in/index.isp
http://www.iisc.ernet.in/
http://www.jnu.ac.in/

One can obtain a research article on paying the charge
ﬁxed by the INFLIBNET provided the particular journal
is available in it. Articles can also be purchased from the
publishers on payment. Alternatively, reprint of the arti-
cle can be had from the author by sending a letter/card
to the author. A format of reprint request card is shown
below.

VI. LITERATURE SURVEY

After deﬁning a problem, the researcher has to do lit-
erature survey connected with the problem. Literature
survey is a collection of research publications, books and
other documents related to the deﬁned problem. It is very
essential to know whether the deﬁned problem has al-
ready been solved, status of the problem, techniques that
are useful to investigate the problem and other related
details. One can survey

(1) the journals which publish abstracts of papers pub-

lished in various journals,

(2) review articles related to the topic chosen,

(3) journals which publish research articles,

(4) advanced level books on the chosen topic,

(6) reprint/preprint collections available with the su-
pervisor and nearby experts working on the topic
chosen and

(7) Internet.

A free e-print service provider for physics, mathematics,
nonlinear science, computer science and biology is

http://www.arXiv.org

No research shall be complete unless we make use of
the knowledge available in books, journals and internet.
Review of the literature in the area of research is a pre-
liminary step before attempting to plan the study.

Literature survey helps us

(1) sharpen the problem, reformulate it or even leads

to deﬁning other closely related problems,

(2) get proper understanding of the problem chosen,

(3) acquire proper theoretical and practical knowledge

to investigate the problem,

(4) show how the problem under study relates to the

previous research studies and

(5) know whether the proposed problem had already

been solved.

Through survey one can collect relevant information
about the problem. Clarity of ideas can be acquired
through study of literature.

Apart from literature directly connected with the prob-
lem, the literature that is connected with similar prob-
lems is also useful. It helps formulate the problem in a
clear-cut way. A review on past work helps us know the
outcome of those investigations where similar problems
were solved. It can help us design methodology for the
present work. We can also explore the vital links with the

————————————————————————-
Front Side

Place :
Date :

Dear Dr./Prof.

I would appreciate in receiving a reprint of your following
article and other related preprints/reprints, if any.
Title :
Journal name :
Volume number :

Page(s) :

Year :

With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,

————————————————————————-
————————————————————————-

Sender’s Address

Reverse Side

To

————————————————————————-

The references from current contents or from journals
can be noted on a separate card or sheet with the names
of authors and the title of the paper/book, etc. For a
research paper, its title, journal name, volume number,
starting and ending pages of it and year of publication
should be noted. For a book, publisher’s name, place
of publication and year of publication must be written
down. Instead of cards, nowadays one can store the de-
tails of the references in computers and have a copy in
two or three ﬂoppy diskette. The references can be clas-
siﬁed. For example, sources dealing with theory, dealing
with experimental techniques, concerned with numerical
methods, etc. can be grouped separately. The copies of
the research articles can also be classiﬁed and bounded.
Cross references (that is research articles or books re-
ferred or cited in a research report) should also be col-
lected and classiﬁed. These also provide useful informa-
tion.

VIII. ASSESSING THE CURRENT STATUS

Generally, it is not diﬃcult to know the current status
of research work in a speciﬁc topic. The current sta-
tus of the chosen topic can be identiﬁed by reading the
relevant journals and the recent papers, discussions in
conferences, seminars and workshops. One can perform
inquiries at several important places known for research
on proposed topic.

9

A study of the current literature in the chosen topic ex-
plores the current status of it. More importantly, review
articles point out not only to the basic aspects and fea-
tures of the topic concerned but also give a brief account
of its present status. For this purpose, one can survey the
journals (for a topic in physics) such as Physics Reports,
Reviews of Modern Physics, Physical Review Letters, Re-
view section of American Journal of Physics, Pramana,
Current Science and Proceedings of recently conducted
seminars and conferences, etc.

Rapid communication and Letter sections of interna-
tional journals publish articles which are very important
and fall in recent trends category. There are several areas
in internet where the papers just submitted to journals
are placed. One can download such articles free of cost.
These articles indicate the recent trends in a particular
topic. Some relevant web sites are listed below.

http://arxiv.org/

http://www.ams.org/global-preprints/

http://front.math.ucdavis.edu/math.AG/

http://www.ma.utexas.edu/mp−arc/

http://www.cliﬀord.org/anonftp/clf-alg/

IX. HYPOTHESIS

Researchers do not carry out work without any aim
or expectation. Research is not of doing something and
presenting what is done. Every research problem is un-
dertaken aiming at certain outcomes. That is, before
starting actual work such as performing an experiment
or theoretical calculation or numerical analysis, we ex-
pect certain outcomes from the study. The expectations
form the hypothesis. Hypotheses are scientiﬁcally reason-
able predictions. They are often stated in terms of if-then
sentences in certain logical forms. A hypothesis should
provide what we expect to ﬁnd in the chosen research
problem. In other words, the expected or proposed solu-
tions based on available data and tentative explanations
constitute the hypothesis.

Hypothesizing is done only after survey of relevant lit-
erature and learning the present status of the ﬁeld of
research.
It can be formulated based on previous re-
search and observation. To formulate a hypothesis the
researcher should acquire enough knowledge in the topic
of research and a reasonably deep insight about the prob-
lem. In formulating a hypothesis construct operational
deﬁnitions of variables in the research problem. Hypoth-
esis is due to an intelligent guess or for inspiration which
is to be tested in the research work rigorously through
appropriate methodology. Testing of hypothesis leads to
explanation of the associated phenomenon or event.

What are the criteria of a good hypothesis? An hy-

pothesis should have conceptual clarity and a theoretical
orientation. Further, it should be testable.
It should
be stated in a suitable way so that it can be tested by
investigation. A hypothesis made initially may become
incorrect when the data obtained are analyzed. In this
case it has to be revised.
It is important to state the
hypothesis of a research problem in a research report.
We note that if a hypothesis withstands the experiments
and provides the required facts to make it acceptable, not
only to the researchers performing the experiments but
to others doing other experiments then when suﬃciently
reinforced by continual veriﬁcation the hypothesis may
become a theory [4].

X. MODE OF APPROACH

Mode of approach means the manner in which research
is to be carried out. It should keep the researcher on the
right track and make him complete the planned work suc-
cessfully. One should sharpen the thinking and focus
attention on the more important aspects of the study.
The scientiﬁc thinking must be more formal, strict, em-
pirical and speciﬁc and more over goal oriented. In or-
der to make steady progress in research and to asses the
progress of the research work, a research design is very
helpful.

A. Research Design

For a scientiﬁc research one has to prepare a research
design. It should indicate the various approaches to be
used in solving the research problem, sources and infor-
mation related to the problem and, time frame and the
cost budget. Essentially, the research design creates the
foundation of the entire research work. The design will
help perform the chosen task easily and in a systematic
way. Once the research design is completed the actual
work can be initiated. The ﬁrst step in the actual work is
to learn the facts pertaining to the problem. Particularly,
theoretical methods, numerical techniques, experimental
techniques and other relevant data and tools necessary
for the present study have to be collected and learnt.

It is not necessary that every theory, technique and
information in the topic of research is useful for a partic-
ular problem. A researcher has to identify and select
materials which are useful to the present work. Fur-
ther, the validity and utility of the information gathered
should be tested before using them. Scientiﬁc research
is based on certain mathematical, numerical and experi-
mental methods. These sources have to be properly stud-
ied and judged before applying them to the problem of
interest.

10

to be Followed by a Researcher?

A researcher can exercise the following aspects regu-
larly throughout the research carrier. These will keep
him in right track and tightly bind him to the research
activity.

(1) Discussion with the supervisor, experts and col-
leagues about the research work, particularly, the
problem and its origin, objectives and diﬃculties
faced in the execution of the problem.

(2) Reading of the latest research papers, relevant theo-
ries and possible application to the present problem
and to overcome the diﬃculties faced.

(3) Review of the work reported on the similar prob-

lems.

(4) Theoretical calculations, setting-up of an exper-
imental setup, numerical calculations, computer
programs, preparation of graphs, tables and other
relevant work related to the research should be done
by a new researcher by himself without assistance
from others.

(5) Have a practice of periodically writing the work
done, results obtained and steps followed in a work.
This is important because sometime we may think
that a particular aspect will be a center piece of the
problem under investigation. But once we make a
write-up of it, this aspect or part of it may turn out
to be only of marginal importance. In fact, writ-
ing of the progress of the work will help us better
understand our work and forms a solid basis for
further progress. It also points out to the gaps in
our work.

(6) Participation and presentation of research ﬁndings

in national and international meetings.

These regular practices provide useful information like
new ideas and can help the researcher

(1) sharpen and focus attention,

(2) conﬁning to the formulation and

(3) in the interpretation of the solution obtained.

Each and every bit of task related to the research work
has to be done by the researcher. A young researcher
should not do the entire work in collaboration with oth-
ers. The researcher is advised to perform all the works
starting from identiﬁcation of the problem to report
preparation by himself under the guidance of supervisor.
Particularly, collaboration work with experts and senior
researcher may be avoided. (However, he can discuss his
problems with them). This is important to acquire

B. What are the Possible Approaches

(1) enough knowledge,

(2) conﬁdence and

(3) training

to carry out research independently after getting Ph.D.
degree. Part of the dissertation should demonstrate the
researcher’s originality. The dissertation should reﬂect
the eﬀorts of a single researcher. Keeping this in mind
one should avoid collaboration as far as possible in the
young stage.

Prof.Balaram wrote “There are guides who have no
interest in their discipline and leave their wards to their
own devices. Surprisingly, it is these guides who produce
some of the most resilient scientists, self-taught men and
women, who develop great conﬁdence in their abilities”
[Current Science 87(2004)1319].

A researcher should provide new information to the
supervisor and avoid getting information from the su-
pervisor. He should learn and collect many information
related to his work. He should deﬁnitely avoid embar-
rassing the supervisor and senior researchers by asking
doubts often. A good supervisor or a senior researcher
does not provide answers to your questions but gives ap-
propriate directions to clarify your doubts.

During the course of research, one should focus the
mind mainly on the research work. Don’t allow the
personal life to interfere with research. Diversions to
other activities should be avoided. Further, after work-
ing about say three years and when the time has came
to consolidate the work done so far a researcher should
not start to work on an entirely new topic. He can com-
plete his thesis work and then work on new topic of his
interest. The woman Nobel Laureaute Maria Goeppert
Mayer said,“If you love science, all you really want is to
keep on working.”

A researcher must be clear in his thoughts. He should
know what he has to ﬁnd out. In order to perform the
work successfully the researcher should acquire proper
training in the techniques of research. The training
equips the researcher with the requirements of the task.
Further, he should be clear about his task and possess
intellectual insight. Then only he is able to ﬁnd out the
facts that would help him in his task. Make your research
a part of your every day life. Think about your research
work in background mode, ideas will come out even when
you are seeing a movie, traveling to a place, sight-seeing
and shopping. Ted Gottfried the author of biography of
Fermi said, “Scientiﬁc research is like sports. To score,
the focus of the scientist must be narrow and intense to
the exclusion of everything else around him. The bat-
ter never takes his eye oﬀ the ball, the hoopster shuts
out everything but the court, the golfer always follows
through–and the scientist focuses his complete attention
on the task at hand and nothing else.”

11

A young researcher should also have persistence, toler-
ance and self-control over the unpleasant outcomes such
as not getting an expected result, not recognized by the
supervisor and rejection of a research article from a jour-
nal. “Don’t get dejected when your paper is rejected ”–
Prof.P.R. Subramanian. Some times one may complete a
piece of work within a week which he might have expected
to ﬁnish it in a month time. On the other hand, at some
times one may get stuck with a particular part of the
work and unable to make a substantial progress, say, in
three months. Avoid feeling remorseful at these circum-
stances and maintain a high tolerance for poor results.
Remember that failure and wasted works are also part
of the research career. Young researchers should create
good relationship with their seniors and colleagues.

C. Getting Joy in Doing Research

To get a deep insight on the topic or the research prob-
lem a suggestion from Dr K.P.N. Murthy is that one
should enjoy doing research and approach it as an en-
tertainment and a mode of getting happiness. In the re-
search career one should treat doing research as a way of
life and not just a job. In order to achieve a goal in the
research one has to work harder. The harder one works
the happier one feels. One need not try to conquer the
world of science. One has to come in order to work and
to ﬁnd his way. Initially one must work hard. Getting
insise a research topic or a research career is like a push-
ing a door. It is hard to push the door open. But when
one understand it it is ver interesting and joyful.

Chandrasekhar pointed out that in the arts and liter-
ature quality of work improves with age and experience
while in science generally it does not. He felt that it is
because of doing science in isolation, very narrow focus
on immediate goals and insuﬃcient broad in interests and
pursuits. In order to continue research even at old age
one should develop the spirit of experiencing the beauty
of science. The spirit of experiencing it is not restricted
to only the great scientists. Chandrasekhar said, “This is
no more than the joys of creativity are restricted to a for-
tunate few. They are instead accessible to each one of us
provided we are attuned to the perspective of strangeness
in the proportion and conformity of the parts of one an-
other and to the whole. And there is satisfaction also be
gained from harmoniously organizing the domain of the
science with order, pattern and coherence.”

Professor G.Baskaran stressed that group discussion is
indeed an important component of doing research partic-
ularly in small and isolated institutions. He said, “One
cannot explain the power and usefulness of group discus-
sions – it has to be experienced. When I was a student
at the Indian Institute of Science (I.I.Sc.), Bangalore, a
few of us students of physics from I.I.Sc. and National
Aeronautic Laboratory were introduced to this joyous

experience by S.K.Rangarajan, formerly a Professor of
chemistry, in whose house we assembled virtually every
evening to discuss such grave issues as amorphous solids
and renormalization group. Each one of the discussants
has made a mark” (Current Science, 75(1998)pp.1262).

For a discussion on emotional factors see, for example,

ref.[5].

D. Crucial Stage of Ph.D

The crucial period for a research scholar doing full-time
Ph.D. is the last year of the programme. During this pe-
riod one should concentrate on completing the ﬁnal work
for his thesis and writing of various chapters. Generally,
a research fellowship is for ﬁxed period of time, it might
have ended before the ﬁnal year of the Ph.D. programme.
We have noticed many scholars converted the full-time
programme into part-time and joined in a job. If the job
is a permanent one then one can join in the job and con-
tinue the research. But joining in a temporary position
may highly change his research career. This would delay
the submission of his Ph.D. thesis and he may loose the
interest in research. There are examples with students
capable of getting a post doctoral fellowship but failed
to even continuing the research. Therefore, a research
scholar should have a clear plan of what he has to do in
the next few years or so. Even if the fellowship is not
available at the ﬁnishing stage of Ph.D. thesis we have
friends and our well wishers to give ﬁnancial support to
some extend.

XI. ACTUAL INVESTIGATION

One should aim at doing good research. What is good
research? Which universities and research institutions in
your country do the best research? How do you distin-
guish the great from a good, a black hole from an or-
dinary hole, a superconductor from a normal conductor,
supernova from mere stars, poles from ordinary points,
linear diﬀerential equations from nonlinear ones?

To distinguish one from another we can use various
quantities. Like wise, to identify the best from among the
available, one can use various quantities to measure the
quality of them. For example, to identify a best research
the quality of the one’s research publications, number of
citations of his publications, projects completed, books
published, contribution made to the science and society,
etc. can be considered.

Research work

12

(3) which added new information to the existing knowl-

edge on a topic

are generally considered as good .

At the beginning of research career a young researcher
should aim to produce a good research, particularly, his
research ﬁndings should distinguish him from other re-
searchers and keep him one among the top young re-
searchers in the nation.
In order to encourage young
researchers and motivate them to produce high quality
of research work awards are given yearly by certain aca-
demic and research bodies in each country. For exam-
ple, in India, Indian President Award, Indian National
Science Academy (INSA) Young Scientist Award and
many other awards are given every year. Some Confer-
ence/Seminar organizers also provide best papers award
to young scientists.

A. What are the Points to be Kept in
Mind in Order to do a Good Research?

Actual investigation should lead to original contribu-
tion and not involve objectionable duplication. Original-
ity is the basic credit point of any research. Therefore,
actual investigation must be directed towards obtaining
novel results. A researcher should develop new ideas and
obtain deep insight into the problem in order to get novel
and new results which are the characteristics of a good
research.

Trivial analysis should not be performed. Recently in-
troduced theories, experimental techniques and numeri-
cal algorithms have to be used instead of outdated meth-
ods. Before applying any method, the researcher should
It it not
familiarize with the features of the method.
worthwhile to continue in a particular direction if the re-
sults are trivial and less informative. If similar problems
have already been done, for instance about ten years ago,
then a researcher should not consider it as important but
could treat it as a useful exercise.

We do research by conceiving information and open-
ings from important research papers published by other
researchers in the topic of interest and continue in our
own directions. The work of some other researchers
might have formed the basis of our research. Similarly,
our research outcomes should help other researchers.
That is, the work should be such that it should invite
others to read and more importantly use it and cite it in
their research work. Our work should lead to recognition
and respect. It should fetch joy and beneﬁts others and
as well as us.

(1) published in reputed international journals,

(2) cited by other researchers working in the same or

similar topic and

As pointed out by Professor M.Lakshmanan, generally,
each and every work of us may not produce novelty, but
if we work towards novelty then deﬁnitely in the course

of research there would come a fascinating and exciting
breakthrough.

The researcher must remember that ideally in the
course of a research study, there should be constant inter-
action between initial hypothesis, observation and theo-
retical concepts. It is exactly in this area of interaction
between theoretical orientation and observation that op-
portunities for originality and creativity lie.

Actual work ﬁnally leads to results and conclusions of
the research undertaken. For proper results it is neces-
sary that various steps of the work should be scientiﬁcally
taken and should not have any ﬂaw. Developed computer
algorithms must be tested for the problems for which re-
sults are already available. The work should be free from
mistakes. Important analysis must be repeated in order
to make sure that they are free from human mistakes.
Professor Devanathan suggests that a researcher should
check, recheck, cross check, ... all the results before sub-
mitting a research paper to a journal . Before beginning
to write a part of the work done and the results obtained
check and recheck the data and the results by repeat-
ing the experiment, rerunning the programs and going
through the theoretical derivations and arguments.

When analysing the data, appropriate statistical tools
have to be employed. The number of data used, units
of the data, error bars and other necessary details must
be noted in the graphs. As many statistical tools as pos-
sible should be used. Appropriate curve ﬁtting can be
done. Necessary interpretations on the results of statis-
tical analysis have to be made.

In the case of development or modiﬁcation of a theory
and proposal of a new method the assumptions made,
basic idea, and calculations should be clearly stated and
analyzed. Various special cases of the theory or method
must be identiﬁed. The validity, eﬃciency and applica-
bility of it must be demonstrated with examples. Merits
and demerits have to be identiﬁed. Comparison of the
proposed method with the already existing and widely
used similar methods should be performed.

In any experimental work, mere measurement of cer-
tain quantities is not enough. The interpretation of the
kind of data observed and explanation for the particular
pattern must be made. On the basis of interpretation
general principles underlying the process can be formu-
lated. One has to check whether the generalizations are
universal and true under diﬀerent conditions.

Some common errors made in research are [6]

(1) Selective observation

(2) Inaccurate observation

(3) Over-generalization

(4) Made-up information

13

(5) Ex post facto hypothesizing

(6) Illogical reasoning

(7) Ego involvement in understanding

(8) Premature closure of inquiry

(9) Mystiﬁcation

For a very interesting discussion on the above aspects
with examples refer to the ref.[6]

XII. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION

The next step after performing the actual research
work on the chosen problem is preparation of results and
conclusion of the performed work. Predictions, results
and conclusion are ultimate goals of the research per-
formed.

There are two indispensable rules of modern research.
The freedom of creative imagination necessarily sub-
jected to rigorous experimentation. In the beginning any
experimental research on a speciﬁc subject, imagination
should give wings to the thought. At the time of conclud-
ing and interpreting the facts that were collected observa-
tion, the imagination should be dominated and prevailed
over by concrete results of experiments.

Proper interpretations of the results must be made. In-
terpretation refers to the task of drawing inferences from
the actual research work . It also means drawing of con-
clusion. Conclusion is based on the study performed.
It would bring out relations and processes that underlie
the ﬁndings. The utility of the outcome of the research
greatly lie on proper interpretations and is the hardest
part of solving a scientiﬁc problem. Interpretation of re-
sults is important because it

(1) links the present work to the previous,

(2) leads to identiﬁcation of future problems,

(3) opens new avenues of intellectual adventure and

stimulates the quest for more knowledge,

(4) makes others understand the signiﬁcance of the re-

search ﬁndings and

(5) often suggests a possible experimental veriﬁcation.

The basic rule in preparing results and conclusion is to
give all the evidences relevant to the research problem
and its solution. A bare statement of the ﬁndings are not
enough. Their implications must be pointed out. Discuss
your answers to the following questions with experts:

(1) Are the supporting evidences suﬃcient?, and if not,

What to do?

14

(2) How many pieces of evidence are required? Instead
of producing all, is it possible to restrict to one or
two pieces of evidence? If so, what are they? and

Researchers in certain research institutions not only
discuss their own work but also have discussions on very
recently reported work of other scientists.

(3) Why are they suﬃcient?

and so on. Such directions can help us minimize work and
the quantity of presentation of the report. Do not rely
on a bogus evidence which would increase the chances of
errors. The investigator has to give suggestions. These
should be practical and based on logic, reasoning and
fact. The suggestions should be such that they can be
actually implemented.

The researcher should not be in hurry while preparing
the results and conclusion. After preparing them the
researcher may ask the following questions:

(1) Are the quantitative and qualitative analysis per-

formed adequate for the conclusion drawn?

(2) Are the results and conclusion general ?

(3) Are the results and conclusion valid only for the
particular situation considered in the present work?

(4) Is the conclusion too broad considering the analysis

(5) Is any evidence which weaken the conclusion omit-

performed?

ted?

An oral report provides a bridge between the researcher
and audience and oﬀers greater scope to the researcher
for explaining the actual work performed, its outcome
It also leads to a better understand-
and signiﬁcance.
ing of the ﬁndings and their implications.
In an oral
report, the researcher can present the results and inter-
pretations which are not clearly understood by him and
may request the experts in the audience to give their
opinions and suggestions. Oral reporting at a conference
or a seminar requires more elaborate preparation than
the written report.

A Nobel prize winner Paul Dirac said, “A person ﬁrst
gets a new idea and he wonders very much whether this
idea will be right or wrong. He is very anxious about it,
and any feature in the new idea which diﬀers from the old
established ideas is a source of anxiety to him. Whereas
some one else who hears about this work and talks it up
doesn’t have this anxiety, an anxiety to preserve the cor-
rectness of the basic idea at all costs, and without having
this anxiety he is not so disturbed by the contradiction
and is able to face up to it and see what it really means.”

The results and conclusion prepared can be revised based
on the answers to the above questions.

B. Points to be Remembered in
Preparing an Oral Report

Each and every statement made in the results and con-
clusion sections must be based on evidence obtained from
theoretical or experimental analysis. Baseless statements
should never be made.

Assignment:

(9) For each of the following topics write at least two
questions, the answers to which must be available
in the respective topics. For example, for the topic,
“introduction”, a relevant question is ‘why am I
doing it?’.
(i) Introduction, (ii) Review of a research topic,
(iii) Methodology, (iv) Research design, (v) Re-
sults, (vi) Discussion and (vii) Conclusion.

Before starting the preparation of an oral report, an
outline can be drawn based on the time duration of the
report and the quality of the audience. Departmental
seminar is usually 45 minutes duration. In other meet-
ings time duration is ﬁxed by the organizer based on the
number of days of the meeting, number of speakers and
the status of a speaker.

For a long time report, that is, 45–60 minute presen-

tation, one may have enough time to

(1) introduce the topic,

(2) discuss the deﬁnition of the problem,

(3) describe the method and technique employed,

XIII. PRESENTING A SCIENTIFIC
SEMINAR-ORAL REPORT

(4) give technical details, and

(5) present results and conclusion.

A. What is an Oral Report?
What are the Importance of an Oral
Report?

Presentation of one’s research work in a scientiﬁc meet-
ing is an oral report . Scientiﬁc meetings include con-
ference, seminar, symposium, workshop, departmental
weekly seminar, etc.

Consequently, these aspects can be prepared in detail.

For a 15–30 minute, oral presentation one cannot ﬁnd
enough time to discuss complete details of the work.
In this case less informative material must be dropped.
Methods and techniques used can be presented very
brieﬂy without going into technical details. Much time
should be reserved for results, conclusion and further di-
rections.

Prepare a write-up of the oral presentation.

It is a
good and very helpful practice to write the talk before
presenting it orally. Then evaluate the written material.
Ask:

from the audience and then proceed. This will make the
presentation attractive, interesting and also allow the au-
dience to clarify their doubts so that they can follow the
work.

15

(1) Why should the audience listen to your presenta-

(2) Is the presentation match with the standard of the

tion?

audience?

Revise the presentation until you get convincing answer
to the above two questions.

Oral presentation can be made eﬀective and attractive
by using modern visual devises, power-points, slides and
transparency sheets. Title of the report, author’s name,
plan of the presentation, very important content of it and
conclusion can be printed in the slides or sheets possibly
point by point with bold and suﬃciently large size let-
ters. Important formulas, equations, tables, ﬁgures and
photographs can be prepared using transparency sheets
or slides. Slides and transparency sheets should not con-
tain running matters. Researcher should not simply read
the content in the sheets. That is, the descriptive por-
tion of the report should not be prepared on the sheets.
An abstract or a short write-up of the presentation may
be circulated to the participants of the meeting. So-
phisticated softwares developed for preparing the text on
transparency sheets/slides are available in internet and
can be freely downloaded. In order to make the presen-
tation, more lively, the researcher could use multimedia.
Nowadays, the use of power-point of Microsoft Windows
is common. It is an easy and compact utility software es-
pecially for preparing classroom presentations. The fol-
lowing are the web sites from which one could download
the software at free of cost:

http://www.oﬃce.microsoft.com/downloads
http://www.lb.com/download-free-power-point-

presentation.org

One could use the audio aspects also to facilitate his
presentation in a better way. While presenting the topic,
the researcher should strictly follow the class room teach-
ing methodology. For example, one should allow interac-
tion; don’t restrict the vision of the audience of a partic-
ular section, don’t forget to modulate the voice as and
when required and don’t violate the time frame.

One or two rehearsals of the report in the presence of
colleagues, supervisor and collaborators can be exercised
in order to

(1) complete the presentation within the allotted time,

(2) improve the quality of presentation and

(3) maintain the ﬂuency of the presentation.

XIV. ART OF WRITING A RESEARCH PAPER
AND THESIS

A. What is a Research Report?

Research reporting is an oral or a written presenta-
tion of important and useful aspects of the research work
done. Scientiﬁc writing, a thesis or a paper, is intended
to present clearly the purpose and outcome of a speciﬁc
It is the last but a major part
research investigation.
of the research study. A report helps the researcher get
feedback from other researchers and experts working in
the same ﬁeld. It also evaluates the success and original-
ity of the researcher’s work. Without a report, a research
study is incomplete and of no use. A report essentially
conveys the outcome of a research work to interested per-
sons. Brilliant work and most striking ﬁndings are of
little value if they are not eﬀectively communicated to
the scientiﬁc world. As pointed out by Eli Maor, in aca-
demic matters the iron rule is publish or perish. Some
times delaying a publication of a result one would lose
his claim.

B. What are Research Paper or Article
and Ph.D Thesis or Dissertation?

A research paper is a report published in a journal
or magazine or conference proceedings, etc. Whereas a
Ph.D. dissertation is a report of the entire work done
by a researcher to a university or an institution for the
award of the degree of doctor of philosophy. A Ph.D.
dissertation is a lengthy, original and substantial docu-
ment.
It should contain original contributions. Essen-
tially, the role of a Ph.D. dissertation is to demonstrate
the research person’s original thinking and contribution
to the topic of research. It should also clearly point out
the research competence of the researcher in his research
ﬁeld. M.Phil. dissertation is designed as a practice for
It will help the researcher learn and un-
Ph.D. thesis.
derstand the present status of the topic and make him
capable of working at the Ph.D. level. The work done
for an M.Phil. dissertation need not be publishable in
journals.

C. Why Should a Researcher Report
his Findings?

During a long presentation, the speaker can stop the pre-
sentation at various stages, seek comments and questions

Every research investigation is carried out with cer-
tain objectives. The outcome of a research work may

add new information to a theory or may have technolog-
ical applications. Sometimes the researcher may not be
aware of the theoretical development on practical appli-
cations. His research results may be useful to another
research problem. Some other researchers may be work-
ing or planning to work on the same or similar type of
research work. Several researchers doing same research
work is a waste of time unless the solution of the problem
is needed very urgently and is of great use. Repetition of
a work should be avoided by the research community as
much as possible. Unless a researcher reports his work
to the world, the correctness, validity and originality of
the work is under a question mark. The outcome of a
research work will become known to the scientiﬁc com-
munity only through publications.
In view of these, it
is important to report a work in an appropriate jour-
nal or magazine and in scientiﬁc meetings like confer-
ences, seminars and symposia. Identify possible publica-
tions of your research ﬁndings after making a consider-
able progress on a research problem. Don’t be conﬁned
with a mere Ph.D. degree.

D. Characteristics of a Good Report

A good report results from slow, pain taking and ac-
curate inductive work. To attract a reader, the reading
matter of a report should be clear and interesting.
It
should not be obscure and dull. The write-up should be
logical, clear and concise. The basic quality or charac-
teristics of a good scientiﬁc report/paper and thesis are
the following:

(1) good presentation

(2) good organization of various chapters/sections

(3) accuracy

(4) clarity

(5) free from contradictions and confusion.

Further, a Ph.D. dissertation should be a formal and
should have high level of scholarship.

XV. OUTLINE OF A REPORT

What are the considerations to be kept in
mind while preparing a report?

(1) First, an outline of a report has to be prepared.

(2) A sketch of what information to be conveyed must

be made.

(3) Then, one can write down various topics, subtopics
to be considered and what material to be presented
in them.

16

(4) The sentences which are to be expanded, reworded

and veriﬁed for its validity can be marked.

The outline of the report helps us concentrate on

(i) what is to be presented,

(ii) logical relationships between diﬀerent parts of the

report,

(iii) smooth ﬂow of the content and

(iv) continuity in the presentation.

The outline can be discussed with the guide, collabora-
tors, colleagues and experts in local area. Based on their
comments the structure of the report can be modiﬁed.

A three stage preparation of a report is generally done

by researchers. They are

(1) First draft – Rough draft .

(2) Second draft – Rewriting and polishing of the rough

draft .

(3) Third draft – Writing the ﬁnal draft .

A. First Draft

In this stage a researcher can write

(1) what has been done in the research study,

(2) procedure, method, theory and technique applied,

(3) technical diﬃculties faced and how they are over-

come,

(4) broad ﬁndings and

(5) concluding remarks.

Tables and charts can be typeset using computer and
kept separately in order to avoid rewriting them. Con-
clusion should be precise, clear and objective. Further
directions may be pointed out.

Since a research paper is identiﬁed by its title it should
be brief and not more than above 10-15 words. A sub-
ject index of a paper is primarily based on the words in
the title. Therefore, few key words which are helpful to
classify the paper can be included appropriately in the
title.

How does a reader decide whether to read the con-
tent of a paper or not? Abstract serves the purpose. By
reading the abstract a reader would decide whether the
content of the paper is useful to him. Therefore, the
abstract should have positive information about the con-
tent of the paper and summary of the work reported in
it. Further, if the abstract has ﬁnal results and main
conclusion of the paper then a reader who has a general
interest in the subject can know the outcome of the paper
without reading the entire text by referring the abstract
itself.

17

B. Second Draft

C. Third Draft

This is the most important and diﬃcult part of the
writing. Extreme care must be taken in writing this
draft. Unclear points, jargons, weakness of the report
have to be identiﬁed and revised. Over-generalization
of outcomes should be avoided. For example, Hermi-
tian operators have real eigenvalues. Generalizing it as
eigenvalues of operators are real or concluding that to
have real eigenvalues, operators should be Hermitian are
incorrect. Similarly, complex analytic functions satisfy
Cauchy–Riemann conditions.
It doest not mean that
functions satisfying Cauchy–Riemann conditions should
be analytic. How do you avoid over-generalization? For
some details see, for example, ref.[5].

Attention must be paid to the arguments made, logi-
cal ﬂow of work presented, the quality of supporting evi-
dences and conclusion drawn. Do these in each chapter.
Don’t do the entire second stage at a single stretch. Give
suﬃcient time between revisions of two consecutive chap-
ters. During the break time think over the revision made
in the previous chapter or section.

More importantly, grammar must be checked. A care-
ful spell check must be made. Use simple words as far
as possible. Indecisive words such as perhaps, somewhat,
rather, etc. should be avoided. Usage of some particu-
lar words repeatedly, for example, ‘very’, ‘extraordinary’,
‘invariably’ should be avoided. Expressions such as ‘it
seems’, ‘there may be’, ‘since’, ‘putting’, etc. should be
replaced by appropriate equivalent words.

Style, presentation and grammar can be improved by
asking your friends, colleagues to read and give their crit-
ical comments, suggestions and correct English grammar.

In some universities the report is ﬁrst read by an En-
glish teacher. He corrects the grammar and give sugges-
tions. After this only a researcher can submit the thesis.

Complicated and lengthy sentences have to be rewrit-
ten and broken. Similar sentences or sentences conveying
same information must be eliminated. Check whether the
words used clearly convey exactly the meaning intended.

S. Chandrasekhar said, “I always sought to present my
ﬁndings in as elegant, even literary, a form as possible. I
select some writers in order to learn. For example, I read
Henry James or Virginia Woolf, and I don’t simply read
the text as a novel; I see how they construct sentences,
how they construct paragraphs, how one paragraph goes
into another and so on.” (J. Horgan, Current Science,
67 (1994) pp.500-01).

Proper references of related work should be included.
Trivial matters and obvious conclusion should not be in-
cluded and if there are such sentences then they should
be dropped.

This is the last stage. In this stage, one can concen-
trate on ﬁnal touches and ﬁnishing. This should be in
the direction of making the report weighty, authorita-
tive, attractive and convincing. Similar words and for-
mat should be avoided in successive sentences. Make sure
that the script clearly shows the originality of the author
and importance of the outcome of the study performed.

In all the three stages of report preparation one should
follow a proper style of writing. Use clear and unadorned
English appropriate for the readers. One has to be aware
of to whom the research report is intended. The report
is not for the supervisor. It is better to avoid the use of
personal pronoun. Use of “I” and “the author” should be
avoided. Some supervisors like to use “we”. For an inter-
esting fun about the usage of “I” and “we” see p.106 of
“Why are things the way they are?” by G. Venkataraman
(University Press, Hyderabad, 1992).

Both active and passive voice should be used wherever
necessary or appropriate. However, when using them one
should check whether the meaning is strictly correct. For
example, when writing “The experimental results agree
with the theory” we must check whether we are strength-
ening the experimental result or the theory. Care must
be taken in using present and past tenses. Use past tense
to describe the data collection and work done by others
and you. For interpretation, assessments and discussions
present tense is appropriate.

Between various stages it is advisable to give gap of
few days so that one can leisurely think of the manuscript
and record how to revise it. This will avoid unnecessary
tension and half-hearted write up.

XVI. LAYOUT OF A RESEARCH REPORT /
PH.D. THESIS / M.PHIL. DISSERTATION

The layout of a research report is the list of various
parts of the report/thesis. Generally, a research report
should consist of the following three components:

(1) Preliminary pages

(2) Main text

(3) End matters

A. Preliminary Pages

Preliminary pages include title of the report, acknowl-
edgement, certiﬁcate page, list of publications and table of
contents. Acknowledgements are written to thank those
who have helped the researcher during their course of in-
vestigation. For a book it is in the form of preface or for-
ward. Acknowledgement should be brief, simple, modest

and given only to substantial assistance provided by the
guide, head of the department, staﬀ of the department,
agencies which provided ﬁnancial support, collaborators
and institutions where part of the work has been carried
out. Acknowledgements made for routine participation
by members of the researcher’s family, librarian, friends,
clerical helpers and god are normally considered super-
ﬂuous. Acknowledgement should be made at the time of
public viva-voce also. There is a chance for a researcher
to forget to say acknowledgement at the end of the pre-
sentation. To avoid this he may do it at the beginning of
the presentation. An important point is to consider the
tone to adopt so that you sound genuine.

Every research report should have an abstract . It is a
necessary part of any scientiﬁc and nonscientiﬁc research
report. In a research article it appears next to the au-
thor’s name and aﬃliation. In the case of Ph.D. thesis,
before its submission an elaborated abstract of the the-
sis called synopsis has to be submitted to the institution
where registration for Ph.D. degree is made. Abstract
and synopsis convey the essence and brief details about
the report. It should contain a very short statement of
the problem, methodology and procedures adapted in the
work and results of the study in a very condensed form.
The abstract can act as a tool to control the ﬂow of ideas
in the thesis. It can help you link in a logical way the
reasons for the research and aims of the work. It should
contain answers to the questions: What was done in the
project? Why is it of interest? How was it done? What
were the outcomes of the work done? What is the signif-
icance of the results? One should emphasize the original
contribution in the abstract. The abstract of a Ph.D.
thesis will be about three or four pages.

Table of contents gives title of the chapters, section
headings, title of appendices and their page numbers. In
the certiﬁcate page the researcher should undertake that
the work reported has not been reported earlier by him
or by any one else for the award of any degree. It should
also mention that the work is done by the researcher and
not copied from any other source.

All the preliminary pages should be numbered with

lower-case roman numbers.

1. Introduction

18

The purpose of the introduction is to give a brief out-
line of the ﬁeld of research. In this part one can bring
clearly the importance of the ﬁeld and the current status
of it. It should contain an overview of the problem, its
importance, statements about the hypothesis or speciﬁc
questions to be explored. This is followed by a preview
of the scheme of the following chapters, that is an out-
line of plan of the work. Here, aim of each of the chap-
ters and their contents can be brieﬂy stated. Related
and relevant work done by others must be pointed out.
Various concepts and deﬁnitions of scientiﬁc and techni-
cal terms necessary for understanding the research work
undertaken are to be deﬁned and explained. Details of
statistical tools or quantities used in the study can be
given in a separate chapter.

Irrelevant and less informative materials need not be
presented. For example, regular and irregular behaviour
of solution of a system or diﬀerential equation can be
characterized by calculating the statistical tools such as
Lyapunov exponents, correlation function, correlation di-
mension, power spectrum, periodicity of the solution and
probability distribution.
If the power spectrum is not
used in a research work then there is no need to discuss
in detail the systematic way of calculating it. Similarly,
suppose the eﬀect of noise in a theoretical model equation
is studied by including, say, Gaussian random numbers
in the simulation. There are many methods available to
generate Gaussian random numbers. If the Box–Muller
method is used then it can be described. In this case de-
scribing other methods, for example, rejection technique
is redundant to the present thesis report. The theory
and experimental set up used should be clearly described
with proper references. Deﬁne the technical terms used
in the dissertation either by a reference to a previously
published deﬁnition or by a precise deﬁnition. Such a
deﬁnition should be given only once in the report.

The introductory chapter(s) should be prepared in
such a way that it should interest the reader in the sub-
ject matter of research. It should not be aimless, confused
and laking in precision. Introductory part may contain
one or two chapters.

To be precise, the introductory part should cover the

B. Main Text

following aspects:

The main text presents the details of the research work
and results. This part of the thesis should provide the
following, about the research work:

(1) Introduction

(1) Features of the topic

(2) Present status of the ﬁeld

(3) Some unsolved problems

(2) Actual research work performed and the ﬁndings

(4) Statement of the problem undertaken

(3) Summary and conclusion.

(5) Importance and justiﬁcation of the present problem

(6) Preview of the scheme of the following chapters and
their interrelationship Deﬁnition of various scien-
tiﬁc terms used, and

(7) Methodology used.

2. Actual Research Work

Assignment:

19

of others. Don’t use the words “bad”, “terrible” and
“stupid”. Avoid use of “today”, “modern times”, “soon”,
“seems”, “in terms of”, “based on”, “lots of”, “type of”,
“something like”, “just about”, “number of”, “proba-
bly”, “obviously”, “along with”, “you”, “I”, “hopefully”
and “may”. There is no need to mention the circum-
stances in which the results are obtained.

(10) Reword/rephrase the following and give the reason

for the change:

(a) Dinesh and Geethan [1] reported that ...

(b) The following algorithm represents a major

breakthrough ....

shaking ....

(c) Even though the above method is not earth-

(d) Geethan and I obtained ....

(e) There is a method to calculate ....

(f) The program will use the data after it stored

them to a CD ...

(g) The method is started by calculating the value

of δ ....

3. Conclusion

At the end of each of chapter, one can place a brief
summary of the outcome of the work presented in that
chapter under the heading conclusion. They should be
clear and precise.

The relevant questions which are still not answered and
new questions raised by the work of the present chapter
have to be mentioned. Whether the answers to the ques-
tions are obtained or not, if obtained in which chapter(s)
they are presented should be speciﬁed. Mention possible
future research. It is important to make a connection be-
tween two consecutive chapters either at the end of the
ﬁrst or at the beginning of the second.

Chapters should not look like reports of isolated work.
There should be a link between consecutive chapters and
the link should be clearly brought out.

C. End Matters

The end part of the report generally consists of refer-
ences, appendices, computer programs (if they are not
easy to develop) and copies of research publications that
came out from the research work done.

This is the heart of the research report/thesis. The
actual research work undertaken, diﬃculties faced, tech-
nical details, results, conclusion and future direction form
the main part of this portion. This part can be presented
in a few chapters. Each chapter should contain introduc-
tion, research work, results and conclusion. Materials
should be organized systematically and presented under
appropriate headings and subheadings. First, write the
chapters that describe your actual research work. Af-
ter this, prepare the conclusion and introduction parts.
When writing the actual work collect the terms and note
down the matter which are to be deﬁned and described
in the introduction.

As Professor P.R. Subramanian points out, for prepar-
ing the Ph.D. thesis report one should not simply copy
word by word from his research articles. Even if the con-
tent of the thesis is the work reported in his research pub-
lications, the student should reword the material without
changing the meaning, give much more details, explana-
tions, suggestions and possibly a better reorganization of
the content.

Wherever possible, the results should be presented in
the form of ﬁgures, illustrations and tables. They can
make the report quite attractive. Tables should be as
precise as possible. All the ﬁgures should clearly specify
the variables of the axes, units used and other necessary
information. Figure caption should not be a reproduc-
tion of sentences of the text. It must clearly state what it
is. Figures should be clearly explained in the text. Data
should be ﬁtted to an appropriate mathematical expres-
sion. Nowadays, sophisticated softwares are available for
curve ﬁtting. After making a curve ﬁt or plotting a set
of data, proper explanation for observed variation of the
data should be given. A set of data measurement without
any analysis and discussion is of no use.

Extreme care must be taken in type setting mathemat-
ical equations, variables and parameters involved in the
study. Italic or Greek letters or mathematical symbols
can be used for variables and parameters. For example,
x or X should not be used as a variable name. The correct
usage is x or X (or typeset in italics). All the equations
should be centered and numbered. Vectors should be
clearly speciﬁed by an arrow over the name or by bold
face name. Equations should not be repeated.

Jokes or puns should not ﬁnd a place in the re-
port. Use “correct” or “incorrect” to refer to the results

1. Appendices

Appendices are supplementary contents which are not
placed in the main report in order to keep the continuity
of the discussion; however, they are relevant for under-
standing the particular part of the report. An appendix
may present

(1) a brief summary of a theory or a numerical method

used which can be found elsewhere,

(2) a lengthy mathematical derivation or a large set of

equations,

(3) technical details and

(4) a list of values of constants and parameters used in

the work.

Appendices can be placed at the end of report after ref-
erences. They should be numbered by capital alphabets.

2. References/Bibliography

References or bibliographies are sources consulted.
Each reference should contain name(s) of author(s), title
of the paper, journal name, volume number of the issue
in which the article appeared, starting page number, end
page number and year of publication. In the case of a
book source its author(s), title, publishers’s name, place
of publication, year of publication and edition should be
given. Some examples are given below.

(1) Suppose the reference is the paper of K. Murali,
Sudeshna Sinha and W.L. Ditto with title “Imple-
mentation of NOR gate by a chaotic Chua’s circuit”
appeared in the journal called ‘International Jour-
nal of Bifurcations and Chaos’ in the year 2003, the
volume number of corresponding issue is 13 and the
starting and ending page numbers of the article are
2669 and 2672 respectively. The above article can
be speciﬁed as (without mentioning the title of the
article)

K. Murali, Sudeshna Sinha and W.L. Ditto, Int. J
Bifur. and Chaos 13 (2003) 2669–2672.

(2) For an article which appeared in a conference pro-

ceedings a typical format is given below:

R. Harish and K.P.N. Murthy, “Intermittency
and multifractality in iterated function systems”.
In: Nonlinear Systems.
Eds. R. Sahadevan
and M. Lakshmanan (Narosa, New Delhi, 2002)
pp. 361–371.

In the above “Intermittency....” is the title of the
report of R. Harish and K.P.N. Murthy. “Nonlin-
ear Systems” is the title of the conference proceed-
ings edited by R. Sahadevan and M. Lakshmanan.

20

The proceeding was published in the year 2002 by
Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi. In the pro-
ceedings the article appears from the page 361 to
page 371.

(3) A book can be noted down as, for example

T. Kapitaniak, “Controlling Chaos” (Academic
Press, San Diego, 1996).

(4) A Ph.D. thesis can be referred as shown below:

S. Parthasarathy, “On the analytic structure and
chaotic dynamics of certain damped driven non-
linear oscillators”. Ph.D. thesis.
(Bharathidasan
University, 1993, Unpublished).

(5) For an unpublished manuscript downloaded from
internet one can note down the web site where it is
available (see for example the references 5 and 6 of
the references section of this manuscript).

References can be either in alphabetical order according
to author’s name or the order in which they are referred
in the report. Make sure that each reference cited in
the text is correctly entered into the list of references.
Repetition of references in the list should be avoided.

D. Typing the Report

Typing should conform to the set of requirements of
the institution. The thesis should be double line spaced
and not more than 25 lines per page. It may be typed
on both sides. Chapter heading must be in large size
with bold face. Each paragraph should be right margin
aligned.
Important terms when used ﬁrst time can be
in italic letters and bold face. First word of a sentence
should not be an abbreviation. Latest softwares such as
LATEX or WORD can be used for thesis, dissertation
and report preparation. One could download the soft-
ware LATEX a free of cost from the web sites:

1) http://www.ctan.org
2) http://www.miktex.org

If a report is prepared keeping all the above precau-
tions in mind, there is every likelihood of it becoming
useful for proper study. Such report enables the reader
to comprehend the data and to determine for himself the
validity of the conclusion.

Before or immediately after submitting hard copies of
the Ph.D. dissertation to a university, show it to your
colleagues, teachers, scientists of your department, your
parents and friends.

XVII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We acknowledge valuable discussion with Professor
M. Sivasankaran Nair, Dr K. Balasubramanian and

Dr E. Subramanian. We are very grateful to Professor
P.R. Subramanian and Dr K.P.N. Murthy for a critical
reading of the manuscript and their suggestions which
greatly improved the presentation of the manuscript. We
are thankful to Prof.V.Devanathan, Dr.K.P.N.Murthy
and Dr.Sudeshna Sinha for their suggestions to young
researchers.

REFERENCES:

1. C. R. Kothari, Research Methodology: Methods and
Techniques (Wiley Eastern, New Delhi, 1985).

2. P. Saravanavel, Research Methodology (Kitab Ma-

hal, Allahabad, 1987).

3. E. M. Phillips and D. S. Pugh, How to get a Ph.D.?

(UBSPD, New Delhi, 1993).

4. R. Spangenburg and D. K. Moser, The History
of Science in the Eighteenth Century (University
Press, Hyderabad, 1999)

5. http://www.cs.indiana.edu/mit.research.how.to/

section3.12.html

index.html

6. http://www.camden.rutgers.edu/camden/TEC/

“It seems to me that scientiﬁc research should be re-
garded as a painter regards his art, a poet his poems,
and a composer his music.” – Albert A. Michelson.

“The average Ph.D. thesis is nothing but transference
of bones from one graveyard to another.” – Frank J. Do-
bie.

When I got by B.S., I would be able to “bullshit”...
When I got by M.S. I would have “more shit”, and that
ﬁnally, upon reaching my Ph.D., it would be “piled higher
and deeper.” – S. Baker.

“Works are of value only if they give rise to better

ones.” – Alexander von Humboldt.

A Short interview with three eminent sci-
entists.

1. Interview with Professor V. Devanathan

What are the requirements for a successful research ca-
reer?

Prof. V. Devanathan : Motivation and innate interest in
the topic of his research pursuit are the requirements for a

21

successful research career. If a person takes the research
not by compulsion but by his own choice, then he will
not feel it as a burden but pursue it as a hobby. “Science
is at its best when it is a part of a way of life” - this
is the inscription that is found on the foundation stone
of Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai and truly
describes the correct aptitude for a successful research
career.

Is it possible for an average student to come up with novel
results in a research problem? If so, what kind of ap-
proach he should follow?

Prof. V. Devanathan : Usually, the assessment of a stu-
dent as good, average or bad is based on his performance
in the examinations. There are some who are good in
examinations with a good memory for reproduction but
lack in deeper understanding of the subject and original-
ity in approach. There are some who are not so good in
examinations but show originality in thinking and follow
unconventional or novel approach to the subject. There
are a few who are good both in examinations and re-
search. So, an average student with an ability of average
performance in the examinations, need not feel diﬀerent
if he has originality in thinking and self-conﬁdence.

During a research career, a young researcher may come
across disappointing moments like not getting expected
results, rejection of a research article from a journal, etc.
What kind of mode of approach a researcher should have
to face such situations?

Prof. V. Devanathan : “Success begets success and fail-
ure begets failure.” Success and failure are like two sides
of a coin and one is bound to face them alternatively in
the course of one’s research career. Elation at the time of
success and depression at the time of failure are usually
mitigated if one works in collaboration with others. At
the time of depression, the co-workers come to the rescue
and prop up the sagging spirit.

In our manuscript we have mentioned the following:

Each and every bit of work has to be done by the re-
searcher. A young researcher should not do the entire
work in collaboration with others. The researcher is ad-
vised to perform all the work starting from identiﬁcation
of the problem to report preparation by himself under the
guidance of supervisor.
Please give your views on this point.

Prof. V. Devanathan : At the initial stages, the re-
searcher gets the support of the research group in which
he is working and he acquires the knowledge of the group
eﬀortlessly. The weekly informal seminars, if conducted
within the group, will increase the pace of learning and
help to clarify and crystallize the problems. This process
of learning is made easier if the young researcher works in
collaboration with others. This is true both for theoreti-
cal and experimental work. At present, the experimental
work is almost a team work and successful research group

is one in which the group leader allots the speciﬁed work
to individuals taking into account his ability and exper-
tise.

2. Interview with Dr K.P.N. Murthy

is that research is laborious and
The common belief
painful. Many times you have mentioned: “Doing re-
search is an entertainment.” Please, elaborate on this
statement of yours.

Dr K.P.N. Murthy : Research not only constitute a dis-
covery or creating a new paradise but also consist of ob-
taining a personalized understanding of a phenomenon.
The struggle that you go through for obtaining an insight
into a phenomenon or getting a hold of a nuance and the
extessy that you get when you get an understanding of
a phenomenon or obtaining a new way of explaining of
that phenomenon may be unmatched. This ecstasy is
nothing to do with what yours creative have impact on
science and society. However, it is the ecstasy of what
Einstein got when he created special theory of relativity
or Feynman when he created quantum electrodynamics
or Raman when he found the so-called Raman lines. It
is this makes the research an enterprise of joy. It is that
makes a research an entertainment.

Is it necessary for a beginner of research to learn all the
aspects of theoretical, experimental and numerical tech-
niques involved in a topic before he take-up an actual
research problem?

Dr K.P.N. Murthy : A certain basic knowledge about
physics and mathematics is must for starting research.
That is it. Several things you learn doing research. Igno-
rance of even some of the basic elements is no hindrance
for creativity. What is required for doing good research
is an enthusiasm, a commitment and willingness to go
back to basics and learn them right.

Before preparing the ﬁnal write-up of your research work,
you have the practice of discussing the salient features of
your ﬁndings with a few other researchers. How are you
beneﬁted from this?

Dr K.P.N. Murthy : After you have completed a piece
of work I ﬁnd it is a good practice to discuss with your
colleagues the important ﬁndings that you have made. I
have always realized that I got a better understanding of
what I have done when I tried to explain to my colleagues
about my work in a convincing way. The very act of
speaking of what you have done removes the cob-webs in
your understandings. I always make it to give a seminar
on my work to a larger audience before submitting it to
a journal for publication. I feel this is a very good and
helpful practice.

“Enjoy doing research and approach it as an entertain-
ment and a mode of getting happiness.” This is your sug-
gestion to young researchers. Please, brief it for the ben-

22

eﬁt of youngsters. In what way will this be helpful to a
researcher?

Dr K.P.N. Murthy : In any human enterprise it is impor-
tant that one likes what one does. The hard work that
you have put in a problem does not tired you and rest be
assured if you approach a research problem with joy and
you will get a good result. Publication of that result and
the acceptance that you get from your colleagues become
secondary. The satisfaction that you obtained by doing a
job well is a reward by itself. I would say that youngsters
should have this attitude towards whatever they do.

3. Interview with Dr Sudeshna Sinha

Despite unavoidable tasks a woman of our country has,
you have become one of the leading scientists in theo-
retical physics. What are your advice and suggestions
to young researchers particularly to young women re-
searchers?

Dr Sudeshna Sinha : It is indeed somewhat harder for
women to concentrate on career planning - especially
when their children are young. One will have to accept
that household tasks will always be there. The hard-
est thing is not really the number of hours of work one
can put in - but the quality of concentration one can
achieve. Here discipline comes in. Since women will
probably manage to get fewer hours of academic work
done every day - they need to really plan the academic
work they hope to achieve every single day. So it is most
beneﬁcial to discipline oneself into shutting oﬀ all daily
chores from one’s mind for some hours every day. The
point is to learn eﬃciency – and to appreciate that one
does not have the beneﬁt of unlimited time (as others will
make justiﬁable demands on your time – like children).
Also women may ﬁnd it hard to pursue academic work
at certain points in their life - but they must preserve the
self-conﬁdence and will to return to academic after such
times are over. They must realize that in 3–4 decades of
working life – a few years is not a big deal. They should
not think that a break in career is irreversible.

Publishing in reputed journals (like Physical Review Let-
ters) is a dream or prestige for many physicists. What
are the secret of yours for regular publications in reputed
journals? What type of problems one has to take up for
getting published in top-level journals?

Dr Sudeshna Sinha : With journals like Physical Review
Letters one must remember two things: First, always try
and make a case of the general interest of your results.
The commonest grounds for rejection is lack of broad in-
terest . This is very subjective of course, and being In-
dian does not help. But still, at the outset, one should
make an attractive statement of the general scope of one’s
work (that is, try to answer this hypothetical question:
Why should someone not doing research in this exact
narrow sub-ﬁeld be interested in reading my paper). Sec-
ond point is persistence. Take all criticisms of the paper

23

seriously (and don’t reply needlessly aggressively to the
referees) and try to answer all the criticisms. Then re-
submit, and don’t give up till the last round!

How could a beginner of research come up with novel re-
sults?

Dr Sudeshna Sinha : Well, I think coming up with novel
results is not entirely in one’s hand. There is an element
of good fortune here! If the guide of the young researcher
can identify a problem that is technically easy to tackle –
but whose results can be of considerable potential interest
– then there is a good chance for the young researcher
to get a novel result. But this is not in the hands of the
young researcher, and most often not in the hands of the
guide either (as it depends on the subject, timing etc.).
In this matter I always tell my students:
whether you get a novel result tomorrow is a

matter of luck, but in a career spanning several
decades, if you work steadily and think deeply
about the subject, it is almost assured that at
some point or the other, you will get a good idea
which will lead to a novel result!

To get a deep insight into the topic or problem of research,
what are the ways a young researcher can follow?

Dr Sudeshna Sinha : One should not just passively read
papers or books! One should try to work it all out in
some detail. While reading passively one feels one has
understood – but only when one is trying to solve some-
thing does one gain any real understanding. In fact it is
a great idea to look at the title and abstract of a paper,
and then ask oneself how one would have attempted to
work on such a problem and only then look at what the
authors have done.

