6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Elements, Topology, and T-shirts

P. Fraundorf
Physics & Astronomy, U. Missouri-StL (63121), St. Louis, MO, USA∗
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Consider the network of elements connected by adjacency in atomic number and periodic table
If all elements except H-He are connected by identical springs and constrained to a z-
column.
spiral in 2D, a map sans spring-crossing results for various values of rest length in units of the
H-He distance. If the z-spiral is removed, and the network allowed to relax in 3D, the resulting
surface with three holes has the topology of a T-shirt or open-handle teapot. Mapping this to a
shirt’s front-back pattern yields a 2D table of elemental inter-connects in tabular (nearly rectilinear)
form. Sample applications: The ﬂat spiral (like other spiral patterns) might serve as basis for an
educational board game, while the T-shirt table might serve as a starting point for “topologically
informed” classroom periodic-table design projects with wearable awards.

PACS numbers:

Contents

I. Introduction

II. Springs on a spiral

III. Relaxing to three dimensions

IV. T-shirt table of connections

Acknowledgments

References

I.

INTRODUCTION

The traditional periodic table shows elemental columns
nicely, but only intermittently shows element connectiv-
ity via adjacent proton number (e.g. Ne-Na or Ba-La).
Hence a variety of “spiral” and “start-column” variations
have emerged1,2,3,4, involving designer decisions on where
to put things. In this note, we explore ways to “let the el-
ements decide” where to go, as if they are e.g. connected
by a network of springs. This is a standard ploy for vi-
sualizing networks. The exploration also turned up an
interesting topological connection between the periodic
table and an item of everyday apparel.

1

1

1

2

2

2

the spring also worked, but only if one weakens a sub-
set of the springs e.g.
for atoms beyond Argon. Going
back to equal strength springs, and allowing all elements
except hydrogen and helium to go where they want on
the wire, yields a slightly wilder layout but nonetheless
without spring overlap for select values of “spring rest
length” in units of the H-He distance.

The table form of this pattern, rotated to match the
modern periodic table with noble gases on the right, is
shown in Fig. 1. Given positions for hydrogen, helium
(specifying scale and orientation) and lithium (specify-
ing spring constant), all the other elements have decided
where to go on their own. The patches for each ele-
ment were then deﬁned with an algorithm for locating
intermediate vertices on spiral paths of the wire, and its
180 degree complement (which serves here to deﬁne the
one continuous periodic table “row”). As you might ex-
pect, this table has ﬁfty elements in eight long (6 or 7
entry) ”main-element” columns on the lower right, forty
elements in ten intermediate (4-entry) “transition-metal”
columns, and twenty-eight elements in fourteen short (2-
entry) “rare-earth” columns at the top.

III. RELAXING TO THREE DIMENSIONS

II. SPRINGS ON A SPIRAL

Begin by considering elements as movable beads-on-a-
track, connected with springs when they are adjacent in
atomic number and/or in traditional periodic table col-
umn assignment. Our ﬁrst reasonable pattern emerged
with hydrogen, the noble gases, and elements heavier
than xenon, ﬁxed while letting the other elements slide
along a spiral track under the inﬂuence of equal strength
springs. Further letting the outer elements slide along

These connections between elements also rearrange
themselves nicely under tension in three dimensions. In
Fig. 2 we use Mathematica’s spring-electrical model with
adjacent element spring attraction, and a global “one
over r-squared” repulsive force.
In this screen capture
from an interactive applet, note the black spiral pattern
of increasing atomic number, as well as the three holes in
the topographic sheet. These holes are associated with
three network bifurcations, and in eﬀect give the sheet
the same topology as an open-handled teapot (top, spout,
handle) or a T-shirt (neck opening and two sleeves).

2

3 a black line charts the path of the atomic-number spi-
ral, while all columns of elements ﬂow from one of three
red-bordered (bifurcation) openings. The main element
groups pour in from the top, transition metal groups from
the central opening, and rare earth groups from the bot-
tom. One advantage to this format is that questions
of period alignment4 become mute since the z-spiral is

FIG. 3: Here the mapping to T-shirt topology is designed to
make the layout as rectilinear as possible.

shown intact in this layout (as well as on the T-shirt).

Although the topology of the connections above is dic-
tated by quantum mechanics, the shape and color of each
region leaves quite a bit of room for artistic license to
address problems like that of ﬂow, color balance, infor-
mation content, and “crowding for the rare earths”. In
fact, one might imagine “periodic table shirt” design con-
tests that honor the topological constraints, but go for a
variety of eﬀects (both aesthetic and conceptual). They
might even work in a junior high school math class, mak-
ing for a nicely cross-disciplinary experience. How to
manufacture the contest prize, i.e. a shirt without obtru-
sive blank spots, remains an open question.

FIG. 1: Here the spring rest length is set at 2.5 times the
ﬁxed H-He distance.

FIG. 2: This network is relaxed using Mathematica’s spring-
electrical model.

IV. T-SHIRT TABLE OF CONNECTIONS

Acknowledgments

The T-shirt topology suggests a way to display all con-
nections in tabular (nearly rectilinear) form. Thus in Fig.

Thanks to colleagues Chuck Granger, Hal Harris, and

Keith Stine for useful suggestions.

pfraundorf@umsl.edu

∗
1 E. G. Mazurs, Graphic representations of the periodic
system during one hundred years (U. Alabama Press,
Tuscaloosa, 1974).

2 M. W. Cronyn, J. Chem. Ed. 80, 947 (2003).
3 R. L. Rich, J. Chem. Ed. 82, 1761 (2005).
4 G. Katz, Chem. Educator 6, 324 (2001).

