6 Cooling in the Universe
0
0
2
 
r
a

Sohrab Rahvar

Department of Physics, Sharif University of Technology,
P.O.Box 11365-9161, Tehran, Iran.
and
Institute for Studies in Theoretical Physics and Mathematics, P.O.Box 19395-5531,
Tehran, Iran
E-mail: rahvar@sharif.edu

Abstract.

One of the questions in the cosmology courses is the cooling mechanism of cosmic
ﬂuid during it expansion according to classical concepts of the thermodynamics. In this
short pedagogical paper, we quote the questions and give a natural approach dealing
with this problem by measuring the dispersion velocity of the particles in the cosmic
ﬂuid by a comoving observer. We show that the thermal motion of the particles in the
cosmic ﬂuid deviates from the Hubble ﬂow and follows the geodesics governed by the
gravity of the homogeneous universe. The dynamics of the ”thermal peculiar velocity”
of the particles leads in an expanding universe, momentum of the particles relax by the
inverse of the expansion factor and the result is losing the energy of particles, hence
cooling the universe.

M
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
8
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cooling in the Universe

2

One of the main questions of students of the cosmology is the cooling mechanism
of the universe during its expansion. According to the concepts from the classical
thermodynamics the question are as: (i) Is our universe non-adiabatic (i.e. universe is
connected to the cold thermal bath and losses its energy during the time) ? The answer
to this question is trivial, there is nothing outside the universe, so thermodynamically
our universe is adiabatic.(ii) So, if our universe expands adiabatically the particles of
gas should loos their energy during the expansion of the universe by bouncing oﬀ from
the physical boundary of the universe during the expansion which makes the cosmic
ﬂuid to cool down.

In the standard cosmological text books [1, 2] and pedagogical articles [3, 4, 5, 6],
the variation of temperature of the cosmic ﬂuid during the expansion of the universe
has been discussed in several ways. It has been shown that the momentum of particles
in the cosmic ﬂuid decrease with the inverse of scale factor of the expansion, however
some of these approaches such as dealing the motion of particles with the special theory
of relativity seems does not satisfy the students’s curiosity [1]. Here we use the natural
general relativistic approach to revisit this problem.

In the standard model of the cosmology the distance between any two points in an
expanding homogeneous universe is given by r = ax where a is the expansion factor
and x is deﬁned as the comoving distance. As the universe expands, the scale factor
increases and makes a larger distance between any two points in the universe. For
an homogeneous universe the comoving distance does not change with time, so the
velocity of expansion can be given by vh = xda/dt, so-called Hubble velocity. For the
real universe, the density is not homogenous and due to the large structures and voids
the density of matter deviates from the background density of universe. One of the
consequences of this deviation is that there is no more a solid comoving coordinate
system and it changes by time as the structures grow. So the velocity of cosmic ﬂuid
gets one more term of vpec = adx/dt, so-called peculiar velocity, due to the variation of
comoving distance with time.

We take a comoving observer freely follows the expansion of the universe. For this
observer the global velocity of the cosmic ﬂuid around him/here is zero. However due to
none-zero temperature of the cosmic ﬂuid, the observer will measure non-zero velocity
due to the thermal motion of cosmic ﬂuid, we call this velocity as thermal peculiar
velocity. We should bear in mind that thermal peculiar velocity is diﬀerent from that
appear due to the perturbation in the gravitational potential of the large scale structures.
The dynamics of the (thermal motion of) particles in the Friedman-Robertson-Walker
(FRW) universe with the metric of ds2 = dt2 − a2dx2 is given by the geodesic equation
as:

¨xµ + Γµ

νλ ˙xν ˙xλ = 0,

(1)

where derivation is taken with respect to the comoving time of the particles, τ and Γµ
νλ
i0 = 1/a × da/dt is the only non-zero
is the Christoﬀel symbol in the (FRW) metric. Γi
spatial component of the Christoﬀel symbol in this metric and by substituting it in (1),

3

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Cooling in the Universe

the equation of motion of the particles in the comoving frame obtain as:

The solution of this equation implies: dx/dτ ∝ a−2. Using the chain rule to express this
result in terms of diﬀerentiation with respect to t-component results:

Now we use the deﬁnition of peculiar velocity vpec = adx/dt and substitute dt/dτ =
(1 − v2

pec)−1/2 in equation (3) which yields:

¨xi +

2
a

da
dt

× dt
dτ

˙xi = 0

dx
dt

dt
dτ

∝ a

−2.

vpec
q1 − v2

pec

∝ 1
a

.

p = m0vpec/q1 − v2

pec

∝ 1
a

.

By multiplying both sides of the equation (4) to the rest mass of a particle, the
momentum of thermal motion of particles obtain as:

This equation shows that the momentum of (non)-relativistic particles relaxes as 1/a
during the expansion of the universe. We see that for a static universe, momentum
would remain constant. Decreasing the momentum of the particles during the expan-
sion of the universe causes the energy of the ultra-relativistic particles, E = pc to fall
as 1/a. In the case of non-relativistic particles where E ∝ p2, the energy will fall with a
faster rate of 1/a2. Using the distribution function of particles for the (non)-relativistic
particles, the temperature of cosmic ﬂuid scales with the mean energy of the particles as
T ≃ E [7]. Now according to the dependence of the energy of the particles to the scale
factor we can come to conclude that the relativistic particles will cool with the rate of
1/a while the non-relativistic particles will cool with a faster rate of 1/a2.

Summarizing this letter, we assigned the dispersion velocity of the particles of
the cosmic ﬂuid to the peculiar velocity in a comoving reference frame and obtained
the dependence of the momentum of particles to the scale factor both for the (non)-
relativistic ﬂuids. According to the dependence of temperature to the energy of the
particles, the temperature of relativistic ﬂuids such as photons will fall as T ∝ 1/a. For
the non-relativistic ﬂuids such as dust and cold dark matter, temperature relaxes with
a faster rate of T ∝ 1/a2. This approach showed that the cooling of the cosmic ﬂuid
can not be explained with the classical concepts from the thermodynamics and cooling
directly results from the expansion of universe which makes the thermal peculiar velocity
of particles reduce during the stretch of the scales.

References

55-56.

[1] Padmanabhan, T 1993 Structure Formation in the Universe (Cambridge University Press)., pp.

[2] Weinberg, S 1972 Gravitation and Cosmology ( John Wiley & Sons)., pp. 507-508.

Cooling in the Universe

4

[3] Christman,J, R 1995 Question #10. Cooling and expansion of the universe, Am. J. Phys. 63 1,

[4] Burko, L, M 1995 Answer to Question #10 [“Cooling and expansion of the universe,” Christman,

J. R 1995 Am. J. Phys. 63 1, 13], Am. J. Phys. 63 12, 1065-1066.

[5] Blau, S 1995, ”Answers to Question #10 [“Cooling and expansion of the universe,” Christman,
J, R 1995 Am. J. Phys. 63 1, 13 and Question #17 [“What happens to energy in the cosmic
expansion?” Munley, F 1995, Am. J. Phys. 63, 5, 394 ], Am. J. Phys. 63 12, 1066-1067. (1995)
[6] Keeports, D 1995 Answer to Question #10 [“Cooling and expansion of the universe,” Christman,

J. R 1995 Am. J. Phys. 63, 1, 13 ], Am. J. Phys. 63 12, 1067.

[7] Padmanabhan, T 2002 Theoretical Astrophysics Volume III (Cambridge University Press)., pp.

13.

210-212.

