6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Assessing the Impact of Student Learning Style Preferences

Stacey M. Davis and Scott V. Franklin∗
Dept. of Physics, Rochester Institute of Technology
(Dated: Aug, 2003)

Students express a wide range of preferences for learning environments. We are trying to measure
the manifestation of learning styles in various learning environments. In particular, we are interested
in performance in an environment that disagrees with the expressed learning style preference, paying
close attention to social (group vs. individual) and auditory (those who prefer to learn by listening)
environments. These are particularly relevant to activity-based curricula which typically emphasize
group-work and de-emphasize lectures. Our methods include multiple-choice assessments, individual
student interviews, and a study in which we attempt to isolate the learning environment.

Introduction

A learning style is a biologically and developmen-
tally imposed set of personal characteristics that
make the same teaching (and learning) methods
more eﬀective for some and less eﬀective for oth-
ers [1]. These include techniques, approaches, and
processes[2], but also innate physiological factors,
experience, habit, and training. Learning styles
are consistent with personality types, but there
is more to one’s learning style than personality.
Common learning styles diagnostics range from the
Jungian-based Myers-Briggs personality type test[3]
to more detailed attempts to discern environmen-
tal and physiological eﬀects [4, 5]. As these rely
on student self-reporting, they suﬀer greatly from
the fact that students often don’t know when they
learn, let alone how they best learn. Students that
claim to learn best by listening often mean that
they are most comfortable following a competent
lecturer. This comfort often does not correlate with
learning (in fact, it sometimes is anti-correlated with
learning)[6]. As such, it is perhaps more accurate to
talk about learning style preferences (LSP).

To accommodate diﬀerent LSPs , many research-
based physics curricula [7, 8, 9] present information
in a variety of representations [10, 11]. Motion, for
example, is described with words, pictures, graphs,
and, ultimately, equations. As measured by stan-
dard conceptual evaluations [12], these courses pro-
duce learning gains signiﬁcantly larger than tradi-
tional courses. These learning gains are experienced
by all segments of the class, with stronger students
beneﬁting the most by the reformed curricula [13].
A study on deaf students [14] found a correlation
between learning style preference and course grade,
with students who have a more participatory ap-
proach to learning earning higher grades. Dunn,
et al.
[2] also found that accommodating learn-
ing styles could boost student performance by al-
most one standard deviation. Felder has analyzed

[15, 16] student performance in introductory engi-
neering classes in the context of LSPs. He found that
extroverts performed almost one full letter grade
higher than introverts, and speculated that the co-
operative learning beneﬁted the extroverts. He also
found a signiﬁcant gender gap [16] in performance
between students who tend to make judgments sub-
jectively and personally (Jungian feelers), but no
gap between those who approach learning more ob-
jectively (Jungian thinkers). Addressing LSPs may
begin to remedy the under-performance of women in
introductory physics classes [17, 18].

Multiple-choice LSP assessments

Dunn and Dunn have developed the Productivity
Environmental Preference Survey (PEPS) [4] which
incorporates environmental, perceptual, and socio-
logical preferences. The PEPS test, a 100-item, 5-
point Likert scale, evaluation, breaks from the tradi-
tional either/or classiﬁcation of type, instead report-
ing a level of compatibility with a particular style.
Compatibility with seemingly contradictory styles is
possible. For example, an individual may have a
high compatibility with a group learning environ-
ment as well as an individual environment. Rel-
evant perceptual elements include auditory, tactile
and verbal kinesthetic, and visual picture. Prefer-
ences for group or individual, tactile or verbal en-
virnoments might have important ramiﬁcations in a
group-based introductory physics course.

Rundle’s Building Excellence (BE) exam [19] is
similar to the PEPS test. It is an 111-item question-
naire that uses a 5-point Likert scale.
It expands
the social dimension to include small teams of 2-3
people, as opposed to just individual or group pref-
erences. In addition, it can be administered online.

Correlating Course Grade with LSP

The Building Excellence exam was administered
to 390 students enrolled in the ﬁrst quarter of RIT’s

Fall 2002

Winter 2002-3

SCALE-UP

Traditional

SCALE-UP Lecture

SCALE-UP Lecture

N
< G >

55
3.44

43
3.48

41
2.43

251
2.84

Alone Group Team
53
2.37

51
2.30

80
2.37

Alone Group Team
55
2.97

55
2.91

77
2.92

%
< G >

TABLE I: Average course grades < G > for students
who took the Building Excellence survey.

three-quarter calculus-based introductory physics
course. 98 students participated in the fall of 2002
and 292 participated in the winter of 2002-2003. The
test was administered on-line, so students could take
it at their convenience and it did not detract from
class time, although all students that took the test
did so within the ﬁrst 2 weeks of class. We have
not investigated whether the classroom activities can
inﬂuence student response on Learning Style assess-
ments; such a study would be quite interesting. A
breakdown of student performance is shown in Table
I. The average class grade was the same in the fall
quarter, but students in the traditional sections in
the winter had a higher average grade (2.84 to 2.43).
Our current analysis looks for diﬀerences between
students in similar environments, so this diﬀerence
is not a problem. In order to compare performance
between students in diﬀerent environments we com-
pare the deviation from mean section grade. This
seems to remove the artifact caused by the diﬀerent
average grade of diﬀerent sections.

Social Environment

The BE test gauges compatibility with three dif-
ferent sociological styles, alone/pairs, small groups
(3-4 students), or in teams (4 or more). Table II,
combining students from the fall and winter quar-
ters, shows that there was little diﬀerence in ﬁnal
class grade in either SCALE-UP or traditional sec-
tions. We hypothesize that students mold their envi-
ronment to match their preferences. Students in tra-
ditional classes who prefer group interactions might
satisfy this need by formin study groups. Similarly,
students in SCALE-UP classes who prefer individual
learning might ﬁnd a niche within their group.

Auditory Learning

Of particular interest to many faculty are audi-
tory learners, or those who claim to learn best by
listening. Unlike the social dimension, the auditory
learners have either high,
dimension is exclusive;
neutral, or low aptitudes for auditory environments.

TABLE II: Average grade < G > for students expressing
compatibility with individual, group, or team environ-
ments. No correlation between performance and prefer-
ence is seen. Students with a strong preference for indi-
vidual environments do not fare worse in the SCALE-UP
environment, where group work is common.

SCALE-UP

Traditional

Auditory Neut. Low
40
31
2.35 2.41

28
2.44

Auditory Neut. Low
38
23
3.03 2.69

38
2.99

%
< G >

TABLE III: Average grade for students expressing a
strong, neutral, and low preference for auditory learning.
The under-performance of low-auditory learners in tra-
ditional settings is not statistically signiﬁcant (p = 0.1).

We looked for a depressed average grade in high-
auditory learners in SCALE-UP classes and the con-
verse in traditional classes. As table III shows, how-
ever, there is no apparent correlation between au-
ditory preference and grade. There may be some
self-selection here, as those with a preference for au-
ditory environments may choose traditional sections
over SCALE-UP sections. The data, however, show
little beneﬁt from this choice.

Little correlation was found between course grades
and any preference as expressed on the Building Ex-
cellence exam. There are several possible explana-
tions for this. The ﬁnal course grade may be too
coarse a measurement of learning to distinguish this
eﬀect. Student preferences may not, in fact, align
with the environment that best produces learning
(consistent with [6]). Finally, students may ﬁnd
ways to apply their particular learning styles regard-
less of course structure.

Student Interviews

The ability of students with strongly expressed
preferences against group learning appeared to suc-
ceed in the seemingly discordant SCALE-UP envi-
ronment. One student,
in particular, had an in-
teresting combination of LSPs and agreed to be
interviewed several times throughout the quarter.
“Max’s” BE scores indicated a low compatibility for

learning in small groups, an aversion to auditory
learning, and a strong dislike for for authority-driven
methods.
In class, Max’s ostensible participation
was very limited, and frequently his partners would
turn and talk amongst themselves, leaving Max on
the periphery. At the same time, his perceptual LSP
dimensions classiﬁed Max as one who is internal and
tactile kinesthetic, meaning he learns by verbalizing
to himself or to others and needs to be actively do-
ing something. This tactile kinesthetic need may or
may not be speciﬁc to the task, and Max was often
seen doodling, which may have satisﬁed this need.

Max strongly preferred the SCALE-UP classroom
to the traditional one (he had dropped out of a pre-
vious traditional class), saying

I learn a lot better with hands-on and group ac-
tivities. As we got into the class, I realized that I
understood things a lot better, and I didn’t know
why. I kind of paid more attention to it and I re-
alized that we were explaining stuﬀ to each other
and teaching each other.

Max rarely spoke out in class, but saw himself
participating in his group although, as noted, his
group did not share this view. Max included himself
when describing group activities with statements like
“Here’s where we are measuring the force...”, “We’re
all interacting, doing the same thing...”, or “We’re
solving problems...”.

Max maintained an above average grade (B)
throughout the quarter, falling at the end to a high
C. His FMCE post-test score of 60% was at the class
average (Max did not take the pre-test so no normal-
ized gain can be calculated). Especially when com-
pared with his experience with lecture-based course
(he withdrew), Max’s story in SCALE-UP can be
considered a success despite the extreme mis-match
between expressed preference and environment.

Isolating Learning Style Dimensions

As many research-based curricula [7, 8, 9] have re-
ported signiﬁcant learning gains, often attributed
in part to the group work, the question of learn-
ing styles vis a vis group interactions is important.
Speciﬁcally, are there students who learn best indi-
vidually and, if so, how do they fare in group activ-
ities? A related question involves the stronger stu-
dents. A common fear amongst faculty skeptical of
group work is that the stronger students in a group
will carry along their less capable partners. Work
by Beichner [13] and others has shown that in fact
stronger students beneﬁt most from the new activi-
ties, and a plausible explanation is that the process

of explaining ideas to partners actually helps learn-
ing (along the idea that one doesn’t learn until one
teaches). The proof, however, is rather indirect. It
is not clear whether the student learning is improved
because of the group activities or from the research-
based activities all students are asked to perform.

Methodology
Student volunteers were solicited and paid to
spend two hours working through activities and tak-
ing various LSP assessments. Students were re-
quired either to have taken introductory calculus-
based physics in the previous 2 years or to be cur-
rently enrolled in the course. After a short pre-test,
students spent approximately 40 minutes on each of
two activities. A post-test concluded the session. In
the ﬁrst hour, half of the students worked on a work-
sheet in groups of three while the other half worked
on the same worksheet alone. In the second hour,
the groups switched. To reduce the chance that stu-
dents would be familiar with the topics, we chose ac-
tivities involving buoyancy, a topic typically outside
the typical introductory physics curriculum. Related
activities included hydrostatics, which research has
shown students to struggle with. Activities had been
developed as part of the Explorations in Physics [20]
curriculum and were adapted for this research.

The pre-test incorporated those questions from
the Building Excellence survey which probed the so-
cial dimension, and assessed student preferences for
group or individual activities. Students were also
given the Keirsey Temperament Sorter, a 70-item
questionnaire, to assess personality types. Pre- and
post-content tests were devised and tested on 1st-
year physics majors who were not participating in
the study. This test conﬁrmed that the topics cho-
sen were at the appropriate level but also commonly
misunderstood.

Students were randomly divided into groups of 12.
Of these, 6 students worked on an activity alone, and
6 were split into groups of 3. After working on an
activity for 45 minutes, the groups of 12 switched
lab rooms. Those that ﬁrst worked individually now
worked in a small group, and those who ﬁrst worked
in a small group, now worked individually. The
activity guide contained 2-3 self-contained experi-
ments that students could perform with little prior
preparation. Students were asked to make predic-
tions, record data, posit explanations and imagine
applications for the ideas they develop. Students
were asked to record complete answers whether they
worked alone or in a group. When they had spent
45 minutes on each of the two topics, students were
then given a post-test.

Preliminary Results As with the previous study
involving course grades, little correlation between
personality types, sociological learning style prefer-
ence and performance on pre- and post-tests were
found. We oﬀer some possible explanations for this
lack of correlation, recognizing that there may be
many more. Possible explanations include,

• the expressed learning style preference may
bear little connection with the environment in
which the student best learns

• college students may eﬀectively activate other
learning resources when placed in a less pre-
ferred environment

• activities might need to be reﬁned to ﬁt within
the alloted forty-ﬁve minutes, or the chosen
topics may be inappropriate

• pre- and post-tests are too coarse to measure

improvement in student understanding

• 8am on a Saturday morning may be too early
to start any study involving college students

Summary

factors,

Learning and the educational setting is a very com-
plicated balance of learning styles, teaching styles,
personality types, environmental
innate
physiological and psychological factors, motivation,
socioeconomic backgrounds, culture, and numerous
other factors that may eﬀect the learner. While com-
mon assessments that have been validated for inter-
nal consistency do produce some discrimination be-
tween diﬀerent students, there appears to be little
signiﬁcant correlation between learning style prefer-
ence and performance (as measured by course grade)
in diﬀerent learning environments. This is greatly
complicated by the fact that classes, extending over
a ten-week quarter, expose students to many dif-
ferent environments.
In addition, students possi-
bly seek out-of-class environments that more closely
match their preference. (This will be the subject of
an upcoming study in which we will ask students
about their out-of-class activities and look for corre-
lations with their expressed LSP.) Attempts to iso-
late students in a restricted environment do not yet
produce discrimination in learning, although we be-
lieve this methodology, with signiﬁcant reﬁnement,
shows promise. Finally, by studying individual stu-
dents with extreme preferences we may gain insight
into the manner in which diﬀerent students learn.
Our crude analysis seems to indicate that we are not
harming students by placing them in the educational
setting that might not best suit their aptitudes.

SVF is grateful to Teresa Larkin for bringing at-
tention to Learning Style Preference research and

assessment tools as well as useful discussions. This
work has been supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. 0116795.

∗

svfsps@rit.edu; http://piggy.rit.edu/franklin/
[1] R. Dunn, J. S. Beaudry, and A. Klavas, Educational

[2] R. Dunn, Reading, Writing and Learning Disabili-

Leadership 46 (1989).

ties 6 (1990).

[3] I. B. Myers, Manual: The Myers-Briggs Type Indi-

cator (Consulting Psychologists Press, 1975).

[4] R. Dunn, K. Dunn, and G. E. Price. Productivity
Environmental Preference Survey: An Inventory for
the Identiﬁcation of Individual Adult Preferences in
a Working or Learning Environment. Price Systems,
Box 1818, Lawrence, KS 66044-0067.

[5] Http://www.ncsu.edu/felder-
public/ILSdir/ilsweb.html.

[6] D. Druckman and R. A. Bjork, eds., Learning, Re-
membering, Believing: Enhancing Human Perfor-
mance (National Academies Press, 1994).

[7] P. Laws, Workshop Physics Activity Guide (John

Wiley & Sons, 1999).

[8] D. R. Sokoloﬀ and R. K. Thornton, Interactive Lec-
ture Demonstrations (John Wiley & Sons, 2001).
[9] L. C. McDermott, P. S. Shaﬀer, and the Physics
Education Group, Tutorials in Introductory Physics
(Prentice Hall, 1998).

[10] T. Larkin, M. Feldgen, and O. Clua, presented at
the IEEE/ASEE Frontiers in Education Conference,
Boston, MA. 2002.

[11] T. Larkin and D. D. Budny, IEEE Transactions on

Education Journal 44 (2001).

[12] R. K. Thornton and D. R. Sokoloﬀ, American Jour-

nal of Physics 66 (1998).

[13] Www.ncsu.edu/per/SCALEUP/.
[14] H. G. Lang, M. S. Stinson, F. Kavanagh, Y. Y. Liu,
and M. L. Basile, Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf
Education (1999).

[15] R. M. Felder and L. K. Silverman, Engineering Ed-

ucation 78 (1988).

[16] R. M. Felder, G. N. Felder, and E. J. Dietz, Journal

of Engineering Education 91 (2002).

[17] L. McCullough and D. Meltzer, in Proceedings of
the 2001 Physics Education Research Conference,
edited by S. V. Franklin, J. Marx, and K. Cum-
mings (American Association of Physics Teachers,
2001).

[18] L. McCullough and D. Meltzer (American Associa-

tion of Physics Teachers, 2002).

[19] Susan M. Rundle with Rita Dunn, Building Excel-
lence Survey. 2002. Performance Concepts Interna-
tional, 585-383-9086, ww.pcilearn.com.

[20] D. P. Jackson, P. W. Laws, and S. V. Franklin, Ex-
plorations in Physics: An Activity-Based Approach
to Understanding the World (John Wiley & Sons,
2002).

