IS PSEUDOSCIENCE THE SOLUTION TO SCIENCE LITERACY?

C.J. Efthimiou and R.A. Llewellyn
Physics Department
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816

6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

In EISTA03 the authors described an ambitious
project they have embarked upon at the University of
Central Florida to help improve public understanding
of the basic principles of physical science, topics often
included in the general education program at many
colleges and universities. After the pilot course was
very successful, the authors were motivated to work
harder on the course and explore new directions. They
thus decided to create versions of the course, nick-
named ﬂavors, whereby each ﬂavor used a particular
genre or theme of movies: Action/Adventure, SciFi,
Modern Physics, Superheroes, Astronomy, Pseudo-
science.

Among all ﬂavors, the Pseudoscience ﬂavor was es-
pecially praised by the students. Contrary to passive
attendance in the traditional course, the class was full
of passionate discussions driven by scenes in popular
movies such as Sixth Sense, The Others, and Dragon-
ﬂy. Almost every single person in the class (of 90
students) would participate in the discussions and de-
fend his/her positions. These discussions often were
passionate and quite ‘heated’. Eventually, scientiﬁc
analysis was presented by the instructors who always
maintained a skeptic attitude on any extraordinary
topic requiring extraordinary proof, thus explaining
how the scientiﬁc method works and what is accept-
able and what unacceptable in science. Amazingly, a
fraction of the students (not always the same students
in all topics) did not always agree with the rational
explanations; often their decisions were inﬂuenced by
personal fears and biases or emotions. Their think-
ing at times revealed the introduction of arbitrary as-
sumptions and acceptance of anecdotal statements.

Many reasons have been put forward by scientists
why they do not want to be involved in a ﬁght against
Pseudoscience. For example: pseudoscientiﬁc beliefs
are irrational and therefore it is impossible to ﬁght
them with rational arguments; by even agreeing to
discuss Pseudoscience we accept it as an established
discipline; Pseudoscience is a background noise that
does not harm science. All these (and many other)
reasons may contain pieces of the truth, but they are
not necessarily true. However, Pseudoscience posses a
continuous and, in fact, increasing threat to our soci-

ety. It is impossible to estimate exactly the irreversible
harm that will do in the future. It is the scientists’
duty to act now to eliminate or, at least, contain this
danger. Therefore, in a time when the science literacy
of the public has declined and the threat of pseudo-
science has increased, revising the traditional science
course to present science through the window of Pseu-
doscience might oﬀer not only a way to restore science
literacy, but also a way to help society by eliminating
misconceptions and attacking growing trends (astrol-
ogy, remote viewing, psychic readings, etc) that might
harm (ﬁnancially or otherwise) innocent and trusting
citizens.

Keywords: Physics, Physical Science, Films, General

Education, Science Literacy, Pseudoscience, Multimedia

1 Physics in Films

In [1] the authors have described an ambitious project
embarked upon at the University of Central Florida to
help improve public understanding of the basic prin-
ciples of physical science, topics often included in the
general education program at many colleges and uni-
versities. The project is built around the use of a wide
range of popular ﬁlms to illustrate and serve as the ba-
sis for discussions of physical science concepts. One or
two brief clips are shown each day, augmented by live
demonstrations and other visual aids. (The complete
ﬁlms are viewed by the students at home as a part of
their homework.) While still a young project (about
24 months old at this writing), it quickly became a
success [2] and a topic of student conversation [3].

Student interest and performance in the Physical
Science course have both increased dramatically com-
pared with the traditional teaching mode, which we
still use in some sections.

2 The Idea of Flavors

After the pilot course was very successfully tested in
four sections (with total enrollment of 800 students),
the authors were motivated to develop the course fur-
ther and to explore new directions. The original pilot
course included movies that were selected to span the
entire topical range of the standard Physical Science

1

course. In the selection of the movies no attention was
paid to the genre or the theme of the movie; eventually
all the movies used were action, adventure, and science
ﬁction ﬁlms. Encouraged by the enthusiasm of the stu-
dents, the authors decided to take the project to the
next level by considering possible extensions of the
course that would accommodate the curiosity of every
student and would satisfy the needs of every instruc-
tor. Thus, we decided to create versions (packages)—
nicknamed ﬂavors—of the course whereby each ﬂa-
vor used a particular genre or theme of movies. As
a result, plans were developed to create the following
ﬂavors, each using a diﬀerent ﬁlm genre:

• Action/Adventure that would use action and

adventure movies;

• SciFi – science ﬁction movies;

• Superhero – superhero movies;

• Modern Physics– movies that enable the teach-

ing of topics from Modern Physics;

• Astronomy – movies that contain topics related

to astronomy;

entiﬁc topics;

• Pseudoscience – movies that include pseudosci-

• Metaphysics – movies that touch on questions

of metaphysical content.

The reader will immediately recognize the instructors
intent to break out of the traditional constraints and
to teach the concepts of Physical Science using media
aids and illustrative examples that not only go far be-
yond the usual approach, but also have already been
accepted by the students as a part of their everyday
experience.

3 Pseudoscience Flavor

An idea is named pseudoscientiﬁc if it contradicts ac-
cepted scientiﬁc data, yet it is presented as scientiﬁc.
We hasten to avoid a possible misunderstanding. A
mistake or error in the presentation of a scientiﬁc fact
does not signal pseudoscience; in these cases the source
of the mistake or error is limited or due to incomplete
knowledge and is not an intentional act. The border-
line of pseudoscience starts when misrepresentation of
facts or promotion of unveriﬁed claims are intentional.
When it comes down to movies, it is very hard to ac-
cuse the industry of promoting pseudoscience in the
guise of artistic freedom. However, due to the great

inﬂuence movies have on the scientiﬁcally unsophis-
ticated, we shall label (with our apologies to the di-
rectors) movies that deal with topics that contradict
scientiﬁc facts as pseudoscientiﬁc.

Figure 1: Some of the ﬁlms that are used in the Pseu-
doscience ﬂavor of the course.

There are numerous examples of pseudoscience that
may be discussed in a class. However, within the
schedule of a normal course only a limited selection
In Summer 2003 we taught a
of topics is possible.
Physical Science class using the Pseudoscience ﬂavor
and we chose topics that—we thought—the students
would ﬁnd exciting and stimulating. The topics in-
cluded:

• intelligent life in the universe, alien visitors on

Earth, alien abductions;

• fundamental interactions, ghosts;

• universality of the physical laws, magic;

• strength of materials, unbreakability;

• time, time reversal, time stopping;

• chemical reactions, zombies;

• physiology of human body, crossing to afterlife.

The instructors used clips from many Hollywood
movies and scientiﬁc documentaries. However, the re-
quired movies were: Clockstoppers, The Craft, Drag-
onﬂy, Independence Day, The Others, Signs, The Sixth
Sense, and Unbreakable.

The texts for this course were a selection of popu-
lar readings [4] in pseudoscience: The Demon-Haunted

2

World, Did Adam and Eve Have Navels, Fads & Falla-
cies, Why People Believe Weird Things and one book
that describes how science works The Scientiﬁc En-
deavor [5].

Figure 3: In The Sixth Sense, the room temperature
drops before the appearance of a ghost. In this picture
taken from the motion picture, we see that the room
thermostat has been set to about 72oF but the room
temperature has dropped to 56oF .

Figure 2: Books which have been used or will be used
as texts in the Pseudoscience ﬂavor of the course.

This summer we will teach the Pseudoscience ﬂavor
again (by the time this conference is taking place, the
class will be close to its ending). Dracula 2000 and
The Ring will be added to the required movies and
several new texts [6] will be used and tested for their
usefulness.

EXAMPLE: Among the topics discussed in physical sci-
ence is the concept of temperature. Included are related
topics of heat transfer via conduction, convection, and ra-
diation. The ﬁlm The Sixth Sense provides a background
against which temperature and heat transfer may be eﬀec-
tively discussed.

The Sixth Sense is a ﬁlm concerned with ghosts. The
movie consistently tells the viewer that ghosts like low tem-
peratures, although why that should be is not explained.
In Chapter 26: Someone’s in the kitchen, the scene clearly
shows a sudden drop in the room temperature, so one ex-
pects the appearance of a ghost, and indeed one appears.
To get a hint concerning the possibility that the appear-
ance of ghosts is heralded by a sudden drop in temperature,
we shall look at a case studied by scientists.

In Hampton Court Palace [7] near London, UK, there is
a well-known Haunted Gallery. It is said that the Gallery
is stalked by the spirit of Catherine Howard. Catherine
Howard was the ﬁfth wife of King Henry VIII. King Henry
executed her on February 13, 1542 for her indecent life.
Many visitors to the room have described strange phe-
nomena in the gallery such as hearing screams and seeing
apparitions. Due to many reports of such occurrences, a
team of psychologists, led by Richard Wiseman of Hert-
fordshire University was called to investigate the claims

Figure 4: Hampton Court Palace. The picture is bor-
rowed from the oﬃcial site [7].

[8, 9]. The team installed in the Gallery thermal cam-
eras and air movement detectors. Then about 400 palace
visitors were asked if they could feel a “presence” in the
gallery. The response was extraordinary: more than half
reported sudden drops in temperature and some said they
sensed a ghostly presence. Several people claimed to have
seen Elizabethan ﬁgures. The team however discovered
that the experiences could be simply explained by the
gallery’s numerous old, concealed doors. These exits are
far from draught-proof and the combination of air currents
which they admit cause sudden changes in the room’s tem-
perature. In two particular spots, the temperature of the
oF . “You do, literally, walk
gallery plummeted down to 36
into a column of cold air sometimes,” said Dr Wiseman.
Convection is one of the three ways heat propagates; the
other two are conduction and radiation. Convection ap-
pears in ﬂuids that have a non-uniform distribution of tem-
perature. As a result, currents inside the ﬂuid will be such
as to attempt to restore a uniform temperature. These
currents are stronger when the non-uniformity is greater.
In the case of the gallery rooms, the convection currents
would be felt as cold drafts, similar to those experienced
by someone who opens the door of a refrigerator a hot day
in summer.

Wiseman and his team have investigated other haunted
places besides Hampton Court Palace with similar results

3

• We have enough to do communicating science;
there is no time to attack false science or correct
inaccurate perceptions about the personalities of
scientists.

• We would dignify pseudoscience by mentioning it

at all.

However, as scientists we have a moral obligation to
society not only to promote science for the well-being
of humanity but also for the well-being of the individ-
ual members of the society, too. The following passage
from Park (page 212 in [12]) summarizes this position
well1:

Voodoo science [pseudoscience]
is a sort of
background noise, annoying, but rarely rising
to a level that seriously interferes with genuine
scientiﬁc discourse... The more serious threat
is to the public, which is not often in a posi-
tion to judge which claims are real and which
are voodoo [not real]. Those who are fortunate
enough to have chosen science as a career have
an obligation to inform the public about voodoo
science [help the public make the distinction].

Belief in pseudoscience indicates, besides lack of un-
derstanding for the scientiﬁc method, lack of critical
thinking and this is dangerous for the science policy in
the nations, dangerous for the democracy, and danger-
ous for the believer. Who can forget the bodies of the
39 cult members in Rancho Santa Fe, California who
committed suicide in the belief that a UFO shielded
behind the Halle-Bopp comet would take them to
heaven?

The question ‘who is responsible?’ is hard to be an-
swered. The cause of this is quite complex and if we
were to try to study it carefully and thoroughly, we
would be lost in a labyrinth of intricate social, polit-
ical, and economic factors. However, we believe that
the media, and in particular, the entertainment in-
dustry, may be at least partially responsible for the
large numbers of people who believe in pseudoscience.
There has been a large number of very successful Hol-
lywood ﬁlms that have gloriﬁed pseudoscientiﬁc topics
such as astrology, extrasensory perception, alien inva-
sions and alien abductions, ancient interstellar trav-
ellers, ghosts, etc. Unfortunately not everyone per-
ceives such ﬁlms as entertaining ﬁction and often many
people have extrapolated the ideas to the everyday
life. This, combined with the passive attitude of the
scientists described above, has magniﬁed the problem
and the public science illiteracy seems to grow.

1Words printed in italics may be replaced by those in the

Figure 5: Convection currents are created in any ﬂuid
which is kept in a non-uniform temperature. The
greater the non-uniformity, the stronger the currents.
The picture is borrowed from [10].

[9]. Although, self-identiﬁed ‘psychics’ claim that what
people experience is evidence of supernatural phenomena,
physicists are using Occham’s razor to eliminate the pos-
sibility of anything supernatural.

The previous example describes the interweaving of
supernatural claims and physics brieﬂy, but demon-
strates how such topics may be related to physics con-
cepts. In the example, the common belief that ghosts
live in cold places provides the opportunity to discuss
temperature and heat transfer (among other physics
topics). Besides educating students about physics, the
course oﬀers a unique opportunity to attack widely
held misunderstandings and misconceptions. We will
report on the topic of pseudoscience more thoroughly
in the future.

4 Scientists vs Pseudoscience

The majority of mainstream scientists avoid or ignore
dealing with pseudoscience. Some of the reasons used
to explain this attitude are tabulated by Friedman
[11]:

• For whatever reason, people want to believe in
pseudoscience; therefore it is essentially a religion,
and it is not the business of science to criticize
religious beliefs.

• Pseudoscience is irrational; rational argument

cannot counter it successfully.

• There might be something in the mass of pseu-
doscience that is correct but at present unknown
to science. We would be foolish to attack pseu-
doscience, if even a tiny part of it proves out.

• Unlike creationism, astrology does not attack sci-

ence itself. Live and let live.

brackets.

4

Physics in Films is a course that exactly attacks this
problem: the entertainment industry cannot present
its ideas unchallenged any more. Even more, the pseu-
doscientiﬁc topics are paid special attention and a
great eﬀort is invested to help the public make the
distinction between science and pseudoscience.

Science to be a waste of their time; they now feel that
they learn something. Their opinions are tabulated in
Table 4.

A

SA
NO D SD
60% 32% 5% 1% 2%

5 Student Perception

Table 4: Data on the question “I think I learned some-
thing from this course”.

How do the students perceive the Pseudoscience ﬂavor
of the Physics in Films course? The instructors made
use in class of an electronic personal response system
whereby each student could respond immediately to
questions posted by the instructors, their responses
being automatically recorded and tabulated by an in-
class computer. This system, besides its pedagogical
value for giving quizzes with immediate feedback and
scores, was used to obtain data on the student’s feel-
ings and reactions to the course and to record atten-
dance. The results for few course-evaluation questions
are shown in Tables 1 through 3. The notation in those
tables are as follows: SA=strongly agree, S=agree,
NO=no opinion, D=disagree, SD=strongly disagree.

A

D SD
NO
SA
42% 42% 16% 0% 0%

Table 1: Data on the question “The topics selected
from the movies for physics analysis were interesting”.

A

NO D SD
SA
75% 20% 2% 0% 4%

Table 2: Data on the question “The instructors should
develop this course further since it is more interesting
than the standard physical science course”.

References

A

NO D SD
SA
68% 25% 5% 2% 0%

Table 3: Data on the question “I would recommend
to my friends that they take this course”.

6 Where do we go from here?

Since we have been teaching Physics in Films, we have
made progress in improving student perceptions of
physical science: students no longer consider Physical

5

However, changing the public’s overall perception
of science is not easy. More and longer term eﬀort is
necessary. Fear and unreasonable dislike for science is
deeply-rooted in the minds of the students, as Table
5 illustrates.

A

SA
SD
NO
25% 26% 8% 18% 23%

D

Table 5: Data on the question “I do not like science
and I do not want to read anything on science once I
am done with this course”.

On the strength of the positive results from the
course Physics in Films we believe we may have found
a way to address the problem of low scientiﬁc literacy
among the public, in general, and the abysmally low
interest in physical science among college non-science
majors, in particular. Among all ﬂavors, the Pseu-
doscience is distinctly viewed by the students as by
far the most exciting and it thus presents a unique
tool to facilitate science literacy. We plan to continue
to develop the course, explore its application to other
science disciplines, and ﬁnd ways to disseminate it to
interested instructors throughout the nation.

[1] Physics in Films: A New Approach to Teaching
Science, C.E. Efthimiou, R. Llewellyn, in
the proceedings of EISTA ’03. See also, Phys-
ical Science: a revitalization of the traditional
course by avatars of Hollywood in the physics
classroom, C.E. Efthimiou, R. Llewellyn,
http://www.arXiv.org/physics/0303005.

[2] Lee Chow,
Phys.

Cinema
Today

as Physics
(2003)
56

Les-
son,
15;
http://www.physicstoday.org/vol-56/iss-5/
Films,
p15a.html.
in
News;
http://www.aps.org/apsnews/0303/030306.h
tml. B. Dume, Physics Goes to Hollywood,

In
APS

Physics

March

2003

the

[11] Alan J. Friedman, The Inﬂuence of Pseudo-
science, Parascience and Science Fiction, in Com-
municating Science to the Public, Ciba Foundation
Conference Proceedings, Wiley 1987.

[12] Robert Park, Voodoo Science: the Road from
Foolishness to Fraud, Oxford Universiy Press
2001.

[3] Alexis

with

lessons

Physics

Using movies
fear

http://www.ioppublishing.com/news/739.
A. Witze,
im-
re-
pact:
duces
Dal-
las Morning
5/10/04;
http://www.dallasnews.com/sharedcontent/
dws/fea/texasliving/stories/051004dnliv
physicsfilms.18dfb.html.

to teach concepts
professors
issue

factor,

News,

ﬁnd,

of

of

bit

Trina

a
Florida

A little
of Physics,
issue

Graham,
lot
Future,

of Hol-
lywood,
The
Cen-
tral
10/3/2002;
http://www.ucffuture.com/main.cfm?includ
Pri-
e=detail&storyid=328832.
ore, With Great Power Comes a Phys-
teach stu-
ical Explanation:
dents
laws
the
The
Cen-
tral
Florida
5/21/2003;
http://www.ucffuture.com/news/436180.html
&mkey=724230. Cary Grayson,
Students
play games, watch movies, raise grades, The
Central Florida Future,
issue of 11/21/2002;
http://www.ucffuture.com/news/436180.html
&mkey=724230.

action ﬁlms
physics,
of
Future,
issue

of

[4] Carl Sagan, The Demon-Haunted World, Bal-
lantine books 1997. Martin Gardner, Did
Adam and Eve Have Navels?, W.W. Norton 2000.
Martin Gardner, Fads & Fallacies, Dover 1957.
Michael Shermer, Why People Believe Weird
Things, Owl Books 2002.

[5] Jeffrey A. Lee, The Scientiﬁc Endeavor, Ben-

jamin/Cummings 2000.

[6] Terence Hines, Pseudoscience and the Para-
normal, 2nd ed, Prometheus Books 2003. Mil-
ton Rothman, A Physicists’ Guide to Skepticism,
Prometheus Books 1988. Georges Charpak,
Henri Broch, Debunked Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press 2004. William Stiebing, Ancient
Astronauts, Cosmic Collisions, Prometheus Books
1984. Clarence Darrow, Why I am an Agnostic
Prometheus Books 1994.

[7] http://www.hrp.org.uk/webcode/hampton hom

e.asp

288.html

[8] http://www.ananova.com/news/story/sm 258

[9] A. Frood, Ghosts ’all in the mind’, BBC News,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/3044
607.stm

[10] Jay Bolemon, A Window to Our World,

McGraw-Hill 2002.

6

