6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reforming a large lecture modern physics course for
engineering majors using a PER-based design

S. B. McKagan∗, K. K. Perkins† and C. E. Wieman∗†

∗JILA, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 80309, USA
†Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 80309, USA

Abstract. We have reformed a large lecture modern physics course for engineering majors by radically changing both the
content and the learning techniques implemented in lecture and homework. Traditionally this course has been taught in a
manner similar to the equivalent course for physics majors, focusing on mathematical solutions of abstract problems. Based
on interviews with physics and engineering professors, we developed a syllabus and learning goals focused on content that
was more useful to our actual student population: engineering majors. The content of this course emphasized reasoning
development, model building, and connections to real world applications. In addition we implemented a variety of PER-
based learning techniques, including peer instruction, collaborative homework sessions, and interactive simulations. We have
assessed the effectiveness of reforms in this course using pre/post surveys on both content and beliefs. We have found
signiﬁcant improvements in both content knowledge and beliefs compared with the same course before implementing these
reforms and a corresponding course for physics majors.

INTRODUCTION

It is well-documented that PER-based interactive en-
gagement techniques improve student learning in intro-
ductory physics courses. However, the use and study of
these techniques has been much less common in upper-
level physics courses. Some physics professors who ac-
cept the use of interactive engagement techniques in in-
troductory physics courses claim that these techniques
are inappropriate for more advanced courses. At the Uni-
versity of Colorado, we are working to systematically re-
form both introductory and advanced courses in physics
and other sciences, and to document the results of these
reforms. In the fall of 2005 and spring of 2006, the
authors taught and reformed Physics 2130, a modern
physics course for engineering majors [1]. This course
is the third semester of physics, and is typically taken
by sophomore mechanical engineering majors and se-
nior electrical engineering majors. This is the last physics
course that most of these students will take.

This course has been reformed using a research-based
design, based on the following principles learned from
Physics Education Research:

1. Using interactive engagement techniques can lead
to higher learning gains than traditional lecture. [2]
2. Directly addressing common misconceptions can

lead to higher learning gains. [3]

3. Unless physics content is presented in a way that
explicitly addresses student beliefs about science,

these beliefs tend to become more novice-like. [4, 5]
4. People have a limited short term memory, so ma-
terial should be presented in a manner that re-
duces cognitive load by focusing on the important
points, having a coherent structure, and eliminating
nonessential details. [6]

5. For students to gain a conceptual understanding of
the material, all aspects of the course, including
homework and exams, must address conceptual un-
derstanding, not just numerical problem-solving.

PROCESS OF REFORM

In order to develop a clear set of learning goals for the
course, we interviewed seven physics faculty members
about the most important concepts they thought students
should learn from this course. These interviews eluci-
dated an important issue in reforming more advanced
courses: unlike introductory physics, in which there is
a well-established set of topics on which most experts
agree, there is no general consensus about what should
be taught in more advanced classes. This issue is partic-
ularly acute in this course, which by default has often
closely resembled the corresponding course for physics
majors, who will see the topics in several later courses.

To determine how to make our course most relevant to
our target audience, we met with a group of engineering
professors, to whom we posed the question, “What do

your students need to know about modern physics?” The
general consensus was that engineering students need
to know about applications of quantum mechanics such
as electron devices, lasers, STMs, and MRIs; they need
to know about the quantum origin of molecular bond-
ing and material structure; and they need some experi-
ence solving differential equations describing physical
systems. The engineering professors said that their stu-
dents do not need to know about special relativity or a
lot of abstract mathematical formalism, topics that had
typically been emphasized in this course.

To address principle 2, we reviewed the existing PER
literature on student difﬁculties in modern physics and
quantum mechanics. In addition, one of us (SBM) hosted
a weekly problem-solving session for students in the
course the semester before our reform. Field notes from
this session provided insights into common problems for
our student population.

Concurrently with our reform effort, we have been
developing the Quantum Mechanics Conceptual Survey
(QMCS), a multiple choice survey designed to test stu-
dent understanding of the fundamental concepts of quan-
tum mechanics [7]. The questions in the QMCS are based
on faculty interviews, studies of textbooks and syllabi,
existing conceptual tests of quantum mechanics [8, 9],
research studies of student misconceptions [10, 11, 12],
informal observations of students in problem-solving
sessions and class, and formal interviews with students.
The student interviews conducted to validate this survey
were also useful in gaining a better understanding of stu-
dent misconceptions.

The content of the course was chosen to reﬂect the
concepts most commonly cited in faculty interviews
(fundamental principles of quantum mechanics), the pri-
orities of the engineering faculty (real world applications
and the relationship of microscopic principles to macro-
scopic properties of materials), and expert beliefs about
the relevance and coherence of physics (real world ap-
plications, grounding in experiment, conceptual under-
standing, and reasoning development).

INTERACTIVE ENGAGEMENT
TECHNIQUES

We encouraged interactive engagement in class by as-
signing students to 3 person consensus groups for peer
instruction. We asked an average of about 5 questions
per 50 minute class, to which students submitted their
answers using clickers. Most of the questions included
a period of group discussion. We used several different
kinds of clicker questions, including interactive lecture
demos in which we asked students to predict the results
of an experiment, usually demonstrated with a simula-

tion; eliciting misconceptions in order to address them;
polling students to ﬁnd out more about their background
or what they wanted us to address; asking students to
work through difﬁcult multi-step problems; and quizzes
on the assigned reading. During clicker questions, the
three instructors as well as three undergraduate learning
assistants circulated through the room in order to facil-
itate group discussions and to listen and report back on
what students were thinking. We occasionally used other
interactive engagement techniques in class, for example
working through a tutorial on quantum tunneling.

Outside of class, we encouraged interactive engage-
ment by hosting collaborative problem solving sessions
where students could work together on homework. These
sessions were staffed by instructors, undergraduate learn-
ing assistants, and graduate teaching assistants, all of
whom were trained to facilitate discussion and help stu-
dents work to ﬁgure out the answers on their own, rather
than telling the students the answers. These sessions
were voluntary, but attendance was encouraged by adver-
tising their value and making the homework sufﬁciently
difﬁcult that students could seldom complete it on their
own. According to the end of term survey, one third of the
students attended the problem-solving sessions at least
80% of the time, and another third attended 20-60% of
the time.

We have developed a suite of interactive computer
simulations on quantum mechanics speciﬁcally for this
course as part of the Physics Education Technology
(PhET) Project [13]. These simulations follow research-
based design principles and are extensively tested
through student interviews and classroom studies. In the
course, we incorporated simulations into lecture, clicker
questions, and homework. The homework included a
large number of guided inquiry activities designed to
help students explore and learn from the simulations. By
providing visual representations of abstract concepts and
microscopic processes that cannot be directly observed,
these simulations help students to build mental models
of phenomena that are often difﬁcult to understand.

The simulations incorporate many of the principles
listed in the introduction, such as reducing cognitive load
by focusing student attention only on essential features.
For example, many students have difﬁculty understand-
ing the circuit diagram for the variable voltage supply in
the photoelectric effect experiment, which distracts them
from seeing the main point of the experiment. By illus-
trating the variable voltage supply as a battery with a
slider, our Photoelectric Effect simulation eliminates this
distraction.

CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING AND
REASONING DEVELOPMENT

Throughout the course, we focused on helping students
develop conceptual understanding and reasoning skills,
such as making inferences from observations and under-
standing why we believe the ideas of quantum mechan-
ics. This was emphasized in all aspects of the course. We
wrote all our own homework, which was online and com-
posed of computer-graded multiple choice and numeric
questions, and TA-graded essay questions. The home-
work was designed to be extremely difﬁcult conceptu-
ally, though only moderately difﬁcult mathematically.
Thus students were required to write essays explaining
a conceptual model or to determine the underlying rea-
sons for a complex physical phenomenon.

For example, students worked through a series of
homework questions using the Lasers simulation to build
up an understanding of how a laser works, at the end of
which they had to write essays on questions such as why
a population inversion is necessary to build a laser and
why this requires atoms with three levels instead of two.

REAL WORLD APPLICATIONS

We incorporated applications into every aspect of the
course, presenting at least one application of each major
concept discussed. We presented photomultiplier tubes
as an application of the photoelectric effect; discharge
lamps, ﬂuorescent lights, and lasers as applications of
atomic structure and transitions, alpha decay and STMs
and applications of quantum tunneling, LEDs and CCDs
as applications of the quantum theory of conductivity,
and MRIs as an application of spin. A lecture on Bose
Einstein Condensation tied together many of the con-
cepts introduced throughout the course.

TEXTBOOK

Finding a textbook appropriate for this course was dif-
ﬁcult, given the focus on conceptual understanding and
applications, which are not suitably covered in standard
texts. The ﬁrst semester we used Tipler and Llewellyn
[14], a popular modern physics textbook that was consis-
tent with our level of math and contained most topics we
covered. Students complained about the text on a weekly
basis, both verbally and in feedback forms, and our top
students reported that they stopped reading the textbook
because they couldn’t understand it. Many students used
our power point lecture notes, which were posted online,
as an alternative to the textbook. The second semester
we switched to portions of volumes 3 and 5 of Knight’s

introductory physics textbook based on physics educa-
tion research [15]. This textbook is at a lower level than
our course mathematically, and it does not include many
of our topics such as the time-independent Schrodinger
equation. However, the pedagogical focus for the topics
it does include is much more consistent with our with
our approach. There were almost no complaints about the
textbook second semester, and the average student rank-
ing of the usefulness of the textbook for their learning on
a scale of 1 (not useful) to 5 (a great deal) went up from
2.1 to 3.2. The usefulness rankings for other aspects of
the course did not change signiﬁcantly between the two
semesters, and were between 3.5 and 4.3, with the posted
lecture notes receiving the highest ranking.

ASSESSMENT OF COURSE

We used several methods for assessing the effective-
ness of instruction in this course, including giving the
QMCS pre/post as measure of conceptual learning and
the Colorado Learning and Attitudes about Science Sur-
vey (CLASS) [16] as a measure of the change in student
beliefs about science. We have also done several stud-
ies to assess learning in particular content areas of the
course, the results of which will be reported elsewhere.

We gave the QMCS as a pretest and posttest during
the two semesters in which we taught this course (Fa05
and Sp06) both to our students (engineering majors) and
to the students in the corresponding course for physics
majors. We also gave it as posttest to both the engi-
neering and physics majors’ courses the semester be-
fore our reforms (Sp05). We use the other four modern
physics as baseline “traditional” courses 1. It is worth
noting that our class size was approximately 180 students
both semesters, more than double the typical size of this
course in previous semesters, about 80. The physics ma-
jors’ course ranges in size from about 30 to 80.

Table 1 shows the QMCS results. We calculate the av-
erage normalized gain (<g>) for each course, which mea-
sures how much students learned as a fraction of how
much they could have learned.2 The values of <g> for the
reformed courses are consistent with typical normalized
gains on the Force Concept Inventory (FCI) in reformed
introductory physics courses [2]. There are wide varia-
tions in <g> for the traditional courses, but all are con-
sistently lower than in the reformed courses. It is inter-
esting to note that the physics majors started consistently
higher than the engineering majors, but ended up lower
than the engineering majors in the reformed courses.

1 Two of these courses used clickers, but in a quite limited fashion.
2 <g> and its uncertainty D <g> are computed as in Ref. [2].

TABLE 1. Average percent correct responses and normal-
ized gains on 12 common questions on QMCS for six mod-
ern physics courses. We do not have pretest data for Spring
2005, so in the analysis of these courses, we have assumed
that the average pretest scores would have been the same
as the following spring. Because the survey is still under de-
velopment, different versions were used different semesters.
This analysis includes only the 12 common questions that
were asked all three semesters.

Course

Ref. Eng. Sp06
Ref. Eng. Fa05
Trad. Eng. Sp05
Trad. Phys. Sp06
Trad. Phys. Fa05
Trad. Phys. Sp05

Pre

30
32
(30)
44
40
(44)

Post

65
69
51
64
52
63

<g>

0.49
0.54
0.30
0.37
0.21
0.34

D <g>
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.15
0.06
0.08

N

156
162
68
23
54
64

It should be noted that the QMCS covers only the fun-
damental concepts of quantum mechanics, and not any of
the applications that constituted a substantial fraction of
our course. However, all six courses spent a comparable
amount of time on the material covered by the QMCS,
since the engineering majors’ course in Sp05 covered
statistical mechanics and the physics majors’ courses
covered special relativity, neither of which were covered
in the reformed courses or tested in the QMCS.

It is difﬁcult to evaluate the relative success of our
treatment of the real world applications that constituted a
major part of our course, because this material is simply
not covered in other courses. However, this is likely to
impact students beliefs about science, and this can be
compared with other classes.

We gave the CLASS to assess student beliefs. It is a
well known result [4, 5] that in a typical physics course,
these beliefs tend to shift towards novice-like. In other
words, students leave most physics courses believing that
physics is less coherent, less logical, and less relevant to
their everyday lives than when they started the course.
There is some evidence that, because the subject is so
abstract and counterintuitive, teaching modern physics
can have a negative impact even in courses where special
efforts are taken to address beliefs [17].

Table 2 shows that while the traditional modern
physics courses had large shifts towards novice-like be-
liefs, there were no statistically signiﬁcant shifts in the
overall beliefs of students in the reformed courses. While
it is difﬁcult to pinpoint a single cause of this difference,
it seems reasonable that the emphasis on real world ap-
plications and reasoning development helped students to
see the subject as more relevant and coherent.

TABLE 2. Average percent favorable (expert-like) re-
sponses on CLASS for the same six modern physics courses
shown in Table 1. The shifts for the reformed courses are not
statistically signiﬁcant, unlike the traditional courses, which
all have large statistically signiﬁcant shifts down.

Course

Ref. Eng. Sp06
Ref. Eng. Fa05
Trad. Eng. Sp05
Trad. Phys. Sp06
Trad. Phys. Fa05
Trad. Phys. Sp05

Pre

66.1
70.2
68.5
72.1
78.6
78.5

Post

shift

67.1
68.0
60.5
67.2
72.9
74.8

+1.0
-2.1
-8.0
-4.9
-5.7
-3.7

D shift
1.1
1.1
1.9
2.4
1.5
1.5

N

135
150
55
25
47
61

CONCLUSIONS AND NEXT STEPS

We have reformed a large lecture modern physics course
for engineering majors by implementing peer instruc-
tion, collaborative homework sessions, and interactive
simulations, and by emphasizing real world applications,
conceptual understanding, and reasoning development.
These reforms have been successful in producing in-
creased learning gains and eliminating the substantial de-
cline in student beliefs. We are now working on the next
step, archiving and sustaining these reforms. This course
will be taught next semester by a different professor in
the PER group, who will use our materials. We will con-
tinue to work to improve the course and package it in a
way that is easy to pass on to other instructors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank the undergraduate learning assis-
tants and graduate teaching assistants who helped with
the course, as well as the PhET team and the Physics Ed-
ucation Research Group at the University of Colorado.
This work was supported by the NSF.

REFERENCES

1.

For course materials,
see:
http://jilawww.colorado.edu/%7Emckagan/2130archive/

2. R. Hake, Am. J. Phys., 66, 64 (1998).
3. L. C. McDermott, Am. J. Phys., 69, 1127 (2001).
4. E. Redish, J. Saul, and R. Steinberg, Am. J. Phys., 66, 212

5. K. K. Perkins et al., 2004 PERC Proceedings (2005).
6. R. E. Mayer, Learning and Instruction, Merrill, 2003.
7.
8. E. Cataloglu and R. W. Robinett, Am. J. Phys., 70, 238

http://cosmos.colorado.edu/phet/survey/qmcs/

9. C. Singh, Am. J. Phys., 69, 885 (2001).
10. B. Ambrose, Ph.D. thesis, University of Washington

(1998).

(2002).

(1999).

11. D. Styer, Am. J. Phys., 64, 31 (1996).

12. P. R. Fletcher, Ph.D. thesis, University of Sydney (2004).
13. PhET simulations can be downloaded for free from

http://phet.colorado.edu/

14. P. A. Tipler and R. A. Llewellyn, Modern Physics, W.H.

Freeman and Company, 2002, 4 edn.

15. R. Knight, Physics for Scientists and Engineers, Pearson,

2004, 1 edn.

010101 (2006).

16. W. K. Adams et al., Phys. Rev ST: Phys. Educ. Res., 2,

17. T. McCaskey and A. Elby, Contributed poster at

Foundations and Frontiers of PER Conference (2005).

