6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

CINEMA, FERMI PROBLEMS, &
GENERAL EDUCATION
C.J. EFTHIMIOU1 and R.A. LLEWELLYN2
DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS
UNIVERSITY OF CENTRAL FLORIDA

During the past several years the authors have developed a new approach to
the teaching of Physical Science, a general education course typically found in the
curricula of nearly every college and university. This approach, called Physics in
Films [1], uses scenes from popular movies to illustrate physical principles and has
excited student interest and improved student performance. A similar approach at
the high school level, nicknamed Hollywood Physics, has been developed by Chandler
Dennis [2, 3]. The two approaches may be considered complementary as they target
diﬀerent student groups.

The analyses of many of the scenes in Physics in Films are a direct application
of Fermi calculations — estimates and approximations designed to make solutions
of complex and seemingly intractable problems understandable to the student non-
specialist. The intent of this paper is to provide instructors with examples they can
use to develop skill in recognizing Fermi problems and making Fermi calculations in
their own courses.

1 Fermi, Socrates, and Orders of Magnitude

1.1

In the Beginning there was Fermi

In the early morning of July 16, 1945, the ﬁrst atomic bomb exploded near Ala-
magordo, New Mexico. Watching at the main observation post a few miles from
ground zero was Enrico Fermi (1901–1954), the Italian physicist who had built the
ﬁrst man-made atomic reactor a few years before. About 40 seconds after the bright
detonation ﬂash, as the air blast reached his location he dropped a handful of torn
bits of paper from a height of about 1.5 meters above the ground. There being no
wind that morning, he measured their displacement at the ground, about 2.5 meters,
as the air blast passed him. Doing a quick, approximate calculation, he estimated
the strength of that ﬁrst atomic bomb explosion to be equivalent to about 10,000
tons of TNT [4]. His quick calculation missed the actual strength of the explosion, as
measured by the instrumentation, by less than a factor of two!

Fermi3 had an extraordinary ability to answer with reasonable accuracy any ques-
tion posed to him, questions that would seem impossible to answer to an ordinary

1costas@physics.ucf.edu
2ral@physics.ucf.edu
3A nice essay about Fermi problems can be found in [5].

1

Figure 1: Left: A US commemorative postage stamp which was issued at the University of Chicago
on Sept. 29, 2001, portrays Enrico Fermi. Right: First atomic bomb test, near Alamogordo, New
Mexico, July 16, 1945. Picture is from U.S. Department of Energy, Los Alamos National Laboratory,
New Mexico.

person. The classic example of such questions that is attributed to him is ‘How
many piano tuners are there in the city of Chicago?’ Asking this question, even of
trained scientist, will initially create frustration and a feeling that the answer may be
unattainable, at least without referring to the piano tuners’ union website. However,
upon second, more careful thought, one discovers that the question can be split into
a series of simpler questions which admit approximate answers leading eventually to
an approximate (but very reasonable) answer to the original question:

1. What is the population of the Chicago?

2. How many families does this correspond to?

3. What fraction of families have pianos?

4. What is average number of piano tunings per year per family?

5. What is the average number of piano tunings per year that a tuner can make?

‘Fermi problems’ thus have a very distinct proﬁle: they always seem vague with very
little or no information given, but they admit dissection into a set of simpler questions
that lead to the ﬁnal answer. Once understood, Fermi problems become a source of
limitless fun. An answer found is a blast of excitement and joy.

1.2 Socrates’ Dialectic Method

Socrates (470–399 BC) was an Athenian philosopher and teacher of Plato. One of
the most signiﬁcant philosophers of the western world, he had (through Plato) direct
inﬂuence on modern thought. Socrates established the Socratic method (dialectic

2

method ). The method is probably used by many—in not all—of us. Basically, through
a series a questions and answers the interviewer leads a person who thought he knew
something to a realization that he does not. Alternately, the series of questions and
answers is used to prepare the development of a more sophisticated structure. Isn’t
this that we do all the time in the classroom? Looking carefully at the concepts, Fermi
Problems are a variation of the Socratic method. The answer has to be extracted
from the person who was asked the Fermi Problem. However, in order for him to
answer the question, he has no other choice but asking himself a series of questions
that will help him reach a solution. Indeed, the Socratic method is at the heart of
the method of solving Fermi Problems .

1.3 Orders of Magnitude
Physicists have a lifelong addiction to comparing sizes4. Words such as ‘small’ and
‘large’ are useless in physics in favor of more precise terms such as ‘small compared to’
and ‘large compared to’. The standard units—those of SI—are usually scaled appro-
priately to make smaller and larger sizes. For simplicity, preﬁxes that are multiples
of 10 have been introduced to standardize the system. Table 1 lists the frequently
used preﬁxes.

PREFIX SYMBOL VALUE
. . .
T
G
M
k
h
da

. . .
tera
giga
mega
kilo
hecto
deka

. . .
1012
109
106
103
102
10
1
10−1
10−2
10−3
10−6
10−9
10−12
. . .

deci
centi
milli
micro
nano
pico
. . .

d
c
m
µ
n
p
. . .

3

Table 1: Standard preﬁxes in SI.

4Size here refers to the magnitude of any physical quantity; it is not restricted to the physical

dimensions of an object.

By making use of the preﬁxes and standard units, physicists get a feeling for the
magnitude of a quantity which is often rounded oﬀ to the nearest power of ten. For
example the average life of a human is of the order of 102 years and the age of the
universe is of the order of 1010 years. A nice visualization of 39 orders of magnitude
can be found in the website [6], which is based on the classic ﬁlm by Charles and Ray
Eames [7]. A modern remake can be seen in the IMAX ﬁlm Cosmic Voyage [8] that
presents a narrated cosmic zoom across 42 orders of magnitude.

Real-life problems encountered by physicists are almost always hard and few admit
analytical solution. Physicists, in an eﬀort to understand the scales involved, approach
them as Fermi Problems. Once a rough estimation is obtained and the range of
the answer is known, educated decisions can be made as to which approaches and
techniques are optimum for a more precise, but probably still approximate, solution.
An interesting example of a Fermi Problem that captures students’ attention in
general education physical science and astronomy courses is the question ‘How many
technologically advanced civilizations exist in our galaxy?’ The question was ﬁrst
asked and answered by astronomer Frank Drake; consequently, the equation that
estimates that number is known universally as Drake’s equation. To answer Drake’s
question we need to approximate

1. the number of stars in our galaxy;

2. the fraction of stars that admit solar systems;

3. the average number of planets in these solar systems that are in the habitable

zone;

4. the fraction of the planets that will develop life;

5. the fraction of the planets in which life will involve to intelligent life;

6. the fraction of the plants in which intelligent life will advance to create techno-

logical societies;

7. the lifetime of such civilizations.

2 Why Fermi Problems in General Ed?

According to surveys by the National Science Foundation [9], while 70 percent of the
U.S. population know that Earth moves around the sun, only half know that it takes
one year to do so. Over half think that early humans lived at the same time as the
dinosaurs. Only about 42 percent know that electrons are smaller than atoms and
barely 35 percent know that the universe started with a huge explosion. Clearly, the

4

traditional science general education courses, particularly physical science, are not
doing their job of fostering science literacy.

In the summer of 2002 the authors began the Physics in Films version of the
physical science course with goal of improving the science literacy of the thousands of
non-science students who take the course at our institution each year. In the process
of the continuing development of that program it has been discovered that general
education students, who normally shudder at the thought of doing calculations of any
kind, readily accept and learn to emulate the Fermi calculation approach to dealing
with seemingly very diﬃcult, if not impossible problems. Here is a quick and simple
example that can help demonstrate the method even at the ﬁrst meeting of the class
and at the same time use content related to the class.

2.1 Speed ... of Earth!

The concept of ‘speed’ is one that arises early in physical science. Many students
know that a world-class runner can sprint 100m in 10s (or less), but have no clue
about how fast, i.e., at what speed the runner is moving. Similarly, they know that a
hot sports car will accelerate to 60mi/h (97km/h) in 3.5s, but don’t how to ﬁnd the
average speed of the car. We ﬁnd that by introducing them to the Fermi calculation
approach to determining a speed they initially see as impossible for them to ﬁnd,
they gain conﬁdence. They discover that (a) they can solve the simple problems like
those above and (b) they retain more, having ‘done it themselves’.

To ﬁnd the speed of Earth, some numbers are needed, many of which students
generally may not know. Table 2 contains some useful data for Earth5. Earth’s speed
is given by:

VEarth =

distance traveled
time required

.

(1)

In one year Earth completes one orbit around the sun, so the distance traveled is

the circumference C of the orbit and the time required is one year.

C = 2πR = 2π × 150 · 106km = 9.42 · 108km ,

where the radius R of Earth’s orbit is given in Table 2.

Converting one year into hours provides another opportunity to reinforce the

treatment of units like numbers in multiplication and division.

1y = 1y ×

365d
1y

×

24h
1d

= 8, 760h .

5George Goth has tabulated a long list of data [10] that are useful in answering a very wide range

of Fermi problems.

5

Physical Quantity
Area of Earth’s oceans (% of total)
Mass of Earth
Radius of Earth
Thickness of Earth’s outer core
Radius of Earth’s inner core
Radius of Earth’s orbit around sun

Magnitude Units

70.8
5.97 · 1024
6.37 · 106
2.27 · 106
1.2 · 106
1.5 · 1011

%
kg
m
m
m
m

Table 2: Some data for Earth for Fermi calculations.

Now we can ﬁnd Earth’s speed from equation (1):

VEarth =

9.42 · 108
8, 760

km
h

= 108, 000

km
h

.

and the students are amazed! During the hour they spent in class they have traveled
through space a distance of more than 2.5 times Earth’s circumference at the equator!

3 Cinema Fermi Problems

Since our goal is to train students in critical thinking and reasoning, the Fermi Prob-
lems discussed in class are more sophisticated than those in the previous section.
Almost all of them rely on information presented in a movie. We call such problems
Cinema Fermi Problems. The students have to extract data from the spoken dia-
logue and the visual pictures. Often the calculation is quite intricate, similar to those
encountered in a regular, algebra-based introductory physics course. An example of
In that article the authors discussed the NASA
such a calculation is given in [1].
plan in the movie Armageddon [12] to use the explosion of a nuclear bomb to split
into two pieces an asteroid which is on a collision course with Earth. The two halves
will be deﬂected away from Earth by the explosion. Based on the information given
in the movie and some additional reasonable estimates, it was shown that the plan
would only result in Earth colliding with—instead one asteroid—two smaller frag-
ments, each about half the size of the original asteroid hitting Earth just a few blocks
apart. The authors skip calculations that could also be performed (such as three
body calculations for the system moon-Earth-asteroid and the tidal forces on Earth
from the asteroid) or discussions of an alternate real NASA scenario that has been
proposed for such a situation [20]. Another Cinema Fermi Problem, based on the
movie Speed 2 has been described by the authors in [11]. There the authors explain
that the deceleration of the cruise ship that is crashing into the port is too small to
have the catastrophic eﬀects on the passengers of the ship, contrary to what is shown
in the movie. Tretter [13] presents a Cinema Fermi Problem that deals with scaling.

6

Figure 2: Left: exterior view of the space station. Right: interior view of space station.

Scaling arguments are simple and powerful and known since Galileo’s time [14]. Be-
low we present three additional Cinema Fermi Problems to help the reader become
familiar with the concept. For our course, we have screened hundreds of movies and
worked tens of such problems.

3.1 Gravity on a space station

Let’s do a bit harder Fermi problem, ‘What is the artiﬁcial gravity generated on a
rotating space station?’ One example that the authors use in Physics in Films is
taken from the movie 2001: A Space Odyssey [15]. In the movie passengers on board
the space station live normally. In scenes both inside of and outside of the station,
they walk about, prepare food, sit in chairs, and there are no objects ﬂoating about
as students are accustomed to seeing in television coverage of NASA’s orbiting space
shuttles and the International Space Station or the old Mir space station. To answer
the question we need to know (a) the rotational speed of the space station and (b) the
radius of the station. The ﬁlm provides us scenes showing people (who we assume are
of average height), windows (whose size we estimate by comparison with the people),
and external views of the slowly rotating space station (whose rotation period we can
measure with a wristwatch) that show the same windows that were seen from inside.
The size of the windows provides a way to estimate the radius of the wheel-shaped
space station.

The ﬁlm shows the rotation of the space station in real time. This enables the
computation of the time needed for one full revolution. Figure 2 can be used in the
estimation of sizes. The left picture can be used to relate the radius of the space
station to the length of the windows. The second can be used to compare the length
of the window to an average person. From the comparison of the lengths as explained
above, we estimate that the radius r of the space station is about 300 meters.

From the movie, we see that one-fourth of a rotation occurs in 9 seconds. There-
fore, a full rotation of 2π radians occurs in 36 seconds. This corresponds to an angular
speed ω given by

ω =

= 0.174

2π rad
36s

rad
s

.

7

Then, the centrifugal acceleration that is felt as gravity on the outer ’rim’ of the space
station (where the people inside walk, their heads toward the station’s ‘hub’) is equal
to

m
s2 ,
which is very close to 9.80m/s2, the acceleration of gravity on Earth.

acentrif ugal = ω2r = (0.174)2 × 300

m
s2 = 9.08

Leaving this discussion, we present to our reader a related Cinema Fermi Problem.
The inside view of the space station (see Figure 2) clearly shows a curving ﬂoor. Is
the curvature of the ﬂoor consistent with the size of space station as shown in the
outside view?

3.2 When a victory is worse than defeat

ID4 [16] became a Hollywood blockbuster on the strength of its action and special
eﬀects. However, from the physics point of view this is one movie that hardly makes
sense. In an eﬀort to present the superiority of the aliens, the director attributes to
them spaceships of impressive dimensions (both for the mothership and the battle-
ships). These dimensions are simply huge and the approach of such a ship to Earth
would have serious eﬀects that are not, of course, presented in the movie. We shall
not try to explore all problems raised by the basic plot of the movie; instead, we will
only demonstrate that, under the premises of the director, humans will be obliter-
ated. That is, we shall present a simple calculation to show that, even if humans
successfully destroyed all of the battleships deployed above the major cities on Earth,
the ultimate result would be holocaust for the human race. Casting this as a Fermi
Problem, ‘What is the eﬀect of destroying the alien space ship hovering over a major
city? We need to know (a) how big is the ship; (b) what is its density; (c) what is its
mass; and (d) what is its potential energy.

According to the movie, the battleships have a base diameter of 15 miles. This
would imply a radius of 12 kilometers and a base area A = πR2 of about 452.4 square
kilometers or A = 4.5 · 108m2 in SI units. To place this number in prospective, the
borough of Manhattan in New York City is about 59.5 square kilometers. Just one
battleship would cover about 8 Manhattans!

Watching the scene of the battle between the allied forces and the ship, we can
get a feeling of its height and also at the hovering height above the city. Based on
the stated diameter, we approximate the height h of the ship to be 1 kilometer and
its hovering height H about 2 kilometers.

From Figure 3, we see that the battleship has the shape of a cylinder. Therefore,
its volume would be V = A × h or V = 4.5 · 1011m3. However not all of the volume of
a spaceship is material; a lot of it should be just empty space. In order to estimate
the mass of the ship, we must estimate how much of the volume is material. A
rough estimate would be about 10 percent. Therefore Vmaterial = 4.5 · 1010m3. But to
estimate the mass of the ship, we also need to estimate the density of the material.

8

Figure 3: A spaceship hovering above a city in ID4. Ships of this size were deployed above every
major city of the globe.

Physical Quantity Magnitude Units
kg/m3
kg/m3
kg/m3
kg/m3
kg/m3
kg/m3

Density of water
Density of Earth
Density of aluminum
Density of iron
Density of copper
Density of lead

103
5.52 · 103
2.7 · 103
7.87 · 103
8.96 · 103
11.4 · 103

Table 3: Some density data for Fermi calculations.

Based on our current experience, spaceships are made of alloys. The density of
metals is quite high (See Table 3). However, let us assume that we are dealing with
an extremely advanced species, far more advanced than humans.
It has mastered
interstellar travel after all. So, it seems reasonable, that the species has discovered
a new material of high strength but low density—close to the density of water, ρ =
1000kg/m3. Therefore, the mass of the ship would be m = ρ Vmaterial = 4.5 · 1013kg.
Hovering at a height of 2 kilometers, the ship has stored E = mgH = 88.2 · 1016J of
potential energy. This energy will be released as heat after the allied forces destroy
the ship and it falls on the ground. Recalling that the Hiroshima bomb released an
amount of 5 · 1013J of energy, the fall of the ship corresponds to the detonation of
17,640 Hiroshima bombs! Remember, this happens above every major city on Earth!

3.3 Scientists who never studied Physical Science

Probably, the worst movie that Hollywood has ever produced is The Core [17]. The
director worked hard to rewrite the majority of the basic laws of physics. Eventually,
he succeeded. Like Armageddon and ID4, this movie can be the topic for numerous
topics in physics. Here, we shall concentrate only on the Army’s plan to undo the
problem that it created: a secret project funded by the Army is responsible for

9

slowing the rotation of Earth’s outer core. To better understand this statement and
its implications, a brief explanation is in order.

Figure 4: The onion-like structure of Earth. Picture is borrowed from [19].

Figure 4 shows a cross section of Earth. Earth has an onion-like structure. It is
made of several shells: the crust, the mantle, the outer core, and the inner core. We
live on the surface of the crust. But the other shells are as important as the crust.
The outer core is made of molten iron and rotates relatively fast:
it completes one
full revolution in one day. This gives the outer core an angular speed of

ωouter =

2π rad
1d

= 7 · 10−5 rad
s

.

The inner core is solid and rotates very slowly: only 1.5 degrees a year. (This is
equivalent to an angular speed of ωinner ∼ 10−9rad/s.) Electric charges (ions and
electrons) circulating with the rotation of the iron in the outer core are the likely
source of Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. This ﬁeld, in turn, protects us from harmful cosmic
radiation (mostly protons from the sun). In the movie, since the outer core has slowed
considerably and it is about to stop rotating, the eﬀects of cosmic rays on Earth start
to be evident. Although we could explore other obvious questions, such as, ‘How did
the Army manage to stop the core’s rotation so eﬀectively?’; ‘What happened to the
stored energy?’, and ‘What else would happen to Earth if the rotation of the outer
core stops?’, we shall only deal with the plan to restore the rotation of the outer core.
The scientists have concluded that the only way to restore the rotation of the outer
core, is to carry a bomb of 1,000 megatons to the outer core and explode it. Leaving
aside the question ‘How easy is it to get there?’, we will estimate how much rotation
could be restored with the bomb they used.

10

First of all, the movie shows to us that the bomb is placed inside the outer core.
As such, all forces that develop are internal and one could argue that no rotation could
be created as a result of the explosion. However, the director is lucky here. Internal
forces, although they give a zero net result, they can create a non-zero torque. For
example, let’s look at the two-body system of Figure 5.

~F

~r1

−
~F
~r2

Figure 5: A two-body system moving under its internal forces.

Obviously, the net torque is

~τnet = ~r1 × ~F − ~r2 × ~F = (~r1 − ~r2) × ~F .

The net torque will vanish only if the interaction between the two particles of the
system is along the line that joins the particles. This is true for most cases but not
necessarily all situations. We will thus give the director the beneﬁt of doubt and
assume that releasing the bomb inside the outer core is ﬁne.

The Hiroshima bomb was 12 kilotons and released 5 · 1013J of energy. Therefore,
the bomb carried to the outer core will release approximately E = 4.2 · 1018J. Assum-
ing that all this amount will become rotational energy of the outer core (of course,
not true), the angular speed given by the the explosion is found by the equation:
1
2

Iouter ω2 ,

E =

where Iouter is the moment of inertia of the outer core. This can be computed very
easily since inertia is an additive quantity and the outer core is a spherical shell:
If Ro, Ri are the radii of the surfaces of the outer and inner cores respectively and
Io, Ii, Mo, Mi stand for the moments of inertia and masses for the spheres with radii
Ro, Ri respectively, then

Iouter = Io − Ii =

MoR2

o −

MiR2
i .

2
5

2
5

If ρ stands for the density of the outer core, then Mo = ρ (4π/3) R3
and

o, Mi = ρ (4π/3) R3
i ,

Iouter =

ρ (R5

o − R5

i ) .

8π
15

11

It is known that Ro = 3470km and Ri = 1220km and ρ = 7870kg/m3 (see tables 2
and 3). Substituting all numbers in the equations we ﬁnd

ω ≃ 10−9 rad
s

.

But this is 70,000 times smaller than the original angular speed! So, using a bomb that
is equivalent to 83,000 Hiroshima bombs is not going to make any diﬀerence. They
should have carried a bomb that was equivalent to 406,700,000,000,000 Hiroshima
bombs. Recall that this assumes that all energy given oﬀ by the explosion will become
rotational energy. And, ... as always, the scientists who did the calculations were
the best humanity has ever produced! A Fermi Problem calculation revealed the
absurdity of this plan.

3.4 What seems obvious is not always right

We are familiar with human motion on Earth. We are also familiar with human mo-
tion on the Moon. From the many pictures NASA has popularized, almost everyone
knows that the Moon has low gravity and walking is hard there. Instead, leaping is
quite eﬀective.

Figure 6: A team of people walks on the surface of Mars as it would walk on Earth. Still is taken
from Red Planet [18].

Hollywood has also popularized a planet Mars where everything happens as usual.
Recently, astronomers have been talking about Mars and drawing attention to the
fact that Mars is similar to Earth. In fact, in the distant past Mars was very much
like Earth with oceans of water and the possibility of harboring life. Hollywood has
taken the opportunity and has produced a number of movies where life on Mars looks
identical to Earth. (By this, we really mean the mechanics and response of the human
body to Martian gravity.) As a Cinema Fermi Problem, we would like to determine
how close to reality Hollywood’s depiction of Martian living has been.

12

Physical Quantity Magnitude Units

Mass of Moon
Radius of Moon
Mass of Mars
Radius of Mars

7.35 · 1022
1,740
6.42 · 1023
3,400

kg
km
kg
km

Table 4: Some data for Fermi calculations.

The acceleration of gravity on a planet (or satellite) is given by the simple formula

where G is Newton’s universal constant of gravity, M and R are the mass and radius
of the planet (or satellite), respectively. We can apply the same formula for Earth

g = G

M
R2 ,

gEarth = G

MEarth
R2

Earth

,

where gEarth is the well known 9.80m/s2. Dividing the previous two formulæ, and
solving for g, we ﬁnd:

Using tables 2 and 4, we ﬁnd

g = gEarth

M

REarth

MEarth (cid:18)

R (cid:19)

2

.

gM oon = 0.17 gEarth = 1.67

gM ars = 0.38 gEarth = 3.72

m
s2 ,
m
s2 .

The acceleration of gravity on Mars is about twice that on the Moon, but still only 40
percent of that on Earth. Locomotion on Mars cannot be identical to that on Earth.
Here is a quick way to understand this. Let V be the speed of walking of a human
in a gravitational ﬁeld g and L is the length of his leg. Treating the leg as a solid
rod that rotates about its one end, the (centripetal) acceleration at the other end is
V 2/L. However, this acceleration can be at most g (since the motion happens under
the inﬂuence of gravity only). Then

The length of the the leg of a human adult is of the order of 1m. Therefore, the
maximum walking speed is

V 2
L

≤ g ⇒ V ≤

gL .

p

Vmax = 3.13

,

on Earh ,

m
s

13

Vmax = 1.93

on Mars ,

Vmax = 0.62

on Moon .

m
s
m
s

,

,

4 Concluding Comments

The use of Fermi problems and calculations in this way has proven to be a signiﬁcant
factor in students’ improved understanding of the principles of physical science [1].
Even though at the beginning they could not individually perform the analyses nor,
for most of them, the algebra involved, they quickly learn to follow the mathematical
arguments and begin to think critically regarding other scenes in the movies. Our
hope and expectation is that they will extend this new-found ability beyond the
classroom.

References

[1] Efthimiou, Costas J. and Ralph A. Llewellyn, Avatars of Hollywood in Physical
Science, Phys. Teach. 44, 28-33 (Jan. 2006). This published version is an abridged
version of physics/0303005.

[2] Dennis, Chandler “Run, Forrest! Run!”: A Powerful “Hollywood Physics” Ac-

tivity, Phys. Teach. 44 290–292 (May 2006).

[3] Dennis, Chandler, Start Using “Hollywood Physics” in Your Classroom!, Phys.

Teach. 40 420–424 (Oct. 2002).

[4] Rhodes, R. The Making of the Atomic Bomb, Simon and Schuster 1986.

[5] von Baeyer, Hans Christian, The Fermi Solution: essays on science, Dover 2001.

[6] http://micro.magnet.fsu.edu/primer/java/scienceopticsu/powersof10.

[7] The Films of Charles & Ray Eames - The Powers of 10, Vol. 1, (1968), DVD,

Image Entertainment 2000.

[8] Cosmic Voyage, DVD, IMAX 1996.

[9] National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators 2006, National Sci-

ence Foundation, Washington, D.C., 2006.

[10] Goth, George, The Magnitudes of Physics,

insert in the December 1996
issue of Phys. Teach. An updated list is available through the author’s website:
http://www.smccd.net/accounts/goth/MainPages/magnitudes aligned.pdf.

14

[11] Efthimiou, Costas J. and Ralph A. Llewellyn, Physics in Films: A New Approach
to Teaching Science in the proceedings of EISTA 2003. physics/0404064.

[12] Armageddon, DVD, Touchstone Home Video, 1999.

[13] Tretter, T.R., Godzilla versus Scaling Laws of Physics, Phys. Teach. 43 530–532

(2005).

[14] Galileo, G., Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences, Dover, 1954.

[15] 2001: A Space Odyssey, DVD, Warner Home Video, 2001.

[16] ID4, DVD, Twentieth Century Fox Home Video, 2002.

[17] Core, DVD, Paramount 2003.

[18] Red Planet, DVD, Warner Home Video, 2001.

[19] Tillery, B.W., Physical Science, 6th ed., McGraw-Hill, 2004.

[20] Lu, E. T. and S. G. Love, Gravitational tractor for towing asteroids, Nature,

438, 177-178 (2005).

15

