6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Exploring Student Understanding of Energy through the
Quantum Mechanics Conceptual Survey

S. B. McKagan∗ and C. E. Wieman∗

∗Department of Physics and JILA, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 80309, USA

Abstract. We present a study of student understanding of energy in quantum mechanical tunneling and barrier penetration.
This paper will focus on student responses to two questions that were part of a test given in class to two modern physics
classes and in individual interviews with 17 students. The test, which we refer to as the Quantum Mechanics Conceptual
Survey (QMCS), is being developed to measure student understanding of basic concepts in quantum mechanics. In this paper
we explore and clarify the previously reported misconception that reﬂection from a barrier is due to particles having a range
of energies rather than wave properties. We also conﬁrm previous studies reporting the student misconception that energy
is lost in tunneling, and report a misconception not previously reported, that potential energy diagrams shown in tunneling
problems do not represent the potential energy of the particle itself. The present work is part of a much larger study of student
understanding of quantum mechanics.

INTRODUCTION

Quantum mechanics is a fascinating subject because it
is so challenging to the intuition. Learning quantum me-
chanics requires learning to accept such counterintuitive
notions as “particles” reﬂecting off barriers even though
they have enough energy to cross them as well as tunnel-
ing through barriers that they do not have enough energy
to cross. Perhaps even harder than accepting these no-
tions is actually understanding them. Previous research
shows that even when students accept strange ideas, they
often do not understand them [1, 2, 3, 4]. In order to
change this, we must ﬁrst gain a clearer understanding
of how students actually think about these concepts. We
are in the process of developing an instrument called
the Quantum Mechanics Conceptual Survey (QMCS) [5]
to measure understanding of basic concepts in quantum
mechanics. The QMCS is a multiple-choice survey, de-
signed to provide quantitative data to complement and
extend the qualitative interview data that already exists
on this subject. Through in-class tests and student inter-
views, we have used the QMCS to elicit and explore stu-
dent thinking about many concepts in quantum mechan-
ics. Here we focus on two QMCS questions that were
developed to further explore student misconceptions pre-
sented in a previous study [1]. We elaborate on the source
and extent of these misconceptions and present a new
misconception not seen in previous work.

We present results from two modern physics classes
where the QMCS was given at the end of the Spring
2005 semester and from 17 student interviews. The two

classes used the same textbook [6] and covered similar
material, but were taught by different professors with dif-
ferent teaching styles. One class was intended for engi-
neering majors (ENGsp05, N=68) and one for physics
majors (PHYSsp05, N=64). The interview subjects in-
cluded four students from ENGsp05, nine students from
PHYsp05, and four students who took the equivalent of
ENGsp05 in a previous semester (ENGfa04), taught by a
different professor. In interviews, students were asked to
work through the QMCS, thinking out loud and explain-
ing why they chose the answers they did. The interviewer
(SBM) asked questions to further probe their thinking.

There is some controversy in the Physics Education
Research community over the deﬁnition of the word
“misconceptions” and the extent to which students have
them [7]. In this paper we will take the perspective that
student thinking can take many forms, ranging from frag-
mented and incoherent ideas that apply only in certain
contexts to robust theories that are consistent across all
relevant contexts. Here we will use the word “miscon-
ception” to mean any incorrect student idea that can be
clearly articulated and is seen consistently in numerous
students in at least one context.

REFLECTION: A RANGE OF ENERGY?

In an extensive study of student understanding of wave
properties of light and matter [1], Ambrose has reported
on the “failure to recognize that reﬂection occurs at the
boundary between regions of different potential or wave

speed” and the “mistaken belief that reﬂection and trans-
mission of a beam of particles is due to a range of ener-
gies of the particles in the beam.” Using a survey with an
open-ended question similar to that shown in Fig. 1, he
found that many students did not believe that any elec-
trons would be reﬂected, using the classical reasoning of
answer A. Of those students who knew that some elec-
trons should be reﬂected, many thought the reason was
that the beam contained electrons with a range of ener-
gies, as stated in answer B, in spite of the fact that the
beam was described as “monoenergetic”. We adapted the
question in Fig. 1 from Ref. [1] in order to further ex-
plore these misconceptions. We wanted to determine the
extent to which students hold these misconceptions and
why. Further, we wanted to determine to what degree the
misconception described by answer B was due to stu-
dents’ simple misunderstanding of the word “monoener-
getic,” and whether it was robust enough to appear even
if the contradiction between the problem statement and
the answer was more apparent. Our results show that this
misconception is quite robust; most students hold on to
it even when the contradiction is explicitly pointed out.

A beam of electrons that all have the same 
energy E are traveling through a 
conducting wire.  At x = 0, the wire 
becomes a different kind of metal so that 
the potential energy of the electrons 
increases from zero to U0.  If E > U0, which 
statement most accurately describes the 
transmission and reflection of electrons? 
 

e- 

E 

U(x) 

U0 

x

0

A.  All the electrons are transmitted because they all have E > U0. 
B.  Some of the electrons are transmitted and some are reflected because they actually 

C.  Some of the electrons are transmitted and some are reflected because they behave 

have a range of energies. 

as waves. 

D.  All of the electrons are reflected because they prefer to be in the region with 

lower potential energy. 

E.  None of the above statements are correct. 

FIGURE 1. A barrier penetration question from the QMCS.
This question is adapted from an open-ended question in Ref.
[1], and the distracters are based on student responses reported
therein. We have changed the wording from “Monoenergetic
electrons” to “A beam of electrons that all have the same energy
E”, and added the ﬁgure and description of the wire to make the
question more grounded in physical reality.

100

80

60

40

20

0

ENGsp05

PHYsp05

60

43

3

0

5

1

25

30

27

6

A

B

C

D

E

 

FIGURE 2. Percentage of students who selected each answer
to the question shown in Fig. 1 on a test given in two classes.

Fig. 2 shows the answers that students selected for
the question in Fig. 1 on the in-class exam. It should

be pointed out that transmission and reﬂection through
a barrier was discussed in both classes, and that all in-
terview subjects from these two classes remembered that
reﬂection occurred in some cases. In ENGsp05 a nearly
identical question had been discussed in class at great
length, which probably explains why these students did
better on this question than the PHYsp05 students, al-
though the PHYsp05 students did better on most QMCS
questions. In spite of instruction, the test results, coupled
with the interviews discussed below, show that a signiﬁ-
cant fraction of students in both classes held the miscon-
ceptions described by answers A and B.

Out of the 15 students interviewed on this question,
eight students initially selected answer B. In all of these
cases, the interviewer then asked, “How do you recon-
cile that answer with the statement in the question that all
the electrons have the same energy?” In response to this
question, three students stuck by their answer, giving de-
tailed justiﬁcations, two students changed their answers
to C (the correct answer), two students changed to A, and
one student changed to D.

Of the three students who defended answer B, two
used the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, arguing that
you could never really know the energy, and E was
just the average energy. The third student gave a more
elaborate explanation, based on a misunderstanding of a
type of diagram commonly used quantum mechanics in
which wave functions are drawn on top of energy levels:
“. . . every picture I’ve ever seen where they tell us what
the wave function is and they say it has this energy E, he
draws a line down the middle and then draws the wave
function around it. And I guess I just internalize that as
saying that. . . that’s like their average energy. . . ”

Of the 15 students interviewed, we argue that seven
had a robust misconception that reﬂection at a barrier is
caused by electrons having a range of energies. In addi-
tion to the three students who defended answer B, there
is strong evidence that the three students who switched
to answers A or D, as well as one student who initially
selected answer A, also held this misconception. These
four students all argued that in this case, in which all
the electrons had the same energy, they would all be
transmitted (or reﬂected), but in all the other cases they
had discussed in class, in which there was reﬂection, the
electrons must have a range of energies. We view this
misconception as an extension of the ﬁrst misconception
discussed by Ambrose, that all electrons with sufﬁcient
energy should be transmitted. It is essentially a way of
reconciling the ﬁrst misconception with the remembered
fact that sometimes electrons are reﬂected.

TUNNELING: ENERGY LOSS AND THE
MEANING OF POTENTIAL ENERGY

Several previous studies have found that students often
believe that particles lose energy in tunneling [1, 2, 3, 4].
While these studies provide extensive interview data on
this misconception, there is little quantitative data on the
extent to which it is held, as we provide here.

Morgan, Wittmann, and Thompson [3] suggest several
explanations for why students might believe that energy
is lost in tunneling. One explanation is that most text-
books and lecturers draw the energy and the wave func-
tion on the same graph, leading many students to confuse
the two, believing that the energy, like the wave function,
decays exponentially during tunneling. A second expla-
nation is classical intuition about objects physically pass-
ing through obstacles, in which energy usually is dissi-
pated. Muller and Sharma [4] propose another explana-
tion: students may be thinking of the energy of an ensem-
ble of particles, rather than the energy of a single particle.
In this case, since not all of the particles are transmitted,
it is actually correct that an ensemble as a whole loses
energy during tunneling.

Suppose that in the experiment described in the previous question*, you would like to 
decrease the speed of the electron coming out on the right side.  Which of the following 
changes to the experimental set-up would decrease this speed? 
 

A.  Increase the width w of the gap: 

U(x) 

U(x) 

becomes: 

E

U0>E 

x

w 

U0>E 
x

w 

B.  Increase U0, the potential energy of the gap: 

U(x) 

U(x) 

U0>E 

x

w 

becomes: 

E

U0>E 

w 

x

 
 
C.  Increase the potential energy to the right of the gap: 
U(x) 

U(x) 

becomes: 

E

U0  

w 

U1<E 

x

 
D.  Decrease the potential energy to the right of the gap: 
U(x) 

U(x) 

E

E

E

E

U0>E 

w 

U0>E 

w 

x

x

becomes: 

E

U0  

w 

x

U1  

 

 

 

 

 

 

E.  More than one of the changes above would decrease the speed of the electron. 
 

*The previous question in the test, which is not discussed in this paper, states “An 
electron with energy E is traveling through a conducting wire when it encounters a small 
gap in the wire of width w.  The potential energy of the electron as a function of position 
is given by the plot [above left], where U0 > E.” 

FIGURE 3. A tunneling question from the QMCS. This
question was developed to explore the misconception that en-
ergy is lost in tunneling.

Fig. 3 shows a QMCS question designed to elicit the
misconception that energy is lost in tunneling. In inter-

100

80

60

40

20

0

18

19

10

11

15

9

38

24

ENGsp05

PHYsp05

34

23

A

B

C

D

E

 

FIGURE 4. Percentage of students who selected each answer
to the question shown in Fig. 3 on a test given in two classes.

views, all students who selected answers A, B, or E ar-
gued that since energy was lost in tunneling, making the
barrier wider and/or higher would lead to greater energy
loss. The fraction of students who selected one of these
three answers (62% in ENGsp05 and 53% in PHYsp05)),
shown in Fig. 4, gives us a lower bound on the fraction of
students who hold the misconception that energy is lost
in tunneling. It is only a lower bound because in inter-
views, even students who gave the correct answer with
the correct reasoning often second-guessed themselves
and wondered whether energy might be lost in cases A
and B as well. Some students who initially held the mis-
conception eventually chose the correct answer because
cases D and E, which were unlike any examples they had
seen in class, forced them to consider the energy on the
right of the barrier more carefully. In interviews we saw
evidence for all three of the explanations for this miscon-
ception listed above.

We found this question particularly useful in explor-
ing student thinking about energy in tunneling, not only
because it elicits the idea that energy is lost, but because
understanding the correct answer, C, requires a clear un-
derstanding of the relationship of potential, kinetic, and
total energy in the context of tunneling. In many cases,
this question elicited signiﬁcant cognitive dissonance, as
students struggled to reconcile two contradictory ideas:
that energy is lost, and that kinetic plus potential equals
total. While it is technically possible to reconcile these
ideas if it is the kinetic and total energy that is lost, we
found that most students who thought that energy is lost
did not have a clear idea of which energy is lost. When
asked, they were just as likely to say potential energy
as any other kind. Often a single student would use two
or even all three types of energy interchangeably within
the same explanation. Most of the interview subjects had
fragments of both the correct view and the view that en-
ergy is lost simultaneously.

Of the four students interviewed from ENGsp05, all
held a robust misconception not seen in any previous
study, and not seen in any of the interview subjects
from the other courses. These students thought that the
quantity U(x), plotted here and in nearly every problem

involving solutions to the Schrödinger equation, is not
the potential energy of the electron itself, but some kind
of “external energy.” We discovered this misconception
in the ﬁrst interview conducted in this study, in which
a student drew an exponentially decaying curve over
the potential energy graph shown in the question, and
consistently referred to this curve as representing “the
potential energy.” The interviewer then asked what the
graph shown in the question represented, since it was
also referred to as “the potential energy.” The student
replied, “I don’t know, that’s just the bump that it goes
through. I don’t know what it means. I just see that and I
know that it’s some kind of obstacle that it goes through.”
When pressed, he said that the “bump” was “the external
energy that the electron interacts with” and insisted that
it was not the potential energy of the electron itself, in
spite of the fact that it was explicitly labeled as such.
The interviews with other ENGsp05 students were very
similar, with all of them referring to the graph as either
“the external potential energy” or “the potential energy
of the medium,” and quickly dismissing the idea that it
was the potential energy of the electron itself.

It is unclear why this misconception was held so ro-
bustly by all of the interviewees from one course and
not present at all in the interviewees from the other two
courses. The sample sizes are small and the courses, as
well as the student populations, were different. Therefore
we do not wish to speculate on which factor caused the
discrepancy. However, it seems unlikely that this miscon-
ception is conﬁned to students in this particular course,
and we hope that other researchers will continue to probe
student thinking about this topic in other contexts.

We ﬁnd this misconception interesting because while
many studies have shown that students think energy de-
cays in tunneling, none of these studies discuss how stu-
dents reconcile this idea with the fact that they are often
drawing these decaying curves on top of graphs of en-
ergy curves that are not decaying.

The source of this misconception becomes clearer if
we consider that textbooks and lecturers nearly always
refer to “a particle in a potential” as if the potential is
something external. One physics professor, in a discus-
sion of these results with SBM, stated that the potential
is an external thing, caused by an external ﬁeld of some
kind. SBM replied that it may be caused by an external
ﬁeld, but the potential energy is a property of the particle
itself. The professor said that he always thinks of it as
a potential, rather than a potential energy, in which case
it is not a property of the particle itself. We suspect that
many physics professors think this way, easily switching
between potential and potential energy in their minds,
forgetting that the distinction between the two is not a
trivial factor of charge q in the minds of their students.
In all other ﬁelds of physics, the symbol V is used for
potential and the symbol U is used for potential energy,

but most quantum mechanics textbooks use the symbol
V for potential energy (the textbook used in these classes
is an exception to this rule) and then use the terms poten-
tial and potential energy interchangeably. Few textbooks
give any kind of physical explanation for the source of
the potential energy term in the Schrödinger equation.

Because we had seen this confusion over the meaning
of potential through the semester, throughout the QMCS
we used the symbol U(x) rather than V (x) and referred to
this symbol as “the potential energy function of the elec-
tron.” In interviews students simply skimmed over this
unfamiliar phrase and focused on the familiar symbols.

It is important to note that one should not over-
interpret the statistical results given in Fig. 4 as indicat-
ing the fraction of students in a class that hold a partic-
ular view. First, answer E does not distinguish between
students who think that A and B alone are correct and
students who think that A, B, and C are correct. Fur-
thermore, even if this ambiguity were resolved, for ex-
ample by allowing students to mark more than one cor-
rect answer, the answers alone would not tell us much
about the thinking of those students who held fragments
of the correct view and the view that energy is lost. In
interviews we found that these students selected a wide
range of answers. Some students who held both views
decided that A, B, and C were all correct, while others
picked only one or two of these options, either at random
or because one sounded slightly more plausible. Several
students changed their answer after several minutes of
thinking through all the implications, which would not
have happened under normal test-taking circumstances.
This project is the ﬁrst step in a comprehensive study
of student thinking about quantum mechanics. We have
found the QMCS to be a useful tool in probing student
thinking, and will extend these results in further studies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Dana Anderson and Mihaly Ho-
ranyi for useful feedback on the QMCS and for allowing
us to give it to their classes, the physics education re-
search group at the University of Colorado for additional
feedback, Brad Ambrose, Michael Wittmann, Jeff Mor-
gan, and Derek Muller for discussions of their studies on
these topics, and ﬁnally, the students who participated in
interviews. This work was supported by the NSF.

REFERENCES

1. B. Ambrose, Ph.D. thesis, University of Washington

(1999).

2. L. Bao, Ph.D. thesis, University of Maryland (1999).

3. J. T. Morgan, M. C. Wittmann, and J. R. Thompson, Phys.

Educ. Res. Conf. Proceedings (2003).

4. D. A. Muller, and M. D. Sharma, in preparation (2005).
5. http://cosmos.colorado.edu/phet/survey/qmcs/ (2005).
6. J. R. Taylor, C. D. Zaﬁratos, and M. A. Dubson, Modern
Physics for Scientists and Engineers, Pearson Prentice
Hall, 2004, 2 edn.

7. A. Elby, J. Math. Behav., 19, 481 (2000).

