Astronomy for the Developing world
Proceedings IAU Symposium No. SPS5, 2006
J. Hearnshaw & P. Martinez

c(cid:13) 2006 International Astronomical Union
DOI: 00.0000/X000000000000000X

Graduate Program in Astrophysics in Split

1

Davor Krajnovi´c1†,
Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
email: dxk@astro.ox.ac.uk

Abstract. Beginning in autumn 2008 the ﬁrst generation of astronomy master students will
start a 2 year course in Astrophysics oﬀered by the Physics department of the University of
Split, Croatia (http://ﬁzika.pmfst.hr/astro/english/index.html). This unique master course in
South-Eastern Europe, following the Bologna convention and given by astronomers from interna-
tional institutions, oﬀers a series of comprehensive lectures designed to greatly enhance students’
knowledge and skills in astrophysics, and prepare them for a scientiﬁc career. An equally impor-
tant aim of the course is to recognise the areas in which astronomy and astrophysics can serve
as a national asset and to use them to prepare young people for real life challenges, enabling
graduates to enter the modern society as a skilled and attractive work-force. In this contribution,
I present an example of a successful organisation of international astrophysics studies in a devel-
oping country, which aims to become a leading graduate program in astrophysics in the broader
region. I will focus on the beneﬁts of the project showing why and in what way astronomy can
be interesting for third world countries, what are the beneﬁts for the individual students, nation
and region, but also research, science and the astronomical community in general.

Keywords. education in astronomy, sociology of astronomy

1. Introduction

The knowledge-based economy is founded on discoveries and innovations. The power
of a nation is measured by its ability to stimulate discoveries and capacity to innovate.
A nation cannot achieve this without increasing its educational levels and intellectual
competences. Moreover, for a small nation, building knowledge-based society is more
than an economic necessity – it is also a strategy for preserving its culture and identity.
Astronomy, as a scientiﬁc discipline, is a valuable incubator of new ideas, discoveries
and enterprises, driven by the synergy of sophisticated technologies, diﬀerent natural
sciences and the wish to understand our Universe. Astronomy has also a unique pub-
lic appeal, which enables it to inspire young generations and stimulate their curiosity,
creativity and appreciation for science.

In developing countries, astronomy is, however, often perceived as an abstract and
expensive science, without visible end-products through which it is possible to quan-
titatively ’weigh’ its usefulness. Even in developed countries, in the times of economic
uncertainty, astronomy falls into the group of fundamental sciences which are the ﬁrst to
loose governmental monetary support. It is the duty of professional astronomers to op-
pose this opinion, and to demonstrate the beneﬁts related to astronomy as a science and,
especially, as an educational option for bright young people of all ages and school levels.
Astrophysics Initiative in Dalmatia (ApID) is an attempt to do this and promote the
growth and development of astrophysics in Dalmatia, a southern region of Croatia. ApID
is a collaboration of projects, institutions, and individuals, from professional scientists
to amateur astronomers, sharing the common interest in astronomy and astrophysics.

† Present address: University of Oxford, Keble Road, Oxford, OX1 3RH, UK

1

6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

Davor Krajnovi´c

The strategy of ApID is to ensure its sustainability through a carefully designed com-
bination of educational, research, and outreach programs. The operational performance
and strength of ApID are enhanced by the synergy of a public university (the University
of Split) and a non-proﬁt non-governmental organisation (the Society znanost.org). The
backbone of ApID is the Graduate Program in Astrophysics at the Department of Physics
at the University of Split (GPAS), Croatia, which is the main topic of this contribution
to the Special Session 5. The main objectives of GPAS can be summarised as follows:

- provide the graduates with know-how to continue in diverse career paths as well as
to make them attractive targets for a range of employers in diﬀerent branches of business,
government and ﬁnances,

- attract young people for careers in science and technology,
- establish connections with other disciplines present at the University of Split, other
Universities in Croatia and abroad in order to actively promote interdisciplinary sciences,

- promote top level research in astronomy in Croatia, and
- enhance the quality of existing graduate level education in the region and set an

example to other educational institutions in South Eastern Europe.

Here, I outline the graduate program focusing on aspects which diﬀer from existing
and more classical courses (Section 2). This is followed by a discussion about the beneﬁts
that such a study can bring to the students, to the region, but also to us, the astronomical
community (Section 3). Finally, I conclude with highlights of the GPAS (Section 4).

2. Study astrophysics in Split

GPAS is supported by the Department of Physics of the University of Split, which is a
part of the Faculty of Natural Sciences, Mathematics and Kinesiology. Recently, following
the Bologna process (standardisation of higher education in Europe), the Department
of Physics restructured its courses now oﬀering three-year undergraduate and two-year
MSc (masters degree) graduate study programs. The MSc in Astrophysics will be given
in English, enabling students from other countries to follow the courses in Split increasing
their mobility and exchange of experiences.

Students. The MSc program in Astrophysics is open to Croatian and international
students, who completed their undergraduates studies (BSc) in physics or related subject.
In the modern world, it is necessary to actively work on attracting bright students.
Clearly, the best undergraduate students should be encouraged to apply to the program.
Possible candidates, however, could be identiﬁed and attracted to astronomy at even
younger age, among the gifted high-school or even elementary schools pupils. This means
that a part in the organisation of the graduate studies also includes an active outreach
through which GPAS will be present in the media and news, will actively participate in
the organisation of local and regional scientiﬁc events for young people, and will promote
the popularisation of science to the general public.

Lecturers. Currently, there are no professional astronomers at the Department of
Physics in Split. The expanding department will in the following years oﬀer positions
for astronomers, but the bulk of the astronomy speciﬁc teaching at GPAS will be given
by visiting lectures. Some of these lecturers are Croatian astronomers working abroad,
while others are foreign scientists. The rest of the courses (non-astronomy related, but
necessary for a completion of the master degree in Astrophysics) will be given by local
physics faculty. The vising lecturers will not need to spend a whole semester in Split, but
rather a few weeks necessary for completing their course.

Courses and Timetable. The courses are divided between required and elective
courses. The aim is to give a thorough astrophysical background, which is supplemented

Graduate Program in Astrophysics in Split

3

with optional courses in general physics, computer science and humanities (history, phi-
losophy, etc). Since large section of courses will be given by visiting lecturers, the whole
educational program is organised in blocks. One block, lasting between 2 to 4 weeks,
contains the lectures as well as the exam. The emphasis of the studies on the research is
evident in the fact that in all semesters students will be required to participate in sci-
entiﬁc projects. Moreover, the last semester is completely devoted to a research project
which will become the master thesis. The aim of these projects is to encourage students
to tackle complex programs and learn methods of the scientiﬁc research. The most im-
portant aspect, however, is to enable students to work in an international environment
at astrophysical centres of excellence. They will have to work on projects oﬀered by the
lecturers, visiting their institutions abroad and producing publishable scientiﬁc results.
The ﬁrst light. The new graduate program will commence during the fall of 2008
when the ﬁrst group of Croatian students following the Bologna process will ﬁnish their
BSc.

3. Beneﬁts of the graduate program

The position of astronomy in early societies was very much diﬀerent than it is today.
First astronomical exploits were very practical, from the determination of the seasons
necessary for the agriculture, which fed the stratiﬁed human societies, to predictions of
terrifying eclipses and explanation of the heavens. Astronomy was a very practical and
necessary system of theoretical knowledge, with deep cultural and social consequences.
Last few hundred years, however, saw a reverse of the medal. Astronomy, supported
by physical laws of nature, was turning towards theoretical knowledge of Universe, its
structure and properties, loosing its practicality and usefulness for everyday aspects of
human lives. On the other hand, younger sciences like physics, chemistry, biology and
their various mixtures (medicine, engineering...), with their technical applications, started
changing the human society as well as its inﬂuence on the Earth. Astronomy did little in
this ’progress’†, becoming more and more academic and idealistic pursuit of the nature
of the Universe. Today, it is often considered a fundamental science, remote and useless
for ’real’ life, perhaps an exercise for the mind, interesting in terms of secular human
culture; an entertainment, although rather expensive, of general public.

Astronomy in the modern world, however, is much more than that. It still makes
humanistic, educational and technical contributions to our society. Rather than going
through a list of recent contributions from astronomical research, I will focus on a more
speciﬁc aspect of beneﬁts that a study of astronomy can oﬀer to the students and to the
region hosting an astronomical institution.

3.1. Beneﬁts for the students
It is self-evident that training in science opens doors to a scientiﬁc career. It is, however,
often not clear to the general public that the same training can be very attractive to
industry and diﬀerent businesses as potential employers of skilled people. An objective
of GPAS is to produce world-class graduates with the necessary skills to become local
and global leaders and entrepreneurs.

† One should, however, remember the crucial role of astronomy in navigation and, hence, in
the great geographical discoveries and world trade until the recent advent of satellite navigation.
The importance of astronomy for economy of the sea-faring nations is evident also in the support
astronomical research was getting from the governments: both Paris and Greenwich Observa-
century with purpose to perfect the art of navigation, increase the
tories were opened in 17
maritime power of the nations and, in general, make the seafaring safer.

th

4

Davor Krajnovi´c

Industry and ﬁnances are generally not concerned about the specialisation of an aca-
demic course. They are more interested in broader skills obtained by students, which can
be transferred to the work place. A master course in astronomy is actually well suited
in this respect. The interdisciplinary nature of astronomy provides a full framework for
illustrating to the students the unity of natural phenomena and the evolution of scien-
tiﬁc paradigms that explain them. On a more pedagogical level within higher education,
teaching astronomy to master students prepares them for a broad range of scientiﬁc dis-
ciplines ranging from purely academic, such as astrophysics, to widely applicable tasks
of engineering and computer science. GPAS aims to leave a number of transferable skills
to its graduates:

- mathematical, computing and modelling skills with scientiﬁc literacy
- tacking complex problems and handling incomplete and large data sets
- cooperating in international teams and projects
- preparing and executing projects (often on tight deadlines)
- presenting an account of work to colleagues and to broader audiences

It is important to stress that the above mentioned skills provide a solid base not only for
a career in science, but also in diﬀerent branches of business. It is the synergy of diﬀerent
sciences used in astronomical research that oﬀers a broad spectrum of transferable skills
and know-how for diverse career paths.

3.2. Beneﬁts for the region
The region concerned in this section is primarily Dalmatia with its capital Split. On
a slightly higher level it, of course, concerns Croatia as the country where the master
study is organised. It is, however, easy to generalise towards a larger region of South–East
Europe, but certain aspects of the graduate program apply to the whole Europe, both
to its political and geographical entities.

Modern economy of a nation depends on its ability to compete technologically with
other nations. This ability directly translates in the number of technically trained people
that are able to use existing technologies and develop new ones for international mar-
kets. In addition to that, the quality of environment depends on developing safe, clean
industries and sources of energy. This, also, can be accomplished only by imaginative and
highly trained scientists and engineers. However, even governments of developed coun-
tries recognise the steadily decreasing number of students interested in pursuing technical
careers as a major concern for the future development of their nations. To overcome this
downward trend it will be necessary to support those activities that stimulate young peo-
ple toward scientiﬁc thinking and the development of mathematical and technical skills.
The subject of astronomy is inherently interesting to young people, thereby keeping them
interested in science, whilst they learn fundamentals of mathematics, statistics, physics,
chemistry, etc. GPAS follows the trends of physics departments in developed counties
which started oﬀering astronomy options in their curriculum, resulting in an increased
interest in bachelor and master degree programs in astronomy. GPAS aims to provide a
highly educated and scientiﬁcally literate work force required by their home country for
its future development.

A big problem facing developing countries is the brain-drain, the exodus of highly
educated individuals who go to wealthy nations capable of oﬀering well payed or other
speciﬁc jobs (such as research positions in astronomy). Croatia and the region of Split
suﬀer from this eﬀect as well. A graduate course in astronomy, however, can be used
to reverse the brain drain into brain gain by attracting astronomy professionals (either
Croatian or foreign) to take posts in Split and promoting a modern program which oﬀers
transferable skills to its students preparing them for diﬀerent career paths.

Graduate Program in Astrophysics in Split

5

GPAS should also be interesting to the relevant bodies in the European Union, since
it is fully compatible with the European standards for high education (Bologna process),
emphasises the mobility of students between the countries, especially the neighbouring
countries of Croatia, and its existence will enhance the quality of existing graduate level
education in the region, as well as set an example to other educational institutions in
South-Eastern Europe.

3.3. Beneﬁts for astronomy

As a ﬁnal remark in this section, it does not hurt to stress that with a new graduate
program in astronomy the whole astronomical community also gains. An obvious beneﬁts
are the job openings and a popularisation and spread of astronomy to the general pub-
lic (who is paying for most of the astronomical research). Possibly the most interesting
gain is opening of a new channel for introduction of young bright people into the world
of top level astronomical research. The graduate program in Split supports this aspect
by linking professional scientists and students. This is achieved by bringing astronomers
(lectures, see Section 2), who work at international institutes and are involved in diﬀerent
international projects, to Split to give lectures and oﬀer master projects to the students.
On the other hand, they will meet capable students with diﬀerent backgrounds and eager
to do astronomical research but coming from Croatia and neighbouring countries which
do not have developed astronomical infrastructure nor are members of major interna-
tional projects or organisations. To our knowledge, the astrophysics graduate course in
Split is the ﬁrst program of this scale oﬀering the link between astronomically developed
western and underdeveloped south-eastern Europe.

4. Conclusions

Astronomy is a lively natural science that can oﬀer a broad range of products to the
general community: from ’pretty’ pictures to an understanding of the structure of the Uni-
verse, from technological advancements to educational programs. Many of these are appli-
cable and useful for developing countries. In this work I focused on the tertiary education,
on the organisation of a graduate course in astrophysics and on the beneﬁts it oﬀers to the
students and the host country. Here I summarise the main points. The aims of GPAS are:
• to recognise the areas in which astronomy and astrophysics can serve as a national

asset and to use them to prepare young people for real life challenges;
• to attract young people for careers in science and technology;
• to set the example of excellence to be followed by other existing higher education
programs in the region and demonstrating to the public that investing in science is the
right thing to do;

• to bring the top science and technology research to Croatia, enhance the transfer of
technology to Croatia through international collaborations and joint projects with inter-
national centres of excellence, and help disseminate the skills and knowledge necessary
for the establishment of similar world-class centres of excellence in the region; and

• to actively participates in the process of brain-gain by attracting Croatian science
diaspora and foreign scientists to actively participate in the Croatian education system
through the transfer of their skills and knowledge to Croatia.

The astrophysics graduate course is fully compatible with the European educational
standards, and its international orientation (curriculum, language and lecturers) and
research excellence will serve as a bridge between the existing and future EU states,
empowering Croatia as a future EU member.

6

Davor Krajnovi´c

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Dejan Vinkovi´c, for useful discussions and careful reading of the

manuscript.

References

Discussion

The following list of references have been consulted during the development of this document:

’History of Astronomy’, Pannekoek, A. 1961, London: Allen & Unwin, 1961,
’The decade of discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics’, National Research council, 1991,

’Astronomy and Astrophysics in the New Millennium’, National Research Council, 2000, Na-

National Academy press, Washington, D.C.

tional Academy press, Washington, D.C.

’Bologna Process in Croatia’, http://bolonjski-proces.idi.hr
’Astrophysics Initiative in Dalmatia (ApID): Business Strategy for 2006-2011’, Forum of Croa-

tian Astronomers, Split, Croatia, 2006.

