6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hands-on Gravitational Wave Astronomy:
Extracting astrophysical information from simulated signals

Louis J. Rubbo
Center for Gravitational Wave Physics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802

Shane L. Larson∗
Department of Physics, Weber State University, Ogden, UT 84408

Michelle B. Larson∗
Department of Physics, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322

Dale R. Ingram
LIGO Hanford Observatory, Richland, WA 99352
(Dated: December 23, 2013)

In this paper we introduce a hands-on activity in which introductory astronomy students act as
gravitational wave astronomers by extracting information from simulated gravitational wave signals.
The process mimics the way true gravitational wave analysis will be handled by using plots of a
pure gravitational wave signal. The students directly measure the properties of the simulated signal,
and use these measurements to evaluate standard formulae for astrophysical source parameters. An
exercise based on the discussion in this paper has been written and made publicly available online
for use in introductory laboratory courses.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Observational astronomy stands at the threshold of an
era where gravitational wave detectors are a tool which
regularly contributes important information to the grow-
ing body of astrophysical knowledge.1 Ground based de-
tectors such as the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-
wave Observatory2 (LIGO) and the forthcoming space
based detector the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna3
(LISA) will probe diﬀerent regimes of the gravitational
wave spectrum and observe sources that radiate at diﬀer-
ent gravitational wavelengths. Unlike their cousins, tra-
ditional electromagnetic telescopes, gravitational wave
detectors are not imaging instruments. How then does
a gravitational wave astronomer take the output from a
detector and extract astrophysical information about the
emitting sources? This paper introduces a hands-on ac-
tivity in which introductory astronomy students answer
this question.

Traditional astronomy is often presented through the
medium of colorful images taken with large scale tele-
In addition to studying images, astronomers
scopes.
learn about astrophysical systems by collecting data at
multiple wavelengths, using narrow band spectra, mea-
suring time varying light curves, and so on. It is often
the case that the core physics governing the evolution of
these distant systems is deduced from the physical char-
acter of the observed electromagnetic radiation, rather
than from the imagery that is used to illustrate the sci-
ence for other audiences.

Gravitational wave astronomy is completely analogous
to its electromagnetic cousin, with one important distinc-
tion: there will be no image data, because gravitational
wave detectors are not imaging instruments. Gravita-

tional wave observatories like LIGO and LISA return
a noisy time series that has encoded within it gravita-
tional wave signals from one or possibly many overlap-
ping sources. To gain information about the systems
emitting these gravitational wave signals requires the use
of time series analysis techniques such as Fourier trans-
forms, Fisher information matrices, and matched ﬁlter-
ing. Recently an activity has shown how students can
emulate the match ﬁltering process by comparing ideal
signals to mocked noisy detector output.4 In this paper,
a procedure is described whereby students can analyze a
simulated gravitational wave signal and extract the astro-
physical parameters which describe the radiating system.
The goal is to introduce students to how gravitational
wave astronomers learn about sources of gravitational ra-
diation in a fashion suitable for classroom or laboratory
exercises related to this modern and emerging branch of
observational astrophysics.

The rest of this article introduces some basic back-
ground of gravitational radiation and then describes the
activity. Section II outlines the theory connecting the
structure of gravitational waves to astrophysical param-
eters, and Section III illustrates the characteristic wave-
forms from a typical binary system. Section IV illustrates
a procedure where measurements made from waveform
plots, together with the theory of waveform generation,
can be used to extract the astrophysical parameters (or-
bital period, distance, etc.) of the system emitting grav-
itational radiation. Section V discusses implementations
and extensions for this activity in an introductory as-
tronomy course. The analysis described in the paper has
been implemented in an activity format, complete with a
keyed solution for the instructor, and is publicly available
online.5

II. GRAVITATIONAL WAVE PRODUCTION IN
BINARIES

In electromagnetism radiation is produced by an ac-
celerating charged particle. Similarly in general relativ-
ity, gravitational radiation is produced by an accelerating
mass. To be precise, gravitational waves are produced by
a time varying mass quadrupole moment. The reason for
this is straightforward.6 Monopole radiation is prevented
due to conservation of mass, while dipole radiation does
not occur due to the conservation of momentum. This
leaves the quadrupole as the leading order term in the
multipole expansion of the radiation ﬁeld. A simple and
common example of an astrophysical system with a time
varying quadrupole moment is a binary star system.

For a circular binary system, where the components
are treated as point-like particles, the gravitational wave-
forms take on the seductively simple form

h(t) = A(t) cos(Φ(t)) ,

(1)

where h(t) is the gravitational waveform (also referred
to as the gravitational wave strain), A(t) is the time de-
pendent amplitude, and Φ(t) is the gravitational wave
phase. The amplitude A(t) can be expressed in terms of
the physical parameters characterizing the system,
2(GM)5/3
c4r

π
Pgw(t) (cid:19)

A(t) =

(2)

2/3

(cid:18)

,

where G is Newton’s gravitational constant, c is the speed
of light, r is the luminosity distance to the binary, and
Pgw(t) is the gravitational wave period. The quantity
M ≡ (M1M2)3/5(M1 + M2)−1/5 is called the chirp mass
and appears repeatedly in gravitational wave physics,
making it a natural mass scale to work with. The origin
for this nomenclature will become evident shortly. The
waveform phase Φ(t) is given by a the integral:

Φ(t) = Φ0 + 2π

(3)

t

dt′
Pgw(t′)

,

Z
0

where Φ0 is the initial phase.

As in electromagnetism, gravitational waves have two
independent polarization states. For a binary system the
two states are related by a 90◦ phase shift. Consequently,
Eq. (1) captures the functional form for both polariza-
tion states. For the purposes of this paper only a single
polarization state and its associated waveform will be
discussed.

Gravitational waves carry energy and angular momen-
tum away from the binary system causing the orbital
period to decrease with time according to7

where P0 is the orbital period at time t = 0, and k is an
evolution constant given by

Porb(t) =

8/3
0 −

P

(cid:18)

3/8

,

8
3

kt

(cid:19)

k ≡

(2π)8/3

96
5

GM
c3 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

5/3

.

2

As a consequence of the ever shortening orbital period,
the two binary components will slowly inspiral, eventu-
ally colliding and coalescing into a single remnant. Under
the assumption of point-like particles made here, this for-
mally occurs when Porb(t) = 0.

Note that Eq. (4) gives the orbital period not the
gravitational wave period. Careful scrutiny of Eqs. (2)
and (3) will reveal that the gravitational wave period
Pgw(t) is the quantity which appears in the description
of the waveform. Fortunately, for circularized binary sys-
tems, Porb(t) and Pgw(t) are simply related:

Porb(t) = 2Pgw(t) .

(6)

The simple factor of two stems from the fact that the low-
est possible order for gravitational radiation production
is the quadrupole order. Moreover, quadrupole moments
are invariant under a 180◦ rotation, yielding a factor of
two per complete orbit.

III. WAVEFORMS FROM A BINARY SYSTEM

As an illustrative example of the kind of waveforms we
expect from binaries, consider a binary neutron star sys-
tem with M1 = M2 = 1.4 M⊙ (M = 1.22M⊙) located
at the center of the galaxy r = 8 kpc away. For the
activity we will consider waveforms generated at two dis-
tinct times in the binary’s evolution. The ﬁrst waveform
we will consider is ∼ 106 years before coalescence. Dur-
ing this phase the gravitational wave frequency is in the
regime that will be detectable by the spaceborne LISA
observatory, which has a principle sensitivity in the range
of 10−5 Hz to 1 Hz. The second waveform considered will
be during the ﬁnal second before the neutron star binary
coalesces. The gravitational wave frequencies during this
phase are in the regime that will be detectable by the
terrestrial LIGO observatory, which is sensitive to gravi-
tational wave frequencies between 10 Hz and 103 Hz.

A. Far from Coalescence

Figure 1 shows the emitted gravitational radiation long
before the binary components coalesce. During this era
of the binary evolution, the gravitational waves are es-
sentially monochromatic; the orbital period is evolving
too slowly to detect a frequency derivative term.

For monochromatic signals like this, the only measur-
able properties of the gravitational waveform are the pe-
riod Pgw (and the orbital period Porb through Eq. (6)),
amplitude A, and initial phase Φ0. Even though the
waveform equations depend on the chirp mass M and
the luminosity distance r, it is not possible to solve for
their values from the data provided by the monochro-
matic waveform. Not enough information exists to com-
pletely solve Eqs. (2) and (4) together for both quanti-
ties. This can be seen by considering the relative size

(4)

(5)

2
2
-

0
1

⋅

h

 1.5

 1

 0.5

 0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

 0

3

8
1
-

0
1

⋅

h

 1

 0.5

 0

-0.5

-1

 2000

 4000

 6000

 8000

 10000

 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

t (seconds)

t (seconds)

FIG. 1: The gravitational waveform for a binary system con-
sisting of two neutron stars far from coalescence and located
at the center of our galaxy.

FIG. 2: The waveform over the last second before coalescence.
Since the signal’s amplitude and frequency is increasing with
time, these types of systems are said to be chirping.

of the two terms in Eq. (4); using the binary neutron
star chirp mass M = 1.22 M⊙, it should be evident that
the second term is completely negligible compared to the
period P0 of the wave shown in Fig. 1. In the parlance
of gravitational wave astronomy, there is a mass-distance
degeneracy in the waveform description, analogous to the
familiar mass-inclination degeneracy in the electromag-
netic observations of spectroscopic binaries. This degen-
eracy is a well known problem, but as the next section
shows, it can be broken if the orbital period of the binary
evolves during the gravitational wave observations.

B. Near Coalescence

Inspection of Eq. (4) shows that as time goes on, the
emission of gravitational waves causes the orbital period
to grow shorter, and as a result the frequency of the emit-
ted waves increases. Similarly, consideration of Eq. (2)
shows that as the wave period decreases, the time de-
pendent amplitude A(t) increases. This is characteristic
behavior for gravitational waves emitted just prior to a
source coalescence, and is known as a chirp. The chirp
waveform emitted by the example binary neutron star
system just prior to coalescence is illustrated in Fig. 2.

Any binary signal which evolves appreciably during the
gravitational wave observation is called a chirping binary.
In these cases, the mass parameter M which appears in
the amplitude A(t) and in the period evolution constant
k can be determined from measurements of the evolving
signal. For this reason, the mass M is called the chirp
mass. To leading order in gravitational wave production,
it is not possible to measure the individual masses, only
the chirp mass. Consequently, it is not possible to dis-
tinguish between binaries with the same chirp mass. For
example, the binary neutron star considered in this pa-
per with M1 = M2 = 1.4 M⊙ has roughly the same chirp

mass as a binary with an M1 = 10 M⊙ black hole and a
M2 = 0.3 M⊙ white dwarf.

To extract the chirp mass from measurements of the
gravitational waveform, consider two small stretches of
the chirping waveform. Figure 3 shows the waveform
from 0 s ≤ t ≤ 0.05 s, and Fig. 4 shows the waveform
from 0.9 s ≤ t ≤ 0.92 s. The waveform is appreciably
diﬀerent between these two snapshots, both in amplitude
A(t) and in period Pgw(t). This allows the degeneracy
found in the monochromatic signal case to be broken,
because the gravitational wave period can be measured
at two diﬀerent times and used in Eq. (4) to solve for the
chirp mass M.

IV. MEASURING GRAVITATIONAL
WAVEFORMS

This section illustrates a procedure at the introductory
astronomy level where students can make direct measure-
ments from the ﬁgures in Section III using a straight edge
and the axis labels. Using their measured data together
with the theory presented in Section II, the astrophys-
ical character of the system emitting the gravitational
waveforms can be deduced.

A. Monochromatic Waveforms

Limited astrophysical information can be extracted di-
rectly from Fig. 1, as will be the case with true monochro-
matic signals detected by gravitational wave observato-
ries. With limited assumptions more detailed informa-
tion can be deduced, which will be valid so long as the
assumptions are valid. A suitable extraction and analysis
procedure for an introductory astronomy student would
proceed in the following manner:

4

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

-0.2

-0.4

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

-0.2

-0.4

8
1
-

0
1

⋅

h

8
1
-

0
1

⋅

h

• The gravitational wave period Pgw can be mea-
sured directly from the ﬁgure. Since the signal is
monochromatic, the binary is circular and the or-
bital period Porb is obtained directly from Pgw us-
ing Eq. (6). For the waveform in Fig. 1 careful mea-
surement should yield a value of Pgw = 1000 sec.

• The amplitude A and the initial phase Φ0 can also
be measured directly from the ﬁgure. As noted
in Section III A no astrophysical information can
be extracted from the amplitude alone. The initial
phase is a simple quantity to measure, but does not
represent any intrinsic property of the binary; its
value is solely a consequence of when the gravita-
tional wave observations began. To illustrate this,
imagine relabeling the time axis in Fig. 1 to rep-
resent a new observation which started somewhat
later than the observation shown. The initial phase
will have some new value, but the waveform itself
does not change because the intrinsic properties of
the binary did not change.

• If a gravitational wave astronomer were to assume
that the binary was a pair of neutron stars, the
component mass values could be assigned as part
of the assumption. Most neutron star masses clus-
ter around M = 1.4 M⊙, so a good base assump-
tion is that each component of the binary has this
mass. As noted in Section III A this assumption
can be a dangerous one, since similar chirp masses
M can result from signiﬁcantly diﬀerent systems.
Other information, not present in the gravitational
waveform, may help an astronomer feel more con-
ﬁdent about such an assumption. For example, an
associated simultaneous electromagnetic signal or
the location of the source on the sky may favor one
model of the binary over another.

• If the masses are assumed, the orbital separation
of the binary components, R, can be computed
from the measured orbital period by using Kepler’s
Third Law:

G(m1 + m2) =

(7)

2

2π
Porb (cid:19)

(cid:18)

R3 .

For this example, the orbital separation is R =
1.4 × 10−3 AU = 2.1 × 108 m, or a little less than
the separation of the Earth and the Moon.

• If the masses are assumed, the distance to the bi-
nary can be computed from Eq. (2) and the mea-
If careful measurements have
sured amplitude.
been made, the answer should be close to the value
r = 8 kpc = 2.5 × 1020 m.

• Lastly, if the masses are assumed, it can be quanti-
tatively shown that the monochromatic descriptor
is a good one for this wave by computing the value
of the second term in Eq. (4) and showing that it
is negligible compared to the measured period P0.

-0.6

 0

 0.01

 0.02

 0.03

 0.04

 0.05

t (seconds)

FIG. 3: The chirping waveform one second before coalescence.

-0.6

 0.9

 0.905

 0.915

 0.92

 0.91
t (seconds)

FIG. 4: The chirping waveform one-tenth of a second before
coalescence.

B. Chirping Waveforms

In the case of a chirping waveform, additional as-
trophysical information associated with the system can
be extracted directly from measurements of the wave-
form without making underlying assumptions like those
needed when the system was far from coalescence. To ex-
tract information from the chirping waveform shown in
Fig. 2, the two zoom-ins of the waveform shown in Figs. 3
and 4 will be used. A typical extraction procedure might
look like this:

• For each of the Figs. 3 and 4, measure the period
of one cycle of the wave, and note the time t at
which the periods were measured. The amplitudes
A(t) should be measured for the same cycle as the
periods.

• If the period measured at time t1 in Fig. 3 is P0,
and the period measured at time t2 in Fig. 4 is
Pgw(t) at time t = t2 − t1, then Eq. (4) can be used
to deduce the chirp mass M of the system.

• Once the chirp mass M has been determined, the
distance to the binary can be computed by using
Eq. (2) with the measured amplitude A(t) and pe-
riod Pgw(t) of each waveform. The results from the
two ﬁgures can be averaged together to obtain a
ﬁnal result.

V. DISCUSSION

core

calculations

This paper

introduced the

in
gravitational wave astrophysics an introductory as-
tronomy student can perform in a laboratory set-
ting to glean information about an astrophysical
system. To compliment this article we have also de-
veloped a student activity sheet and corresponding
teacher’s guide related to the exercises described in
sections IV A and IV B.
The complimentary ma-
terial is available, along with a template activity,4 at
http://cgwp.gravity.psu.edu/outreach/activities/.
The activity described here is a simple introduction to
how gravitational wave astronomers extract astrophysi-
cal information from observed binary waveforms. Real
signal analysis is a more complex endeavor than what
has been presented here. The most signiﬁcant challenge

5

in the case of true data is identifying the signal buried in
a noisy data stream. A common approach to this prob-
lem in gravitational wave astronomy is to use template
matching, which has been explored in a separate activ-
ity.4 If a signal is present in a noisy data stream, the
template provides a way to subtract the noise away and
leave a clean waveform behind. This is the assumed start-
ing point in the activity developed here. Its from clean
waveforms that astronomers will estimate the values of
astrophysical parameters describing a source of gravita-
tional waves. By sequencing the two activities a student
is exposed, at least in an idealized way, to the methods
used by gravitational wave astronomers to extract astro-
physical information about the emitting systems.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Center for Gravita-
tional Wave Physics. The Center for Gravitational Wave
Physics is funded by the National Science Foundation un-
der cooperative agreement PHY-01-14375. The authors
would also like to thank the LIGO Laboratory. LIGO is
funded by the National Science Foundation under Coop-
erative Agreement PHY-0107417.

∗

Formerly at the Center for Gravitational Wave Physics,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802
1 L. J. Rubbo, S. L. Larson, M. B. Larson, and K. D. Kaleski,
“Gravitational Waves: New Observatories for New Astron-
omy,” Phys. Teach. 44, 420-423 (2006).

2 A. Abramovici et al., “LIGO: The Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory,” Science 256, 325-333
(1992).

3 T. J. Sumner and D. N. A. Shaul, “The Observations of
Gravitational Waves from Space using LISA,” Mod. Phys.

Lett. A 19, 785-800 (2004).

4 M. B. Larson, L. J. Rubbo, K. D. Zaleski, and S. L. Larson,
“Science Icebreaker Activities: An Example from Gravita-
tional Wave Astronomy,” Phys. Teach. 44, 416-419 (2006).

5 http://cgwp.gravity.psu.edu/outreach/activities/.
6 B. F. Schutz, “Gravitational Waves on the Back of an En-

velope,” Am. J. Phys. 5, 412-419 (1984).

7 J. B. Hartle, Gravity: An Introduction to Einstein’s General
Relativity (Addison Wesley, San Francisco, 2003), pp. 508

