6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Proceedings of the Conference on
Promoting Undergraduate Research in Mathematics

Life on Both Sides of the Fence: Mentoring Versus Being
Mentored

Mason A. Porter

1. Introduction

The responsibility of scientists includes not only the development of new knowl-
edge but also the education of future generations of scientists. One of my own great
pleasures has been the opportunity to mentor over twenty undergraduate students in
various interdisciplinary projects in theoretical and computational science. While
my own research borders most closely with applied mathematics and theoretical
physics, my goal is not to train mathematicians per se but to train scientists.

My mentoring style is a direct product of my research, teaching, and social
experiences during my undergraduacy at Caltech, from which I obtained a B.S.
degree in applied mathematics in 1998. Caltech undergraduates are expected to
drink from the ﬁrehose of knowledge, and I try to give the same opportunities to
my students. Of course, how much science I expect a research advisee to swallow
depends greatly on the student. Nevertheless, in order to help a student really
appreciate science, it is extremely important to impart not only knowledge that is
directly germane to their project and how to attack it (and other research problems),
but also to convey just how much wonderful stuﬀ there is for us to study (in any
ﬁeld!) and some of the places where the student’s particular research problem ﬁts
into the big picture.

In the rest of this article, I expand on these ideas a bit. I start by giving speciﬁc
details on how undergraduate research is organized at Caltech. I then brieﬂy discuss
my own undergraduate research experiences, commenting a bit on what I did and
did not like. I subsequently discuss my experiences as a mentor at Cornell (in the
Mathematical and Theoretical Biological Institute), Georgia Tech, and Caltech and
summarize with a few pithy pieces of advice.

2. Undergraduate Research at Caltech

Caltech’s primary research program for undergraduate students is the Summer
Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF) program, which has been around since
1979 and presently oﬀers research opportunities—both on campus and at the Jet

Received by the editor December 21, 2013.

c(cid:13)2006 American Mathematical Society

1

2

MASON A. PORTER

Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), which is run by Caltech—for about 250 Caltech
students and 150 students from other institutions each year.

The SURF program, a campus-wide research initiative, permeates Caltech’s
culture. It encompasses all academic ﬁelds and is a fundamental part of Caltech’s
undergraduate education, as roughly three quarters of all Caltech undergraduates
students participate in SURF at least once before they leave. Moreover, one of
Caltech’s primary selling points to prospective undergraduates is the prominence
of Nobel Laureates, National Academy members, and—more generally—the top
scientists in just about every ﬁeld in their classroom and research education from
the very beginning of their undergraduate careers.

As described at http://www.surf.caltech.edu/, the SURF program is modeled

on the grant-seeking process:

• Students collaborate with potential mentors to deﬁne and develop a project.
• Applicants write research proposals for their projects.
(A prospective
SURF student typically writes the entire proposal; his/her mentor may
provide suggestions during the revision process.)

• A faculty committee reviews the proposals and recommends awards.
• Students carry out the work over a 10-week period in the summer (from
the middle of June to late August), earning a salary of $500 per week.
• In order to ensure that students keep the big picture in mind, they are
required during the summer to submit two progress reports that detail
unexpected challenges, how their goals have changed from the description
in their project proposal, and other similar items.

• At the conclusion of the program, students submit a technical paper and
give an oral presentation at SURF Seminar Day, a symposium modeled on
a professional technical meeting. There is a seminar day predominantly
for non-Caltech students in the middle of August and one for Caltech
students in the middle of October. A draft of the ﬁnal report is due right
before Caltech’s fall quarter starts at the end of September, but the ﬁnal
version approved by the mentor is not due until about November 1st.
Every year starting in December, the entire Caltech faculty is solicited to ad-
vertise SURF projects that they are oﬀering for the following summer. As responses
are received, research opportunities are compiled on a website, which is organized
according to student majors (or, more precisely, according to Caltech “Divisions”
such as “Physics, Math, and Astronomy”).1 Each opportunity includes a terse de-
scription of the problem(s) available and other germane information such as allowed
majors; coursework requirements; whether the work is theoretical, computational,
or experimental in nature; whether non-Caltech students will be considered, etc.
Students then contact the appropriate professor (or perhaps even ones who have
not advertised projects, which is a lesser-known but often successful strategy) and
arrange to meet with them. Typically, potential mentors have informal interviews
with several students for a given project before they decide which one(s) they want
to advise. Mentors who are postdoctoral scholars or graduate students must also
have a faculty sponsor listed on the SURF opportunity.

To enrich the students’ research experience, Caltech’s SURF program includes
a variety of activities aside from individual research projects—including weekly
(accessible!) seminars by Caltech faculty and JPL technical staﬀ; a participatory

1
See http://www.surf.caltech.edu/applicants/opportunity/index.html.

LIFE ON BOTH SIDES OF THE FENCE: MENTORING VERSUS BEING MENTORED

3

discussion series on developing a research career, graduate school admissions, and
other topics of interest to future researchers; and social and cultural activities
sponsored by the SURF Student Advisory Council. These activities facilitate in-
teractions between students coming from other universities and those who attend
Caltech, which tends to have a fairly insular student body.

3. My Undergraduate Research Experiences

As a Caltech undergraduate, I undertook three research projects. Here I’ll
brieﬂy discuss the two that were through the SURF program. Although many
projects are advertised, both of mine arose from unsolicited e-mails I sent to pro-
fessors.2

During my freshman year, I attempted unsuccessfully to obtain a SURF project
on cellular automata with a mathematics postdoc. However, he was willing to
supervise an independent reading course in tensor analysis and geometry using a
book by Jerry Marsden, who he told me would be joining Caltech as a faculty
member in the fall. Armed with two of Marsden’s books—I used his analysis book
in a course I took at UCLA that summer—and slightly star-struck, I arranged to
meet with him once the school year started in order to get my books autographed.
Later, when it came time to apply for summer 1996 SURF projects, I looked at
the advertised projects and wasn’t interested in any of them. I already knew that
I wanted to have a research career in dynamical systems, so I contacted Marsden
and ended up working with him on a project entailing the writing of an expository
article on the Hopf ﬁbration and its application to problems in mechanics. That
summer, I learned not only a lot of geometric mechanics but also a great deal
concerning how to write mathematical articles and how to use LATEX.

I also learned a few other lessons from this ﬁrst research experience. For exam-
ple, I tried to get the expository article that resulted from my project published in
various venues, although I was never successful. It is worth noting that I did this
entirely on my own when what I should have done was convert my manuscript to a
coauthored article and ask Marsden to help me ﬁnd an appropriate place to submit
the paper. (I did ask his opinion about where to send the paper, but I pursued
the submission process on my own.) While it is probably very rare for undergrad-
uates to take such initiative, I have made it a point to discuss the publication and
dissemination of work (in some context) with all my research students, if only to
make sure they don’t make the same mistake I did. I have published papers with
several of them, but I wanted them to know that that was something we would do
together.

My summer 1997 SURF project, which I also obtained by contacting a professor
who had not advertised a project, taught me a lot about my own interests and what
not to do as a mentor. During our ﬁrst meeting, my advisor-to-be oﬀered me my
choice of a computational or theorem-proof project. I felt it would be useful to
try my hand at research in pure mathematics and when the professor told me that
numerous prior students had tried the same project without success, I knew I had
to try it. Unfortunately, that project was a complete disaster for me as well. I did
learn a lot and had the chance to read some seminal physics papers, but my advisor
was absent from campus virtually the entire summer and I was basically stuck the

2
I have since learned that many faculty never advertise projects and only advise students

who take the initiative to contact them.

4

MASON A. PORTER

entire time with nobody to ask for help.3 I didn’t yet know how to ﬁnd journal
articles on my own or even which journal articles I should get, what techniques
I should try to learn, or (honestly) much of anything.
I was interested in the
physical phenomenon (diﬀusion limited aggregation) about which I was supposed
to be proving a theorem, so one major thing I learned was that pure mathematics
was not for me. Naturally, I need to know a lot of pure mathematics to do research
in applied mathematics, but in my own research I have come to insist on close ties
to physics or other application areas. Hence, my summer 1997 project played an
important role in my career by making me appreciate a few of the things I did not
want. It also complemented the previous summer by teaching me a few things that
a mentor should not do: While sometimes one’s students who show more results and
ask more questions may deserve more attention (which is perhaps counterintuitive),
that does not mean you should let the others sink or swim. Instead, teach them to
ask questions and think creatively even if they have trouble learning the science.
I also decided that undergraduates should be taught how to search the research
literature as part of their research experience.

Although I did not publish any papers from my undergraduate research, my
various experiences played strong roles in shaping my mentoring style. I also learned
a lot of technical material, how to use LATEX, how to write scientiﬁc reports, and
what to do and not to do as an advisor.

4. The Transition from Mentee to Mentor

4.1. The Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Institute (MTBI).
My ﬁrst signiﬁcant mentoring experience came during the summers of 2000 to 2002
as part of Carlos Castillo-Chavez’s Mathematical and Theoretical Biological Insti-
tute (MTBI).4 My role included both assisting students with homework problems
and helping out as an advisor and critic for research projects.

Because of the beneﬁts I had already gained by attending conferences, I strongly
encouraged the MTBI students to attend research conferences. In 2002, the Soci-
ety for Industrial and Applied Mathematics’s annual summer meeting was held in
Philadelphia. This allowed us to arrange a road trip so that the current MTBI
students could attend the meeting, where Stephen Wirkus and I co-organized two
sessions on mathematical biology whose speakers were all MTBI alums [2]. This
“minisymposium” allowed the students to see what people who used to be in their
shoes had accomplished, talk to them about both academic and social issues, and
experience the usual beneﬁts of attending conferences.

At MTBI, I was known for my tendency to ask tough questions during ﬁnal
presentations and return manuscript drafts containing numerous suggestions writ-
ten lovingly in red. My experience at Caltech taught me that academic rigor should
be stressed from the start. Moreover, there are times when one should be blunt
with students in order to improve certain aspects of their work. For example, I
think it’s extremely important to ask tough questions in a relatively friendly envi-
ronment to prepare students for future situations, such as doctoral thesis defenses

3
By contrast, Marsden was often reachable when he was out of town and was also very
explicit about when he would be gone, so while he might be away from e-mail for a few days,
during my second SURF project, I wouldn’t get a response for several weeks at a time (for a ten
week project).

4
See http://mtbi.asu.edu/.

LIFE ON BOTH SIDES OF THE FENCE: MENTORING VERSUS BEING MENTORED

5

and conference talks, where the audience might not be a priori favorably disposed
towards their research. On occasion, students would try to ﬁnagle an answer to my
questions, which would invariably lead to even tougher follow-up questions in order
to teach them that that is simply not permissible. I ﬁnd that many students don’t
appreciate that it is acceptable, and in fact preferable, for them to give an honest
answer of ’I don’t know.’ and (ideally) to ask the questioner to discuss the matter
further oﬄine.

My ﬁrst chance to be the main advisor on an MTBI research project was an
important learning experience for me. I felt my regular meetings with the students
were reasonably productive, but mentors and students need to have personalities
that are at least somewhat compatible. In this particular case, I had a personality
conﬂict with a student who I found to be particularly abrasive and whose academic
background was extremely poor. My initial expectations for her were too high, and
she did not appreciate my attempts to push her. Thus, while my belief that one
should have high expectations for every student was untempered, I realized that
what actually constitutes this varies greatly from student to student. Essentially,
my goal became to make sure that students left my charge in a more advanced state
than when they entered it. For some students, this means a peer-reviewed publica-
tion, but for others it may be as simple as understanding (and having duplicated
on their own) some calculations, proofs, or numerical computations from a book or
article. Usually, things fall somewhere in between these extremes. I also learned
from that project that it is essential that I show my frustration only when I think
a kick in the butt will help the student. I still experience considerable frustration
when advising many of my students, but I am purposely better at showing it only
when I have judged it’s what the student needs to see. (Whether that judgement is
correct in a given instance is obviously something that can be debated.) The third
thing I learned from this experience concerned what projects I wanted to advise:
For me to be a good mentor, it is imperative not only that the students be inter-
ested in the project but also that I am as well. I didn’t particularly appreciate this
limitation before that experience.

4.2. Georgia Tech’s VIGRE Program. I began advising projects at Geor-
gia Tech in summer 2003 through the math department’s REU, which was funded
through the department’s National Science Foundation VIGRE grant.5

When a student ﬁrst contacts me about research, we meet in person so that I
can ﬁnd out his/her background and interests. In my experience, many students
are ready to undertake research even without an extensive coursework background,
and I like to be able to accommodate that. (In fact, some of my best students
initially approached me during their freshman years.) Alternatively, one can adjust
the scope of projects to accommodate students who haven’t had as many courses.
Things might progress slower, but the ﬁrst term of advising a project typically
entails (with all but the best students) more time learning background material than
producing original results anyway. During our ﬁrst conversation, I also encourage
my prospective advisees to contact students who have worked with me in the past.
Most students seem to be ready to sign up on the spot, but I want them to get

5
A slightly outdated version of

is available at
http://www.math.gatech.edu/∼lacey/ump/reu/reu.htm#vigre. The projects that have been un-
dertaken are listed at http://www.math.gatech.edu/∼lacey/ump/reu/gtreulist.htm.

these projects

format

the

for

6

MASON A. PORTER

into the habit of seeking advice from those who have gone before them.6 Student
projects that lead to publications invariably last longer than one term/summer.
Indeed, the publications I have obtained from student mentoring have all been co-
authored with students who worked with me for two–four semesters rather than
just one.

My ideas for projects come from several sources. One of them, on modeling
bipolar disorder, was a continuation of an MTBI project I had advised in summer
2002. Another, involving the construction of a graphical user interface to simulate
billiard systems, was motivated by a question that arose during a seminar at the
Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in which an audience member wondered
how everybody was making the graphics for the talks in a quantum chaos workshop.
I have also obtained many others through traditional means such as the research
literature. Many of these have been in network theory, a subject that is particularly
suited for undergraduate research.7

On several occasions, I co-advised student research projects (with, for example,
two students working on similar projects) with Georgia Tech faculty to facilitate
group meetings, establish collaborations, and delve into new research areas. Start-
ing in summer 2003, for example, I co-advised a pair of students (with assistant
professor Peter Mucha) who were studying two diﬀerent networks (Congressional
committee assignments and the NCAA Division-IA football schedule) but often
needed to learn similar concepts and compute similar quantities. I found that stu-
dents typically advance much faster when they are working on similar projects and
can bounce ideas oﬀ each other. Assigning two students to the same project can
be beneﬁcial as well, but I think it’s much better if their projects overlap rather
than duplicate each other. Additionally, the presence of two advisors with comple-
mentary skills—Peter specializes in scientiﬁc computation and has done most of his
research on problems in ﬂuid mechanics—is wonderful for both the students and
the mentors (and is ideal for collaborations in general). It is also worth noting that
while I had learned about network theory through coursework and reading research
papers, I had never actually done any research in that area and was very keen to do
so. These research projects were thus my ﬁrst forays into network theory (in which
I have remained active).8 My subsequent research groups have included students
from multiple majors and faculty from other departments, allowing my students to
be introduced not only to research but also to interdisciplinary collaboration. (For
applied mathematics projects, it is ideal to involve faculty from multiple depart-
ments.) For example, one group I initiated included a biology professor, a math
professor, an electrical engineering major, a math major, and me.

Motivated by Caltech’s framework, I insisted that my students write ﬁnal re-
ports that we would then polish together by working through several drafts. (I

6This is the same advice that is invariably passed on to new doctoral students when it comes
time for them to ﬁnd Ph.D. advisors. Students are extremely honest when it comes to talking
about current and former advisors.

7There are very few theorems that apply to real-world networks, the importance of many of
the problems is easy to explain, and it does not take very much coursework to be ready to conduct
research in this subject.

8More recently, my network-theory collaborators and I have instituted a research-group wiki
(http://www.unc.edu/∼mucha/netwiki/), where we hope to post papers we would like our students
to read, concepts we think they should understand, links to introductory material on software
like Matlab and LATEX, and other useful material.
It would be wonderful if wikis devoted to
undergraduate research—with separate subpages for each REU—are developed.

LIFE ON BOTH SIDES OF THE FENCE: MENTORING VERSUS BEING MENTORED

7

also insisted that they use LATEXto write these reports and provided them with a
tutorial for ﬁrst-time users that I had written while at MTBI. [1]) This not only
improved my students’ communication skills but also allowed us to better appreci-
ate the gaps that still needed to be ﬁlled in when it came to possible publication.
I also arranged for my students to give short talks in group meetings of Georgia
Tech’s Center for Nonlinear Science, with which I was aﬃliated. Moreoover, I en-
courage my students to present posters and talks at conferences and occasionally
took them with me to meetings, ranging from Ohio State’s Young Mathematicians
Conference9 to research conferences such as Dynamics Days.10

Perhaps a bit more unusual, I organized a public lecture (as well as a more tech-
nical seminar) at Georgia Tech by Cornell applied mathematician Steve Strogatz,
which gave my students (some of whom had used his books and/or articles to help
them with their research) a chance to meet him. While not many mathematicians
give public lectures, one can still ask colloquium speakers to also give more gen-
eral talks for undergraduates (or design the colloquium series itself to include such
talks) and arrange for them to have lunch or otherwise meet informally with un-
dergraduates. I remember attending several lunches with colloquium speakers as a
graduate student, and the ensuing informal discussions give students opportunities
to be heard that are not otherwise available.

4.3. On the Other Side at Caltech. I have continued my student mentoring
as a Caltech postdoc. The 2006 version of my research-opportunity announcement
read as follows:
Projects in Nonlinear Dynamics and Complex Systems

Michael Cross, Professor
Department of Physics

mason@caltech.edu
130 Sloan Annex

Mason Porter
Postdoctoral Scholar
Department of Physics and Center for the Physics of Information

Majors: Any major is good, but students in applied math, physics,
math are likely to be especially interested in these projects.

Prerequisites: It depends on the specific project. Some require more
than others. I will work with the student’s background to design something
appropriate. This should not be considered any sort of obstacle.

Type: Theoretical and/or Computational

Note: This is an on-campus SURF. Caltech students only.

9
See http://www.math.ohio-state.edu/conferences/ymc/.
10
See http://www.bu.edu/provost/ddays 07/ for the homepage for Dynamics Days 2007.

8

MASON A. PORTER

Nonlinearity and complexity abound throughout science, nature, and
technology, as their understanding helps to provide explanations of
myriad phenomena---including synchronization of flashing fireflies and
lasers, chaotic motion in double pendula, the formation of patterns in
chemical reactions, species co-existence in plankton populations, correlations
between political ideology and congressional committee structure, and
chaotic dynamics in both classical and quantum systems. In this project,
the student(s) who work with me will work on some mathematical modeling
of some phenomenon (to be discussed in private communication) using
computational and/or analytical techniques. To get an idea of the types of
things I like to study, please see www.its.caltech.edu/~mason/research or
drop me a line. Possible projects include ones involving Bose-Einstein
condensates, complex networks (such as congressional networks), quantum
chaos, billiard systems, pattern formation, synchronization, and others.
Several of these items require some explanation. First, a member of the Caltech
faculty (in this case, my postdoctoral advisor Michael Cross) must be listed as the
oﬃcial mentor. Caltech asks mentors to list “allowed” majors, although I instead
indicated who was more likely to enjoy my projects. I purposely included several
project ideas with the intention that the particular projects students would choose
would be a function of not only my interests but also theirs.11

I require my students to write four or ﬁve drafts of their SURF proposal before
I am willing to sign oﬀ on it, and I make this requirement clear when we ﬁrst
meet to discuss possible projects. I show them sample proposals written by former
students to use as models. In some cases, I have also shown my old proposals to
some of my students to accentuate the fact that I was in their position not so long
ago. Because they have seen my recent professional writing rather than my rougher
undergraduate work, it is very useful as positive feedback after all the time they
spend on their proposals to show them that their proposals are better than mine
were.

One change I have made in my advising since returning to Caltech has been the
establishment of group meetings along the lines of what is perhaps more familiar
in physics departments than in math departments. Hence, in addition to meeting
individually with each student twice a week (for roughly 30 minutes each time) and
communicating over e-mail and instant messaging, my students and I all meet for
about an hour every week.12 In a typical meeting, two of my students will present
material in front of the whole group, the others are expected to ask questions
about concepts they don’t understand, and I will occasionally speak up when I
want to highlight a particular point (which may be related to science, exposition,
or both). In some meetings, students practice more formal oral presentations or
read and discuss each others’ written reports. I speciﬁcally instruct my students
to ask tough questions and make critical comments, and I expect my them to be
similarly critical when reading their peers’ papers, as it is imperative that they

11

12

In one case in 2005, one prospective advisee was suﬃciently advanced that I asked him to

come up with his own project, which proved to be very successful.

This is similar to what our network theory group did at Georgia Tech, except the scope of
the projects under investigation is larger. All my students are involved rather than just ones in the
topics that are most intimately related. This allows them to learn more about nonlinear dynamics
and complex systems beyond what is directly involved in their project and to ﬁeld questions from
a broader audience and give/receive more feedback from their peers.

LIFE ON BOTH SIDES OF THE FENCE: MENTORING VERSUS BEING MENTORED

9

understand that they are not doing their friends a favor—in fact, they are doing
them a disservice—if they go easy on them. While my purpose with these exercises
is to improve their oral and written presentation skills, I think the students also
might learn a bit about peer review as a byproduct. Once my students have given
comments, I add a few of my own, and I accentuate the previously-raised points
with which I particularly agree. (My students invariably bring up nearly all of the
most essential points I intend to raise, and the fact that multiple people are noticing
the same things reinforces the ensuing suggestions.)

The ﬁnal SURF reports are supposed to be written in the format of an appro-
priate scientiﬁc journal. Caltech’s SURF oﬃce recommends Nature as a default but
leaves the ﬁnal decision to the research mentors. I discuss publishing issues with all
my students (even the weaker ones) and select a journal style that is appropriate for
their particular project and situation. My past journal models have included not
only broadly-oriented venues such as Nature and the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences but also archival journals like Physical Review E and Chaos.
As with the initial proposal, I go through several drafts of the ﬁnal report with
each student.

5. Conclusions

As I have discussed at length, my undergraduate research experiences at Cal-
tech and my interdisciplinary training have fundamentally shaped my mentoring
style. In my opinion, students obtain an optimal research experience when expec-
tations are high—they should drink from the proverbial ﬁrehose of knowledge—but
not too high.13
It is extremely valuable for students and faculty from multiple
backgrounds to interact regularly, and weekly group meetings provide an excellent
supplement to one-on-one meetings by reinforcing this and other boons. From a
selﬁsh perspective, I have found advising student projects to be an ideal means to
enter new research areas. Although it can be very frustrating at times, my close
involvement with talented students is perhaps my favorite academic pursuit.

I gratefully acknowledge Stephen Wirkus and Ed Mosteig for reading an early

version of this manuscript and giving me numerous helpful suggestions.

Acknowledgements

References

[1] M. A. Porter, A Hitchhiker’s Guide to LaTeX: Or how I learned to stop worrying and love
writing my dissertation. http://www.math.gatech.edu/∼mason/papers/draft/lala.pdf, 2002.
[2] S. Wirkus and M. A. Porter, SIAM hears from next-generation mathematical biologists at

Philadelphia meeting, SIAM News, 35 (2002).

Department of Physics and Center for the Physics of Information, California In-

stitute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

E-mail address: mason@caltech.edu

13

but not simpler.”

This is a variant of a quote by Albert Einstein: “Make everything as simple as possible,

