6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
2
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

November 21, 2006

Comment on “Development and assessment
of research-based tutorials on heat engines
and the second law of thermodynamics,” by
Matthew J. Cochran and Paula R. L. Heron
[Am. J. Phys. 74, 734—741 (2006)]

Manfred Bucher
Physics Department, California State
University Fresno
Fresno CA 93740-8031

PACS number: 05.70.-a

Cochran and Heron1 test student understanding of heat engines and re-
frigerators in terms of the pipeline diagram of heat ﬂows and work, familiar
from textbooks. This diagram, drawing on analogies with ﬂuid ﬂow between
reservoirs, nicely illustrates conservation of energy but is silent on the other
constraint involved: the constancy of entropy, ∆S = 0. Not too surprisingly,
about two thirds of the students failed to give correct responses and expla-
nations. I suggest that this outcome results in large part from the pipeline
diagram’s exclusive emphasis on energy conservation which tends to be mis-
leading.

A generation ago a wedge diagram was proposed in these pages2 that
simultaneously represents conservation of energy and constancy of entropy
in a Carnot cycle. The wedge diagram also inspired extensions to other cycles,
irreversibility, and the second law of thermodynamics,3 but it has not yet been
adopted in a physics text. As implied by Cochran and Heron’s study, another

1

Figure 1: Wedge diagram of a proposed heat engine

whole generation of physics students have since been instructed with strong
visual cues on energy conservation in thermodynamic cycles but without
suﬃcient caveats about the entropy constraint.

Figure 1 rephrases the same problem of a proposed heat engine that
Cochran and Heron had posed to their students, but here in terms of the
wedge diagram. The amount of heat ﬂows, QH and QL, and work W are
proportionally represented by the lengths of horizontal lines. The direction
of the vertical arrows relates those quantities to the system (“in” or “out” for
±Q and ∓W ), in agreement with standard sign convention. Conservation of
energy, QH = −QL + W , is shown by the same top and bottom width of the
“system box” in the diagram. Entropy changes are illustrated by angles: The
larger angle between the temperature axis and the solid slanted line, tan σH
∝ ∆SH = QH /TH, shows that the system’s entropy increases more from the
heat inﬂow QH than its entropy decrease from the heat outﬂow, shown by
the smaller angle between the dotted slanted line and the temperature axis,
tan σL ∝ ∆SL = QL/TL. This result is in contradiction with the requirement
∆S = 0 for a complete cycle and thus renders the proposed engine impossible.
The maximum work that can be obtained by a reversible Carnot engine is
represented in Fig. 1 by the horizontal segment to the right of the solid
slanted line, ˆW .

Cochran and Heron’s second examination question reverses the heat ﬂows
and work for a proposed refrigerator. Such a refrigerator proves possible
although of low performance, κ = QL/W = 10J/40J = 25%. The wedge

2

Figure 2: Wedge diagram of a proposed refrigerator

diagram in Fig. 2 shows that a certain part of the work W —denoted as
˜W and represented by the horizontal segment between the dotted and solid
slanted lines—is internally converted to heat, ˜W −→ ˜Q, due to irreversible
processes. This gives rise to a combined entropy increase by ∆SL + ∆ ˜S
= QL/TL + ˜Q/TL, that is oﬀset by the entropy decrease ∆SH = QH/TH .

If instead the refrigerator were to operate reversibly, then that amount of
heat, ˜Q, would be additionally extracted from the low-temperature reservoir
by the work ˆW = W − ˜W , represented by the horizontal segment ranging
from the solid slanted line to the far right. The performance of a reversible
refrigerator under these conditions would be ˆκ = (QL + ˜Q)/ ˆW = TL/(TH −
TL) = 100%.

The persistent, almost universal use of the pipeline diagram—a half-truth,
at best—is astounding. To remedy the consequences of its pitfall Cochran
and Heron have developed tutorials1 that augment this graphical device by
calculations (cycle eﬃciency or performance) and statements of the second
law of thermodynamics in its various formulations. However, such a graphic-
cum-calculational/verbal procedure appears rather asymmetric. The wedge
diagram, on the other hand, implements both conditions of thermodynamic
cycles, ∆E = 0 and ∆S = 0, graphically on a equal footing.

How can students beneﬁt from the virtues of the wedge diagram while
being exposed in their texts to the pipeline diagram? Several, mutually
enhancing possibilities come to mind: (1) An “improved,” wedge-diagram
treatment of the Carnot cycle in lecture. (2) A hand-out sheet with diagram

3

rules and simple examples. (3) Incorporation of the wedge diagram in tu-
torials in the spirit of Cochran and Heron. (4) Use in online teaching and
online homework. (5) Student encouragement (extra credit?) for drawing
the diagram—like a free-body diagram in mechanics—in selected homework
problems from the textbook. (6) Use of the wedge diagram in exams.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

I thank Preston Jones for help with computer graphics.

4

References

1M. J. Cochran and P. R. L. Heron, “Development and assessment of
research-based tutorials on heat engines and the second law of thermo-
dynamics,” Am. J. Phys. 74, 734—741 (2006).

2M. Bucher, ”New diagram for heat ﬂows and work in a Carnot cycle,”
Am. J. Phys. 54, 850-851 (1986). Essentially the same diagram had
been conceived independently in the engineering community by A. Bejan,
“Graphic techniques for teaching engineering thermodynamics,” Mech.
Eng. News, 26-28 (May 1977).

3J. Wallingford, ”Ineﬃciency and irreversibility in the Bucher diagram,” Am.
J. Phys. 57, 379-381 (1989); Z. Yan and J. Chen, ”Modiﬁed Bucher dia-
grams for heat ﬂows and works in two classes of cycles,” ibid. 58, 404—405
(1990); Z. Yan and J. Chen, ”New Bucher diagrams for a class of irre-
versible Carnot cycles,” ibid. 60, 475-476 (1992); M. Bucher, ”Diagram
of the second law of thermodynamics,” ibid. 61, 462—466 (1993).

5

