7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
3
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A PHYSICS SHOW PERFORMED

BY STUDENTS FOR KIDS:

From Mechanics to Elementary Particle Physics

Herbi K. Dreiner

Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Bonn

Nußallee 12, 53115 Bonn, Germany
January 30th, 2007

ABSTRACT: In this article, we describe an initiative at the University of Bonn,
where the students develop and perform a 2 hour physics show for school classes and the

general public. The show is entertaining and educational and is aimed at children aged 10

and older. For the physics students this is a unique experience to apply their knowledge

at an early stage and gives them the chance to develop skills in the public presentation

of science, in front of 520 people per show. We have extended the activity to put on

an elementary particle physics show for teenagers. Furthermore, local high schools have

picked up the idea; their students put on similar shows for fellow students and parents.

We would be interested in hearing about related activities elsewhere.

Physics students spend the early part of their training attending physics and
mathematics lectures, solving problem sets and experimenting in laboratory courses.
The program is typically intensive and fairly rigid. They have little opportunity
to follow their own curiosity or apply their knowledge. There have been several
attempts to address this deﬁciency. For example, Prof. Clint Sprott at the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin, where the author was a graduate student, hosts a physics
show entitled “The Wonders of Physics.” (The show has continued since 1984,
http://sprott.physics.wisc.edu/wop.htm). Dressed up as a mixture of circus director
and magician and assisted by students, Prof. Sprott presents entertaining and edu-
cating experiments to a regularly packed audience of all age groups [1]. This was in
turn inspired by the “Chemistry is Fun” presentations of Prof. Basam Shakhashiri,
also from the University of Wisconsin (http://scifun.chem.wisc.edu/).

In 2001, we launched a similar activity in Bonn. Our idea was to give a group
of undergraduates (about 25-30) from every incoming class (about 150-170) the op-
portunity to put on a physics show for kids aged 10 and older. Thus the essential
point of this initiative is that the students develop and perform the show them-
selves; it is entirely in their control. The students have full access to our collection
of demonstration experiments, assisted and advised by Michael Kortmann, who is
in charge of the collection. They also receive assistance from our workshops in the

1

development and construction of new experiments. They can thus follow their own
curiosity, choosing the experiments they ﬁnd interesting. They spend many hours
understanding the experiments and considering how to best explain them to chil-
dren, without oversimplifying. The show is a unique opportunity for the students to
apply their knowledge at an early stage by teaching kids in a dramatic environment
and to develop valuable skills in the public presentation of science. The show has
been a resounding success with the public, with a regularly packed 520-people audi-
torium. For us however, the Bonn physics show is ﬁrst and foremost an educational
tool addressed at our physics students [2]. The enthusiasm with which they have
picked up the idea has more than rewarded our eﬀorts, and their talent at public
presentation is a delight to observe. Furthermore, we now have a very large pool of
experienced and enthusiastic students with whom we have developed further out-
reach activities. For example, we participate in the so-called Bonn Science Night.
This is a science fair organized every other year in the main university builing, an
18th century palace. This eﬀort was initiated and organized entirely by the students
themselves.

Every year in January, we recruit a new group of students in the second year class.
The students participate voluntarily and for no credit. Together with students from
previous years, Michael Kortmann and I attend the initial meetings. We pass on
our experience and give the main idea of how the show is set up. Starting in March,
the students largely organize the meetings themselves. The last 8-10 days before the
ﬁrst show, the students rehearse daily. Michael Kortmann gives technical assistance
and students from previous years and I give advice on the text and presentation.
There are three performances in September and a repeat with three more at the end
of February. One performance is always for school classes (coming from as far as
100 km) and two on the weekend are for the general public.

The show lasts two hours, including a 20 minute intermission, when the children
can try out and have a close look at experiments at the front of the lecture hall, as
well as in the extensive lobby. There are two MC’s (one woman and one man) to
guide the audience through the show. Two important ingredients were introduced
(i) Short (< 90 sec) home-made entertaining
by the students in the ﬁrst year.
movies to introduce the various physics topics (e.g. mechanics, magnetism, low-
temperatures) into which the show is divided. Over the years these have become
quite elaborate. They can be viewed at http://www.physikshow.uni-bonn.de/ (ii)
Between explanations, the experiments are accompanied by up-beat music, which
creates a unique energetic atmosphere, very much appreciated by the young audience
and the local radio station, which has twice broadcast live from the show.

Two weeks ago we started putting the introductory ﬁlms, as well as ﬁlms of

2

experiments on YouTube. The most successful ﬁlm shows a light boat built out
of aluminum foil ﬂoating in an aquarium ﬁlled with sulphur hexaﬂuoride, Fig. 1.
Within the ﬁrst 3 weeks it had over 290,000 viewings, making it the fourth most
viewed German science and technology ﬁlm “all time”. The ﬁlm can be viewed
at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1PJTq2xQiQ0. Some trailers can also be
viewed on YouTube under the search words “Physikshow” and “Bonn”. One ﬁlm,
for example, shows momentum conservation with a multiple pendulum followed by
four test car crashes all to Beethoven’s 9th symphony, Beethoven of course originating
from Bonn. Another ﬁlm shows ball bearings bouncing in a simulation of kinetic
gas theory, followed by a sequence of photos relating to atomic and particle physics,
accompanied by upbeat music.

Over the years the students have built quite a few experiments themselves. It
started with a simple apparatus to let pickles and other vegetables glow, when an
electrical current ﬂows through them. Later, these included a hoover craft with a
chair and a vacuum cleaner engine, a superconducting train, the “Polar express”,
which is shown in Figs. 2 and 3, and a large tank to simulate a tsunami wave. The
students also built a large box (∼ 2 m3) which produces smoke rings which travel
through the entire lecture hall.

This is the basic structure of the show into which the students have introduced a
tremendous variety. The ﬁrst two years, the show was similar to those of Prof. Sprott:
a series of experiments were presented and explained. In the third year, the students
developed a question and answer scheme, where one of the MC’s asked questions and
the other explained the physics. This created a better ﬂow and also dramatically
improved the explanations, since the students had to imagine possible questions the
kids might have. In the fourth year, the students built a “time-travel machine” out
of an old telephone booth and a smoke machine, and the two MC’s visited the Stone
Age, Aristotle, Newton, etc. asking questions directly of the greats. Last year the
students staged the entire physics show as a large computer game, where they had
to solve various physics problems to advance to higher levels. For the movies the
two protagonists wandered through a virtual computer world to advance to the next
level.

The physics show has mainly involved classical physics occasionally with some
quantum eﬀects. However, when the particle physics laboratory CERN turned 50
in 2004, the ﬁrst year group had suﬃciently advanced in their studies that we could
put on an elementary particle physics and cosmology show addressed at high-school
students. This was a huge success with the local schools.

In March, 2006, we were honored that the Deutsche Museum, in M¨unchen, in-
vited us to put on three shows in the distinguished Ehrensaal, something like the

3

hall of fame of German science and technology. This was an exciting opportunity
for the students and our ﬁrst big away game. It was also a logistical challenge to
get the experiments to M¨unchen at a reasonable cost. The performances were very
well received and the Museum has suggested turning this into a semi-annual event.

The basic idea of the physics show also carries over to high-school physics. Two
local high-schools have independently put on shows for their fellow students and
their parents. At the Kollegium Josephinum, the students put on a 60 min show
on the topic of “water”. At the school in Hennef, they have a regular group called
the “Physikusse”, which also puts on small shows. (http://www.ge-hennef.de/foefo/
begabung−physikusse.htm)

In October, 2006, in honor of the tremendous amount of eﬀort the students have
put into the physics show, they received the Alumni Prize of the University of Bonn
for student initiative.

References

[1] C.J. Sprott, Phys. Teach. 29, 212 (1991)

[2] In the German university system physics students only have classes in physics
and mathematics as well as a small minor requirement such as chemistry or
astronomy. The level they have reached after three years is typically considered
equivalent to an American bachelor degree. Furthermore, they graduate from
high-school a year later and the men typically have one year of military or
community service. They are therefore also on average one and a half years
older at the same stage.

Fig. 1 Aluminium boat ﬂoating on sulphur hexaﬂuoride

4

Fig 2. Superconducting train, construction phase, with a blue suspended “train”.

Fig. 3 Superconducting train set with lighting and gondola trains.

5

