Real Time Relativity: exploration learning of special relativity

C. M. Savage, A. Searle, and L. McCalman

Department of Physics, Australian National University, ACT 0200, Australia∗

“Real Time Relativity” is a computer program that lets students ﬂy at relativistic speeds though a
simulated world populated with planets, clocks, and buildings. The counterintuitive and spectacular
optical eﬀects of relativity are prominent, while systematic exploration of the simulation allows the
user to discover relativistic eﬀects such as length contraction and the relativity of simultaneity. We
report on the physics and technology underpinning the simulation, and our experience using it for
teaching special relativity to ﬁrst year university students.

7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

“Real Time Relativity”1 is a ﬁrst person point of view
game-like computer simulation of a special relativistic
world, which allows the user to move in three dimensions
amongst familiar objects, Fig. 1. In a ﬁrst year univer-
sity physics course it has proved complementary to other
relativity instruction.

Since there is little opportunity for students to directly
experience relativity, it is often perceived as abstract,
and they may ﬁnd it hard to form an integrated rela-
tivistic world-view. They ﬁnd relativity interesting and
exciting, but may be left bemused by the chasm between
the theory and their everyday experience.2,3,4 Real Time
Relativity can help bridge this chasm by making visual
observations the basis from which the theory is deduced.
In his original relativity paper Einstein discarded the
personal observer, who collects information from what
he sees, in favor of more abstract inertial observers who
use distributed arrays of rulers and conventionally syn-
chronized clocks.5 However Komar6 and others7,8 showed
that special relativity may be formulated in terms of pos-
tulates about a personal observer’s visual observations.
This approach to relativity underpins our use of the Real
Time Relativity simulation.

Studies have shown that students may fail to learn fun-
damental concepts, such as the relativity of simultaneity,
even after advanced instruction.2,3,4 This is because spe-
cial relativity contradicts some deeply held ideas about

FIG. 1: Screenshot from Real Time Relativity. The speed
of the camera relative to the objects is v = 0.9682c. The
Doppler and headlight eﬀects have been turned oﬀ.

space and time. To overcome their non-relativistic pre-
conceptions students must ﬁrst recognize them, and then
confront them.3 The Real Time Relativity simulation can
aid this process.

In the next section we discuss some relevant physics
education research. Section III outlines the relativistic
optics required to understand the simulation. Section IV
brieﬂy overviews the computer technology that is mak-
ing interactive simulations of realistic physics, such as
Real Time Relativity, increasingly practical. Section V
describes students’ experience of the simulation. Section
VI shows how it provides fresh perspectives on physics
such as the relativity of simultaneity. Section VII reports
our evaluation of its use in a ﬁrst year physics laboratory.

II. EDUCATIONAL BACKGROUND

There is substantial evidence for the value of ac-
tive learning.9,10 Eﬀective learning is stimulated by stu-
dents participating in the construction and application of
physics based world-views.11 A common factor in active
learning is a cycle of developing, testing, and correcting
understanding in a collaborative environment. Peer in-
struction is one way for this to occur in the classroom,12
while in the laboratory inquiry based approaches are
known to be eﬀective.11

Computer simulations may promote active learning in
physics, especially where real laboratories are diﬃcult
to provide. However, research has shown that a testing
and development cycle is required to ensure good learn-
ing outcomes.13,14 The eﬀectiveness of simulations is re-
duced by poor interfaces,13 and by students’ lack of the
skills required to learn from them.15 They also lose eﬀec-
tiveness if the exploration is not conducted according to
the scientiﬁc method.16 However, when such issues are
addressed the results can be spectacular.14

Computer simulations are most eﬀective when di-
rected towards clear goals, with an understanding of their
strengths and limitations.14,16 They can provide an ad-
ditional active learning mode, and address broad goals
such as “thinking like a physicist”.17 However, learning
to use software increases cognitive load, lessening capac-

ity to learn other new material.15 The value for physics
teaching of ﬁrst person simulations, such as Real Time
Relativity, is largely unexplored, as existing research has
concerned simulations of models, such as might be used
by an expert physicist, rather than immersive ﬁrst person
simulations.13,14,15,16

Real Time Relativity diﬀers from other physics simu-
lations in providing a realistic, explorable environment.
In the context of a ﬁrst year university physics class, we
are asking the question: Can aspects of special relativity
be learnt by exploration of the Real Time Relativity vir-
tual world? Many students are comfortable interactively
discovering the rules of virtual worlds; perhaps they can
use this experience for discovering the rules of physics?

Successful

learning from simulations is more likely
if students are suitably prepared and guided.11,13,15
Preparation should develop a basic understanding of
the physics which determines what is seen in the sim-
ulation.
In our case this includes the ﬁnite speed of
light, the Doppler eﬀect, and relativistic optical aber-
ration. This preparation might use conventional interac-
tive multimedia.18 Preparation should also include how
the scientiﬁc method is used to develop understanding of
novel phenomena.

Scherr, Shaﬀer, and Vokos have found that students’
understanding of time in special relativity is poor.2,3
They conclude that “... many students who study spe-
cial relativity at the undergraduate to graduate levels fail
to develop a functional understanding” .3 They identify
the reason for this as students misunderstanding funda-
mental ideas such as: the “time of an event, simultane-
ity, and reference frame”.3 They have developed instruc-
tional materials to address these problems. Mermin19
has also noted that traditional relativistic pedagogy may
make incorrect assumptions about students’ prior knowl-
edge. Real Time Relativity can address these problems,
as fundamental ideas, such as the time of an event, have
intuitive operational meanings.

III. RELATIVISTIC OPTICS

Some of the basic physics of relativistic optics, namely
the Doppler eﬀect and aberration, was discussed by Ein-
stein in his ﬁrst relativity paper.5 However it was not
until about 1960 that the pioneering work of Penrose,20
Terrell,21 and Weisskopf22 showed that relativity gives a
rich and unexpected visual environment.

In this section we summarize relativistic optics using 4-
vectors, because that is how it is implemented in the Real
Time Relativity program (see Section IV). Rindler23 pro-
vides a more complete introduction, both with and with-
out using 4-vectors.

A plane light wave is described by its 4-frequency F ,

which has components23

F = f [1, ~n],

(1)

where f is the frequency and ~n = (nx, ny, nz) is the

2

(2)

unit vector in the propagation direction. From the 4-
frequency components in a particular frame, the compo-
nents in any other frame may be found using a Lorentz
transformation. The transformation between the usual
standard conﬁguration24 frames S and S′ are suﬃcient
for our purposes. We will use “world” (w) and “camera”
(c) to refer to the frames S and S′,

fc = γfw(1 − nw,xv/c),
fcnc,x = γfw(nw,x − v/c),
fcnc,y = fwnw,y, fcnc,z = f nw,z,
γ = (1 − v2/c2)−1/2,

where v is the component of the relative velocity of the
frames along the positive xw axis of the world frame.
The ﬁrst equation expresses the Doppler eﬀect, and the
remaining equations express the dependence of the prop-
agation direction on the relative frame velocity: an eﬀect
known as “relativistic aberration”. In the Real Time Rel-
ativity simulation let the world frame be that in which
the objects are at rest, and the camera frame be the
user’s instantaneous rest frame, as we represent the user
by a camera. We require the frequencies and propagation
directions in the camera frame, fc and ~nc.

Since ~nc is a unit vector, its x-component, nc,x is the
cosine of the angle θc between the light ray and the
xc axis:
if the ray is coming towards the observer nc,x
changes sign. Dividing the second and third of Eqs. (2) by
the ﬁrst and using nc,x = − cos θc and nw,x = − cos θw,
we get

cos θc = cos θw+v/c

1+(v/c) cos θw ,
sin θw
γ(1+(v/c) cos θw) .

sin θc =

(3)

Relativistic aberration is analogous to non-relativistic
forms of aberration that students may have experienced.
For example, the dependence of the angle of falling rain
on an observer’s velocity, or the diﬀerence between the
visual position of a high ﬂying aircraft and that indicated
by its sound. This understanding may be made quanti-
tative using the relativistic velocity addition formulae.23
Penrose20 showed that relativistic aberration implies
that straight-lines are seen as either lines or circular arcs
in other frames. He also showed that a sphere, which
always has a circular outline (unlike a circle which may
have an elliptical outline), will continue to have a circular
outline after aberration, and hence continue to look like
a sphere. These eﬀects are immediately apparent in the
Real Time Relativity simulation, Fig. 2.

The non-relativistic Doppler eﬀect may also be familiar
to some students. This, together with the analogy to
non-relativistic aberration, emphasize the closer relation
of relativistic optics to direct experience than the usual
space-time approach to special relativity.

A convenient form of the Doppler eﬀect follows from

the ﬁrst two of Eqs. (2) after eliminating nw,x,

fc = p

1 − v2/c2
1 − (v/c) cos θc

fw = Dfw,

(4)

3

the photons, and the change in photon ﬂux due to the
combined eﬀects of time dilation and the observer’s mo-
tion, which is an additional manifestation of the Doppler
eﬀect. In terms of the Doppler factor in Eq. (4) these con-
tribute factors to the change in intensity of D2, D, and
D respectively, for a combined intensity change factor of
D4. However for common detectors, such as the eye or
a CCD camera, it is the photon number ﬂux P that is
detected, and this changes by a factor of D3, since the
energy change per photon is irrelevant,

PB = D3PA.

(6)

IV. TECHNOLOGY

can

images

generate

Computers

incorporating
special,28 and general,29 relativistic optics. By the early
1990s it was possible to interactively render simple
objects, such as cubes.30 The highest quality images
were generated by the ray-tracing method, which is
capable of producing photo-realistic images.31 However
ray-tracing is currently too slow for interactive simula-
tions, although individual images can be strung together
to make movies.18

The development of

the programmable graphics
processor32 has made it possible to render complex rel-
ativistic scenes in real time. The ﬁrst such systems ap-
pear to have been developed by D. Weiskopf33 and M.
Bochers34 within the physics education group at the Uni-
versity of T¨ubingen.35 This group has focussed on us-
ing relativity visualization for science communication.36
Our Real Time Relativity simulation is similar to these,
is freely available, and is being developed as an Open
Source project under the Lesser General Public License.1
The screen image displayed by Real Time Relativ-
ity is created using the computer graphics technique
known as environment mapping, which renders the three-
dimensional virtual world onto a two-dimensional cube
map. A cube map may be visualised as the 4π ster-
radian view-ﬁeld mapped onto the interior surface of a
cube centered on a camera, representing the user’s ﬁeld
of view. In fact, the cube map is a data structure in which
the image pixels are addressed by line of sight direction,
rather than by spatial position. The relativistically cor-
rect scene is produced by transforming the cube map.

Each camera image pixel is formed by light incident
from a particular direction; that is, with a speciﬁc prop-
agation direction ~nc in the camera frame. The relativistic
physics problem is to ﬁnd the corresponding propagation
vector ~nw in the world frame in which the cube map is
constructed. This vector then addresses the pixel on the
cube map that is mapped to the camera pixel. The re-
sulting camera image is displayed on the screen.

A plane light wave is represented by the relativis-
tic 4-frequency, Eq. (1). The propagation direction
in the world frame is found by the inverse Lorentz
transformation25 of this 4-vector from the camera frame

FIG. 2: Screenshots from Real Time Relativity. Top frame:
at rest in the world frame. Bottom frame: v = 0.9682c,
corresponding to γ = 4. The Doppler and headlight eﬀects
have been turned oﬀ.
In the world frame the camera is in
front of the position in the top frame.

where this equation deﬁnes the “Doppler factor” D. For
v/c ≪ 1 the denominator is the familiar non-relativistic
wave compression or expansion. For waves incoming at
θc = π/2 radians to the relative motion, the denominator
is one and the observed frequency is less than the world
frequency, at which they were emitted. This means that
the time between wave crests, the period, is longer; which
is exactly the eﬀect of time dilation, if the wave crests are
regarded as a clock.

The eﬀect of aberration on small angles may be found
by taking diﬀerentials of the inverse Lorentz transforma-
tion of the 4-frequency.25 This yields

dθC = D

−1dθW .

(5)

Hence small angles transform by the inverse Doppler fac-
In particular, for objects directly ahead, so that
tor.
θC = 0, and for v/c ≪ 1, the inverse Doppler factor is
approximately D ≈ 1 − v/c, and objects angular sizes
are shrunk. While for objects behind, D ≈ 1 + v/c and
objects are expanded.

Perhaps the most subtle of the relativistic optics eﬀects
is the headlight eﬀect. Indeed, a complete discussion was
not given until 1979, by McKinley.26,27 It refers to the
increased intensity of light coming from objects we are
moving towards. The intensity decreases for objects we
are moving away from. Three things combine to pro-
duce these intensity changes: the change in angular size
of the emitting region, the Doppler change in energy of

into the world frame. This is implemented as a four-
dimensional matrix multiplication of the 4-frequency.
The transformation matrix is calculated before each
frame is rendered, using the current camera velocity, and
is then applied to a 4-frequency constructed for each cam-
era pixel. This has a spatial component equal to the
pixel’s imaging direction and the time component set to
one. The spatial part of the transformed 4-frequency ad-
dresses the cube map pixel that is then rendered to the
screen.

The Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) on computer
video cards are designed to do 4-vector matrix algebra
eﬃciently and in parallel. This makes it possible for sim-
ulations such as Real Time Relativity, and that due to
Bochers,34,36 to perform the Lorentz transformations in
real time. The 4-vectors that graphics processing units
normally work with specify the x, y and z coordinates of a
vertex and a fourth w component that facilitates certain
non-linear transformations (such as translation and per-
spective projection), or specify the red, green, blue colour
and alpha (transparency) of a (texture) pixel. Since the
processing of diﬀerent vertices or pixels is usually inde-
pendent, the operations can be performed in parallel.

The Doppler shift factor D is given by the ratio of the
time components of the 4-frequencies in the camera and
world frames, Eq. (4). However, to determine the eﬀect
of the Doppler shift on a general colour requires the en-
tire intensity spectrum. But in current graphics systems
the spectrum is speciﬁed at just three frequencies; red,
green, and blue. Hence interpolation is used to gener-
ate the spectrum. This simple approach, together with
the lack of any infrared or ultraviolet spectra, prevents
a true representation of Doppler shifted colors, and is a
signiﬁcant limitation of the current version of Real Time
Relativity. In particular, stars do not maintain a black-
body spectrum.26,37,38

The headlight eﬀect, Eq. (6), is implemented by mul-
tiplying each pixel color vector by the third power of the
Doppler shift factor D. There are signiﬁcant limitations
on how the resulting large intensity range is rendered to
the screen by current hardware.

The graphics processing unit does the Lorentz trans-
formations as well as its usual graphics work. First, a
non-relativistic three-dimensional scene is rendered to a
cube map, then relativistic transformations are applied
to it. To generate a frame, the 4-frequency associated
with each camera pixel is inverse Lorentz transformed to
ﬁnd the corresponding world frame cube map pixel. This
is then Doppler and intensity shifted, also by the graph-
ics processing unit. An 800 by 600 window has 480,000
pixels, so displaying 50 frames per second requires 24
million pixel transformations per second, which is well
within the capabilities of inexpensive graphics process-
ing units. Consequently, it is the conventional graphics
processing generating the cube map that limits the over-
all performance, not the relativistic calculations.

Real Time Relativity is programmed using Microsoft’s
DirectX 9 interface, so that it is independent of the de-

4

tails of any particular graphics processing unit. Conse-
quently, it is only available on Windows computer sys-
tems. DirectX 9 includes the High Level Shader Lan-
guage in which the pixel shader controlling the graphics
processing unit is written.

Graphics processing units have been increasing in
processing power more rapidly than central processing
units.32 This is driven by the demand for parallel com-
puting from the gaming community. For example, the
Xbox 360 graphics processing unit has forty-eight 32-
bit processors running at 500 MHz, each capable of a
ﬂoating point 4-vector operation per cycle, giving nearly
100 GigaFlops, compared to perhaps a few GigaFlops for
a central processing unit.39 The main limitation is that
graphics processing units do data-parallel computing, in
which the same operation is repeated on each element of a
data array. Nevertheless, computational scientists are de-
veloping algorithms that harness their processing power
for tasks such as solving partial diﬀerential equations.32
The Folding@Home distributed computing project has
a client available which runs their molecular dynamics
calculation on graphics processing units, increasing com-
putational power by about twenty times per computer.40
These developments may have an impact on the kinds
of physics teaching simulations that are possible in the
future.

V. THE REAL TIME RELATIVITY
SIMULATION

In this section we introduce the Real Time Relativ-
ity simulation as experienced by students in the ﬁrst
year course for physics majors at The Australian Na-
tional University.41 It was used in a three hour laboratory
structured to encourage exploration, while requiring that
certain measurements be made and compared to theory.
Students were provided with a manual giving background
information and asking both qualitative and quantitative
questions. Many students completed the laboratory be-
fore they attended the relativistic optics lecture. Stu-
dents worked in groups of two or three, and discussion
was encouraged. Preparation included answering simple
pre-lab questions which were assessed at the beginning
of the laboratory.

An initial problem of orientation within relativistic op-
tics simulations arises because the speed of light is very
large in everyday terms. This means that either the ob-
jects in the simulation must be very large, roughly light-
seconds, or the speed of light must be artiﬁcially slow,
as in Gamow’s Mr. Tompkins story.42 In the interest of
realism, we have taken the former view, which allows
us to include realistic astronomical objects such as the
Earth, which is 0.042 light-seconds in diameter. The top
frame of Fig. 2 shows a screen from Real Time Relativ-
ity. The Earth is visible, as is the Sun behind it.43 These
objects set the scale of the simulated world. Other ob-
jects, such as the columns, have been chosen for their

5

they see a rainbow eﬀect, as for directions towards that
of motion, θ < θ0, the color is blue shifted, while for
directions away from the direction of motion, θ > θ0, the
color is red shifted. Fig. 3 shows the red shifting of a
blue cylinder through green and red as the viewing angle
increases.

If students already understand the non-relativistic
Doppler eﬀect, they may be guided to discover the rel-
ativistic version. In particular, it is possible to deduce
time dilation from the observation that there is reddening
when viewing perpendicular to the direction of motion,
Eq. (4).

The bottom frame of Fig. 2 shows the scene with the
camera travelling down the row of columns with a speed
corresponding to γ = 4. The Doppler and headlight ef-
fects have been turned oﬀ. The circular curvature of the
nearest columns is due to relativistic aberration, as dis-
cussed in section III. The curvature of the more distant
columns is barely noticeable. However, they are shrunk
by approximately the inverse Doppler factor D−1, ac-
cording to Eq. (5). The camera ﬁeld of view covers a
wide ﬁeld in the world frame: the hoops and cubes on
the edges of the image are behind the camera in the world
frame.

Aberration may be understood as a consequence of the
ﬁnite speed of light. The key idea is that the light that
reaches the camera at a particular instant was reﬂected
by objects at diﬀerent times. The light from closer ob-
jects was reﬂected later than that from far away objects.
This is irrelevant when the camera is at rest relative to
the objects, but when it is moving, the position of the ob-
jects in the camera frame depends on time. For a large
object this means that the parts nearer the camera re-
ﬂected the received light later than the further parts. If
the camera is moving towards the object, at a signiﬁcant
fraction of the speed of light, the near parts reﬂect when
they are signiﬁcantly closer and hence look bigger than
the far parts which reﬂected when they were further away
and hence looked smaller. If we are moving directly to-
wards the middle of an object the net result is that the
middle looks fatter than the ends, see Fig. 4. If the object
is oﬀ to one side it is curved into a circular arc.

Currently, Real Time Relativity is limited to all ob-
jects being at rest in the world frame. This means that
relativistic dynamics is not within its capabilities.

VI. THE RELATIVITY OF SIMULTANEITY

The relativity of simultaneity has been identiﬁed as a
particularly diﬃcult concept for students to learn from
passive instruction.2,3,4 In order that students might ac-
tively discover the relativity of simultaneity for them-
selves, the Real Time Relativity simulation includes
clocks in the world frame. Even when the camera is
at rest in the world frame, clocks at diﬀerent distances
from the camera are seen to read diﬀerent times due to
the light propagation delay, see the top frame of Fig. 5.

FIG. 3: Screenshot from Real Time Relativity showing how
the Doppler eﬀect depends on the view angle. The camera
is looking perpendicular to the direction of motion, which is
from right to left at v = 0.5c, at a stippled blue cylinder. The
Doppler factor is approximately one, D ≈ 1, in the direction
of the left edge of the image. The rest of the cylinder is red
shifted through green and red. The headlight eﬀect has been
turned oﬀ.

familiar shapes, although they would be absurdly large
if they existed in the real world. Familiar objects aid in
the recognition of the distortions caused by relativistic
aberration.

Students start by accelerating from rest down the row
of columns shown in Fig. 2. At ﬁrst it seems that they
are moving backwards.44 This is completely counterintu-
itive and prompts them to question what they see: the
exploration has begun! The eﬀect is due to relativistic
aberration. An important way that motion is sensed is
by the change in angular size as our distance to the object
changes. Normally, as we approach an object its angular
size increases, roughly proportionate with the distance.
In contrast, the decrease in angular size due to relativis-
tic aberration, Eq. (5), is approximately proportional to
1 − (v/c) cos θc, for v/c ≪ 1, and occurs before the dis-
tance has time to change. Therefore the initial view is of
objects shrinking, and this is interpreted as them moving
away, and hence as backwards movement of the viewer.
As they continue to accelerate, nearby objects eventually
pass by, and the perception of forward motion is restored.

Colors change due the Doppler eﬀect Eq. (4), but the
headlight eﬀect quickly saturates the scene with bright
light, dominating all other eﬀects, due to its dependence
on the third power of the Doppler factor, Eq. (6). Con-
sequently, it is useful to be able to turn it oﬀ. Although
this goes against the principle of making the simulation
as realistic as possible, it is diﬃcult to see some other
eﬀects if it is left on.

The Doppler eﬀect depends on the viewing angle,
Eq. (4). There is a particular angle to the direction of
motion θ0 for which there is no eﬀect, since the Doppler
factor D = 1 when

cos θ0 = (c/v)(1 − γ

(7)
For v = 0.5c this angle is θ0 = 1.3 radians (74◦). If a
student looks at at a pure colored object at this angle

−1).

6

FIG. 4: Screenshot from Real Time Relativity showing rela-
tivistic aberration.The camera is moving towards the center
of the column with v = 0.9682c, so that γ = 4. The Doppler
and headlight eﬀects are oﬀ.

Students generally have no diﬃculty recognizing and uti-
lizing this fact.2,3,4 Note that clocks the same distance
from the camera read the same time.

The middle frame shows the same view of the clocks,
but with the camera moving with v = 0.5c parallel to
the clocks from left to right. The camera is looking per-
pendicular to its direction of motion. Note that the eye
gets confusing cues from this image, as the clocks are ro-
tated as if we were looking at them from in front, but we
are not. This eﬀect is a result of relativistic aberration
known as “Terrell rotation”.21 Length contraction by the
factor γ−1 = 0.87 is also apparent.

The relativity of simultaneity is apparent from the
readings on the clocks in the middle frame of Fig. 5. The
right-most clock is ahead of the left-most by 10 seconds.
This cannot be explained by light delay in the camera
frame, as the observed time diﬀerence is too large, and
the times increase from left to right. However it is ex-
plained by light delay in the clocks’ frame. Students can
see this by immediately stopping the camera relative to
the clocks. Due to relativistic aberration they must then
look back to see the clocks: this view is shown in the
bottom frame of Fig. 5.
In the clocks’ rest frame the
camera is not opposite the clocks, but is to their right.
From this perspective it is clear why the clocks read as
they do: the left-most clock is furthest and reads earli-
est, while the right-most is closest and reads latest. The
time diﬀerence between them is exactly that seen by the
moving camera.

Let us restate the argument in terms of two photogra-
phers: Alice is moving relative to the clocks, and Bob is
stationary relative to the clocks. Both Alice and Bob take
photographs of the clocks at an event “CLICK”, chosen
so that Alice, in her own frame, is approximately equidis-
tant from the locations of the clocks when they emitted
the photographed light.45 Both Alice and Bob are sam-
pling the set of photons originating from the clocks and
present at CLICK. These photons carry the same infor-

FIG. 5: Screenshots from Real Time Relativity explaining
the relativity of simultaneity. Top frame. The eﬀect of light
propagation delay on observed clocks. The camera is at rest
relative to the clocks, which are lined up perpendicular to
the line of sight to the central clock. The clocks are 5 light-
seconds apart and read seconds. Middle frame. The camera is
moving from left to right parallel to the clocks with v = 0.5c.
The perpendicular distance to the clocks is the same as in the
top frame (about 31 light-seconds). The major contributor to
the diﬀerent clock readings is the relativity of simultaneity.
However, light delay causes clocks to the left to diﬀer more
from the central clock than those to the right. Bottom frame.
The camera has been brought to rest immediately after taking
the middle frame, although some time then elapsed before the
image was taken. In the clocks’ rest frame the diﬀerent clock
readings are entirely a consequence of the light propagation
delay. The ﬁeld of view is the same in each frame.

mation; in particular, the times read by the clocks when
they were emitted. The diﬀerent times of the diﬀerent
clocks is understood by Bob as a result of the light prop-
agation delay over the diﬀerent distances to the clocks.
However, the clocks were at approximately the same dis-
tance from Alice when they emitted the light, so she re-
quires another explanation. This is a new physical eﬀect:
the relativity of simultaneity. The relativity postulate
ensures that what is true for these clocks is true for any
clocks, and hence for time itself. A complete discussion
is given in Appendix A.

VII. LABORATORY EVALUATION

Real Time Relativity was incorporated in a ﬁrst
year laboratory session at The Australian National
University.41 The course included nine lectures and three
tutorials on special relativity. One lecture was devoted

7

to relativistic optics.

The content of the laboratory has been indicated in
section V. Its eﬀectiveness was assessed in three ways.
First, students completed questionnaires before and after
the laboratory. Second, one of the authors was present
as an observer in each laboratory, recording how students
interacted with the simulation. A laboratory demonstra-
tor was also present. Third, students recorded their work
in laboratory log books which were assessed.

The pre-laboratory surveys indicated that students
usually had prior knowledge of relativity and were eager
to learn more. However they tended to perceive it as an
abstract subject. The post-laboratory surveys indicated
that students felt they had learnt about relativity from
the simulation, and that it had stimulated their interest.
Some students reported that the “concrete” or “visual”
nature of the simulation was helpful:46

The ﬂaws in the simulation had a bigger negative impact
on the students than expected. Students sometimes at-
tributed their lack of understanding of the physics of the
simulation to a “bug”, even when there was none, rather
than to their need to develop better understanding.13

Our experience suggests that the Real Time Relativity
simulation can stimulate discovery learning, and provide
complementary learning opportunities to those provided
by lectures and problem solving tutorials. However, re-
alizing its full value will require further cycles of testing
and development. Next time we use it, we shall require
students to “play” with the simulation as part of the
pre-laboratory preparation, so that they have some fa-
miliarity with the controls and with the peculiarities of
navigation in a relativistic world. We shall also provide
more opportunity for open ended exploration, as this ap-
pears to be its strength.

“Real Time Relativity is very useful - many
people are visual learners.”

However, students often reported that the laboratory
manual was too prescriptive and did not allow them to
adequately pursue their own investigations. This criti-
cism focussed on the quantitative exercises:

“Why are we forcing equations from the sim-
ulation?”

There were also many complaints about the diﬃculty of
using the program, and the inadequate time available to
develop proﬁciency with navigation through the virtual
world:

“The controls were really, really hard to use.”

The laboratory observer enabled a testing and reﬁne-
ment cycle. We identiﬁed problems, and corrected them,
In
before the next student group took the laboratory.
particular, students often tried to push simulations to
the limits to see what happened, behavior noted by the
University of Colorado Physics Education Technology
group.13,14 If a simulation does not respond sensibly, stu-
dents can lose conﬁdence in its reliability. Observers were
able to monitor what engaged students, and what frus-
trated them. The most engaging aspect was the explo-
ration of a novel and open ended world. Amongst the
more frustrating things were the simulation’s controls not
behaving in ways students considered natural.

The log books completed during the laboratory did
not capture the excitement that was observed in work-
ing laboratory groups. However, successful quantitative
measurements were generally made: for example, of the
Doppler eﬀect and of length contraction as a function of
speed.

Our experience conﬁrmed the importance of develop-
ing educational software through a testing and reﬁne-
ment cycle.13,14 Students used the simulation in ways we
had not anticipated, and had diﬀerent ideas to the au-
thors about what constituted a natural user interface.

VIII. CONCLUSION

Real Time Relativity is an immersive physics simu-
lation of a kind that is becoming increasingly accessi-
ble due to the improving cost eﬀectiveness of computer
technology. It gives students the opportunity to discover
and confront their misconceptions about relativity, and
to construct resolutions.

Our experience with Real Time Relativity suggests
that it provides new perspectives on special relativity.
This may be particularly valuable to students who prefer
the concrete over the abstract. Important physics, such
as the relativity of simultaneity, can be introduced with
minimal mathematics. This may broaden the group of
students who can learn relativity. However, the educa-
tional value of ﬁrst person simulations, like Real Time
Relativity, is an interesting area for further physics edu-
cation research.

APPENDIX A: THE RELATIVITY OF
SIMULTANEITY

In this appendix we expand on the explanation of the
relativity of simultaneity in terms of light delays that
was introduced in section VI. It uses the aberration and
length contraction formulae. In the context of discovery
learning with the Real Time Relativity simulation each
of these formulae may, in principle, be deduced from ob-
servations. Along the way we also deduce time dilation.
We will refer to Fig. 6, which shows schematic diagrams
of the scenario shown in Figs. 5. At event CLICK both
Alice and Bob take photographs of the clocks. We choose
CLICK to be the co-incident origins of Alice’s and Bob’s
rest frames, which we assume to be in standard conﬁgu-
ration with relative velocity v. Therefore CLICK occurs
at times tA = tB = 0. In the notation of section III Al-
ice’s frame is the camera frame, and Bob’s frame is the
world frame.

8

gation time from C1 to Bob, the time on C1’s photograph
will be that it read at time tB = −dB/c = −γd/c. This
diﬀers from the time deduced by Alice by the time dila-
tion factor γ. Thus we obtain time dilation from aberra-
tion.

However the focus here is on the relativity of simul-
taneity. The path length diﬀerence ∆dB between the
paths from clocks C1 and C2 may be approximated by
a method familiar from diﬀraction theory. We drop a
perpendicular to C2 from the line between clock C1 and
Bob. The distance along this line from the perpendicular
to C1 is the approximate path length diﬀerence. Using
the corresponding right-angle triangle with hypotenuse
LB and angle π − θB we have

∆dB = LB cos(π − θB) = −LB cos θB = LB(v/c), (A3)

FIG. 6: Schematic diagrams for the relativity of simultaneity.
Both panels refer to the time of event CLICK, indicated by *s,
when the photographs are taken. The lines from clocks C1 and
C2 to Alice and Bob are the paths taken by the light forming
the photographs in their respective frames. (a) Alice’s frame.
(b) Bob’s frame in which the clocks are at rest.

Fig. 6(a) shows the light paths taken from the clocks
C1 and C2 to Alice, for whom they are moving from
right to left with speed v. She looks perpendicular to
the direction of relative motion to see them, at θA = π/2,
and infers that was their direction when they emitted the
light she images. Let the perpendicular distance to clock
C1 be d, and the distance between the clocks, in Alice’s
frame, be LA. Due to the light propagation delay, the
time on the photograph of clock C1 will be that it read
at time tA = −d/c. The path length diﬀerence between
the paths from clocks C2 and C1 is

where we again used the aberration formulae, Eqs. (3),
with θA = π/2, to ﬁnd cos θB = −v/c. The correspond-
ing light propagation time diﬀerence, ∆tB = LBv/c2, is
the time diﬀerence between the clocks in Bob’s photo-
graph. However, it is also the time diﬀerence between
the clocks in Alice’s photograph, since both images are
made from the same group of photons; those present at
event CLICK.

We can express this time diﬀerence in terms of Alice’s
quantities by using the length contraction formula LB =
γLA,

∆dA = qd2 + L2

A

− d ≈ L2

A/(2d),

(A1)

where we have assumed LA ≪ dA and Taylor expanded
the square root to ﬁrst order. The corresponding light
propagation time diﬀerence can be made arbitrarily small
by making LA a suﬃciently small fraction of d 45.

Fig. 6(b) shows the light paths taken from the clocks
to Bob, who is at rest relative to them. He looks back
at the angle θB to photograph them. Let the distance
to clock C1 be dB. Since lengths perpendicular to the
relative motion are invariant this is given in terms of d
by

dB sin(π − θB) = dB sin θB = d ⇒ dB = γd,

(A2)

where we used the aberration formulae Eqs. (3), with
θA = π/2, to ﬁnd sin θB = γ−1. Due to the light propa-

∆tB = (γLA)(v/c2) = γ(LAv/c2),

(A4)

which is precisely the term responsible for the relativity
of simultaneity in the inverse Lorentz transformation,

∆tB = γ(∆tA + ∆xAv/c2).

(A5)

Thus we have shown how the relativity of simultaneity
can be understood in terms of light propagation delays,
and be deduced from direct observations of clocks.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors acknowledge the assistance of Dr. K. Wil-
son with the implementation and evaluation of the Real
Time Relativity laboratory.

Electronic address: craig.savage@anu.edu.au

∗
1 The Real Time Relativity web site contains informa-
tion about the program and a downloadable installer:
hhttp://www.anu.edu.au/Physics/Savage/RTRi.

2 R. E. Scherr, P. S. Shaﬀer, and S. Vokos, “Student un-
derstanding of time in special relativity: simultaneity and
reference frames”, Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl.
69, S24-S35 (2001).

3 R. E. Scherr, P. S. Shaﬀer, and S. Vokos, “The challenge

of changing deeply held student beliefs about the relativity
of simultaneity”, Am. J. Phys. 70, 1238-1248 (2002).

of basic

“An investigation of
concepts

4 R. E. Scherr,
derstanding
ity”, Ph.D. dissertation, Department
University
hhttp://www.physics.umd.edu/perg/papers/scherr/
index.htmli.

student un-
relativ-
of Physics,
(unpublished),

of Washington

in special

5 A. Einstein, “On the electrodynamics of moving bodies”,

2001

Annalen der Physik 17, 891-921 (1905). Reprinted in En-
glish translation in J. Stachel, Einstein’s miraculous year
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1998).

6 A. Komar, “Foundations of special relativity and the shape
of the big dipper”, Am. J. Phys. 33, 1024-1027 (1965).
7 A. Peres, “Relativistic telemetry”, Am. J. Phys. 55, 516-

519 (1987).

8 H. Blatter and T. Greber, “Aberration and Doppler shift:
an uncommon way to relativity”, Am. J. Phys. 56, 333-338
(1988).

9 R. R. Hake, “Interactive-engagement versus traditional
methods: a six-thousand-student survey of mechanics test
data for introductory physics courses”, Am. J. Phys. 67,
755-767 (1999).

10 L. C. McDermott and E. F. Redish, “Resource Letter:
PER-1: Physics Education Research”, Am. J. Phys. 66,
64-74 (1998).

11 L. C. McDermott, “Oersted medal Lecture 2001: Physics
education research - the key to student learning”, Am. J.
Phys. 69, 1127-1137 (2001).

12 E. Mazur, Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual (Prentice-

Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ, 1997).

13 W. K. Adams, S. Reid, R. LeMaster, S. B. McKagan, K. K.
Perkins and C. E. Wieman, “A Study of Interface Design
for Engagement and Learning with Educational Simula-
tions”, Journal of Interactive Learning Research, submit-
ted (2006).

14 C. Wieman and K. Perkins, “A powerful tool for teaching

science”, Nature Physics 2, 290-292 (2006).

15 S. Yeo, R. Loss, M. Zadnik, A. Harrison, and D. Treagust,
“What do students really learn from interactive multime-
dia? A physics case study.”, Am. J. Phys. 72, 1351-1358
(2004).

16 R. N. Steinberg, “Computers in teaching science: to sim-
ulate or not to simulate”, Phys. Educ. Res., Am.J. Phys.
Suppl. 68, S37-S41 (2000).

17 A. Van Heuvelen, “Learning to think like a physicist: a
review of research based instructional strategies”, Am. J.
Phys. 59, 891-897 (1991).

18 Through Einstein’s Eyes, a multimedia web site about rel-
ativistic optics. Available on CD from the authors, and on-
line at: hhttp://www.anu.edu.au/Physics/Savage/TEE/i.
19 N.D. Mermin, It’s about time (Princeton University Press,

Princeton, 2005).

20 R. Penrose, “The apparent shape of a relativistically mov-
ing sphere”, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 55, 137-139 (1959).
21 J. Terrell, “Invisibility of the Lorentz contraction”, Physi-

cal Review 116, 1041-1045 (1959).

22 V.F. Weisskopf, “The visual appearance of rapidly moving

objects”, Physics Today 13, 24-27 (Sept., 1960).

23 W. Rindler, Relativity: special, general, and cosmological

(Oxford University Press, USA, 2006).
24 Standard conﬁguration of frames S and S′

ori-
gin traveling with speed v along the positive x axis of S.
The frames’ origins are coincident at t = t′ = 0, and the
corresponding coordinate axes are parallel.

has the S′

25 The inverse Lorentz transformations of the 4-frequency are
obtained from Eqs. (2) by swapping the w and c labels and
changing the sign of v.

26 J.M. McKinley and P. Doherty, “Relativistic transforma-
tions of light power”, Am. J. Phys. 47, 602-605 (1979).
27 J.M. McKinley, “In search of the starbow: the appearance

9

of the starﬁeld from a relativistic spaceship”, Am. J. Phys.
47, 309-316 (1979).

28 Men-Chou Chang, Feipei Lai and Wei-Chao Chen, “Im-
age shading taking into account relativistic eﬀects”, ACM
Trans. Graphics 15, 265 (1996).

29 T. M¨uller, “Visual appearance of a Morris-Thorne-

wormhole”, Am. J. Phys. 72, 1045-1050 (2004).

30 W. Gekelman, J. Maggs and Lingyu Xu, “Real-time rela-

tivity”, Computers in Physics 5, 372-385 (1991).

et

31 Ping-Kang Hsiung , R. H. Thibadeau, and M. Wu, “T-
buﬀer:
fast visualization of relativistic eﬀects in space-
time”, ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics 24, 83-88
(1990).

32 J.D. Owens
Purpose
ware”,
hhttp://graphics.idav.ucdavis.edu/publications/i.

Graphics
Forum 26

Computer Graphics

Computation

“A Survey

of General-
Hard-
(2007);

33 D. Weiskopf,
spacetimes”,
sity
of
hhttp://www.vis.uni-stuttgart.de/relativity/readingi.

“Visualization
Ph.D.
T¨ubingen

four-dimensional
Univer-
(unpublished);

of
dissertation,

2001

al.,

on

34 M. Bochers,
relativity”,
alization
in
tion, University
of T¨ubingen 2005
hhttp://w210.ub.uni-tuebingen.de/dbt/volltexte/2005/1891i.

visu-
disserta-
(unpublished);

“Interactive
special

stereoscopic
Ph.D.

35 U. Kraus and C. Zahn, “Relativity visualized: space time

and

travel”, hhttp://www.spacetimetravel.org/i.

36 D. Weiskopf et al., “Explanatory and illustrative visual-
ization of special and general relativity”, IEEE transac-
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12, 522-534
(2006).

37 T. Greber and H. Blatter, “Aberration and Doppler shift:
the cosmic background radiation and its rest frame”, Am.
J. Phys. 58, 942-945 (1990).

38 U. Kraus, “Brightness and color of rapidly moving objects:
the visual appearance of a large sphere revisited”, Am. J.
Phys. 68, 56-60 (2000).

39 J. Andrews and N. Baker, “Xbox 360 System Architec-

ture”, IEEE Micro 26, 25-37 (2006).

40 Folding@home project web site:
hhttp://folding.stanford.edu/i.

41 PHYS1201. Lectures and tutorials were 50 minutes each.

There were 74 students in the class.

42 G. Gamow, Mr Tompkins in Paperback (Cambridge U.P.,
Cambridge, England, 1965). Note that the ﬁgures do not
show what would actually be seen, as this was not known
at the time the story was written.

43 Although the Sun and Earth are the correct size (Sun’s
diameter is 4.7 light seconds) the distance between them
is not to scale.

44 The best way to experience this is to run the simulation.
However, a movie of the sequence discussed in the text is
available from the Real Time Relativity web site.1

45 Choosing the perpendicular distance to the clocks suﬃ-
ciently large, compared to the distance between the clocks,
makes this approximation as good as required. It is only
within this approximation that pure length contraction
and relativity of simultaneity are observed.

46 Quotations are taken from the post-laboratory evaluations

completed by students.

