7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
2
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Emerging technologies in physics education

Zosia A. C. Krusberg∗

Department of Physics, University of Chicago

5640 S. Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

Abstract

Three emerging technologies in physics education are evaluated from
the interdisciplinary perspective of cognitive science and physics edu-
cation research. The technologies — Physlet Physics, the Andes Intel-
ligent Tutoring System (ITS), and Microcomputer-Based Laboratory
(MBL) Tools — are assessed particularly in terms of their potential at
promoting conceptual change, developing expert-like problem-solving
skills, and achieving the goals of the traditional physics laboratory.
Pedagogical methods to maximize the potential of each educational
technology are suggested.

1 Introduction

The use of educational technologies in university physics courses has in-
creased dramatically in the last decade. Course management software is
placing course documents, resources, and student grades online. Homework
delivery systems are supplying physics instructors with databases of potential
homework problems that students can complete online. Electronic response
systems and simulations are transforming the traditional physics lecture into
an interactive and collaborative learning environment. Elaborate software is
teaching students how to problem solve and to perform sophisticated math-
ematical calculations.

∗Electronic address: zosia@uchicago.edu

1

Despite the dramatic changes caused by the implementation of technol-
ogy to many aspects of university physics courses, these technologies have not
oﬀered a panacea to the ever-deepening problems in contemporary physics
education. Though over the past few decades, cognitive science and physics
education research have provided deep insight into how students at all educa-
tional levels learn physics, instructional methods in most university physics
courses do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly from those of a century ago. Fortunately,
the increasing sophistication and availability of educational technologies is
providing physics educators with an opportunity to reevaluate the goals of
physics instruction, and, armed with the growing body of research in cogni-
tive science and physics education, use educational technologies to achieve
these goals.

Thereby, the goal of this paper is to assess three emerging technologies
in physics education from the interdisciplinary perspective of cognitive sci-
ence and physics education research. The three technologies address diﬀer-
ent aspects of physics knowledge: Physlets, a collection of Java applets, are
designed to deepen students’ conceptual knowledge of physics; Andes Intelli-
gent Tutoring System (ITS) aims to develop students’ procedural knowledge
of physics problem solving; and Microcomputer-Based Laboratory (MBL)
Tools, a set of probes and associated software, seek to relieve the physics
laboratory of the drudgery of data collection and display. The subsequent
sections will present the technical speciﬁcations of each technology and the
central objectives guiding its design, and discuss how the technology oﬀers
an improvement over existing instructional methods and how it aligns with
ﬁndings in cognitive science and physics education research. Finally, some
thoughts about the future outlook of the technology will be presented.

2 Physlet Physics

2.1 Technical Speciﬁcations

Physlets, developed by Wolfgang Christian and Mario Belloni at Davidson
College, are small, ﬂexible, Java-generated computer animations that can
be embedded into html documents and run on nearly every web platform.
The animations generally provide visualizations of multiple representations
of a speciﬁc physical phenomenon, such as simulations, graphs, diagrams,
and tables. A number of control buttons below the applet itself allow stu-

2

dents to start, stop, and step the animations, and the mouse can be used
to read scaled coordinates and to drag and drop objects around the frame.
Each Physlet is designed to focus on a single physical principle or concept,
excluding unnecessary detail; this keeps Physlets small and easily download-
able over the internet on a range of connection speeds. Also, as a result of
their simplicity, Physlets do not require instructors to adhere to a particular
pedagogical approach, though the creators point out that Physlets are most
eﬀective when utilized in collaborative learning or tutorial-type settings. A
large collection of Physlets is available for free download from the Physlet
website, and is accompanied by extensive digital resources as well as a num-
ber of books and journal articles. The Physlet exercises oﬀer nearly complete
coverage of the introductory university physics sequence, and, more recently,
have extended their coverage into introductory quantum mechanics [1, 2].

Recently, the Physlet creators published Physlet Physics[3], a book con-
taining over 800 applets and whose content span the full introductory physics
sequence; this publication seeks to provide physics instructors with a com-
plete and structured collection of Physlets that can be implemented into
existing physics curricula. Every chapter in Physlet Physics contains three
diﬀerent types of Physlet exercises — Illustrations, Explorations, and Prob-
lems — intended to be completed in a speciﬁc sequence, and each utilizing a
slightly diﬀerent approach to help students develop an understanding of var-
ious physics concepts. The book, which includes a CD-ROM containing the
Physlet collection, provides snapshots of the applets as well as full versions
of the text and questions that appear along with the online Physlets.

Each chapter of Physlet Physics opens with a number of Illustrations
seeking to introduce students to new physical concepts. The chapter Re-
fraction (Chapter 34), for instance, opens with three Illustrations: Huygens’
Principle and Refraction (34.1), Fiber Optics (34.2), and Prisms and Dis-
persions (34.3). A brief text accompanying each applet brieﬂy explains the
underlying physical principle; the text accompanying Illustration 34.3 states:
”The index of refraction of a given material depends on the wavelength (or
frequency) of the incoming light. Hence, the speed of light in that mate-
rial also depends on the wavelength of frequency of light” [4]. In general,
Illustrations are interactive; the Refraction Illustrations, for instance, allow
students to change the index of refraction of a material, alter the angle of
incidence of light in a ﬁber-optic cable, and modify the wavelength of a light
beam incident on a prism. If the Illustration poses a question to the student,
the answer is either provided directly in the text or indirectly from interac-

3

tion with the applet. In a curriculum that has integrated Physlets into its
instruction, Illustrations can be used to introduce new physical concepts or
analytical tools, either in the form of homework assignments or in classroom
demonstrations.

Explorations, on the other hand, serve as tutorials, guiding students’ in-
teractions with the applet and providing hints and suggestions to conceptual
and procedural problems. Many Explorations ask students to make predic-
tions prior to observing a particular physical phenomenon. In Exploration
34.1, for example, students are asked to predict how light emerging from a
convex lens would behave if the index of refraction of the outside material
were increased; then, students can vary the index of refraction using a slider
located beneath the animation and test their predictions. Other Explorations
let students alter the values of diﬀerent physical parameters in order to estab-
lish or verify physical relationships. In the Refraction chapter, for example,
students are asked to verify the validity of Snell’s Law with the help of a
virtual pink protractor (Exploration 34.2), and later, the relationship be-
tween the curvature of a mirror and its focal length (Exploration 34.3). The
CD-ROM accompanying Physlet Physics also contains supplemental Explo-
ration Worksheets designed to provide students with additional scaﬀolding
when completing the Explorations; these worksheets contain speciﬁc spaces
in which students can write or draw predictions or answers to questions. If
implemented into the regular curriculum, Explorations function well as group
problem-solving challenges or pre-laboratory assignments.

Finally, Problems resemble Explorations in that both provide students
with exercises that require varying degrees of conceptual or procedural un-
derstanding; however, unlike the Explorations, Problems provide students
with little guidance or scaﬀolding. Problems are most eﬀectively used as
homework assignments, group problem-solving challenges, or as classroom
discussion questions.

2.2 Analysis

The principal objective of the Physlet collection is to develop and deepen
students’ conceptual understanding of fundamental physics principles. For-
tunately, the study of how children learn scientiﬁc concepts — particularly
in physics — has been an active area of research both in cognitive science
and science education research for several decades [5, 6, 7]. One of the most
important ﬁndings of this research area is that students enter the classroom

4

not as blank slates, but with ﬁrmly rooted conceptions of the physical world.
Unfortunately, these so-called preconceptions are often incorrect by formal
scientiﬁc standards.
In the last decade, volumes have been dedicated to
documenting the most common physics preconceptions, in order for physics
instructors to be aware of the initial cognitive states of their students, and
to allow them to adapt their curricula accordingly [8, 9, 10].

Based on these ﬁndings, science education researchers have established
instructional methods and curricula designed speciﬁcally to modify students’
preconceptions to align with formal scientiﬁc theories. These methods —
generally based on the so-called cognitive conﬂict principle — tend to incor-
porate the following critical components: ﬁrst, students’ preconceptions need
to be elicited, either by having students make a prediction to the outcome
of a demonstration, or answer a conceptual question. Vast collections of
these demonstrations and questions exist, designed based on research ﬁnd-
ings speciﬁcally to bring out common misconceptions [9]. Then, students
are presented with a scenario — such as a demonstration, a simulation, or
an additional problem — where their preconception fails to explain a given
phenomenon. The new, scientiﬁcally correct conception is then introduced,
and shown to succeed where the preconception failed. Finally, students are
provided with opportunities to practice utilizing and solidifying the new con-
ception [11].

The pedagogical structure of the Physlets adheres very well to this model
for inducing conceptual change. After a brief introduction to a given phys-
ical principle via the Illustrations, the Explorations can serve to bring out
students’ misconceptions about this principle by means of a prediction re-
garding the outcome of a simulation. If the students are required to use the
Exploration Worksheets, which is recommended, a speciﬁc space is provided
In the aforementioned ex-
for students to write or draw their prediction.
ample of light emerging from a convex lens into a medium whose index of
refraction the student can alter, for instance, the ﬁrst question is: ”How,
if at all, would the path of the rays change if the source and the lens were
placed in another medium with an index of refraction of n = 1.2? [...] Draw
what you expect the rays to look like in the new medium.” Once the student
has made a prediction, the next question is: ”Was your prediction correct?
Explain” [3]. In providing designated spaces for students to make and discuss
their predictions, the worksheets thereby scaﬀold the students’ interactions
with the applet. Finally, by supplying students with additional opportuni-
ties to practice using the new physical concept in a number of Problems, the

5

Physlets are further adhering to the established conceptual change model.

Science education researchers have identiﬁed another skill as critical to
developing a conceptual understanding of scientiﬁc principles: the ability to
translate across multiple representations. In science in general, a wide range
of diﬀerent representations are used to represent scientiﬁc phenomena, and
this is particularly the case in physics. Physical phenomena can be repre-
sented in words, equations, tables of numbers, graphs, and specialized dia-
grams. In fact, one of the main diﬀerences found between novice and expert
physicists is their ability to translate eﬀectively across these representations,
and the links between them contribute to experts’ coherent knowledge struc-
tures and their eﬀective problem-solving strategies. As will be discussed later
in this paper, a number of technologies have been developed speciﬁcally to
help students solidify these connections between representations [12, 13].

Throughout its simulations, Physlets utilize a variety of these represen-
tations in displaying physical phenomena. Along with its simple visualiza-
tions, the applets often include additional frames that display the same phe-
nomenon in a diﬀerent representation.
In the chapter on Faraday’s Law
(Chapter 29), for instance, Illustration 29.2: Loop in a Changing Magnetic
Field presents the student with an animation of a loop through which the
magnetic ﬂux changes; simultaneously, the applet displays a plot of Mag-
netic Field vs. Time, and another of Induced Emf vs. Time. Visually, then,
the applet is able to illustrate the physical relationships inherent in Fara-
day’s Law, namely, that a changing magnetic ﬂux through a loop induces an
emf in that loop. Although no research has explicitly evaluated this aspect
of the Physlets, research investigating other technologies that oﬀer students
simultaneous representations of physical phenomena have reported great im-
provement in students’ conceptual understanding [14, 15, 16].

Finally, the Physlets’ tutorial structure aligns well with contemporary
theories of social learning that apply to the development of both conceptual
and procedural understanding. These theories were ﬁrst developed in the
late 1970’s by Russian psychologist Lev Vygostky [17], and have been rein-
forced more recently by Fischer & Bidell [18]. According to these theorists,
students’ performance at various conceptual and procedural tasks may be
greatly enhanced during collaboration with an adult or with more capable
peers. Using Fischer & Bidell’s terminology, when working independently,
students perform at a functional level, whereas in collaboration with adults
or peers, they perform at the signiﬁcantly higher optimal level. This type of
scaﬀolding is provided in the very structure of the Physlets: the instructions

6

and explanations in the Illustrations, as well as the guiding hints and strate-
gies in the Explorations, provide students with the type of support provided
by peers or instructors in traditional educational settings. This scaﬀolding,
then, allows the student to perform at a higher level than possible when
facing the problem without support, and the subsequent Problems provide
students with the opportunity to solidify their developing skills.

2.3 Outlook

Physlets have enriched physics instruction with an invaluable technological
tool, most fundamentally by providing students with dynamic, interactive
animations of physical phenomena previously only visualized in static text-
book images. Physics as a discipline, after all, is generally concerned with
dynamic phenomena, with static ones representing only special cases of more
general principles. Furthermore, like similar technologies developed for bi-
ology and chemistry education [19], Physlets allow students to interact and
experiment with highly abstract physical concepts inaccessible in traditional
laboratory settings: students can listen to the changing frequency heard from
a sound-emitting source whose velocity they can control, move around two
point charges to explore the resulting net electric ﬁeld, and view the motion
of a charged particle in a magnetic ﬁeld. These general properties of Physlets
alone make them an invaluable addition to the physics education toolbox.

However, like any particular educational tool or activity, Physlets may
beneﬁt students most when part of a structured curriculum. As outlined in
the previous section, speciﬁc instructional methods have been developed to
help students modify their scientiﬁc misconceptions. Though the Illustration-
Exploration-Problem structure corresponds well with this model — which is
further reinforced and supported by the Exploration Worksheets — students’
adherence to this structure needs monitoring. Thereby, Physlets may have
their greatest impact on students’ conceptual learning when supported by
a structured curriculum that makes use of collaborative learning under in-
structor supervision. Alternatively, Physlets may be uniﬁed with intelligent
tutoring systems that monitors and provides feedback on student answers to
the questions associated with each applet.

Overall, Physlets are an extremely practical and ﬂexible educational tool.
They are available free over the internet, and are accompanied by extensive
online and physically published resources; they are easily modiﬁed by physics
instructors wanting to adapt them to their speciﬁc educational needs; they

7

can be used as introductory material to a new physics concepts, as classroom
or homework exercises, and in collaborative groups; and, ﬁnally, they are
technologically simple enough to be easily integrated into other educational
technologies.

3 Andes Physics Tutoring System

3.1 Technical Speciﬁcations

The Andes Physics Tutoring System was developed at the University of Pitts-
burgh and the United States Naval Academy through collaboration with
the Cognitive Science Program at the Oﬃce of Naval Research, based on
a common interest in developing artiﬁcially intelligent tutoring technology
for physics education. To this end, two existing technologies — Cascade, a
rule-based cognitive model of physics problem solving, and Olae, an online
assessment system — were combined and supplemented with the capacity
to provide hints and feedback on student work to create Andes. The fun-
damental objective of the Andes Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) was to
interact with physics students using the method of coached problem solving,
whereby the ITS and the student collaborate through the problem-solving
In this process, when the student makes good progress toward a
process.
problem solution, the ITS simply agrees with each step; however, if the stu-
dent makes an error or gets stuck, the ITS can provide hints or feedback on
the student error. Now, Andes is freely available for download, or can be
used as a web-based service [20, 21].

Four general principles guided the design of Andes. First, transfer is facil-
itated by making the ITS interface as similar to a pencil-and-paper solution
as possible. Second, the student is provided with ﬂexibility in the order in
which actions are performed, and is allowed to skip steps when applicable.
Third, immediate feedback is provided in order to minimize the amount of
time spent pursuing wrong paths toward a solution, and to maximize the op-
portunities for learning. Finally, students are encouraged to construct their
own knowledge by receiving simple hints that require them to derive most of
the problem solution on their own [22].

In order to satisfy the ﬁrst design principle — to facilitate transfer by
making the Andes interface similar to a piece of paper — the number of
structured entry ﬁelds in the ITS is minimized. Thereby, the Andes interface

8

consists of four diﬀerent panes: two entry panes, one for diagrams and one
for equations, one pane for variable deﬁnitions, and one for hints. When a
problem is ﬁrst presented, students are generally called upon to do a qual-
itative problem analysis by drawing a diagram in the diagram pane. The
area allows for a wide range of diﬀerent drawings, including free body di-
agrams, vectors, coordinate systems, angles between vectors and axes, and
components of circular paths. When an object is drawn in this pane, a dialog
box is presented that instructs students to deﬁne it. Though some problems
consist entirely of the qualitative problem analysis, others go on to require
a full algebraic and numerical solution. Consequently, the next step in the
problem-solving process is to deﬁne relevant variables. This aspect of Andes
represents its most signiﬁcant diﬀerence from a pencil-and-paper solution,
since equations may be included on the latter without having each variable
explicitly deﬁned; in Andes, however, in order for a student to enter New-
ton’s Second Law — F = m ∗ a — they are ﬁrst required to deﬁne what
each of the variables F , m, and a refer to. Students can deﬁne variables in
two ways: either by assigning a variable name to a component of their dia-
gram, or by entering variables in the variable deﬁnition menu. Finally, once
relevant variables have been designed, students can enter equations into the
equation pane. Andes lacks a structured equation editor; instead, equations
can be entered using conventional syntax (=, +, −, ∗, /, ˆ, and ). In cor-
respondence with the second design principle, variables and equations may
be entered in any order, so long as all variables included in an equation are
deﬁned before the equation itself. Once all relevant variables and equations
are deﬁned, and numerical values for the variables are entered, a calculator
ﬁnds the numerical solution to the problem [22].

The capacity to provide students with diﬀerent types of feedback is one of
Andes’ unique characteristics. In accordance with the third design principle,
Andes provides immediate feedback once a student completes an action: if
the entry is correct, it is colored green, and if it is incorrect, it is colored red.
When student mistakes are likely due to lack of attention, Andes provides
unsolicited help in the form of an error message. Common errors of this sort
include leaving blank entries in dialog boxes, using undeﬁned variables in
equations, or forgetting the units of a dimensional number. On the other
hand, if an error is not recognized as this type of common mistake, Andes
simply colors the entry red. Once an entry is marked red, students can either
correct their mistake without receiving any help, or they can select the entry
and click on a help button, which automatically oﬀers the student a relevant

9

hint. Hints are generally available in sequences of three: a pointing hint, a
teaching hint, and a bottom-out hint. These hints tend to be short, and, as
suggested by the fourth design principle, are designed to point students to the
feature of the entry that was incorrect. Speciﬁcally, the pointing hint simply
calls attention to the location of the student’s error, so that if the student has
the relevant knowledge, the mistake can be easily corrected. However, if the
student gets stuck, the teaching hints provide students with a relevant piece
of knowledge that could be used toward a solution. Finally, the bottom-out
hint tells the student exactly what to change. In order to encourage students
to use these hint sequences when stuck in a problem solution, points are only
subtracted when students ask for the bottom-out hint [20].

3.2 Analysis

An extensive body of literature related to physics problem solving has accu-
mulated over the past decade. Though much of the work in this area had
studied mathematical problem solving, problem solving in physics has been
investigated through a number of careful studies comparing the problem-
solving strategies of novices and experts. The literature in this area now
points to three fundamental diﬀerences between novice and expert prob-
lem solvers. First, experts possess highly coherent, hierarchical knowledge
structures that are organized around a small number of fundamental physics
principles, allowing experts to eﬃciently evaluate the consequences of diﬀer-
ent problem-solving decisions. Novice problem solvers, on the other hand,
possess disorganized, incoherent knowledge structures of loosely connected
facts and formulas. Though important in problem solving, these knowledge
structures generally become more organized as students develop more pro-
found conceptual understanding of physics. Second, expert physicists employ
explicit strategies during problem solving, beginning with an initial problem
analysis in multiple representations, and proceeding with extensive qualita-
tive reasoning before commencing the algebraic and numerical manipulation
of the problem. Novices generally lack these strategies altogether. Finally,
metacognition plays a fundamental role in expert problem solving; experts
spend a considerable amount of time analyzing problems, planning general
solutions, selecting strategies, and evaluating the outcomes of their actions.
This type of metacognitive activity is deﬁcient in most novices [23, 24, 25].
A number of diﬀerent researchers have attempted to utilize these results
to create physics problem-solving curricula or instructional methods, since

10

university physics courses generally lack explicit problem-solving instruction.
At the University of Minnesota, for instance, Heller & Heller [26] have de-
veloped the Cooperative Problem Solving curriculum, in which students are
required to use structured problem-solving frameworks simulating experts’
structured approaches to physics problems. These are combined with so-
called context-rich problems and collaborative groups to create a complete
problem-solving curriculum. A number of publications have reported signif-
icant improvement in problem-solving ability in the students participating
in this curriculum [13, 27]. In mathematics education, research carried out
by Schoenfeld [28] has pointed out that the failure of attempted problem-
solving instruction is often a result of the failure of the instruction to help
students develop the metacognitive skills necessary to eﬀectively apply the
explicit problem-solving strategies they are taught. Thereby, Schoenfeld de-
veloped an instructional method whereby students were asked a series of
questions throughout their problem solving that challenged them to recog-
nize the importance of planning, monitoring, and evaluation throughout the
process. Students’ metacognitive awareness was greatly improved through
this instructional method, as were their problem-solving skills [13].

Andes directly addresses one of the diﬀerences between novice and expert
problem solvers: the structured problem-solving strategies. When utilizing
Andes, students eﬀectively simulate the structured strategies of expert prob-
lem solvers. Rather than jumping into the algebraic and numerical manipu-
lation of the problem, as novices often do, students focus on its qualitative
analysis: they create and label diagrams, identify known and unknown vari-
ables, and determine the physical formulas necessary to solve the problem.
Then, the numerical solution is handled automatically by Andes. Attempts
at teaching students the explicit problem-solving strategies of physics experts
have been made in other curricula, and these have generally reported great
success at improving students’ problem-solving skills.

The diﬀerence between previous attempts at teaching structured problem-
solving strategies and the Andes ITS is the immediate feedback Andes pro-
vides at each step of the process. According to the Andes creators, the imme-
diate feedback provided by the interface is intended to prevent students from
wasting time pursuing incorrect approaches toward a problem solution while
providing them with a number of opportunities for learning [22]. This ob-
jective is structurally supported both by providing students with the choice
of whether or not to receive a hint from Andes, and by the brief but sub-
stantive nature of these hints. However, the metacognitive aspect of problem

11

solving is largely lacking from Andes’ interface. Students are not explicitly
called upon to plan their solution, monitor their progress, or evaluate their
decisions; these processes are all managed by Andes. Furthermore, many ex-
pert physicists perceive problem solving as an inherently cyclical process, in
which errors are both natural and necessary by forcing the problem solver to
analyze and evaluate their answers and the problem-solving decisions lead-
ing up to it [29]. Andes eliminates the opportunity for students to pursue
these wrong paths, thereby also eliminating very important accompanying
metacognitive processes.

3.3 Outlook

The Andes Intelligent Physics Tutor represents an important step toward a
problem-solving curriculum. Although numerous studies have investigated
the nature of physics problem solving, and a detailed picture of the cognitive
structures and strategies underlying expert problem solving is emerging, the
vast majority of introductory university physics courses lack explicit problem-
solving instruction. Andes, on the other hand, provides students with helpful
structure and guidance in how to perform a qualitative problem analysis, and
through its hints, oﬀers plenty of opportunities for student learning. Like
Physlets, Andes adheres well to collaborative learning principles, since the
ITS functions as an instructor or a peer. Furthermore, Andes is available for
free online, making it easily accessible, and though the interface may initially
appear confusing, convenient videos are available online to guide students in
how to interact with the tutor.

However, research in physics problem solving has highlighted the impor-
tance of metacognitive activities such as planning, monitoring, and evalu-
ation throughout the problem-solving process, and Andes does not provide
students with explicit opportunities to practice these metacognitive activi-
ties. Therefore, though Andes has the potential to play an important role in
a future problem-solving curriculum, it would need to be supplemented with
extensive opportunities for students to solve problems without its guidance,
and with explicit direction in how to increase metacognitive awareness.

12

4 Microcomputer-Based Laboratory Tools

4.1 Technical Speciﬁcations

In the late 1980’s, inspired by cognitive science and education research em-
phasizing the importance of grounding scientiﬁc principles in students’ con-
crete experiences, the Center for Science and Mathematics Teaching at Tufts
University embarked upon the Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking project [30].
The eﬀorts of the project produced so-called microcomputer-based labora-
tory (MBL) tools and accompanying software around the central objective of
helping students recognize the connections between the physical world and
the abstract physics principles presented in the classroom. These MBL tools
made use of inexpensive probes — made by Vernier Software & Technology
— capable of measuring physical quantities such as position, velocity, force,
temperature, current, and voltage, connected to the basic Apple comput-
ers of the time [31]. Though computer technologies have changed signiﬁ-
cantly in the past two decades, the technical details of today’s MBL tools
are fundamentally the same as the 1980’s versions: analog-to-digital convert-
ers (ADCs) connect to computers, and a variety of probes measuring a wide
range of physical quantities are connected to the ADCs. The accompanying
software then allows for real-time graphical plotting of measured and inferred
physical quantities [13, 14].

The MBL tools were developed in order to overcome a number of tech-
nical obstacles often facing students in the traditional physics laboratory.
First, the tools can relieve students of the time-consuming and distracting
traditional process of data collection and display. Second, data is presented
graphically in real time, allowing students to quickly view the data in under-
standable form and evaluate it. Third, the speed with which data is collected
and displayed allows students to examine a larger number of physical phe-
nomena each laboratory period. And, rather than spending the laboratory
period collecting and plotting data, students can instead dedicate their time
to analyzing and discussing the collected data. Fourth, the general nature of
the hardware and software allows these to be used to investigate a wide range
of physical phenomena without having students spend a signiﬁcant amount
of time learning how to use complicated tools. Finally, another consequence
of the tools’ general nature is that they can be used in physics classrooms of
all levels, from elementary school to the university [14].

13

4.2 Analysis

In order to evaluate the pedagogical signiﬁcance of MBL tools, two funda-
mental questions need to be addressed: ﬁrst, what are the goals of the physics
laboratory? Second, how successful have traditional physics laboratories been
in achieving these goals?

A wide range of goals have generally been cited for the physics labora-
tory. As outlined recently by Redish [13], the laboratory is a place where
theoretical principles and results presented in class can be veriﬁed, while
providing students with mechanical skills at handling common physics ap-
paratuses and experience with diﬀerent measuring tools. It also familiarizes
students with the process of error analysis and statistics. Furthermore, and
perhaps more profoundly, laboratories can aid students in building an under-
standing of physics concepts, the empirical basis of science, and the nature of
scientiﬁc exploration and research. Finally, it can help students understand
the importance of independent thought and coherence in scientiﬁc thinking.
Unfortunately, most contemporary physics laboratories only address the
ﬁrst few goals, with occasional attention paid to error analysis. Laboratory
manuals tend to provide students with highly explicit instructions of lengthy
and detailed procedures, focused on data collection and graphing, and only
occasionally calling for brief responses to questions. Studies videotaping
student activity in physics laboratories have shown that students spend most
of the time reading the laboratory manual, with most discussion centered
on concrete questions of how to prepare the apparatus and collect data.
The process is highly prescriptive, and rarely calls for conceptual reasoning
or understanding from the student. These cookbook laboratories — often
accused of turning students into technicians rather than scientists — are
common in most university science classes, and few attempts have been made
at altering their structure [13, 32, 33].

Against this backdrop, the MBL tools enable a number of profound
changes to the physics laboratory. Theoretical principles and results from
class can still be reproduced and veriﬁed. While relieving students of the
drudgery of data collection, MBL tools provide students with experience in
experimental setup, though in this case they utilize the computer for the col-
lection, display, and analysis of data. Furthermore, students are able to prac-
tice laboratory skills such as experimental setup and calibration. Thereby,
though the experimental setups are diﬀerent in the traditional laboratories
and those enhanced with MBL tools, they both address the ﬁrst several ob-

14

jectives of the physics laboratory. One recognized disadvantage of the MBLs,
however, is that at least in their current implementation, error analysis re-
ceives little attention [13].

It is really in the later, and more profound, objectives of the physics lab-
oratory that the MBL tools oﬀer a signiﬁcant advantage over the traditional
laboratory setup. Unlike the traditional setup, MBL tools enable an immedi-
ate connection between physical phenomena and useful abstractions, such as
the symbolic representation of physical phenomena in graphical form. The
subsequent analysis — which can occur immediately after the phenomenon
is observed — of these representations allows theoretical concepts presented
in class to be grounded in students’ experiences in the laboratory. Several
studies have, in fact, reported signiﬁcantly improved understanding of physics
concepts in students utilizing MBL tools in their laboratories [14, 15, 16].

Furthermore, as less time is spent carrying out data collection and dis-
play, more time is available for students to experience scientiﬁc exploration
and inquiry. Rather than focusing the laboratory period on data collection,
students can spend their time making predictions and hypotheses, designing
experiments to test these hypotheses, and evaluating their results. Unlike tra-
ditional laboratories where time generally allows for only one such sequence,
students can modify their hypotheses, alter their experimental setups, and
engage in extensive discussion with their peers. This type of experience more
closely simulates the nature of actual scientiﬁc research [14].

Finally, unlike the prescriptive nature of traditional physics laboratories,
those incorporating MBL tools have a more substantial engagement/discovery
component; the students thereby have more opportunities to construct their
own understanding of physical phenomena and scientiﬁc principles, in accor-
dance with modern constructivist theories of learning [15].

4.3 Outlook

Traditional university physics courses have generally consisted of two compo-
nents: lectures and laboratories. In formal lectures, professors present new
physical principles, along with relevant derivations and, perhaps, a num-
ber of example problems. As a result of the non-interactive nature of these
lectures, laboratories have historically played an important role in the intro-
ductory physics curriculum. The laboratory has represented the space where
students can interact with teaching assistants, conﬁrm and validate the prin-
ciples and results presented during lecture, familiarize with the fundamentals

15

of scientiﬁc research, and solidify their understanding of fundamental physics
principles.

Though numerous studies have demonstrated the failure of the traditional
physics laboratory to address these goals to a satisfactory level, research in
cognitive science, physics education, and educational technologies are con-
currently producing instructional tools and methods that are, directly or in-
directly, altering the role of the laboratory in the physics curriculum. Class
meetings are no longer guaranteed to be occupied by professor lectures and
passive students; instead, interactive curricula, such as Mazur’s Peer Instruc-
tion [9], are turning the classroom into a space where student misconceptions
about physics are addressed directly, where students build their conceptual
understanding through extensive discussion, and where students are actively
involved in the construction of their physics knowledge. Additionally, online
simulations, such as Christian and Belloni’s (2004) Physlets, are extending
the space where students can explore physical concepts beyond the classroom
and into computer labs and dormitories.

The role of the laboratory, then, is fundamentally altered. In fact, some
introductory physics courses, such as Physics by Inquiry at the University of
Washington [34] and Workshop Physics at Dickinson College [35], are abol-
ishing the division between lecture and laboratory altogether, teaching the
course in a so-called workshop or studio method. In these classes, the lec-
ture plays only a small or nonexistent role, and instead, students spend the
period working with laboratory equipment in collaborative groups. In the
Workshop Physics curriculum, heavy use is also made of MBL tools. In light
of our current understanding of the importance of constructivist classrooms
and collaborative learning, these examples of completely revolutionized class-
rooms represent a tremendous step ahead in contemporary physics education.
Given their demonstrated eﬀectiveness in helping students develop a more
profound conceptual understanding of physics principles, MBL tools hold
great promise in improving introductory university physics curricula. Cou-
pled with curricula grounded in ﬁrmly established theories of learning —
such as constructivism, cognitive conﬂict in conceptual change, and social
learning — MBL tools can bring some of the most profound objectives of the
traditional laboratory into reality in the modern physics classroom.

16

5 Conclusion

The emergence of educational technologies in physics education is having a
profound impact on all areas of physics instruction, from course manage-
ment to problem-solving instruction and to data collection in the laboratory.
Although it does not oﬀer a panacea to the wide range of problems plagu-
ing physics education, the emergence of these technologies is forcing cognitive
scientists, physics education researchers, physics instructors, and educational
technology researchers to critically evaluate the goals of physics education
and our understanding of how students learn physics. Only through this
important interdisciplinary collaboration can physics instruction be funda-
mentally improved.

The technologies presented and discussed in this paper oﬀer a glimpse
into the tremendous potential of educational technologies in physics educa-
tion. Physlets allow students to visualize and interact with highly complex
and abstract physical concepts; Andes guides students through expert-like
approaches to physics problems; MBL tools relieve students of the drudgery
of data collection in the laboratory and helps them establish the connections
between physical phenomena and abstract representations. Physics educa-
tion researchers have already created numerous structured curricula founded
on well-established principles of learning — such as constructivism and social
learning — that integrate these technologies. Though implementing these
curricula will be a tremendous challenge, physics students will surely beneﬁt
from the gradual elimination of the non-interactive, passive lecture as the
basis of university physics education.

References

[1] W. Christian and G. Novak, What is a physlet?

(2005). Available
at http://webphysics.davidson.edu/Applets/about-physlets.html (12 May
2006).

[2] W. Christian and G. Novak, Physlets

(2005). Available

at

http://webphysics.davidson.edu/Applets/Applets.html (12 May 2006).

[3] W. Christian and M. Belloni, Physlet Physics: Interactive Illustrations,
Explorations, and Problems for Introductory Physics (Pearson Education,
Inc., Upper Saddle River, 2004).

17

[4] W. Christian and M. Belloni, Physlet Physics: Interactive Illustrations,
Explorations, and Problems for Introductory Physics (Pearson Education,
Inc., Upper Saddle River, 2004), p. 292.

[5] J. Piaget and A. Szeminska, in The Essential Piaget, H. E. Gruber and
J. J. Voneche, Eds. (Jason Aronson Inc., New Jersey, 1977), pp. 298-311.

[6] S. Carey and E. Spelke, in Mapping the Mind: Domain Speciﬁcity in Cog-
nition and Culture, L. A. Hirschfeld and S. A. Gelman, Eds. (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1994), pp. 169-200.

[7] T. A. Grotzer, Studies in Science Education 39, 1 (2003).

[8] A. B. Arons, Teaching Introductory Physics (John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,

[9] E. Mazur, Peer Instruction, A User’s Manual (Prentice Hall, Upper Sad-

New York, 1997).

dle River, 1997).

[10] R. D. Knight, Five Easy Lessons: Strategies for Successful Physics

Teaching (Addison Wesley, San Francisco, 2004).

[11] T. A. Grotzer, Principal Leadership October 2004.

[12] J. Lemke, Linguistics and Education 10(3), 247 (2000).

[13] E. F. Redish, Teaching Physics with the Physics Suite (John Wiley &

Sons, Hoboken, 2003).

[14] R. K. Thornton and D. R. Sokoloﬀ, American Journal of Physics 58(9),

[15] E. F. Redish, J. M. Saul and R. N. Steinberg, American Journal of

Physics 65(1), 45 (1997).

[16] R. Trumper and M. Gelbman, Physics Education 35(2), 90 (2000).

[17] L. Vygotsky, Mind in Society (Harvard University Press, Cambridge,

858.

1978).

[18] K. W. Fischer and T. R. Bidell, in Theoretical Models of Human Devel-

opment R. M. Lerner, Ed. (Wiley, New York, 2005).

18

[19] Concord Consortium, MOLO — Molecular Logic (2006). Available at

http://molo.concord.org/ (12 May 2006).

[20] K. VanLehn, C. Lynch, K. Schulze, J. A. Shapiro, R. Shelby, L. Tay-
lor, D. Treacy, A. Weinstein and M. Wintersgill, International Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Education 15(3), 1 (2005).

[21] Andes,

Andes

Physics

Tutor

(2006).

Available

at

http://www.andes.pitt.edu/ (13 May 2006).

[22] K. VanLehn and A. Gertner,

in Intelligent Tutoring Systems: 5th
International Conference G. Gauthier, C. Frasson and K. VanLehn,
Eds. (Springer, Berlin, 2000), pp. 133-142.

[23] J. H. Larkin, J. McDermott, D. Simon and H. A. Simon, Science 208,

1335 (1980).

[24] A. S. Dhillon, Science Education 82(3), 379 (1996).

[25] J. Snyder, International Journal of Science Education 22(9), 979 (2000).

[26] P. Heller and K. Heller, University of Minnesota Cooperative Problem

Solving in Physics (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 1999).

[27] K. Heller, Cooperative Group Problem Solving (1999). Available at
http://groups.physics.umn.edu/physed/Research/CGPS/CGPSintro.htm
(14 May 2006).

[28] E. H. Schoenfeld, in Acquisition of Mathematics Concepts and Processes

R. Lesh and M. Landau, Eds. (Academic Press, New York, 1983).

[29] H. P. V. Kuo, An Explanatory Model of Physics Faculty Conceptions
About the Problem Solving Process (PhD Dissertation) (2004). Available at
http://groups.physics.umn.edu/physed/People/Vince/Vince%20Kuo.htm
(2 May 2006).

[30] R. K. Thornton, Center for Science and Mathematics Teaching (2006).

Available at http://ase.tufts.edu/csmt/index.html (13 May 2006).

[31] Vernier, Vernier Software & Technology

(2006). Available

at

http://www.vernier.com/ (13 May 2006).

19

[32] W. H. Leonard, Journal of College Science Teaching 84 (1991).

[33] K. M. Polacek and E. L. Keeling, Journal of College Science Teaching

52 (2005).

[34] L. C. McDermott, Physics

by

Inquiry

(2006). Available

at

http://www.phys.washington.edu/groups/peg/pbi.html (13 May 2006).

[35] P.

Laws,

Workshop

Physics

(2004).

http://physics.dickinson.edu/ ˜wp web/WP homepage.html
2006).

Available

at
(13 May

20

