Lessons Drawn from Implementation of Online
Tutoring System in Physics Courses

Itzhak Goldman
Department of Basic Sciences
Afeka, Tel Aviv Academic College of Engineering
Tel Aviv, Israel
email: goldman@afeka.ac.il

7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
2
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— The online tutoring system CAPA was implemented
at Afeka College in the academic year 2000-2001 in calculus
based physics courses. It was used also in the academic year
2001-2002 and was very successful in improving understanding
and achievements of the students. The paper describes the system
features and the case study of its implementation. Lessons drawn
from use of the CAPA system are discussed. The system no
doubt contributed signiﬁcantly to increased understanding and
higher achievements in the ﬁnal exams. This was at a price
that students felt that they had to devote more time to study
than traditionally required. The instructor has to invest more
time than traditionally done in composing new problems and
managing the system. However, the increased interaction with
the students makes the teaching process much more interesting
and rewarding.
Index Terms — Elearning, Asynchronous Systems, Physics Edu-
cation

I. INTRODUCTION

The CAPA system (Computerized Asynchronous Personal-
ized Assignments) has been developed, in the 90s, at Michigan
State University (MSU) [1]. The developers were physicists
that confronted difﬁculties with teaching physics to large
undergraduate classes. The difﬁculties were

• The ”loss” of the individual student in such a large class
• Lack of real-time feedback to the lecturer
• The not simple task of ensuring a uniform level for the

recital classes given by teaching assistants

The motivation was to develop a, simple to use, computerized
system that will supply personalized exercises and provide
immediate grading to the students. It turned out that the system
had many additional beneﬁts, notably improved achievements
in exams[2 − 6]. This effect was more pronounced for the
weaker students. The system’s relative simplicity and reported
success made it a favorite of many universities and colleges
in the US and it was used also in other disciplines, e.g. [6, ].
Following the positive reports about CAPA I implemented
it at Afeka College in the academic year 2000-2001. It was
used in calculus based physics classes for engineering students.
An additional motivation was due to the lack, at the time,
of teaching assistants for correcting homework assignments.
Given the success of the system, I have used it also in
the academic year 2001-2002. In the following year, it was
decided that a uniform format for the physics courses must be

employed by the different instructors. Not all instructors were
willing to invest the effort required in using the system and
preferred traditional teaching. This brought to end the use of
CAPA, in spite of its success.

II. SYSTEM FEATURES

The system was implemented on a Linux machine (Pentium
2) running RedHat 6. Support from the technical stuff at
Afeka was very important. A passing note - the server proved
extremely stable- running uninterrupted for months despite
heavy load occurring near the due time of the homework.

The system is:
• A framework capable of delivering personalized assign-

ments

instructor

• Content independent - the content is supplied by the

• Web interfaced - each student had a personal user number,
and for each exercise sheet there was a capa-id consisting
of 4 digits. The students could retrieve their capa-ids from
the system

• Asynchronous - allowing students to pursue the assign-
to the

their preferred time-schedule, subject

ment at
constraint of due time

• Immediate feedback is provided to the student on his

performance

• A useful tool is a report assigning a measure of difﬁculty
to each of the problems. This provides the lecturer with
real-time feedback on what is well understood and what

Fig. 1. Relative difﬁculty of problems.

is not, so he can take corrective measures immediately.
An example of such a report is shown in Fig. 1

• Various statistical analyses, such as the grades distribu-
tions demonstrated in Fig. 2, can be readily obtained and
provide real-time feedback

• The system comes with a web forum that is useful in
enhancing collaboration between the students and pro-
vides the instructor feed back on how well the students
are doing

Fig. 2. Grades distribution for a given assignment.

Each student receives the same problem but with different
numerical data, or different questions to answer. These features
promote cooperation and discussion among students while
rendering mechanical copying much less likely There are two
main types of problems:

• Numerical problems, as in Fig.3. Each student receives

different numerical data

• Multiple-question qualitative problem that tests under-

Fig. 4. Multiple choice qualitative problem.

Fig. 5. The same problem for a different student.

standing. Each student receives different combinations of
the questions or altogether different questions relating to
the same situation. Fig. 4 represents such a problem and
Fig. 5 shows a variant of it

• The system responses are Y, N or U. Y means a correct
answer, N means an incorrect answer and U, (in case of
the numerical problems) means wrong units. The allowed
precision is set by the instructor. Typically, it was 1 ÷ 2%
• Each problem can be tried several times. Normally, 10
tries were used. The multiple tries facility was intended
to compensate for misclicks or imprecise calculations.
The U replies do not count in the number of tries

Fig. 3. Numerical problem.

• It is possible to build the problems so that after a few
wrong answers, there will be a hint or a short explanation.

III. CASE STUDY

The system was implemented and used in the Physics 1
course; which is taken by students in their ﬁrst semester of
the academic studies. At 2000-2001, the physics lecturers were
also giving the recital classes. There were two classes totaling
of 86 students. There were 10 exercise sheets during a semester
of 14 weeks. Overall, there were about 140 different problems,
the best 120 answers were considered. Each problem had
10 tries and each problem set was open forf 7 -10 days
depending on the work involved. An online forum was set up.
I reviewed it on a daily basis - reading comments, questions
and occasionally throwing in guiding clues.

• At the beginning there was quite an enthusiasm from
the students part. They worked willingly and accordingly
achieved very high scores on homework assignments. I
heard comments from lecturer’s of other subjects that the
students asked them why they are not employing CAPA
too

• At about mid-semester complaints had started. The fact
that the system language is English and not Hebrew was
one of them

• The fact that the system checks only ﬁnal answers but
not the detailed solution was regarded as unfair, even
though the 10 tries availability should have compensated
for calculation errors

• However, the most serious complaint was that they are
forced to devote too much time to physics on the expense
of other courses

A survey that I conducted showed that they devoted 3 ÷ 6
hours weekly. The course was 3 weekly hours of lectures and 2
weekly hours of recitals. In physics studies, is usually assumed
that on the average a student should put 2 hours of self-study
for each hour of lectures. By this measure the time was more
than reasonable, but the students truly felt that they are over-
burdened. I’ll discuss this point in the discussion section.

• The good news were the success in the ﬁnal exam: the
grades were higher than in previous years - the median
grade was higher by 8-10 points out of 100 - increasing
from ∼ 60 to ∼ 70

• Moreover, most of the improvement was in the lower
grades of the distribution. This came as no surprise as
similar results were reported in the US

In the subsequent semester, the same students took the
course Physics 2. In response to the complaints in the previous
semester, the students were offered two options: continue with
CAPA as in the ﬁrst semester, or have traditional homework
assignments.

• To my surprise (given the complaints) about 80% chose

CAPA

• The students who chose CAPA said that in the ﬁnal exam
they felt that they were much better prepared than in other

courses and attributed it to CAPA. So in the new course
there were willing to pay the price of investing extra time
• In Physics 2, the grades in the ﬁnal exam correlated
positively with the use of CAPA. The small number of
non-CAPA students renders statistical assessments not
very signiﬁcant; but the trend was qualitatively obvious
• Not few students continued to solve the problems even
after they had 120 correct answers and they knew that the
grade won’t increase. A typical answer to the question
why they did so was that they wanted to have a ”perfect
score” - from the system in addition to getting 100 from
the instructor

• Some students regarded the CAPA assignments as fun
- sort of a computer game- especially so because they
received immediate assessment

As instructor, I beneﬁted from the feedback utility that gave
me in real-time a report on how the students progressed with
each exercise sheet. Moreover, I found out quickly which of
the questions are in particular difﬁcult and could explain once
more the relevant material, before the exercise sheet was due.
The fact that each student received a personalized version
of the sheet was very helpful with students that were absent
from college because of justiﬁed reasons such as illness or
reserve army duty. To these students the sheets were opened
and closed when they returned to the college.

Given the success of the system, I have used it also in the
academic year 2001-2002. In the following year, the physics
courses given by different instructors, had to be identical. Not
all instructors were willing to invest the effort required in using
the system and preferred traditional teaching. This brought to
end the use of CAPA, in spite of its success.

IV. DISCUSSION

In what follows aspects relevant

to the student,

to the

instructor and to the academic institution will be addressed.

A. The students

• Achievements as measured by scores of the ﬁnal exam

improved signiﬁcantly

• Equally important was the fact that the students devoted
more time for self study than they would have otherwise
• Another advantage was that the students were encouraged
to collaborate and discuss the exercises, but mechanical
copying was not simple as with traditional homework.
• However, students felt (justiﬁably or not) that they are
required to work harder at the expense of other courses

The ﬁrst point is impressive, especially so since not only
were the scores higher but also the level of understanding was
higher. Also encouraging is the fact that weaker students seem
to have beneﬁted the most. This last ﬁnding is in accord with
similar ﬁndings in the US[4, 5]. In the US, it was also found
[5] that the improvements among female students was larger
than among male students. In our case the small number of
female students didn’t allow a meaningful test of this point.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am indebted to the CAPA team at Michigan State Uni-
versity for their help in installing the system. The technical
computer personnel at Afeka were a great help. The partici-
pation in this conference was ﬁnancially supported by Afeka
Engineering College. Comments and suggestions by my wife
Hana Goldman helped considerably in improving the paper.

REFERENCES

[1] E. Kashy, B. M. Sherrill, Y. Tsai, D. Thaler, D. Weinshank, M. En-
gelmann, and D. J. Morrissey, CAPA, an integrated computer assisted
personalized assignment system, Am. J. Phys. 61 (12), 1993, pp. 1124-
1130.

[2] E. Kashy, S. J. Gaff, N. H. Pawley, W. L. Stretch, S. L. Wolfe, D.
J. Morrissey, and Y. Tsai, Conceptual Questions in Computer-Assisted
Assignments, Am. J. Phys. 63 (11), 1995, pp. 1000-1005.

[3] M. Thoennessen and M. J. Harrison, Computer-Assisted Assignments in

a Large Physics Class, Computers Educ. 27, 141 (1996).

[4] E. Kashy, M. Thoennessen, Y. Tsai, N. E. Davis, and S. L. Wolfe, Using
Networked Tools to Promote Student Success in Large Classes, Journal
of Engineering Education 87, 385 (1998).

[5] Kashy, E. Albertelli, G. Thoennessen, M. Tsai, Y. Kashy, D.A. ,ALN
technology on campus: successes and problems, Frontiers in Education
Conference, 2000. FIE 2000. 30th Annual.

[6] D. J. Morrissey, E. Kashy, and Y. Tsai, Using Computer-Assisted Per-
sonalized Assignments for Freshman Chemistry, Journal of Chemical
Education, Vol. 72, 1995, pp 141-146.

[7] N. N. Artus, K. D. Nadler, A Computer-Assisted Personalized Approach
in an Undergraduate Physiology Class, Journal of Plant Physiology, Vol.
119 (1999), pp 1177-1186.

[8] Bonham, R Beichner, D Deardorff Online Homework: Does It Make a

Difference? The Physics Teacher 2001, 39, 293.

B. The instructor

• An important advantage for the instructor is the ability
to obtain real-time feedback on the assimilation and
understanding of the study matter by the students

• The instructor has to invest signiﬁcantly more time than

traditionally done

• He should be willing to be involved in a computerized
project where composing and checking out new problems
is time consuming

• However,

the increased interaction with the students
makes the teaching process much more interesting and
rewarding for the instructor compared with the standard
way

C. The academic institution

There is an obvious advantage in using the system for all
classes, studying with different instructors the same course.
Otherwise, some students will regard it as unfair that they
are required to perform additional duties, while others will
consider unfair that they don’t have access to the system.

• The system can be quite valuable in many disciplines of

engineering studies

• It is free and can be used under a GNU license
A condition for success is a ﬁrm commitment of the insti-
tution to provide the necessary support. This should translate
to:

• Establishing a support team that will handle technical
problems and will adapt into the system, the academic
material developed by the instructors

• This will reduce the extra load from the instructors and
will encourage even computer-shy instructors to join
• A policy requiring all instructors, of the same course, to

use the system

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
In Israel, students are typically older by 4-5 years than in
the US or Europe. Most of them work, at least part time, some
are already married, and a some are parents.

It is plausible that this is the reason for the complaints about
the time burden. In a traditional way of homework assignment
they could devise all sort of strategies that will allow them not
to put in the time required. With CAPA they were forced to
invest the time.

This brings up the possibility that the improved achieve-
ments are not due directly to the use of technology but
indirectly through its role as forcing the students to devote
a minimal amount of time for self study.

The system provides the student with immediate feedback,
explains brieﬂy the relevant subject and gives an opportunity
to correct mistakes. This is a very positive educational process.
A related important element is that many students regarded
working with the system as fun with elements of a game. For a
generation brought up on computer games this may be indeed
an advantage.

In conclusion,

technology doesn’t make the educational

process easier, but can be very efﬁcient in enhancing it.[8].

