7
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
5
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

RU-97-38

Renormalizing Recitation Grades
Joel Shapiro
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08855-0849
May 20, 1997

Abstract

I discuss issue of how to adjust recitation grades given by diﬀerent in-
structors in a large course, taking into account and correcting for diﬀerences
in standards among the instructors, while preserving the eﬀects of diﬀerences
in average student performance among the recitation sections.

Introductory physics in large universities is dominantly taught in large
courses which combine lectures with recitation sections. The course content
and policy is set by one person who is the course leader, but there are a
number of people responsible for the recitation sections. The students receive
grades based primarily but not entirely on examinations. These are graded
in a manner so that variations in standards among the recitation instructors
do not unfairly aﬀect some students in comparison to others.1

That component of the grade which is based on recitation work, however,
cannot easily be assigned in a way that is fair to all students. Quizzes are
of necessity diﬀerent, and graded by people with widely diﬀering standards.
Even if the recitation grade is only a small part of the total, so that the
eﬀect of these diﬀerences on a student’s total grade is not very signiﬁcant,
nonetheless the eﬀect on the morale of students is quite signiﬁcant. They are
acutely aware of discrepancies in standards. This paper addresses the issue
of how to deal with this problem so that both the students and instructors
1Many of our examinations in these courses are computer-graded multiple choice, but
even when the questions are graded in a more subjective fashion, a high level of even-
handedness can be assured by having each instructor grade all the exams for a given
question.

1

are conﬁdent that grades are being fairly assigned. I call this the problem of
renormalizing recitation grades.

Before embarking on a convoluted mechanism for renormalizing the grades,
we need to be convinced that the perception of unfairness is the result of a
real problem. Instructors have very diﬀering grading standards, even after
they have been asked to grade to a certain standard. For example, in the
course I have recently administered, Prof. A had two sections with an aver-
age exam grade of 49, while Prof. B had four sections with an average exam
grade of 48. Nonetheless the average recitation for Prof. A was 65, while
that of Prof. B was 79. The students were very aware of this non-negligible
diﬀerence and were quite upset, until I told them that we knew how to cor-
rect for these diﬀerences, and those with the tougher instructor would not be
unfairly graded in the end. Unfortunately, I was stretching the truth — at
the time, we did not really have such a scheme in place. This is my attempt
at developing one.

The problem is also non-trivial. We could just add 14 points to each of
Prof. A’s students, but no doubt this would push some of his students over
100, which would be noticeable and unfair to the best students in Prof. B’s
classes, as they would have no chance to get over 100. This simple approach
also ignores any inherent diﬀerences in the average ability of students among
diﬀerent sections. Most of us who have been involved in such courses realize
there are signiﬁcant variations in the average ability among the sections. For
example, Prof. C in my course had one section with an exam average of 44%
and another with an average of 51%, a very signiﬁcant diﬀerence, especially
considering that these were multiple choice exams where random guessing
alone provided 20%.

Since the beginning of the use of recitation sections and computerized
exams in our Department nearly twenty years ago, the necessity of dealing
with this problem has been recognized. But I believe the issues have not
been well understood, much less solved, before now.

First, I would like to make clear that there are two essentially independent
issues here, once we agree to do some renormalization. Having decided to
set a goal for the average renormalized recitation grades for each section, the
ﬁrst issue is how to determine that goal2. The other problem is what function
f to apply to the raw recitation grades xi to get the new recitation grades
2Some might be more demanding and require not only a goal average but some other
constraint on the distribution, such as a given standard deviation. I am not convinced
that this is an important issue, however, and I will ignore it.

2

f (xi) which will have an average which achieves the goal. Neither has been
done well in our Department in the past.

Determining the Goal

As stated above, recitation sections are far from random samplings from
the total class ensemble. The real reasons are not known to me, but plenty
of possible causes abound, in particular conﬂict with other courses. For ex-
ample, a recitation section that meets at the same time as an honors calculus
course might well have students of lower average ability than the class as a
whole.

In our Department, some course leaders have chosen to ignore such dif-
ferences in the sections and to normalize recitation grades by bringing each
section to the same predetermined average. Those who have tried to make
individual renormalization goals for each section have, to my knowledge, all
used the assumption that the recitation grade average should be proportional
to the exam averages. Thus the goal gr is given by gr = heiirG/ heiic, where
the averages3 of exam scores for the recitation section heiir and for the whole
class heiic are used to scale the overall class goal G.

e
d
a
r
g
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
i
c
e
r
 

w
a
r

The assumption that recitation grades
are, in some average sense, proportional
to exam grades does not stand up to
inspection.
In general exam distribu-
tions are roughly gaussian with a fairly
low mean, while recitation grades are dis-
tributed quite diﬀerently, with a large frac-
tion of the distribution narrowly clustered
near a perfect grade, and a smaller wide
tail. In my course of over 400 students, a
scatter plot of raw recitation grade versus
exam grade shows a very wide dispersion,
but if one imposes a linear ﬁt, roughly half
of the average recitation grade is due to the
intercept. Thus by assuming proportional-
ity one would be overcorrecting by roughly
a factor of two. One way to see how in-
appropriate this goal calculation is is with
the following ﬁctional but still reasonable

sum of exam scores, all students
of

squares

Scatter plot
recitation
grade versus total exam grade
in Spring, 1997. The best
least
is
shown. Note that about half
of the recitation grade is given
by the intercept and half by
the linear term.

linear ﬁt

3I am using throughout the notation hviiS for the average of the data vi over some set

S.

3

situation: Suppose a good section has an exam average of 70% in a course
where the overall average is 55%. Suppose the overall recitation grade goal
is 80%. This gives a goal for the average recitation grade in this section of
102%. Clearly wrong!

The renormalization function

The other issue, also not trivial, is this: Given a set of raw recitation scores
{xi} for a section and a goal g that we wish the average of the renormalized
scores to be, how do we ﬁnd a suitable function f for which hf (xi)i = g.
Unfortunately, f needs to have some other suitable properties4

1: f (0) = 0.

2: f (100) = 100.

One should not be too quick to think he has a solution to this problem.
Clearly a simple scaling of the grades to adjust the average to the goal,
f (x) = gx/hxii, does not meet requirement 2. A piecewise linear ﬁt, say
with one segment from (0,0) to some intermediate point and another from
that point to (100,100), can be made to have the right average, but one
must remember that the average of the function is not the function ap-
plied to the average, and the intermediate point is not determined by only g
and hxii. A quadratic ﬁt is easily calculable; f (x) = (1 − 100a)x + ax2
satisﬁes (1) and (2) automatically. Getting the right average is simple:

100

a =

g − hxii
i i − 100hxii

.

hx2

However,
quirement:

it violates a rather serious re-

3: f must increase monotonically on the

interval [0, 100],

in some quite ordinary situations, includ-
ing the ﬁrst recitation section I taught in
which this method was being employed.

i

)
 
 
x
(
 
f

e
d
a
r
g
 
d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n
e
r

0

raw recit score xi

100

Possible
Functions.

Renormalization

The method which has been in use in our Department for many years
is this: The average score hxii is mapped to g, and this point is connected
4For simplicity, throughout this discussion I will take the recitation grades to range

from 0 to 100.

4

by straight lines to (0, 0) and (100, 100). Clearly, as long as g is sensible,
g ∈ (0, 100), this function satisﬁes (1–3), but unfortunately it doesn’t satisfy
the original criterion:

0: hf (xi)i = g.

Every semester, in the brief interval between the ﬁnal exam being given
and the due date for the receipt of grades by the registrar, a panic ensues
when some new recitation instructor discovers that the computer does not
do what she expects it to do. There then ensues a discussion of whether the
fact that this method undercorrects the section grades compensates the fact
that the goal is overly dependent on the section exam average. The answer
is “not in general”, and in fact the two faults can work in the same direction
rather than cancel.

One of our faculty came up with an mathematically elegant renormaliza-
tion function which satisﬁes requirements (1–3) and sets and achieves a goal
for the average of the logarithm of the grades, which at ﬁrst blush seems as
sensible a criterion as a goal for the average grade. Considering the grades
on the domain [0, 1] instead of [0, 100], he noted that scaling the logarithms
automatically kept the endpoints ﬁxed, and therefore

f (x) = eb ln(x), where b = ln(g)/hln(xi)i

provides a renormalization function, easily calculable and simple to imple-
ment.

While this solution is mathematically elegant, I think it would be a very
poor choice to use. The trouble with this method is that it gives the greatest
weight in adjusting the class average to the worst students — in its pure
form this method would give almost everyone in a class a perfect score if one
student got a zero. We could avoid this by putting in cutoﬀs on who got
included in the average, but still the weakest students included are deter-
mining the renormalization of everyone. And the elegance is lost if we apply
it only to students in some subdomain. I don’t believe this is what we want.

So what can we do?

This paper makes suggestions for how each of these problems can be
solved. Neither is very simple, but each can be readily implemented by
computer. I believe my method for determining the goal for each section has
a “rightness” about it, although I can’t give a set of assumptions under which
it is “correct”. The method of determining the renormalization function is

5

somewhat arbitrary, but it should (well, under reasonable conditions, at least)
satisfy (0–3), and also weigh students fairly evenly, emphasizing those in the
middle.

Determining the goal

If each student deserved a recita-
tion grade which was a monotone func-
tion of her exam grade, and if we knew
the appropriate distribution of recita-
tion grades for the full class, the recita-
tion grade would be simply given by

100

xi = r(E−1(ei)),

(1)

e
l
i
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

where r(n) is the n’th recitation grade
in ascending order, and E(n) the n’th
exam grade in ascending order.

exams

reci-
tation

ei

xi

0

exam sum or recitation grade

Cumulative histograms of exams
and raw recitation grades, for the
full class (thin) and for “quali-
ﬁed” students (thick). The goal
for each section is set by averag-
ing the “expected” grades xi for
the qualiﬁed students in that sec-
tion.

Of course, recitation grades, even
from the same instructor, are far from
well deﬁned functions of the exam
grades. Other factors aﬀect recitation
performance diﬀerently than exam per-
formance, and are a legitimate com-
ponent of a student’s ﬁnal grade.
Nonetheless, (1) could be used to esti-
mate what the expected recitation av-
erage would be, averaging over other
factors, were it not for the diﬀerences in instructors. The function r(n), the
“correct” distribution of recitation grades, is undetermined, but I think its
exact form is not terribly important — the crucial issue here is fairness, and
as long as the distribution has a reasonable spread, it doesn’t much matter
where its mean is, because that will just aﬀect where grade dividing lines are
set5. I think we should use the actual raw distribution of the full class as our
function r(n).

The above discussion applies best if we restrict our attention to students
5Some may be disturbed by my refusal to discuss cosmetic issues, violating such rules
as “it’s okay to raise students’ grades but not to lower them”. Such instructors could
use my method, ﬁnd the maximum amount any student’s grade was lowered, and simply
add that grade to every student. Presumably the grade cutoﬀs will also be raised by that
amount, so not a single grade will be aﬀected, but everyone might feel better.

6

who have taken all exams and who have attended some reasonable minimal
number of recitation sections. Only those students are used to determine
the functions r(n) and E(n), and the section average goals, and thus the
renormalization functions for each section.

Thus I suggest taking as the goal for section S the average

g =

1
nS X
i∈S

r (cid:16)E−1(ei)(cid:17) ,

where nS is the number of qualiﬁed students in section S, with the sum only
over the qualiﬁed students. The minimum number of recitation grades re-
quired for qualiﬁcation can be speciﬁed by the course leader. Of course all
students will have their grades calculated using the renormalization func-
tion for their section, whether or not they were included in determining the
function.

The Renormalization Function

The renormalization function needs to be a monotone function such as
the possibilities shown above. It ought to keep close grades close and large
diﬀerences large, so the slope ought to stay as close to 1 as possible, and
nonetheless distribute the required modiﬁcation to the sum of the grades
I see no justiﬁcation for requiring continuity of the
reasonably uniformly.
derivative f ′, and therefore no objection to using a piecewise linear function.
It would be straightforward to use two straight line segments, perhaps
joining at the average raw grade for the section. The student at the break
point would be moved further than g, because other students will be moved
less, and thus the average will be moved by less than the student who had
the average raw grade. If we use three line segments, which I recommend,
this will still be true but the maximum movement required is less.

If f (x) is given by three continuous line segments, the parameters are
the positions, x and f (x), of each of the two breaks. Four parameters are a
lot to ﬁt, and to make things easier I ﬁx the break points in the domain d1
and d2 to subdivide the section into three approximately equal numbers of
students. This leaves two parameters, f (d1) and f (d2), constrained by the
requirement that the average come out right. This is one linear condition
on the two parameters, with coeﬃcients given in terms of the goal g, the
numbers nL, nM , nR in the left, middle and right thirds of the class, and the
i∈L xi, sM and sR of the raw grades in each of these subsets.
sums sL =
These are all easy to accumulate.

P

7

We still require one further condition to specify the parameters, which is
set by minimizing some measure of how badly the renormalization is distort-
ing the recitation grades. I have considered and implemented two diﬀerent
measures. The simpler, (“minimax”) minimizes the maximum change, in
absolute value, in a student’s grade. This requires the slope of the middle
line segment to be 1, and is straightforward to implement. I also considered
minimizing the deviation of the slopes from 1, because two students who got
nearly the same raw grade should not get very diﬀerent renormalized grades,
or vice-versa. I measured the “badness” by the sum, over the three segments,
of the square of the sum of the slope and its reciprocal. This treats f and f −1
on the same footing, declaring either a zero or inﬁnite slope to be inﬁnitely
bad. Both methods work well and fairly easily, though the second requires a
numerical root ﬁnder to ﬁnd the minimum. I call this the “slope” method.
Each method will lower the grades of some students, the diﬀerence perhaps
best illustrated by the eﬀect in one section with inﬂated grades in my course.
The minimax method kept the maximum change to 7 points, but lowered a
92 to an 85, nearly doubling the points lost. The slope method lowered one
student by more, 10 points, but his grade was a 76 lowered to a 66, perhaps
less dramatic, while the student with a 92 was lowered only to an 87. An
even more extreme example is provided by a test run halfway through the
current term (see below), in which the minimax method lowered grades by
16%, including dropping a 98% to a 82%, while the slope method dropped
the 98% to 96% but dropped a 90% to 68%. I ﬁnd the slope method results
less troublesome, but others might disagree.

Results

Both methods were used in a third term Engineering class with 440 stu-
dents and 15 sections taught by ﬁve recitation instructors, in the fall of 1996,
with the ﬁnal grades utilizing the minimax method. In the spring of 1997,
in the fourth term of that sequence, with 405 students in 13 recitation sec-
tions, the slope method was used to determine the ﬁnal grades. None of
the instructors in either semester complained of the results, which looked as
reasonable as could be expected given the widely divergent grading of my
recitation instructors. Examples from last fall are shown in Figure 4.

8

 

0

100

goal = 78.94, aver= 77.38

goal = 82.04, aver = 70.52

goal = 75.91, aver = 81.74

d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n
e
r

e
d
a
r
g
n
o
i
t
a
t
i
c
e
r
 

slope method
minimax method

Both methods were used at the
halfway point of the semester this
spring, primarily to point out to one
instructor what will happen to his stu-
dents. He was giving highly inﬂated
grades; one third of the class had 98%
and above, and two-thirds had 90% and
above, while the goal for this section
was 80.4%. My intention was to have
the instructor change his ways so that
the ﬁnal scores would need only mod-
erate renormalization6. But this exer-
cise also provided a strenuous test of
the method.
either
Although
in
method can fail
if asked to change
an average excessively, at no point did
that happen, even in the extreme case
of the section at midterm described
above. For safety, the program graphs
the renormalization function for each
section so that sick solutions will be
spotted. By sick solutions, I include
non-monotonic ones. Such a solution
can in principle arise in the minimax
algebra, and also if the minimization routine used by the slope method jumps
over the inﬁnite badness point when a slope goes to zero.
I believe such
problems are not likely to arise in practice, and this did not happen in any
of sections in my course.
Summary

Three sections from last fall’s class,
renormalized by each of the two
proposed schemes. The sections are
the most inﬂated, the most harshly
graded, and the one requiring the
least renormalization. Only for the
most inﬂated section are the results
of the two methods signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent.

Figure 4.
Renormalizations.

Examples of section

raw recitation grade

principle

100

Thus we now have available methods for ensuring that the recitation
grades assigned to students can be assigned fairly, taking account of diﬀerent
average abilities among the sections while eliminating the eﬀects of diﬀerent
grading standards among the instructors. Details of the method can be
obtained from the author7.

6It was partially successful in doing so.
7shapiro@physics.rutgers.edu, or http://www.physics.rutgers.edu/∼shapiro/grades.html

.

9

Acknowledgements

I wish to thank Frank Zimmermann for several interesting discussions,
which reemphasized for me the need to think out a solution to this problem.
These conversations also made clear that the problem was nontrivial, not
only to solve but, even more so, to state.
I also thank Juliet Shaﬀer for
reading this document and making several helpful suggestions for clarifying
the presentation.

10

