7
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
9
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Subatomic Physics - 100 Not Out and Still Going Strong!

Avinash Khare∗

Institute of Physics,

Sachivalaya Marg, Bhubaneswar-751005

* E-mail : khare@iop.ren.nic.in On the occasion of the birth centenary of the discov-

ery of electron, I discuss its role in the area of Elementary Particle Physics. I emphasize

that the discovery of electron marks the end of the speculation era lasting more than

2500 years. The key developments leading to the discovery of electron by J.J. Thomson

are brieﬂy mentioned. The standard model is brieﬂy mentioned and it is emphasized

that no further progress beyond standard model is possible unless there is a dramatic

advance in instrumentation.

1

The year 1897 is truly a landmark year in science since the electron was discovered

in that year. In the last one hundred years it has triggered a host of innovations in both

science and technology. Volumes could be written down about the practical applications

due to the understanding of electricity as a stream of subatomic particles rather than as

a continuous ﬂuid. However, to my mind, the greatest impact of its discovery is in our

understanding of the basic constituents of nature. The discovery of electron marks the

end of 2500 years of speculation about the structure of matter and the beginning of its

current understanding. In this article I wish to oﬀer my perspective to this momentous

advance.

The Speculation Era

The question of the basic constituents of nature has attracted human civilization

for a very long time. In our own Indian civilization, ﬁre, air, water, sky and earth were

regarded as the ﬁve basic constituents. A similar view was also advocated by Empedocles

(490-430 BC) who regarded ﬁre, air, water and earth as the four unchangeable elements.

The term atom ﬁrst appears in the writing of Democritus in the late ﬁfth century BC.

According to him, atoms are the smallest parts of matter, though not necessarily minute.

Till almost the end of the nineteenth century, the Epicurus (341-270 BC) view, shared

by prominent physicists, was that atoms cannot be divided into smaller parts by physical

means even though they have a structure. I might add here that the chemists, by and

large, were still debating till the late nineteenth century whether atoms were real objects

or only mathematical entities which were useful for coding chemical regularities and laws

(it is amusing to note that till about 1970, a similar view about quarks was held by most

particle physicists)!

Advances in Instrumentation

It is worth repeating again and again that physics (also chemistry and biology) is an

2

experimental science and that historically almost all the discoveries were made because of

the advances in instrumentation. For example, the three key advances in instrumentation

which played a leading role in the discovery of electron were (a) improved vacuum (b)

higher voltages (c) cloud chamber. Improved vacua were achieved in the 1850s when J.

Geissler (1815-1879) began developing the tubes now named after him. Soon he was able

to reach and maintain pressure of 0.1 mm of mercury. Michael Faraday experimented

with them in 1858 and at one point commented “very beautifully wrought”. Higher

voltages, on the other hand, were the result of the work of H. R¨uhmkorﬀ (1803-1874)

on an improved version of the induction coil. By the end of the century, voltages of the

order of 100,000 volts could be generated by these coils. The third major advance was

the development of a cloud chamber by C.T.R. Wilson (1869-1959) at Cambridge in 1895

for which he was awarded the 1927 Nobel prize in physics.

It is worth pointing out that neither Geissler nor R¨uhmkorﬀ ever earned academic de-

gree. Yet they were recognized for their achievement in their lifetime. In 1864, R¨uhmkorﬀ

won a 50,000 franc prize established by the French emperor for the most important dis-

covery in the application of electricity while Geissler was given a honorary degree by the

university of Bonn in 1868.

One of the biggest drawbacks of the scientiﬁc development in India is the utter

neglect of instrumentation in this country. No wonder, not many scientiﬁc discoveries

have been made in our country.

Towards the Discovery

Before we discuss the actual discovery of the electron, it is worthwhile to ﬁrst dis-

cuss a few developments in the eighteenth and the nineteenth century which led to this

discovery.

In 1737, Dufay had written about two distinct electricities which he called vitreous

3

and resinous and then had proclaimed the law that the like charges repel, unlike charges

attract. With the rapid developments in instrumentation, several major advances took

place in the next one hundred years in the area of electromagnetism. This, in turn, led

to the formulation of phenomenological laws based on new experiments. In particular,

exactly one hundred years after Dufay’s work, Michael Faraday (1791-1867) gave his

famous law of electrolysis. In modern language his law can be stated as “the amount

of electricity deposited at the anode by a gram mole of monovalent ions is a universal

constant called Faraday constant, and is given by F = N e”. Here N , Avogadro number,

is the number of molecules per mole and e is a universal unit of charge.

How much is e? In 1874, G.J. Stoney (1826-1911) obtained the value of e to be

≃ 3 × 10−11 esu by using the relation F = N e. Note that F and N were reasonably well

known by then. Considering the fact that the present best value of e is 4.80 × 10−10 esu,

Stoney’s estimate is not all that bad for a ﬁrst and very early try.

What does this e signify ? In 1881, Helmholtz (1821-1894), in his Faraday memorial

lecture, advocated that if we accept the hypothesis that the elementary substances are

composed of atoms, we cannot avoid concluding that electricity (both positive as well

as negative) is also divided into deﬁnite elementary portions which behave like atoms of

electricity. In 1891, Stoney baptized this fundamental unit of charge giving it the name

electron. It is amusing to note that the term electron was actually coined prior to the

experimental discovery of the quantum of electricity and matter which now goes by that

name (curiously enough, the term quark too was coined before the actual experimental

discovery of the constituents of proton, neutron and other hadrons).

The Discovery

Let us now turn to the actual discovery of the electron. It was made possible by the

study of the cathode rays. One of the major controversies at that time was regarding the

4

nature of these rays. Two prevalent views were (a) cathode rays are waves traveling in a

hypothetical invisible ﬂuid called the ether (b) the cathode rays are negatively charged

material particles. It is worth recalling that at that time many physicists thought that

the ether was needed to carry light waves through the empty space. The feeling was,

may be the cathode rays are similar to the light waves. On the other hand, the ﬁrst

description of electric current as a stream of discrete electric charges had appeared as

early as in 1840s in the work of Fechner and Weber. Experiments were clearly necessary

to resolve the issue.

Was Electron Really Discovered in 1897?

It is stated in numerous books and articles that J.J. Thomson discovered the electron

in 1897. In fact the whole world (including Resonance) is celebrating the ﬁrst century

of electron this year. However, I cannot agree that electron was discovered in 1897.

It is of course true that in that year, Thomson made a good determination of e/m for

cathode rays (e being the charge and m the mass) which surely was an indespensible step

towards the identiﬁcation of the electron. But then in the same year W. Kaufmann (1871-

1947) also made the same measurement and obtained a good value for e/m. Further,

based on his observations, he correctly noted that certain properties of cathode rays are

independent of the nature of the gas they traverse, a clear indication of the universality

of the constitution of the cathode rays. So why is that only Thomson is given the credit

for discovering the electron in 1897 ? Is it because he correctly conjectured that the

large value of e/m that he had obtained (compared to that of charged hydrogen atom)

indicated the existence of a new particle (which he called corpuscle) with a very small

mass on the atomic scale? However, he was not the ﬁrst one to make that guess ! E.

Wiechert (1861-1928), even though he was not able to measure e/m for the cathode rays,

was able to obtain very accurate lower and upper bounds on its value. On Jan. 7, 1897

5

he stated his conclusions in a lecture where he said “my experiments on cathode rays

show that we are not dealing with the atoms known from chemistry, because the mass of

the moving particle turns out to be 2000-4000 times smaller than that of the hydrogen

atom, the lightest of the known chemical atom”. Historically, this is the ﬁrst time ever,

that a subatomic particle is mentioned in print and sensible bounds on its mass are given.

However, like Thomson, his conclusions depended crucially in his assumption about the

charge.

So why is J.J. Thomson credited with the discovery of electron ? The point is, the

largeness of e/m for cathode rays (compared to that of charged hydrogen atom) did not

uniquely settle the issue since it could be from largeness of e or smallness of m. The

issue was conclusively settled by Thomson in 1899 (and not 1897) when he experimentally

measured the value of e by using the cloud chamber technique developed only four years

before by his student C.T.R. Wilson. Thomson obtained e ≃ 6.8 × 10−10 esu, a very

respectable value in view of the novelty of the method. Using both the results, he quoted

a mass of 3 × 10−26 gm for the electron, the right order of magnitude. Thomson received

the 1906 Nobel prize in physics for his discovery.

It may be noted that the electron itself has not exactly turned out as thought by

many people namely as a particle. With the advent of quantum mechanics, it is wrong

to think that the electron must be either a particle or a wave. The wave-particle duality

shows that under certain conditions electron can act like a particle while under other

conditions can act like wave. It is one of the irony of the 20’th century physics that the

wave nature of the electron was in fact ﬁrst shown among others by J.J. Thomson’s own

son, G.P. Thomson (1892-1975) who as a result shared the 1937 Nobel prize in physics.

The Properties of Electron

Over the last one hundred years, we have come to know quite a bit about the

6

electron. For example, unlike the proton and neutron, it does not experience any nuclear

force (i.e. strong interaction). Further, it has spin h

4π (h being Planck constant), mass
= 9.1 × 10−28 gm (≃ 0.51M eV /c2), negative electric charge of one unit (≃ 4.80 × 10−10

esu), non-zero magnetic moment and lifetime τ > 2.7 × 1023 yr. There is a good reason

(local gauge invariance) to believe that a la energy and momentum, the electric charge

must also be a conserved quantity in any reaction or a decay. As a result, one believes

that a free electron must live for ever. In case it turns out that it only lives for a ﬁnite

life time, that will be one of the biggest shock of the twenty ﬁrst century physics.

Birth of Subatomic Physics

The signiﬁcance of the discovery of electron can hardly be overemphasized. Before

its discovery, even though many believed in the reality of atoms, most (if not all) of them

shared the view that the atom cannot be decomposed further. That is why, the discovery

of the electron can be regarded as the end of an era which lasted for almost 2500 years

and the beginning of the modern era of subatomic physics which is continuing for the

last one hundred years.

Basic Constituents of Nature - The Present Status

Soon after the discovery of the electron, physicists including Thomson started build-

ing the models of the atom. The most celebrated among them is the Rutherford (1871-

1933) model of the atom in which the atom consisted of two types of elementary particles:

a light, negatively charged electron and a heavy, positively charged proton. Only after

1931, when the neutron was discovered by Chadwick (1891-1974), people realized that

there are three elementary particles. Soon also came the realization that there are four

basic forces in nature which in the order of decreasing strength are (i) strong interaction

(ii) electro-magnetic interaction (iii) weak interaction and (iv) gravitational interaction.

Hundreds of the so called “elementary particles” were discovered subsequently mainly

7

due to the use of particle accelerators and bubble chambers. This created a crisis be-

cause the human civilization has always been fascinated by the idea that the number

of basic constituents of nature should not be too many. The hypothetical quark model

was then proposed according to which all the hadrons (i.e. mesons and baryons which

are particles experiencing strong interaction) are made out of still smaller constituents

called quarks. Thanks to the beautiful electron-proton inelastic scattering experiment at

Stanford in 1969 (which is analogous to the classic Rutherford α-scattering experiment),

it was conclusively proved that indeed proton and neutron are composite objects which

are made out of quarks.

The modern view about the basic constituents of nature and the interaction be-

tween them is described by the so called “Standard Model”. According to this model,

the basic constituents are six varieties (or ﬂavors) of quarks (u,d,s,c,b,t) each coming in

three colors and six leptons (e, µ, τ, νe, νµ, ντ ), plus their anti-particles. Besides, there are
twelve gauge bosons, including the photon, eight gluons and W +, W −, Z0 particles. All

the quarks and leptons are point objects with leptons including electron experiencing no

strong interaction. On the other hand, the quarks and gluons, being colored particles, are

permanently jailed inside the hadrons and cannot exist as free particles. In this model,

the electro-magnetic and the weak interactions are uniﬁed into a single force called the

electro-weak force. This is reminiscent of the uniﬁcation between the electricity and

the magnetism by Maxwell (1831-1879). One of the crowning glories of the quantum

electrodynamics ( which is a part of the electro-weak theory) is the spectacular agree-

ment between the theory and the experiment about the anomalous magnetic moment

of the electron to more than seven decimal places. This would rank among the highest

achievements of the twentieth century physics.

One uncertain aspect of the standard model is the mechanism for generating masses

8

of the quarks, leptons and gauge bosons. A large hadron collider (LHC) is being built

around Geneva in Switzerland to settle this question and one hopes to get an answer

around the year 2007. An Indian group is also participating in this truly international

mega project.

The standard model raises a very disturbing thought. For the ﬁrst time, in the

history of mankind, some of the basic constituents of nature do not exist as free particles.

This raises the issue of the very meaning of the word basic constituents.

Beyond the Standard Model

The standard model, though so successful in explaining all the available experimental

data in subatomic physics, is unable to answer several basic questions. Further, there

is only a partial uniﬁcation of the basic forces. In recent years a truly uniﬁed theory

called the superstring theory has been proposed which uniﬁes all the four interactions.

One remarkable break from the past is that here the basic constituents of nature are

not particles at all! Rather the basic object is a string of length 10−33 cm. The quarks,

leptons and gauge bosons are merely the diﬀerent modes of vibration of the string. The

uniﬁcation ideas have also brought closer the seemingly contrasting worlds of the smallest

and the largest. In particular, the uniﬁcation ideas hold the promise to explain how the

Universe evolved after the big bang. Another possibility is that the quarks, leptons

and other particles of the standard model are themselves composed of more elementary

objects. I must make it clear here that so far we have no experimental evidence for any

of the ideas beyond the standard model.

Electron as a Probe in Subatomic Physics

Over the years, the electron has played a big role in uncovering the mysteries of

the subatomic physics. This is primarily because it is so light, experiences no strong

interaction, has non-zero charge and lives for ever. Its ﬁrst major use was in deep in-

9

elastic scattering experiments where it was used as a probe to uncover the structure of

the proton and other hadrons. Its major use, however, was in discovering new particles

in the electron-positron colliders. The big advantage here is that the strong interaction

background is absent in these collisions. The future progress in subatomic physics cru-

cially depends on whether we are able to build a very high energy electron-positron linear

collider or not.

Subatomic Physics - a Hundred Year Hence

Finally, what will scientists think a century later ? What concepts which we hold

dear today will be regarded as the ether of 1997? What will be the elementary particles

of the twenty ﬁrst century? Would there be an ultimate theory of everything (TOE) or

as others would like to say, a truly uniﬁed theory (TUT) ?

One very disturbing aspect is that the recent theoretical activities are highly specu-

lative with absolutely no experimental data to back them up. I believe that it is highly

dangerous to rely too much on formal elegance and too little on facts. Unless the scientiﬁc

community is willing to put higher emphasis on instrumentation, I am afraid, there will

be a big pause in the dialogue between experiment and theory. Hopefully, our children

and grand children will be wiser than our generation.

Finally will we ever have a TOE or TUT ? I ﬁnd that on the whole, the western

civilization would answer this question in the aﬃrmative though there may not be any

unanimity on whether it would take 20, 100 or one million years. However, I completely

disagree with this view point.

I believe that quarks and leptons represent merely yet

another Sari of Draupadi.

Suggested Reading

. A Pais, Inward Bound, Oxford Univ. Press (1986).

. 100 years of Elementary Particles, Beam Line 27, No.1 (Spring 1997), Stanford

10

Linear Accelerator Center.

. For a memorial guided tour consult the website; http://www.aip.org/ history/electron

. For a semi-popular modern view of the subatomic physics, see for example, J. Bern-

stein, The Tenth Dimension, McGraw-Hill Publishing Company (New York, 1989).

11

