Travelers, keep your yardsticks covered!

P. Fraundorf
Department of Physics & Astronomy
University of Missouri-StL,
St. Louis MO 63121
(September 24, 2013)

7
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
0
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

This note is about introducing classical mechanics in a
way that overtly dispels Newtonian misconceptions, minimiz-
ing obstacles to a student’s eventual understanding of space-
time. This is done by operationally deﬁning all quantities
that depend on the observer’s state of motion, including time,
with respect to a speciﬁc “map-frame”, and by introducing
the classical equations for energy, momentum, and velocity-
addition as low-speed approximations. It also provides tools
for quantifying unidirectional motion at any speed, by stu-
dents freshly-introduced to constant acceleration. This is
done by introducing traveler-time as the invariant in the met-
ric equation, presented as a space-time extension of Pythago-
ras’ theorem. Confusions involving frame-dependent simul-
taneity and length contraction are minimized by considering
only distances measured by observers in the reference map-
frame.

03.30.+p, 01.40.Gm, 01.55.+b

I. INTRODUCTION

This note is about introducing classical mechanics in a
way that overtly dispels Newtonian misconceptions, thus
minimizing the obstacles to a student’s eventual under-
standing of curved space-time. It also provides tools for
quantifying unidirectional motion at any speed, by stu-
dents freshly-introduced to constant acceleration.

II. NEWTON’S MISCONCEPTIONS

The ﬁrst of these tasks is easy: Begin by deﬁning all
quantities that depend on the observer’s state of motion
with respect to one speciﬁc “map frame” of reference.
Anchor your coordinate system to this map frame, and
distribute synchronized clocks across it as well.

What measured quantities depend on the observer’s
state of motion? The velocity you estimate for an object
depends on your state of motion, since an object has no
speed at all to those moving with it. The distance be-
tween two events (say sneezes by a Concorde pilot trav-
eling at Mach 2) likewise depends on your frame of mo-
tion: When asked where the sneezes occurred, the pilot
may well note that both took place at the same location,
namely in his airplane’s cockpit!

However, Newton (with Galileo & others) assumed
that the time-elapsed between two events (say those two

sneezes) will be found to have the same value indepen-
dent of the measurer’s state of motion. They further pre-
sumed that velocity diﬀerences (and hence accelerations)
are frame-independent as well. These two assumptions
are incorrect at high speed, and need not ever be made
when learning to put Newton’s ideas to work. To avoid
these assumptions, we suggest two actions.

First, inform students that distances, elapsed-times,
and all their derivatives will be measured using yardsticks
and clocks at rest with respect to an inertial (unacceler-
ated) “map frame” which is speciﬁed at the outset. With
this caveat all standard kinematic equations, which ap-
ply to variables measured in one frame, remain valid at
any speed!

Secondly, when dynamical quantities (e.g. energy &
momentum) or distances and times measured with re-
spect to a second reference frame (e.g. relative-motion
& velocity-addition) are considered, introduce the usual
equations as approximations that work only for velocities
small compared to lightspeed c. This is much better than
introducing them as truth, then taking it back later.

A color scheme that highlights the types of frame-
dependence associated with each variable might also
help. This could be used in handouts like the equation
summary in Figure 1, in a color “crib-sheet” or laminated
bookmark for use on tests, or even in textbooks adding
content by use of color.

III. ANYSPEED EQUATIONS

Once measured quantities have been operationally
clariﬁed in this way, and unidirectional motion other-
wise introduced as usual, your students may be ready to
learn a bit about velocity and acceleration at any speed.
This can be done before they are ready for relativity, if
they consider time on the clocks of an accelerated traveler
without considering distances measured by that traveler’s
yardsticks! We show how to empower them, without con-
ceptual traps, by oﬀering the metric equation as a simple
space-time extension of Pythagoras’ Theorem (written
so that traveler-time is the invariant). Whenever they
are tempted to pull out a traveler’s yardsticks to make
measurements for one problem or another, saying “don’t
go there” may pique their interest in further studies of
relativity and space-time geometry downstream.

Figure 2 is a color introduction to the variables that
track a moving traveler’s time. Here the diﬀerential op-

1

the book (E. F. Taylor, private communication), perhaps
because teachers did not know how to incorporate it into
more familiar multi-frame, relative-motion strategies for in-
troducing kinematics at hi-speed.

6 More derivations related to use of this strategy for describ-
ing map-based motion in (3+1)D are accessible through
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9704018.

FIG. 1. Some color guidelines for introducing Newtonian
mechanics without embracing classical misconceptions, thus
simplifying the way to an eventual understanding of curved
as well as ﬂat space-time.

FIG. 2. A possible way to introduce traveler-time using
the metric equation1 as a space-time extension of Pythago-
ras’ theorem while, in the spirit of J. Bell2 and classic ped-
agogical tradition sticking to one reference frame with its
tangible Cartesian map and extended array of synchronized
clocks. About units: For high-speed problems, it’s con-
venient to measure coordinate-velocity in units of lightyears
per map-year or“c”, while proper-velocity3 (which has no up-
per limit4) is in lightyears per traveler-year. One lightyear
per traveler-year marks the transition to high speed nicely (it
corresponds to v ≃ 0.707c), but it is so cumbersome to say
that students sometimes call it a “roddenberry” for short. For
example, the “world land-speed record” for m > 0 objects is
held by CERN electrons traveling at ≃ 105[rb]!

FIG. 3. Unidirectional anyspeed mechanics using “felt” or
proper-acceleration5in the context of a single map-frame6, in-
troduced here using rules of engagement (e.g., no traveler
yardsticks) which help one steer clear of matters (like length
contraction and frame-dependent simultaneity) that require
a fuller consideration of relativity. The green equalities are
exact at any speed only for unidirectional motion.

is

and time

If distance

in lightyears

FIG. 4. An “anyspeed” constant acceleration nomo-
in
gram.
years,
then 1 “gee” proper-accelerations correspond to
α = 9.8[m/s2] ≃ 1.03[ly/yr2] ≃ 1[ly/yr2]. Thus plotting
a line up from the number 2 on the horizontal axis above
allows one to determine, by inspection, the following re-
sults of a 1 “gee” trip from rest over a distance of 2[ly]: ﬁ-
nal coordinate velocity (≃ 0.9[ly/yr]), elapsed traveler time
(≃ 1.7[tyr]), elapsed map time (≃ 2.8[yr]), and ﬁnal proper
velocity (≃ 2.8[ly/tyr]). The “chase-plane” parabola follows
Galileo’s low-speed curve (cf. Fig. 1).

erator “d” is used like a “∆” for tiny increments. Note
that changes in a quantity (i.e. ﬁnal minus initial values)
behave diﬀerently than the quantity itself, and may be
always frame-dependent (as with dx), frame-independent
only at low speeds (as with dt), or totally frame-invariant
(as with traveler-time dτ ).

Figure 3 describes how the proper acceleration felt by
a traveler diﬀers from that measured by map-based ob-
servers. It also provides equations analogous to Galileo’s
parabolic equations, for motion in which proper, rather
than coordinate, acceleration is held constant. Of course,
holding coordinate acceleration constant becomes impos-
sible at high speeds, where the other equations in Fig. 1
also fail. The equations of Fig. 3, by comparison, are
useful and exact at all speeds.

IV. DISCUSSION

For students who are pictorially-oriented (or equation-
shy), a nomogram plotting all variables versus distance
traveled from rest can be put together with these equa-
tions. To illustrate, Figure 4 allows graphical solu-
tion of constant acceleration problems with almost any
combination of input variables in range of the plot.
Other problems with solutions, on-line solvers, and a
companion derivation of the “felt” acceleration equa-
tion in Fig. 3, may be found on web pages linked to:
http://newton.umsl.edu/∼philf/a1dwuzzl.html.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has beneﬁted indirectly from support by
the U.S. Department of Energy, the Missouri Research
Board, as well as Monsanto and MEMC Electronic Ma-
terials Companies. It has beneﬁted most, however, from
the interest and support of students at UM-St. Louis.

1 H. Minkowski, “Space and Time”, in The Principle of Rel-
ativity - A Collection (translated by W. Perrett and G. B.
Jeﬀery with annotations by A. Sommerfeld, Methuen & Co.,
London, 1923).

2 J. S. Bell, “How to Teach Special Relativity”, in The Speak-
able and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, (Cambridge
University Press, 1987).

3 Sears and Brehme, Introduction to the Theory of Relativity

(Addison-Wesley, NY, 1968).

4 W. A. Shurcliﬀ, Special Relativity: The Central Ideas (19

Appleton St., Cambridge MA 02138, 1996).

5 E. Taylor and J. A. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics, 1st edition
(W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1963). The rapidity/proper-
time integral was less discussed in the 1992 2nd edition of

2

This figure "yardf1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9710013v1

This figure "yardf2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9710013v1

This figure "yardf3.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9710013v1

This figure "yardf4.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9710013v1

