HAVE WE AT LAST FOUND THE A-TOMS?

IMSc/97/06/20

R. Ramachandran
The Institute of Mathematical Sciences
Taramani, Chennai (Madras) 600 113

Abstract

It is argued that the three families of quarks and leptons are the building blocks of
all matter and all forces (leaving out gravity) among them are mediated by photons
(γ), the weak bosons (W ± and Z) and the gluons.

7
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
0
0
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

INTRODUCTION

From time immemorial, it has been the human endeavour to know what everything
may be made up of and what is the form of all forces of nature. Can we understand a
complex system – say the universe – in terms of its parts, which in turn is made up of
further parts? Is there a basic set of constituents in terms of which, in principle, all matter
and all phenomena of the physical world are understandable? Is it possible to reduce them
to just a few principles that can be splashed on a T-Shirt?

Hindu texts refer to ‘Pancha Bhutas’: everything is a manifestation of a harmonious
combination of Prithvi (earth), Jala (water), Vayu (air), Agni (ﬁre) and Akasha (space?).
Greek philosophers also mention four of these elements, leaving out Akasha to begin with
and later realise that they need a ‘void’ to place the other elements in. While today we
may recognise these not as basic constituents, but merely as diﬀerent physical attributes
of all matter, it would be nice if there are just a few ingredients from which everything can
be built. It was Democritus of Mellitus, in Greece, who reasoned that as we keep dividing
anything into smaller and yet smaller pieces, the process may terminate, yielding at the end
ultimate constituents, that may not be cuttable any further. He named them a-tom (tom in
Greek is to cut; a-tom means that which is uncuttable). Unfortunately the then dominant
school of philosophy led by Aristotle largely ignored, in fact rediculed, Democritus and his
notion of ultimate constituents.

Several centuries later, we have the English chemist Dalton, who resurrected the idea
of basic elements of nature and propounded that the large variety of chemical compounds
can be understood in terms of just about 90 elements – each element being made up of its
basic unit, which he called the atom, making use of the terminology of Democritus. All
chemical compounds are molecules – made up of the atoms of the elements it is composed
of. These atoms were indeed uncuttable in the length scales of chemistry (a few nanometres
9m)), but now we are aware that the atoms in Bohr model consist of a much tinier
(10−
15m) massive nucleus and very light electrons moving around the nucleus, somewhat
(10−
like a miniature solar system. The nucleus has protons and neutrons as its constituents and
they too reveal substructure. Indeed the name atom for these species was rather premature.
They are certainly not the a-toms of Democritus.

So let us carry on the quest for the real a-toms of Democritus. Dalton’s atoms are made
up of protons and neutrons in the nuclei and electrons which are bound to them by Coulomb
forces. All chemical reactions are complex manifestation of the electromagnetic forces
experienced by the electrons, so indeed is the short range van der Waals force between atoms
and molecules – a consequence of the polarisability of the neutral atoms and molecules.
The forces of elasticity of bulk material can be traced to the same electromagnetic origin.
Indeed most of the chemical and physical phenomena are understandable in terms of the
forces of electrodynamics, the classical content of which is summarised by the set of four

2

equations of Maxwell. Let us probe further to see what the protons are made up of. What
is the force that holds the protons and neutrons together in the nucleus, overcoming the
Coulomb repulsion among the protons? What are the analogues of Maxwell’s equation for
the strong nuclear forces? What is the spectrum of states of which protons and neutrons
are members.

In the sixties with the advent of proton and electron accelerators, there was a discovery
of a plethora of states, which were either excited nucleons and similar states on the one hand
or many mesons that could be playing the role of the strong nuclear force mediators on the
other. Pion or π-meson was predicted by Yukawa as the particle that could be principally
responsible for the attractive short range force between nucleons. Pions were seen during
50’s in cosmic ray experiments and were later produced copiously in the particle accelerators
at Rochester, Columbia and Chicago. A prominent resonance in the pion-nucleon scattering
was observed at a total energy of 1238 MeV and understood as a shortlived state ∆,
the lifetime being so small that it shows up as a resonance with a width of 120 MeV.
More resonances were discovered and many new mesons were produced in the accelerator
laboratories. Soon there was a ﬂurry of activity in Particle Physics, classifying and jotting
down the properties of the various species of particles and the many short lived and long
lived states were systemetised. The particle spectroscopy was studied, naturally with a
view to ﬁnding the clues for the underlying dynamics. In this way we discovered several
new quantum numbers such as strangeness S and charm C, that were preserved in the
strongly interacting production processes, but violated in its weaker decays. The weak
forces were the ones responsible for radioactivity in some (rather, many) nuclei. Particle
Physics is the discipline that systematises the subconstituents of the subatomic world and
strives to answer whether the a-toms of Democritus can indeed be real and arrived at.

STANDARD MODEL

When the Russian chemist Mendeleev gave the periodic table of elements, he paved
the way for the systematic understanding of the atomic structure of elements. Further
during the ﬁrst half of this century, the development of quantum mechanics yielded a
fairly complete qualitative and quantitative conﬁrmation of the underlying dynamics of all
chemical phenomena.

In the world of Particle Physics we are now in a position of having got the analogue
of the periodic table that classiﬁes the ingredients of all matter and this clearly points
towards the nature of the underlying forces. This is referred to as the Standard Model. The
remarkable feature of the Model, which we claim explains all forces of interaction (except
gravity) among all species of matter, is that the laws are simply suitable generalisation of
the familiar Maxwell’s equations that govern all electromagnetic phenomena.

The main principle in the Standard Model is to elevate the notion of symmetry to the

status of the essence of dynamics. Recall that the Maxwell’s Equations are:

3

E +

= 0

B

µ0ε0

= µ0j

∇ ×

∇ ×

= 0

.B

∇

−

∂E
∂t

.E =
∇
∂B
∂t

ρ
ε0

;

;

Electromagnetic ﬁelds E and B are given by these equations, once we give the distribution of
the sources ρ and j, the electric charge and current densities carried by the matter. Since E
and B are deﬁned through the force experienced by the charges and currents of the matter,
we can say that we have the complete description of the dynamics of the electromagnetic
process. The underlying principle of electromagnetism is gauge invariance – more precisely
the local gauge invariance. E and B can be expressed in terms of scalar (φ) and vector (A)
potentials, speciﬁed together in the 4-vector notation as Aν. The ﬁeld Fµν(
∂νAµ)
∂µAν −
ie∂µΛ(x). Indeed the
is invariant under the gauge transformation that takes Aµ →
Maxwell’s equations and all of physics is left invariant by the gauge transformation.

Aµ −

≡

Symmetries in Physics, we recall are closely related to conservation laws. The symmetry
of gauge invariance in electrodynamics is really the result of the conservation of electric
charge. While on the mundane level this implies that the sum of the charges remains the
same during an interaction, on a more subtle plane, this calls for an abstract operator
Q, whose eigenvalue is indeed the charge of the state, and the gauge transformation is
eﬀected by the change of phase of the complex ﬁeld that represents a charged particle:
ψ(x)
exp(iQΛ)ψ is a gauge transformation on ψ, that is labelled by the parameter Λ. It
is easily seen that successive transformation with parameters Λ1 and Λ2 will also be another
gauge transformation with parameter Λ1 + Λ2 and the set of all gauge transformations will
is a set of all unitary unimoduar matrices of
constitute an abelian group. Since
dimension unity, the relevant group is knows as U(1)1. The charge operator Q is said to
be the generator of the group.

eiΛ

→

{

}

When the symmetry is realised not only globally, but also at each space time point,
– that is when the parameter is a space-time dependent Λ(x) – we have what used to
be referred to as the gauge invariance of the second kind or more appropriately a local
gauge symmetry. Roughly this means that the charge is conserved at each space-time
point. Naturally there is a need to propogate the information of this gauge transformation
over space and time and this necessitates the introduction of the gauge ﬁeld Aµ(x); the
electromagnetic interaction is indeed the coupling of Aµ to the electric current density jµ(x)
of the matter. When quantised, Aµ represents the ﬁeld for photon, the quantum content
of the electromagnetic waves as well as the messenger of the electromagnetic interaction.

Standard model enlarges the gauge symmetry to include both weak interactions and
strong interactions. First let us take into account weak interactions and form Electro-weak
U(1)Y . This has an U(1) component, as
gauge theory with the gauge group as SU(2)L ×
1U (n) denotes a group consisting of unitary unimodular matrices of dimension n and SU (n) implies

further that the matrices are of unit determinant.

4

was encountered in the electrodynamics, but now related to another kind of charge; call it
weak hypercharge YW .In addition, we have the SU(2) component of the symmetry group
that characterises yet another local symmetry, which we may refer as the weak isospin2 IW .
There are four generators of the electroweak symmetry, three for SU(2)L and one for YW .
The elements of the symmetry group are given as exp iΛaI a
W ; a = 1, 2, 3 and exp iΛYW ; I a
W
are like the angular momentum operator J i, i = 1, 2, 3 and YW is like the charge operator
U(1)Y
Qem ; Λa and Λ are real space-time dependent parameters. The symmetry SU(2)L ×
is thus given by four generators I a
W and YW ; further the states are labelled by the irreducible
W and YW , very much like the symmetry under rotations imply
representations of
|
states with deﬁnite

2, I 3
2 and J 3 eigenvalues.

IW |
J
|
|

There is an important diﬀerence between this electroweak symmetry and the elecro-
magnetic U(1)em symmetry.The electroweak symmetry is said to be a hidden symmetry,
meaning that, while the dynamical Lagrangian is symmetric the solution to the equation
of motion does not respect it entirely. We say that the symmetry is spontaneously broken
down to U(1)em which is the residual symmetry that represents the electric charge con-
servation and gives rise to electrodynamics. To take an analogy, while roads admit traﬃc
in either direction, we choose a convention , say in India, that the traﬃc moves along the
left side of the road. Indeed it is equally possible to choose the opposite convention and
have the traﬃc move along the right side, as in fact it does in several other countries.
While the roads are symmetric, the ‘solution’ we pick makes us lose it spontaneously. In
U(1)Y is hidden in the sense that the gauge
the electroweak case, the symmetry SU(2)L ×
ﬁelds exist corresponding to each of the four generators, I 1
W and YW , but only one of
±
them (which corresponds to the residual conserved electric charge) survives as an unbroken
symmetry.

i2
W , I 3

The generator of this symmetry Qem is a particular combination of the generators of

the electroweak symmetry:

Thus photon ﬁeld (Aµ) is a gauge boson, with a component from SU(2)L gauge ﬁeld (W 3
µ )
and the U(1)Y ﬁeld Bµ.

Qem = I 3

W +

YW
2

Aµ = sin θW W 3

µ + cos θW Bµ

(1)

(2)

where θW is called Weinberg angle, a parameter to be determined by experiment.

2The weak isospin is diﬀerent from the usual isospin which is believed to be the underlying symmetry
responsible for the masses of proton and neutron to be nearly the same and also recognise them as two
diﬀerent ﬂavours of Nucleon. Both weak isospin and (ﬂavour) isospin have symmetry properties similar to
the rotational symmetry that leads to the conservation of angular momentum.

5

µ ±

µ −

sin θW Bµ) as well as W ±µ (= W 1

The orthogonal combination Zµ(= cos θW W 3

iW 2
µ )
will be diﬀerent; for instance they acquire mass as a consequence of of the symmetry
breaking. They give rise to neutral (Z) and charged (W ±) vector bosons, responsible for
mediating weak interactions. The relative weak strength of the weak processes is due to
heavy mass of these bosons that occurs as the the energy denominator in the relevant
amplitudes. Standard Model predicts that such mesons will have masses in the region of
80 GeV and this was conﬁrmed when CERN experiments were able to actually see them
in a spectacular experiment in 1980. In the Sp¯pS collider, when protons and antiprotons
were made to collide with a total energy of 540 GeV, it was enough to produce W +W −
pairs. Later at LEP (Large Electron Positron collider) it was possible to have e+ and e−
collide to produce Z meson, when the energy reached 91 GeV. Thus we have the complete
set of messengers of electro weak forces: Photon (mγ = 0), Charged Vector Bosons (m±W =
80GeV ) and Neutral Vector boson (mZ = 91GeV ). At energy scales large compared to
100 GeV, in the region when we may regard W and Z mass to be small compared to their
momenta, the strength of electromagnetic and the ‘weak’ interactions will be of comparable
order, thus resulting in the manifestation of the full electroweak symmetry.

The gauge bosons that are responsible for the electroweak forces couple to the elec-
tromagnetic, charge-changing and neutral weak currents, the coupling parameter (which
is actually mildly distance dependent) of W a
µ and Bµ may be denoted as g and g′. The

electromagnetic coupling α

is related to them through

e2
4π !

=

1
137

 ≡

e = g sin θW = g′ cos θW

(3)

From a variety of experimental inputs one ﬁnds that sin2 θW ≃

0.23.

Now let us turn to the matter content of the universe. Basic building blocks of matter
come in two types of spin 1
2 fermions – leptons and quarks. The most familiar leptons
(which in Greek, means light particle) are electrons (e−) and the associated neutrino νe
that is emitted with an electron in a β-decay (say, when n
p + e− + ¯νe). For a spin half
state there are quantum states with spin up and down (with respect to some deﬁnite axis,
say z-axis) or equivalently left and right handed helicity states. In discussing electroweak
theory, it is convenient to group left helicity states and right helicity states seperately,
since experiments show that the right helicity fermionic states do not take part in the
weak interactions. The weak isopspin (IW ) symmetry involves only left helicity fermions
and hence is the subscipt L in referring to the weak isospin SU(2)L symmetry. While
the right helicity fermions such as e−R is a SU(2)L singlet, left helicity fermions occur as
SU(2)L doublets. The neutrino νe, which has left helicity and the left handed e−L , form
a electroweak SU(2)L doublet, very much like the spin up and down states of angular
momentum representaion. This means that I 3
W quantum numbers for νe, e−L and e−R are

→

6

respectively + 1
2,

1

2 and 0. Since Qem = I 3

W +

, we ﬁnd that the doublet

−

YW
2

νe
e−L !

 

has

weak hypercharge YW = -1 and e−R has YW =
2. That the left and right handed fermions
have diﬀerent electroweak group properties is at the root of the parity non-conservation of
the weak interaction. In particular there is no right handed neutrino at all. Nevertheless,
notice that both e−L and e−R have the same value for Qem, which fact ensures that the
electromagnetic part has parity invariant coupling.

−

Now turning to the strongly interacting states (collectively referred as hadrons) such
as protons and neutrons, the sub constituents are u and d quarks. In a naive quark model
proton is made up of two u-quarks and one d-quark and neutron has two d-quarks and one
u-quark. Since nucleons have an attribute of baryon number, quarks must have nucleon
or baryon number of 1
1
3 units.
As far as the electroweak group properties are concerned, like leptons, left handed quarks
are SU(2)L doublets and the right handed ones are neutral under SU(2)L group, again
reﬂecting the feature that only left handed fermions have a role in weak interaction. We
may read oﬀ their YW quantum number from Eqn (2) and ﬁll up the table 1.

3 units of electric charge and d has

3 unit; further u has + 2

−

State

I 3
W
of SU(2)L

YW

 

 

uL
dL !  
uR
dR
νe
e−L !  
e−R

1
3

4
3
2
3

1
2
1
2 !
−
0
0
1
2
1
1
2 ! −
−
2
0
−

−

Table 1: Quantum numbers of basic fermionic states

While protons and neutrons are three quark states, the mesons, such as pions (π±, π0 of
mass 139 and 135 MeV respectively) are quark-antiquark bound states. Indeed the plethora
of resonant states that were observed in the high energy collisions in the 50’s and 60’s can
all be classiﬁed as either (qqq) baryons or (q ¯q) mesons. Before proceeding further, we need
to address an issue that arises since quarks are fermions and hence should satisfy Pauli’s
3
exclusion principle. Most prominent excited state of nucleon is a spin
2
quartet (∆++, ∆+, ∆0, ∆−) with mass M∆ = 1238 MeV and width Γ∆ = 120 MeV. This is,
(cid:17)
(cid:16)
like nucleon, a three quark s-wave bound state. In particular ∆++ state with ms = 3
2 will
be represented by a symmetric wave function of three u-quarks, with all the spins aligned
along the same direction. Such a state cannot be there, forbidden by Pauli’s exclusion

and isospin

3
2

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

7

principle, except if the quarks possess yet another quantum number, in the internal space
of which the wave function of the ∆- state should be antisymmetric. This space is referred
to as the color3 space and let the color index of quark qi take values 1, 2, and 3. In order
that ∆++ wave function is antisymmetric under the interchange of all quantum numbers
of constituent quarks, it is necessary that it is of the form ǫijkuiujuk in the color space.

This color symmetry can be promoted as a local gauge symmetry, with the gauge group
as SU(3) and it is remarkable that the forces related to this symmetry are the basic dy-
namics underlying all strong interactions – a further example of symmtry being the essence
of dynamics. Quarks are color triplets and strangely they are never observed in its free
form, and all known strongly interacting states like nucleons and mesons are color singlet
bound states of quarks and antiquarks. That is, the physical states that are asymptoti-
cally realised are either states that do not have any color substructure, such as electrons
and neutrinos or hadrons (eventhough the strong interaction properties of them are due
ǫijkqiqjqk
to color forces of the components) that are color neutral states of the type

and

qi ¯qi. The strong interactions between nucleons and mesons are the color analogues

Xi

of van der Waals forces that were seen responsible for the residual electromagnetic eﬀects
between charge neutral atoms and molecules. The role of photon is played in the color
interaction by an octet of colored massless vector bosons that are known picturesquely as
gluons. Being colored states gluons are also not observable as asymptotic physical states.

Xijk

Vector Meson

Associated
generators

photon(γ)
W ±
Z
gluons

i2

Qem
I 1
W of SU(2)L
±
I 3
W , YW
T aa = 1, . . . 8 of SU(3)C

Table 2: Gauge Bosons

SU(2)L ×

In summary, the Standard Model is a gauge ﬁeld theory with the local symmetry of
SU(3)C. The twelve
SU(3)C spontaneously broken down to U(1)em ×
U(1)Y ×
(1+3+8) generators of the symmetry group are related to the 12 vector bosons (photon
(γ), W ±, Z, octet of gluons) that mediate various interactions. Of these, photon and glu-
ons are massless and represent the unbroken symmetries of Quantum Electro Dynamics
(QED) and Quantum Chromo Dynamics (QCD). The matter consists of a set of leptons
(e−, νe), color triplet quarks (ui, di) and the corresponding antiparticles. Color conﬁnement
3We deliberately use the American spelling to denote that this has nothing to do with the usual colour

that stands for the variety of hues.

8

is believed to be an important, still to be properly understood property of the SU(3) gauge
theory.

MORE A-TOMS?

In the preceeding section, we have described the vector bosons as responsible for all
interactions and the main matter ingredients to be one set of quarks and leptons. As
we probe shorter distances, through high energy collisions, we ﬁnd that there appears to
be two more copies of the set of fermions and they are referred to as the second and
third generations of matter. First member of the second set to be discovered (during 50’s
in cosmic ray studies) was the muon (µ), which is just a fat electron, about 200 times
heavier and this was seen accompanied by a nearly massless neutrino, call it νµ. Like
u and d quarks of the electron family, in the second family, we have a pair of quarks,
which are denoted as c and s, and they carry Charm and Strangeness quantum numbers
respectively. Since the quarks are not realisable as asymptotic states one can not talk
about their mass; nevertheless we may associate with s-quark an eﬀective mass of about
160 MeV and c-quark about 1500 MeV, gleaned from the analysis of deep inelastic scattering
probes or mass content of the states carrying strangeness and charm. Apart from the mass
parameters and the ﬂavour4 quantum numbers S, C etc, all fermions of the 2nd generation
have identical structure and properties with respect to the symmetries of the Standard
Model. In particular the left handed fermions are SU(2)L doublets and the right handed
6s, undergoes decay to electron
fermions are singlets. Muon, that has a life time of about 10−
u+e− + ¯νe, which happens
νµ +e− + ¯νe, similar to the interactions d
and neutrinos; µ−
→
during the β- decay of free neutron (n
p + e− + ¯νe). Strangeness carrying hadrons arise
when we have a strange quark in the state. For example, some of the strangeness carrying
hadrons are Λ(1115MeV ), which is a (uds) bound state and K +,0 (495 MeV), which are
(u¯s) and (d¯s) mesons. From the fact that a non-strange vector meson φ(1020MeV ) decays
almost entirely into the channels K +K − and K 0 ¯K 0, we conclude that it is mostly a (s¯s)
state. In 1974, the new ﬂavour charm was discovered, when the charmonium state (c¯c)
was observed as a very narrow resonance at about 3097 MeV in the (e+e−) collission.
,0 (1869 MeV)
Subsequently charmed baryon Λc(2281) MeV as a (udc) bound state, D±
mesons of (c ¯d) and (c¯u) states etc. were discovered.

→

→

The Third set of fermions starts with the τ - lepton at 1760 MeV and the related neutrino
ντ in the lepton sector. In the quark part, in the late seventies, a new ﬂavour B was found
as a consequence of yet another quark, call it b-quark. We may call it ‘beauty’ or ‘bottom’
1
3 and occurs as the bottom part of the SU(2)L
(to denote that it is a quark with charge
doublet). Since Beautionium is a (b¯b) state with 9650 MeV, it is natural that ‘beautiful’
states will have masses in the range of 5 GeV. B+,0 mesons (5275 GeV) are (u¯b) and (d¯b)
4The ﬂavour of the state is given by the type of the constituent quarks. The u and d quark indicate the

−

ﬂavour isospin doublet. Strangeness S and Charm C ﬂavours are carried by s and d quarks.

9

states, while Λb (4750 MeV) is a (udb) bound state.

The third set needs another quark to complete the picture. Such a quark will occupy
the top part of the SU(2)L doublet, of which the b-quark is the bottom. The quest for the
top quark t (which is also referred to as truth, the related ﬂavour) had been elusive, mainly
because the top quark turns out to be much heavier than was expected. Whereas u, d, s are
relatively light quarks c and b were found to be 1.5 and 5 times as heavy as nucleon (whose
mass is about 1GeV). It was not possible to sight t-quark until we increased the collision
energies considerably; the Fermilab results last year suggest that the t-quark is about 175
GeV. With the discovery of t-quark the third set of fundamental fermionic matter appears
complete. Notwithstanding the much heavier masses, the third set of leptons ντ and τ
and the third set of quarks (t, b) have identical structure and couplings with respect to the
Standard Model interactions as the ﬁrst and second generations of fermions.

BOSONS

FERMIONS
LEP T ONS

Charge
1
±

W ±
(80.2GeV )

Charge
0

νe
(0)

νµ
(0)

ντ
(0)

0

0

0

Z
(91.2GeV )

1
−

e
(0.511MeV )

µ
(105.7MeV )

τ
(1.760GeV )

P hoton
(0)

Gluons
(0)

2/3

u
(5MeV )

QUARKS
c
(1.500GeV )

t
(175GeV )

1/3

−

d
(8MeV )

s
(160MeV )

b
(4.250GeV )

Table 3: The a-toms of the Standard Model

In summary, we can now assert that, the a-toms of Democritus are the three sets of

fermions; each set consists of a left helicity lepton doublet

, right helicity lepton

E−R and a color triplet of left handed quark doublet

and right handed singlets

UR and DR with E, U and D as the generic labels. All physical states are made up of
these fundamental sets of fermions and their dynamics is given by the Lagrangian that
displays the gauge dogma. The forces of interactions are due to the messenger vectors
bosons (γ, W ±, Z and gluons) which are also a-toms.

νE
E−L !

 

UL
DL !

 

10

EPILOGUE

Can there be more than three families of matter? Why are there three generations?
Can we understand the reason why top quark is much heavier than the rest. How many
parameters do we need to specify in describing the Standard Model? Why should the gauge
group be U(1)

SU(3)? Is there atleast a partial answer to all these queries?

SU(2)

×

×

Strictly speaking in our description of the Standard Model, we are yet to introduce mass
parameters of the constituents. The gauge ﬁelds, like photons, to begin with are massless.
The symmetry does not admit a mass term for the chiral fermions5 in the Lagrangian.
Indeed, if the gauge symmetry is exact, there is no scope for any of the masses. Then
how are the masses generated. Recall that we mentioned that the U(1)
SU(3)
SU(3)c. The mechanism that achieves this
is spontaneously broken down to U(1)em ×
should be the key to understanding the various mass values. While the full Lagrangian
is manifestly U(1)
SU(3) symmetric, the solutions (that includes the ground
state vacuum) has less symmetry. For this purpose, we need one more species of particles,
which will be responsible for the symmetry breaking and has an added role to make many
particles massive. The agent for this is a SU(2)L doublet scalar ﬁeld. The Higgs doublet
Φ = 1
√2

has YW = 1. The Higgs self interaction is such that it has a

SU(2)

SU(2)

×

×

×

×

φ1 + iφ2
φ3 + iφ4 !

 

0
v/√2 !

 

nonvanishing vacuum expectation value < Φ >=

, where v is an important

|

|

φ

−

= (

2m2φ∗φ + λ

real parameter, the non zero value of which indicates the spontaneous breaking of the
symmetry. To understand this let us consider as example, a single complex ﬁeld φ and let
the interaction be given by V (φ). Let V (φ) = 1
4 (φ∗φ)2. If, as usual, m2 > 0
and λ > 0, this represents scalar meson of mass m and quartic interaction of strength
If, on the other hand m2 < 0,
λ. The ground state will have φ = 0 and is unique.
then φ = 0 is no longer a minimum of V (φ). The minima, on the contrary are given
m2/λ)1/2 = v. The ground state solutions for φ could assume values veiθ;
by
θ arbitrary. Hence the ground state is degenerate. While the full symmetry is reﬂected
in the complete set of the solutions, as soon as we pick a particular solution, say φ = v,
then the symmetry, in this case U(1), is spontaneously broken. In the Standard Model,
similar process occurs and we have the solution for Φ reﬂect the symmetry breaking from
SU(2)L ×
It
is possible to recast so that, three of the four real scalar ﬁelds of Φ play the role of the
longitudinal polarisation modes of W +, W − and Z bosons and in this way make these
gauge bosons massive. (Recall photon has only two transverse polarisation modes while the
massive vector mesons should have longitudinal polarisation as well.) The last remaining
ﬁeld of Φ should show up as a massive scalar meson, called Higgs, that remains to be
5The term chiral fermion implies that the left and right helicity states of the fermion have diﬀerent

U(1)Y to U(1)em. From µ-decay rates, we determine that v

250GeV .

≃

properties.

11

discovered. Higgs mechanism also lets the fermions acquire mass through the coupling of
the Higgs doublet to fermions ( ¯ψL Φ ψR). Closely related to the fermion masses is the
fermion mixing angles, three in number and the possibility of intrinsic CP violating phase
angle6 in the mass matrix.

Standard Model thus consists of a gauge symmetry with 12 gauge vector bosons, of
which all but three (W ±, Z) are massless, three sets of quarks and leptons and one neu-
tral Higgs Scalar meson, that is yet to be discovered. It is speciﬁed by three gauge cou-
pling parameters (αem, αs and sin2 θW ) and Higgs meson vacuum expectation value that
characterises the masses of W ± and Z, Higgs meson coupling to fermions that could be
parametrised in terms of the masses of the 3 charged leptons and 6 quarks, 3 mixing angles,
one CP violating phase and one yet to determined Higgs meson mass. Thus we count in
all merely 18 parameters that are needed to deﬁne the Standard Model.

Perhaps there are no more than three generations. Z boson width, which is a measure
of the sum total of probabilities of Z decays into various modes, is known so well that it can
accommodate no more than three species of neutrinos. Also there will be problems with
cosmology if there are more than four types of neutrinos. If there were only two families,
there is no room for the CP violating phase - whose presence was indicated in the 1965
experiment that found that there is a tiny amount of CP violation in the neutral K- meson
decays. Further the fact that the universe consists of only matter and no antimatter can be
triggered only if we may have the possibility of an intrinsic CP violation. Are these then,
the reasons why we have three generations of matter?

We may have to go beyond the Standard Model to get any clues about why this speicifc
group is chosen or why top quark, is so heavy. Is there a hint in the fact that the top quark,
has mass in the same region as weak interaction symmetry breaking scale? Then, could it
be that Higgs scalar (which is the agent for breaking symmetry), is not an a-tom, but a (t¯t)
bound state? We have to wait for about a decade, when the Large Hadron Collider will be
completed at CERN, and hopefully produce Higgs mesons copiously. Until then, we have
just about three sets of fermions, and the twelve vector bosons of the gauge interaction as
the a-toms that make up all of the universe and let the future decide whether the Higgs
Scalar boson is elementary or composite.

For further reading:

1. Dreams of the ﬁnal theory - Steven Weinberg (Pantheon Books, New York 1992). A

popular account at the Standard Model and journey towards a ﬁnal theory.

6C and P here denote two discrete symmetries - Charge conjugation that interchages particles and anti-
particles and Parity that reﬂects the spatial co-ordinates. They were believed to be good symmetries until
they were both seen violated in the weak interaction, leaving however the combination CP intact, except
in very few processes involving the neutral K mesons. The phase angle is a measure of the CP violation.

12

2. The God Particle - Leon B. Lederman (Dell Paperback 1995)

The Higgs Scalar meson is referred to by Lederman as the God Particle and the
popular book is on the history of developments in Particle Physics and the expectation
for the discovery of Higgs in the ﬁrst decade of the 21st century.

3. Building up the Standard Gauge Model of the High Energy Physics - G. Rajasekaran
in Gravity, Gauge theories and the Early Universe (UGC Instructional Conference)
Ed. B.R.Iyer et al (Kluwer Academic Publishers 1989) p.185-236.
Lectures on the Standard Model and beyond.

4. High Energy Physics - Special Section, Current Science 71 (1996) p.109-127.

Proceedings of a symposium on High Energy Physics in 21st Century held as a part
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Indian Academy of Science during 10-12 November
1995 at Madras. Articles are by G. Rajasekaran, D. P. Roy, Romesh K. Kaul, Abhijit
Sen and R. Ramachandran.

13

