Importance of an Astrophysical Perspective for Textbook Relativity
Eric G. Blackman
Institute of Astronomy, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 OHA

(in press, European Journal of Physics)

ABSTRACT

The importance of a teaching a clear deﬁnition of the “observer” in special relativity

is highlighted using a simple astrophysical example from the exciting current research

area of “Gamma-Ray Burst” astrophysics. The example shows that a source moving

relativistically toward a single observer at rest exhibits a time “contraction” rather than

a “dilation” because the light travel time between the source and observer decreases with

time. Astrophysical applications of special relativity complement idealized examples with

real applications and very eﬀectively exemplify the role of a ﬁnite light travel time.

7
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
0
2
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

The basics of special relativity such as length contraction, time dilation, and simul-

taneity are commonly taught using idealized examples of moving trains, rocketed twins, and

cars moving though small garages with doors that open and close at either end. However,

very important applications of special relativity to the real world come from astrophysics,

where many sources with relativistic outﬂows are seen and the observed eﬀects of special

relativity in action are ubiquitous.

An important diﬀerence between idealized examples and astronomical examples is in

the deﬁnition of the “observer.” In astronomy, the observer is always a single detector

at a ﬁxed location in space. The diﬀerence in light travel times to the detector between

successive observations of a relativistically moving source is thus fundamental to every

observation.

In idealized examples however, it is possible to imagine that every space

time point has a measuring rod and clock. Because astrophysical examples highlight

the consequences of the above diﬀerence, and generally show very real eﬀects of special

relativity in action, classroom teaching beneﬁts from an astrophysical perspective. Below

I derive an example of this from the current frontier ﬁeld of Gamma-Ray Burst astronomy.

The example emphasizes the importance of a clear deﬁnition of observer, and how a source

with a time-varying luminosity moving relativistically toward a single detector would be

seen by that detector to exhibit an eﬀective time-contraction(!) rather than a time dilation.

This is because the light travel distance to the detector is constantly decreasing during the

motion.

First a little background: Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs) are notoriously mysterious

2

astrophysical sources which emit bursts of gamma-ray emission lasting ∼ 0.1 to ∼ 100

sec without repeating.1 A new one appears every day and the population is isotropically

distributed on the sky. This isotropy has been one key feature suggesting that they are lo-

cated at cosmological distances. This has now been conﬁrmed directly for at least 1 burst2.

Each burst requires a luminosity of order ∼> 1018 times that of the Sun! Though little is

known about the actual source engines, relativistic ﬂows are believed to be important to

GRB since they signiﬁcantly relax the model constraints of non-relativistic models.1 In

short, bulk ﬂow Lorentz factors of γ > 100 are likely required, the highest of any source

in nature.

The study of variability times in these relativistic GRB highlights the importance of

an astrophysical perspective in clearly deﬁning an “observer” in special relativity. Consider

one such variability time, taken to be the duration of an individual ﬂare within a spiky

GRB light curve.

Imagine the source to be a highly relativistic expanding shell with

constant Lorentz factor γ emitting photons toward a distant detector at rest with respect

to the shell. For γ >> 1, the only emission seen at the detector is produced by the shell

material moving within an angle θ ∼ 1/γ to the detector line of sight. Suppose that in the

co-moving frame, the time duration of a single ﬂare emitted by material moving directly

along the line of sight is given by ∆tC ≡ t2C − t1C. Assume that the ﬂare remains at the

same location along the line of sight in the co-moving frame, in other words let x1C = x2C,

where the variable x measures displacement along the line of sight and C indicates the

co-moving frame. The duration as measured at the detector is then given by

∆tD = γ∆tC − ∆xD/c,

(1)

3

where ∆xD ≡ x1D −x2D, and x1D and x2D are the shell positions measured in the detector

frame at the beginning and end of the ﬂare respectively. Now, note that ∆xD = γv∆tC,

so that

∆tD = γ∆tC(1 − v/c) ∼ ∆tC/2γ ∼ ∆xD/(2cγ2),

(2)

where the last similarity uses v ∼ c. Thus, note that γ >> 1 means the variability time

measured at the detector, ∆tD, is short compared to the co-moving ∆tC.

Let us reﬂect on this result. The derivation of (2) highlights why the statement

commonly made in special relativity that “a clock moving relative to an observer runs

slow” 3 must be interpreted very carefully. Strictly speaking, this statement is actually

opposite to (2) if the observer is the single detector. That a single detector does not

generally measure the standard time dilation results from the fact that the photon travel

distances to the detector are diﬀerent from diﬀerent points of the motion. This accounts

for the presence of the last term of (1), and the appearance of γ in the denominator rather

than in the numerator on the right side of (2).

Note that while many textbook treatments 4,5,6 are careful in deﬁning what is an

appropriate observer to measure time dilation and length contraction (ie. appropriate ob-

server = a system of rods and clocks used throughout the frame which can measure at the

position of each event), some textbooks are not. The interpretation of detected variabil-

ity in ultra-relativistic GRB shows through (2), why a clear deﬁnition of the observer is

absolutely essential. An observer in astrophysics means a single detector, but as shown

above, such an observer would not generally measure the standard time dilation and length

4

contraction from a moving source unless the distance between the source and observer at

each measured space-time event were the same.

Some eﬀects of the diﬀerent photon travel distances from a relativistically expand-

ing source shell toward a single detector were considered in the classic paper by Rees7,

where apparent super-luminal motion in astrophysical sources was ﬁrst predicted. Recent

excitement and attention toward GRB and relativistic ﬂows provides the opportunity to

highlight why an astrophysical perspective can be extremely important to the study of

fundamental special relativity and can help bring the taste of a current research topic into

the classroom.

Thanks to L. Rodriguez-Williams and A. Fabian for discussions.

1. M.J. Rees, preprint, http://xxx.lanl.gov/astro-ph/9701162, (1997).

2. M.R. Metzger et al., Nature, 387, 878 (1997)

3. M.H. Nayfeh & M.K. Brussel, Electricity and Magnetism, (Wiley, New York, 1985),

p564.

4. E.M. Purcell, Electricity and Magnetism, (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1985), p452.

5. E.F. Taylor, & J.A. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics, (Freeman, San Francisco, 1966) p18.

6. W. Rindler, Essential Relativity, (Spinger-Verlag, New York, 1977), p. 30.

7. M.J. Rees, Nature, 211, 468, (1966).

5

