8
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
0
6
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

World Wide Student Laboratory

Description of Project

Anatoli Arodzero
Department of Physics, University of Oregon
Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA

February 20, 1995
Revised June 19, 1998 ∗

1 Introduction

This paper describes a new framework in educational technology - the
World Wide Student Laboratory Project.
It’s main goals are to raise the
eﬃciency of educating students of principles of experimental research favor-
ing the integration of the advanced research methods into education, to raise
student’s motivation and to increase the professional resources of educators.
The World Wide Student Laboratory ( WWSL ) Project is in some way
the development of the traditional laboratory study. WWSL allows students
to study natural phenomena simultaneously with learning an Internet-based
telecommunication and computer technology, study the methods of trans-
mission, processing and analyzing experimental data.

In the given publication, the concepts of the World Wide Student Labo-
ratory are outlined, a possible idea for structure is discussed and examples
of various laboratory studies (projects) are shown.

∗Copyright c(cid:13)1995-1998 A. Arodzero

1

2 Concept of the World Wide Student Labo-

ratory

Based on the Internet, the World Wide Web (WWW) has been rapidly
growing over the last several years. The essence of the WWW is a combi-
nation of a large number of computer servers which can send documents or
”pages” to the Internet clients using a Web-browser software for navigation
between diﬀerent ”sites.”

From the beginning the WWW has primarily been used for educational

purposes in three ways [1]:

- to provide students with a wider access to information;
- as a supplement to traditional forms of education, raising the eﬃciency

of interaction between the educators and students;

- as ”a virtual classroom”, ” a virtual laboratory”, as an integrated in-

terface for distance learning.

The student’s laboratory practice work is the main form of experimental

research study. The eﬃciency of traditional labs have certain limits:

-often students do not have enough opportunities to explore deeply a
number of important sections of the courses due to the fact that not all uni-
versities may support a wide spectrum of laboratory research setups because
of their high price, service cost, the lack of necessary space, etc.;

-more often laboratory classes are too short to obtain persuasive research

results of the given process or phenomenon;

-in many cases, the laboratory instruction and student research projects
do not fully reﬂect the up-to-date level of professional experimental research.
In the framework of WWSL project, we oﬀer new methods of educa-
tional technology which complement the traditional methods and upgrade
the standard of experimental research study even with the use of existing
lab equipment. Those methods may also signiﬁcantly reduce the above men-
tioned limits of laboratory practice work.

The concept of WWSL may be expressed in the following way:

World Wide Student Laboratory (WWSL) is a dynamic inter-
national Internet-based collaboration of resources of educational
and research labs of universities, institutions, government re-
search centers and companies. The main element of WWSL is

2

the educational or research setup. This setup has interactive con-
nection through the Internet with a particular thematic WWSL-
Site (Research Group Site). Through the Research Group Sites,
students, under the instruction of an educator, are able to control
experiments, take, process and analyze data, regardless of their
location. The results obtained by each student are available to
all other students who are participants of the particular research
group and can be used in their own projects. 1

Main features of the WWSL project involve the following:
-the possibility of studying and demonstrating certain eﬀects and phe-
nomena unobservable from traditional lab studies. For example, the study of
the eﬀects which require simultaneous tests in diﬀerent geographical points
of the world, in diﬀerent environments, in a period times, etc.;

-as a result of uniﬁcation of the experimental data obtained from a net-
work of setups, it is possible to study ”ﬁne” processes and/or processes which
require a large number of data. This allows exploration of the origins of in-
strumental or methodological errors and demonstrates methods of extracting
information from noisy data;

-it is possible to run certain experimental projects in parallel with their
mathematical modeling. Integrating the two allows more global understand-
ing of the phenomena;

-any student who has access to the Internet, regardless of their location,
may become a member of the WWSL. This also makes the WWSL a perfect
tool for distant education;

-students have an ability to around the clock access to experimental set-

ups, and ability to work on their own schedule;

-educators have the possibility to use for lectures the data of experiments

on-line through the WWSL;

-by using the WWSL, students have access to real data of ”professional”
scientiﬁc experiments, and educators may use this ”live” data for educational
purposes;

-the use by WWSL of well known elements of the Internet such as ”Fo-
rum” and ”FAQ” allows students and educators to have ”global seminars ”
1The idea of such a organization of lab studies came to me in 1987, when I was project
manager of development of the new Department of Fundamental Science at the Moscow
State Technical University. But the Internet at that time was weakly developed.

3

for each experiment;

-individual student projects can be integrated in the form of a ﬁnal report
of the research work. The participation in making such a report will favor
the student’s ethics of joint research, increase motivation and estimation of
their work, will obviously have a positive educational eﬀect;

-setting up new WWSL software modules may well be an attractive and

challenging project for students in computer science;

members of WWSL may not only be students from universities but also

from colleges and high schools.

It seems evident that WWSL will substantially enrich the personal re-
search results of each student and help lab studies to approach the top-level
scientiﬁc research. It is important to emphasize that WWSL is not a ”vir-
tual” laboratory. It is a real lab where real experiments can be made.

The traditional form of conducting is preferable for many laboratory stud-
ies. From our point of view, the following projects are advisable to complete
through WWSL:

-projects that require a long time to complete;
-projects which require a certain preliminary theoretical and/or practical

preparation;

-projects which require repeated change of experimental conditions;
-project which require special conditions for their fulﬁllment.

3 The Structure of WWSL

In it’s foundation, WWSL represents an Extranet intended to provide in-

formational and methodical services in the educational sphere.

In the present time, the World Wide Student Laboratory is developing

using the following structure:

The general coordination of WWSL operations is conducted by Coordi-

nation Center WWSL which fulﬁlls the following functions:

-supports the Oﬃcial Site of the WWSL Project;
-registers organizations and individuals, which will be participants of the

WWSL Project;

-carries out all statistics of WWSL activity;
-manages the development of methodology of WWSL studies and creates

4

its data;

-maintains the WWSL-FAQ Page.
Research Group Site will be created to conduct a particular series of stu-
dent lab studies. It combines the sites of Experimental Setups of participating
organizations. If it is required, the activity of each Research Group can be
deﬁned by a Research Program which is prepared by Educators of participat-
ing Universities.

Research Group Site has the following functions:
-registers the participants of given lab studies;
-combines Student’s Sites who are participating in a given project;
-collects experimental data from all Experimental Setups;
-maintains Research Program, schedule of data taking;
-maintains the Pages with information necessary for completing these

studies;

-maintains the FAQ and Forum pages;
-maintains the Page with test questions;
-maintains the Page for a combined student report.
The Site of the Experimental Setup may be located at a computer which is
a part of the setup and is used for data storage, data processing and analysis
of the results from that setup. It is maintained by the Educator in charge of
the installment.

Students use their Sites for access to WWSL resources, to control exper-
imental setups and for processing and analyzing experimental data. Their
site is also used to prepare the ﬁnal report of a completed experiment.

It is clear that the structure of WWSL is not complicated and will not
require essentially new elements at student or research laboratories or on the
Internet.

Presently, the ﬁrst stage of the WWSL development has been completed
[2]. An Oﬃcial Site of the WWSL Project has been created on the server of
the Department of Physics at the University of Oregon. On that server, a
Site of ”Cosmic Rays” Research Group has been organized. It combines two
student research setups. One of them is located at the Department of Physics
at the University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, USA, the other is located at
the Department of Physics at N. E. Bauman Moscow State Technical Uni-
versity, Moscow, Russia.

The next stage is going to involve a number of projects for students who
are studying Physics, Radiophysics, Statistical Physics and Biophysics. The

5

following projects are under discussion and/or development:

-Mossbauer eﬀect;
-Coriolis acceleration;
-nuclear magnetic resonance;
-study of the accuracy of global positioning system;
-study of the correlation between the processes of diﬀerent biological sys-

tems.

4 Examples of possible WWSL projects

Let us now consider some possible scenarios of student projects which can be
completed in laboratory setups for studying properties of cosmic rays. These
studies are part of a curriculum of physics and engineering majors in many
universities [3], [4].

The setup consists of two detectors, usually scintillating. An absorber of
variable thickness (a set of lead or tungsten plates) is sandwiched between
them. The signals from the detectors are readout to the coincidence unit.
The unit selects events due to the passing of cosmic ray particles through
the angular acceptance of a telescope, formed by these detectors. The output
signals from coincidence units are collected by a data acquisition system and
a computer.

Student projects, which can be implemented using these setups can be

divided into two groups:

-projects for studying certain properties of cosmic rays, for studying of
experimental methods and apparatus of cosmic ray physics and high energy
physics;

-projects for studying the properties of random processes (in this case,
the ﬂux of particles of cosmic rays is considered as a generator of random
processes).

The ﬁrst group may contain the following projects:
-study of the composition of cosmic rays near the earth surface;
-study of the angular distribution of cosmic ray ﬂux;
-study of the ﬂuctuation of energy loss of charged particles;
-study of the eﬀect of the detector’s dead time on the character of statis-

tical distribution of the detector signals.

6

The second group may contain the following projects:
-properties of Poisson data of random events;
-study of the relationship between binomial, Poisson and normal distri-

butions;

-test of the hypothesis of statistical distribution;
-”waiting time paradox” for Poisson processes;
-study of correlations in stochastic processes.
The experimental data collected on the setups for the detections of cosmic
rays allows students to fulﬁll the studies of all themes listed above simulta-
neously.

References

[1] J. M. Barrie, D. E. Presti. The World Wide Web as an Instructional

Tool. Science, Vol. 274, 1996, pp. 371-372.

[2] http : //zebu.uoregon.edu/ ∼wwsl

[3] A. Arodzero, P. Gramenitsky, V. Rodionov. Study of composition of cos-
mic rays. Guide for students. Moscow, MSTU, 1980. 10p. (in Russian).

[4] The laboratory studies on physics. Edited by L. Goldin. Moscow, Nauka,

1983. 704 p. (in Russian).

7

