8
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
6
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Density Functional Theory — a brief introduction

NSF-ITP-98-032

Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA

Physics Department, NRCN, P.O. Box 9001, Beer Sheva 84190, Israel

Nathan Argaman

Guy Makov

Abstract

Density Functional Theory (DFT) is one of the most widely used methods

for “ab initio” calculations of the structure of atoms, molecules, crystals,

surfaces, and their interactions. A brief undergraduate–level introduction

to DFT is presented here — an alternative to the customary introduction,

which is often considered too lengthy to be included in various curricula. The

central theme of DFT, i.e. the notion that it is possible and beneﬁcial to

replace the dependence on the external potential v(r) by a dependence on

the density distribution n(r), is considered here to be a generalization of the

idea of switching between diﬀerent independent variables in thermodynamics.

Speciﬁcally, it is a direct extension of the familiar Legendre transform from

the chemical potential µ to the number of particles N . This is used to obtain

the Hohenberg–Kohn theorem and to derive the Kohn–Sham equations. The

exchange–correlation energy and the local density approximation to it are

then discussed, followed by a very brief survey of various applications and

extensions.

1

A. Introduction

The predominant theoretical picture of solid–state and/or molecular systems involves

the inhomogeneous electron gas: a set of interacting point electrons moving quantum–

mechanically in the ﬁeld of a set of atomic nuclei, which are considered to be static (the

Born–Oppenheimer approximation). Solution of such models generally requires the use of

approximation schemes, of which the most basic — the independent electron approximation,

the Hartree theory and Hartree–Fock theory — are routinely taught to undergraduates in

Physics and Chemistry courses. However, there is another approach which over the last

thirty years or so has become increasingly the method of choice for the solution of such

problems (see Fig. 1.) — Density Functional Theory (DFT). This method has the double

advantage of being able to treat many problems to high accuracy, as well as being computa-

tionally simple (involving only a slight modiﬁcation of the Hartree scheme). Despite these

advantages it is absent from most undergraduate curricula with which we are familiar.

We believe that this omission stems in part from the apparent absence of a brief in-

troduction to density functional theory. While several excellent books and review papers

on this subject are available, e.g. Refs. [1–3], they all tend to follow the historical path of

development of the theory, which unnecessarily prolongs the introduction and grapples with

problems which are not directly relevant to the practitioner. It is our purpose here to give

a brief and self–contained introduction to density functional theory, assuming only a ﬁrst

course in quantum mechanics and in thermostatistics. We break with the traditional ap-

proach by relying on the analogy with thermodynamics [4] — in this formulation, concepts

such as the exchange–correlation hole or generalized compressibilities, which are central to

recent developments in the theory [5], appear naturally from the outset. The discussion is

suﬃciently detailed to provide a useful overview for the beginning practitioner, and can also

serve as the basis for a one or two hour class on DFT, to be included in courses on quantum

mechanics, atomic or molecular physics, solid state physics, or materials science.

The primary characteristics of density functional theory are the role played by the elec-

2

tron density, n(r) and the absence of many–body wavefunctions. The density distribution

can be introduced by a Legendre transform, as the variable conjugate to the external poten-

tial, as we shall show in detail below. This transform makes no reference to the quantum

nature of electronic systems, and in fact density–functional methods have been developed

in other ﬁelds as well, e.g., in the classical description of liquids [6]. We begin by recalling

(in Sec. B) some salient facts about the Legendre transform in thermodynamics, and then

proceed to obtain the Hohenberg–Kohn theorems from such a transform (Sec. C). We then

relate the interacting electron problem to the non–interacting problem with the same n(r)

distribution, thus deriving the Kohn–Sham equations (Sec. D). Practical applications of

DFT rest upon uncontrolled approximations to the so–called exchange–correlation energy,

of which the local density approximation is the most widely applied. Accordingly, we present

this approximation and discuss some recent improvements on it (Sec. E). Finally we attempt

to place the present introduction in the context of current research in DFT (Sec. F).

B. Thermodynamics: a reminder

In this section, we recall some facts which are well–known from thermodynamics [7], and

show that an analogue of the Hohenberg–Kohn theorem is already implied by them.

Consider a system of many electrons, interacting with each other and with the nuclei of

the corresponding atoms. The many–body Hamiltonian can be written as:

ˆHMB = ˆT + ˆV + Λ ˆU ,

(1)

where ˆT , ˆV , and ˆU are respectively the kinetic, potential, and Coulomb–interaction energies

of the electrons, and Λ = 1 is a parameter introduced for later convenience. Explicitly, the

potential energy operator is ˆV =

dr ˆn(r) v(r), with ˆn(r) the local density operator and

v(r) the potential energy due to the atomic nuclei; and the Coulomb–interaction operator is

R

ˆU = 1
2

dr dr′

e2
|r−r′| ˆn(r)

R

interaction of each electron with itself (we are using ﬁrst quantized notation). The electron

ˆn(r′) − δ(r−r′)
(cid:16)

, where the second term in the bracket excludes the
(cid:17)

3

density operator is deﬁned as ˆn(r) =

N
i=1 δ(r−ˆri), where ˆri is the position of the ith electron,

and N is the number of electrons in the system. Depending on v(r), this Hamiltonian may

P

describe an atom with only a few electrons, a molecule, or a piece of solid material (in the

latter case, periodic boundary conditions are usually implied).

The starting point for our discussion is the grand–canonical ensemble, in which the

system is assumed to be in contact with a reservoir of ﬁnite temperature T and chemical

potential µ. This diﬀers from most uses of DFT which address the ground–state properties

of a system of N electrons — we will recover this case below by taking the T → 0 limit. The

grand potential, which is the free energy in this case, is given by:

Ω = −T log Tr exp

−

ˆHMB−µ ˆN
T

,

!

 

(2)

where ˆN is the overall electron number operator, and the temperature is in energy units (i.e.

kB = 1). The trace here sums over all possible electron numbers N, and over all the states in

the Hilbert space of the many–body Hamiltonian for each N. The expectation value of the

number of electrons in the system is given by a derivative of the grand potential, N = − ∂Ω
∂µ

(note that from here on, N denotes an expectation value and not a given number). Other

partial derivatives give the values of additional physical quantities, such as the electronic

Coulomb–interaction energy,

= ∂Ω

∂Λ or the entropy, S = − ∂Ω
∂T .

ˆU

D

E

A basic lesson of thermodynamics is that in diﬀerent contexts it is advantageous to use

diﬀerent ensembles. The Helmholtz free energy [8], for example, can be obtained from Ω by a

Legendre transform: F (N, T ) = Ω(µ, T ) + µN, where µ on the right hand side is a function

of N, obtained by inverting the relationship N = − ∂Ω

∂µ mentioned above. This inversion

requires a one–to–one relationship between µ and N, a condition which is guaranteed by the

convexity of the thermodynamic potentials (the condition of convexity may fail for inﬁnite

systems at a phase transition, but such exceptions will not concern us here). Note that

the other partial derivatives are unchanged by the Legendre transform, in the sense that

∂Ω

∂X = ∂F

∂X for X = Λ, T, . . ., where the derivatives of Ω are taken at constant µ and the

derivatives of F are taken at constant N.

4

For the purpose of comparison with DFT, it is useful to deﬁne the following grand

potential function, which depends explicitly on both µ and N:

Ωµ(N, T ) ≡ F (N, T ) − µN .

(3)

This function gives the original grand potential of Eq. (2) when minimized with respect to

N, i.e. when the derivative ∂F

∂N − µ vanishes, which is the same as the condition N = N(µ, T ).

For other values of N it describes the “cost” in free energy of having a conﬁguration with

the “wrong” number of electrons. Since µ(N) is monotonous, the minimum of Eq. (3) is

unique.

C. The Hohenberg–Kohn theorem

The discussion above can be generalized in a quite straightforward manner to the treat-

ment of the density distribution of the electrons, n(r), instead of their total number, N.

Recalling that the grand potential is a functional [9] of the external potential, v(r), one

ﬁnds that the expectation value of the local density of electrons is given by the functional

derivative: n(r) = hˆn(r)i = δΩ

δv(r) (this can be seen directly from Eq. (2), or equivalently

from ﬁrst order perturbation theory). The Hohenberg–Kohn free energy can be deﬁned via

a functional Legendre transform:

FHK[n(r)] = Ω[v(r)−µ] −

dr n(r) (v(r)−µ) ,

(4)

where v(r)−µ on the right hand side is chosen to correspond to the given n(r) (the explicit

temperature variable is omitted). Note that we are treating the diﬀerence v(r)−µ as a single

functional variable, rather than treating v(r) and µ as independent variables [10] (which are

deﬁned only up to a constant) — this follows naturally from the deﬁnition of Ω, Eq. (2),

and corresponds to the fact that N is not independent of n(r).

The deﬁnition of FHK[n] through a Legendre transform assumes that for each choice of

the function n(r) there corresponds one and only one v(r) − µ which has this n(r) as its

Z

5

equilibrium density distribution (given the other parameters in Ω, i.e., T and Λ). This

assumption was ﬁrst proven for non–degenerate ground states, and is known as the ﬁrst

Hohenberg–Kohn theorem [11]. Rather than engage in a mathematical discussion of the

domain of validity of diﬀerent deﬁnitions [12], we take the same approach as was taken for

thermodynamics above: we assume a one–to–one relationship between n(r) and v(r) − µ

(generalized convexity), and we admit that exceptions may exist and will perhaps need to

be studied separately. In practice, the need for such a separate discussion does not arise.

The direct generalization of the free energy function of Eq. (3) is the free energy func-

tional:

relation

Ωv−µ[n(r)] ≡ FHK[n(r)] +

dr n(r) (v(r)−µ) ,

(5)

Z

with v(r) and n(r) treated as independent functional variables.

If we minimize this free

energy functional with respect to n(r) at constant v(r) (and given µ, T , etc.), we obtain the

δFHK
δn(r)

= µ − v(r) ,

(6)

and for n(r) and v(r) obeying this physical relation, the free energy functional is equal to

the grand potential by inspection. This procedure is analogous to that used in Sec. B for µ

and N. The existence of a functional of n(r) with this property is one of the basic tenets of

DFT, and is the second Hohenberg–Kohn theorem [11].

As already mentioned, most applications of DFT are studies of ground–state properties,

i.e. refer to situations in which the temperature is negligibly small, and the number of

electrons is ﬁxed. It it thus important to note that all of the above arguments are valid in

the T → 0 limit, except for the claim that the relationship between µ and N is one–to–one.

In fact, both Ω(µ) and F (N) become piecewise linear functions in this limit, with a whole

linear segment in one of them corresponding to a point with discontinuous derivative in

the other [13] (the diﬀerence between them continues to be the trivial µN product). This

is not a major obstacle, and from here on we proceed to discuss the situation for T → 0.

6

In principle, this requires that we replace statements such as Eq. (6) by “ δFHK

δn(r) is equal to

−v(r) up to a constant”, but instead we simply assume that an inﬁnitesimal value of the

temperature is restored whenever it becomes necessary to remove some ambiguity.

D. The Kohn–Sham equations

An expression for the Hohenberg–Kohn free energy of Eq. (4) is now needed. For a given

density n(r) one can start from the case of noninteracting electrons with energy Fni[n],

and gradually increase the interaction strength Λ from 0 to 1, while keeping the density

distribution n(r) ﬁxed [14]:

FHK[n] = Fni[n] +

1

∂FHK[n]
∂Λ

0

Z

dΛ .

From the general properties of Legendre transforms, we ﬁnd that the derivative with respect

to the interaction strength, ∂FHK[n]

∂Λ , is equal to the interaction energy ∂Ω

∂Λ =

ˆU

. As n(r) is

given here (and independent of Λ) it is natural to approximate this by the Hartree electro-

D

E

static energy. The diﬀerence between this approximation and the actual value is included

as an exchange–correlation term [15]:

FHK[n(r)] = Fni[n(r)] + Ees[n(r)] + Exc[n(r)] ,

with the electrostatic energy given by

Ees[n(r)] =

n(r) n(r′) ,

e2
2 Z

dr dr′
|r−r′|

and the exchange–correlation energy given formally by

1

Exc[n(r)] =

dr dr′
|r−r′|
n(r) ρxc(r, r′; [n], Λ) = hˆn(r) [ˆn(r′) − δ(r − r′)]in(r),Λ − n(r) n(r′) .

n(r) ρxc(r, r′; [n], Λ)

e2
2 Z

dΛ

0
Z

;

The expectation value in the last line describes the density of pairs of electrons at r and

r′, for a system with reduced interaction strength Λ, and with the density distribution

7

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

n(r). In order to reproduce this distribution, the corresponding Hamiltonian must contain

a Λ–dependent “external” potential vΛ(r). Clearly, v1(r) is just the external potential v(r).

On the other extreme is v0(r), which reproduces n(r) for non–interacting electrons, and

is also called the Kohn–Sham potential or the eﬀective potential, veﬀ(r). The quantity

ρxc(r, r′; [n], Λ) is the density of the so–called exchange–correlation hole — it describes the

region in r′–space from which an electron is “missing” if it is known to be at the point r.

Having written FHK[n] as a sum of three terms in Eq. (8), we ﬁnd that Eq. (6) gives a

simple relationship between veﬀ(r) and v(r):

µ − veﬀ(r) − eϕ(r) + vxc(r) = µ − v(r) ,

where the electrostatic potential is

and the exchange–correlation potential is deﬁned as

ϕ(r) = −e

dr′ n(r′)
|r−r′|

,

Z

vxc(r) =

δExc
δn(r)

.

(12)

(13)

(14)

Given a practical approximation for Exc[n], and hence for vxc(r), one can thus ﬁnd veﬀ(r)

from n(r) (the chemical potential µ drops out of Eq. (12)). However, n(r) can also be found

from veﬀ(r) by solving the non–interacting problem,

n(r) =

|ψi(r)|2

;

∇2 + veﬀ(r)

ψi(r) = ǫiψi(r) ,

(15)

¯h2
2m

−

 

!

N

Xi=1

i.e. by summing over the solutions of the single–particle Schrodinger equation (the states ψi

here are ordered so that the energies ǫi are non–decreasing, and the spin index is included

in i). At ﬁnite temperatures, the Fermi–Dirac distribution is used for the occupations of

the Kohn–Sham orbitals; fractional occupations are also implied when ǫN is degenerate with

ǫN +1, but if only spin–degeneracy is involved, this does not aﬀect the expression for n(r).

The set of equations (12)—(15) is called the Kohn–Sham equations of DFT [16], and

must be solved self–consistently. It provides a scheme for ﬁnding n(r) and the ground state

8

energy [17] for a system of N interacting particles. Historically, additional properties [18]

of the Kohn–Sham non–interacting system, e.g. the band structure for crystals, have also

provided surprisingly accurate predictions when compared with experiment.

In fact, the

agreement between the calculated Kohn–Sham Fermi surface and the measured one was

so remarkable for some systems [19], that it motivated analyses of simple soluble models

for which the diﬀerence between the interacting and non–interacting Fermi surfaces could

be calculated explicitly, and shown not to vanish [20]. Clearly, the accuracy of the DFT

predictions for ground–state energetics and density distributions can be improved by ﬁnding

better (but still practical) approximations for Exc[n], whereas improving the accuracy of such

band–structure calculations may require “going back to the drawing board” and devising

other, more appropriate, calculational schemes [21].

E. The Local Density Approximation

All the complicated physics of interacting electrons has thus been lumped into a formal

expression for Exc. For a slowly varying density of electrons n(r), it makes sense to use

properties of the homogeneous interacting electron gas, i.e. to assume that the exchange–

correlation energy density at r depends only on n(r):

Exc[n(r)] ≃

dr n(r) ǫxc(n(r)) ,

(16)

Z

where ǫxc(n) is the exchange–correlation energy per electron in a uniform electron gas of

density n. This quantity is known exactly in the limit of high density, and can be computed

accurately at densities of interest, using Monte Carlo techniques. In practice one employs

interpolation formulas, e.g., that given by Gunnarson and Lundqvist (Ref. [23]): ǫxc(n) =

−0.458/rs − 0.0666G(rs/11.4) Rydbergs, where the Wigner–Seitz radius rs = (3/4πn)−1/3

is in units of the Bohr radius, and G(x) = 1

2 [(1+x3) log(1+x−1) − x2 + 1

2x − 1
3].

Note that the resulting approximation scheme is very similar to a Hartree calculation,

with the only diﬀerence being the addition of a potential

9

vxc(r) =

d

n ǫxc(n)
dn

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
n=n(r)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(17)

to the electrostatic potential at the appropriate step in the self–consistency loop. This

local density approximation (LDA) has been shown to give surprisingly good results for

many atomic, molecular and crystalline interacting electron systems, even though in these

systems the density of electrons is not slowly varying (see examples below).

Approximate models of many–electron systems which use the local density in a similar

manner had already been in use when DFT was being developed. The best–known of these,

the Thomas–Fermi model [22], is obtained in the present scheme by ignoring the exchange–

correlation energy, Exc ≃ 0, and using an LDA for the non–interacting problem Fni[n] ≃

C

n5/3(r)dr, with C = 3

10 (3π2)2/3 ≃ 2.87 in atomic units, calculated for a uniform electron–
gas of density n(r). Another well–known approximation scheme was the Xα method [24], in

R

which an LDA was used for the exchange energy, and only the correlation energy was ignored,

so that an accuracy comparable to that of the Hartree–Fock method could be obtained with a

Hartree–like scheme. The advance made in introducing DFT was twofold: ﬁrst, it promoted

such calculation schemes from the status of “models” to that of a “theory”, by showing that

in principle the density distribution n(r) contains all of the information about the system;

and second, it pointed out the direction for improving the level of approximation: developing

more and more accurate practical expressions for Exc[n].

Indeed, improving upon the accuracy of the LDA is a goal which has been persistently

pursued, with an important impetus coming from the very high degree of accuracy required

by practical applications in chemistry. One improvement which is very often implemented

is the local spin–density (LSD) approximation, which is motivated by the fact that the

exchange–correlation hole is very diﬀerent for electrons with parallel and with antiparallel

spins. In this scheme, separate densities of spin–up and spin–down electrons are used as

a pair of functional variables: n↑(r) and n↓(r). Correspondingly, the Hamiltonian contains

separate potentials for spin up and spin down electrons — a Zeeman–energy magnetic ﬁeld

term is introduced. The exchange–correlation energy per particle is again taken from the

10

results of a homogeneous electron gas, ǫxc(n↑, n↓).

The next degree of sophistication is to allow ǫxc to depend not only on the local densities

but also on the rate–of–change of the densities, i.e. to add gradient corrections. Unfortu-

nately, it was found that such corrections do not necessarily improve the accuracy obtained.

One way of explaining this is to note that the exchange–correlation hole of Eq. (10) obeys a

simple sum–rule: if an electron is known to be at r, then exactly one electron (with the same

spin) is missing from the surrounding space,

dr′ ρxc(r, r′) = −1. Only the weighted inverse

R
distance between r and r′ aﬀects the energy Exc[n], and approximating it with the inverse

distance taken from a uniform electron gas at density n(r) introduces only minor errors,

which tend to further cancel out when the integration over r is performed.

In contrast,

introducing gradient corrections in a straightforward and systematic manner, by expanding

around the uniform electron gas, breaks this sum rule and is less accurate. This situation

led to the development of various generalized gradient approximations (GGAs) [25,26], in

which the spatial variations of n(r) enter in a manner which conforms with the sum rule,

and which have succeeded in reducing the errors of the LDA by a factor which is typically

about 4.

Further improvements in practical expressions for Exc[n] are actively being pursued [27].

One direction which may achieve the accuracy needed for applications in chemistry [28], is

to use the fact that the exact form of the exchange–correlation hole can be calculated for

Λ = 0 relatively easily, directly from the non–interacting Kohn–Sham system. There is thus

no need to use an approximation such as the LDA or the GGA for the low–Λ portion of the

integral in Eq. (10). Ultimately, one may hope that a systematic method of improving the

approximation would be found, although the experience with the gradient expansion is not

promising in this respect.

11

F. Discussion

We have outlined here the main ideas of DFT as they are commonly applied today.

This eﬃcient approximation scheme gives the electronic ground–state energy and density

distribution as a function of the position of the atomic nuclei, which in turn determines

molecular and crystal structure and gives the forces acting on the atomic nuclei when they are

not at their equilibrium positions. DFT is being used routinely to solve problems in atomic

and molecular physics, such as the calculation of ionization potentials [29] and vibration

spectra, the study of chemical reactions, the structure of bio–molecules [30], and the nature

of active sites in catalysts [31], as well as problems in condensed matter physics, such as

lattice structures [32], phase transitions in solids [33], and liquid metals [34]. Furthermore

these methods have made possible the development of accurate molecular dynamics schemes

in which the forces are evaluated quantum mechanically “on the ﬂy” [35].

It is important to stress that all practical applications of density functional theory rest on

essentially uncontrolled approximations, such as the local density approximation discussed

above. Thus the validity of the method is in practice established by its ability to reproduce

experimental results. It is of interest to note some of the cases for which these approximations

are known to fail. When considering a point r a short distance away from the surface of a

metal, it is obvious that the exchange–correlation hole, ρxc(r, r′), is concentrated at points

r′ inside or very near the surface of the metal, and this results in image forces, i.e. a 1/r

behavior of vxc (here r is the distance from the surface). This is not reproduced in local

approximations. Likewise, van der Waals forces, which among other things are important

for many biological molecules, are not reproduced. Both these examples are manifestations

of the signiﬁcance of non–local correlations — a non–locality which is by deﬁnition absent

from the LDA and its immediate extensions. These examples of practical failure, together

with the unattractiveness of uncontrolled approximations, spur research towards new and

more exact exchange–correlation energy functionals.

A discussion of the role DFT plays in practice, compared to other alternative approaches,

12

necessarily depends very much on the speciﬁc applications one has in mind. For atoms and

small molecules, the simplest version of the LDA already provides a very useful qualitative

and semi–quantitative picture. It is of course a dramatic improvement over the Thomas–

Fermi model, which fails to describe the shell structure of atoms and the very existence

of chemical bonds.

It even improves on the more labor–intensive Hartree–Fock method

in many cases (for examples involving a few small atoms, see table 1), especially when

one is calculating the strength of molecular bonds, which are severely overestimated in

Hartree–Fock calculations. This can only be considered as a surprising success, keeping

in mind that an isolated atom or molecule is as inhomogeneous an electronic system as

possible, and therefore the last place where one might expect a local approximation to

work.

In other words, electronic correlations in such systems are in a sense weak, and

are on average similar to those of a uniform electron gas (see the discussion of the sum–

rule in Sec. E). However, the many–body quantum states of such relatively small systems

can be solved for extremely accurately using well–known techniques of quantum chemistry.

Furthermore, these techniques use controlled approximations, so that the accuracy can be

improved indeﬁnitely, given a powerful enough computer, and indeed impressive agreement

with experiment is routinely achieved. For this reason, most quantum chemists did not

embrace DFT methods at an early stage.

It is in studies of larger molecules that DFT becomes an indispensable tool [5]. The

computational eﬀort required in the conventional quantum chemistry approaches grows ex-

ponentially with the number of electrons involved, whereas in DFT it grows only as the

second or third power of this number.

In practice, this means that DFT can be applied

to molecules with hundreds of atoms, whereas the conventional approaches are limited to

systems with ∼ 10 atoms, or less. It is appropriate to note here that simply solving the

non–interacting problem for a complicated molecule may also be prohibitive, and various

methods have been and are being developed in order to reduce the problem to a compu-

tationally manageable task. Of these, we mention the well–known pseudopotential method

[37], which allows one to avoid recalculating the wavefunctions of the inert core electrons over

13

and over again, and the recent attempts to develop “order N” methods [36], which would

make use of the fact that the behavior of the wavefunctions at each point is determined pri-

marily by the atoms in its immediate vicinity rather than by the whole molecule. As implied

already in Sec. E, it is for this problem that more and more accurate density functionals are

most obviously needed. To illustrate this, we quote one sentence from Ref. [26]: “Accurate

atomization energies are found [using the GGA] for seven hydrocarbon molecules, with a

rms error per bond of 0.1 eV, compared with 0.7 eV for the LSD approximation and 2.4 eV

for the Hartree–Fock approximation.”

The remarkable usefulness of DFT for solid–state physics was apparent from the out-

set. For example, the lattice constants of simple crystals are obtained with an accuracy of

about 1% already in the LDA. Admittedly, this method is inappropriate for treating some

more complicated situations, such as antiferromagnets or systems with strong electronic

correlations. In other cases, such as for the work–function of metals, the above–mentioned

deﬁciency of the LDA in not accounting properly for image potentials can be corrected for

“by hand”, yielding satisfactory results [38]. It is useful to note that, in contrast to approx-

imations using free parameters which are empirically optimized to ﬁt a certain set of data,

the LDA and the GGA have proved to exhibit a consistent degree of accuracy or inaccuracy

for various types of problems — when applied to a new problem, the results can thus be

interpreted with some conﬁdence.

Our discussion would not be complete without mentioning the existence of many other

uses of density–functional methods, for electronic systems and for other physical systems.

The former include time–dependent DFT, which relates interacting and non–interacting

electronic systems moving in time–dependent potentials, and relativistic DFT, which uses

the Dirac equation rather than the Schrodinger equation to calculate the Kohn–Sham states

(these are reviewed in Ref. [2]). The latter include applications in nuclear physics, in which

the densities of protons and neutrons and the resulting energies are studied [39], and in the

theory of classical and quantum liquids, where the densities of atoms or of electrons and

nuclei appear [6,40].

14

In summary, we have provided a brief introduction to density functional theory, based on

an analogy with thermodynamics. Two of the advantages of this approach, as compared, e.g.,

with introducing DFT using Levy’s constrained–search mehod [12], are: (a) the introduction

of n(r) through a Legendre transform, as the variable conjugate to v(r), makes it appear to

be a natural variable, whereas in the conventional description of DFT the very existence of

the functional F [n] of Eq. (4) appears to be surprising and requires some digestion; and (b)

using the standard properties of Legendre transforms, one immediately obtains the physical

expression for the exchange–correlation energy in terms of the density of the exchange–

correlation hole, an expression which serves as the basis for a discussion of the weaknesses

and strengths of the approximations employed in practice. We hope that the availability of

this type of introduction will help increase the awareness and understanding of DFT amongst

potential users, and especially amongst the general audience of physicists and scientists.

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to express their gratitude to N.W. Ashcroft, W. Kohn, H. Metiu, Y.

Rosenfeld, and G. Vignale for helpful discussions. N.A. acknowledges support under grants

No. NSF PHY94-07194, and No. NSF DMR96-30452, and by QUEST, a National Science

Foundation Science and Technology Center, (grant No. NSF DMR91–20007).

15

REFERENCES

[1] R.G. Parr and W. Yang, Density Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules (Oxford,

Oxford, 1989).

[2] R.M. Dreizler and E.K.U. Gross, Density Functional Theory: An Approach to the Quan-

tum Many–Body Problem (Springer, Berlin, 1990).

[3] W. Kohn and P. Vashista “General density functional theory,” in Theory of the Inhomo-

geneous Electron Gas, S. Lundqvist and N.H. March, Eds., (Plenum, New York, 1983),

pp. 79–147; see also additional chapters in this book.

[4] The relationship between DFT and Legendre transforms was discussed mathematically

by E.H. Lieb, “Density functionals for Coulomb systems,” Int. J. Quantum Chem.

24, 243–277 (1983), and has occasionally been used in the research literature — see,

e.g., R. Fukuda, T. Kotani, Y. Suzuki, and S. Yokojima, “Density functional theory

through Legendre transformation,” Prog. Theor. Phys. 92, 833–862 (1994). However,

we are unaware of any previous references which focus on the pedagogical value of this

relationship.

York, 1996).

[5] W. Kohn, A.D. Becke, and R.G. Parr, “Density functional theory of electronic struc-

ture,” J. Phys. Chem. 100, 12 974–12 980 (1996).

[6] H.T. Davis, Statistical Mechanics of Phases, Interfaces, and Thin Films (VCH, New

[7] H.B. Callen, Thermodynamics, 2nd ed. (Wiley, New York, 1985).

[8] Note that F (N) thus deﬁned is not identical with that obtained by ﬁxing the particle

number — the equivalence of the canonical and grand–canonical ensembles is guaranteed

only in the thermodynamic limit. This is not relevant for the present discussion, one

reason being that we will focus on the T → 0 limit, in which the equivalence is regained

because the ﬂuctuations of both the energy and the particle number vanish.

16

[9] Functionals and functional derivatives are not always familiar concepts to undergrad-

uate students, and this is an excellent opportunity for them to be introduced. For our

purposes one may simply regard the functional variables, n(r) and v(r) − µ above, as

deﬁned on a dense lattice of M points ri, each point representing a small volume of

space Vi, with i = 1, 2, . . . , M and with the limit M → ∞ in mind. In this picture

the functionals such as FHK[n] are simply functions of the M variables {ni}, where

ni = n(ri). Integration over space is now expressed as a sum, e.g.

dr n(r) (v(r) −µ)

becomes

M
i=1 Vi ni (vi − µ), and correspondingly a δ function near the point rj is re-

R

placed by a Kronecker δi,j divided by the volume Vj. The functional derivative, which is

P

conventionally deﬁned as

δF
δn(r) = limα→0

F [n(r′)+αδ(r′−r)]−F [n]
α

, is then equal to the partial

derivative ∂F

∂ni divided by the volume element Vi. The usual chain rules for derivatives

then follow, and can be used in deriving, e.g., the relationship n(r) = δΩ

δv(r) .

[10] R.F. Nalewajski, and R.G. Parr, “Legendre transforms and Maxwell relations in density

functional theory,” J. Chem. Phys. 77, 399–407 (1982); B.G. Baekelandt, A Cedillo, and

R.G. Parr, “Reactivity indices and ﬂuctuation formulas in density functional theory:

isomorphic ensembles and a new measure of local hardness,” J. Chem. Phys. 103, 8548–

8556 (1995).

[11] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, “Inhomogeneous electron gas,” Phys. Rev. 136, B864–867

(1964); The generalization to a ﬁnite–temperature grand–canonical ensemble was pro-

vided almost immediately by N.D. Mermin, “Thermal properties of the inhomogeneous

electron gas,” Phys. Rev. 137, A1441–1443 (1965).

[12] Clearly, if for a certain potential v(r) (and for a given value of N or µ) there exist degen-

erate ground states Ψi with diﬀerent density distributions ni(r), then the relationship

between v(r) and them is not one–to–one. In fact, there also exist density distributions

n(r), which do not correspond to any v(r), (i.e. are not ground–state v–representable),

e.g. those obtained by interpolating between degenerate ni(r) distributions, [see, e.g.,

17

M. Levy, “Electron densities in search of Hamiltonians,” Phys. Rev. A 26, 1200–1208

(1982)]. Here we are avoiding this problem by using a thermodynamic ensemble, for

which n(r) is equal to the average of the ni(r) in the T → 0 limit, when a ground–state

degeneracy occurs.

In the DFT literature, this problem is solved in a diﬀerent manner: an alternative def-

inition of FHK[n], which does not explicitly use the potential v(r), but coincides with

the deﬁnition of Ref. [11] for v–representable distributions, was suggested in M. Levy,

“Universal variational functionals of electron densities, ﬁrst–order density matrices, and

natural spin–orbitals and solution of the v–representability problem,” Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. (USA) 76, 6062–6065 (1979). As Levy’s formulation may also be very useful for a

pedagogical introduction to DFT (see, e.g., Fig. 3.1 in Ref. [1]), we reproduce it brieﬂy

in this footnote. The ground state energy is known to be the minimal expectation value

of ˆHMB, with respect to all wavefunctions Ψ in the Hilbert space of N particles. If we

constrain the range of this search only to wavefunctions which produce a certain n(r)

(denoted by Ψ → n), we will necessarily ﬁnd a higher energy, with the ground–state

energy being obtained only if n(r) is the ground–state density. Thus, Levy deﬁned a

ground–state energy functional FL[n]+

dr n(r)v(r), with FL[n] = minΨ→nhΨ| ˆT + ˆU|Ψi,

a deﬁnition which is valid for any reasonable n(r). One advantage of the thermodynamic

R

approach we are using here is that it clariﬁes the special role of the density distribu-

tion, n(r), whereas in Levy’s formulation one could equally well imagine other ways of

constraining the search to other subspaces of the Hilbert space.

[13] J.P. Perdew, R.G. Parr, M. Levy, and J.L. Balduz, “Density–functional theory for frac-

tional particle number: derivative discontinuities of the energy,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 49,

1691–1694 (1982).

1648–1659 (1984).

[14] J. Harris, “Adiabatic–connection approach to Kohn–Sham theory,” Phys. Rev. A 29,

18

[15] Note that this deﬁnition diﬀers from the conventional one for exchange–correlation

energy.

[16] W. Kohn and L.J. Sham, “Self–consistent equations including exchange and correlation

eﬀects,” Phys. Rev. 140, A1133–1138 (1965).

[17] For completeness, we write the interacting ground–state energy E0 explicitly in terms

of the Kohn–Sham eigenvalues and the density distribution:

E0 =

ǫi −

dr n(r)

+ Ees[n(r)] + Exc[n(r)] .

veﬀ(r) − v(r)
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

N

Xi=1

Z

In the LDA, and using Eq. (12), this can be rewritten as

E0 =

ǫi +

dr n(r)

N

Xi=1

Z

ǫxc(n(r)) − vxc(n(r))
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

− Ees[n(r)] .

At ﬁnite temperatures, the free energy is obtained by including a term involving the

entropy of the Kohn–Sham system, and using a temperature–dependent approximation

for ǫxc(n).

[18] Interestingly, the work function of a metal surface is equal to that of the Kohn–Sham

system. Using the fact that both ϕ(r) and vxc(r) decay as 1/r at large distances away

from the system, and taking v(r) and veﬀ(r) to vanish at inﬁnity by convention, one

ﬁnds that Eq. (12) reduces to a statement of the equality of the chemical potentials for

the interacting and the Kohn–Sham system.

[19] See, e.g., S.B. Nickerson, and S.H. Vosko, “Prediction of the Fermi surface as a test

of density–functional approximations to the self–energy,” Phys. Rev. B 14, 4399–4406

[20] See, e.g., D. Mearns, “Inequivalence of the physical and Kohn–Sham Fermi surfaces,”

Phys. Rev. B 38, 5906–5912 (1988).

[21] See, e.g., G.D. Mahan, “GW approximations,” Comm. Cond. Mat. Phys. 16, 333–354

(1976).

(1994).

19

[22] L.H. Thomas, “Calculation of atomic ﬁelds,” Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 33, 542–548 (1927);

E. Fermi, “Application of statistical gas methods to electronic systems,” Accad. Lincei,

Atti 6, 602–607 (1927); “Statistical deduction of atomic properties,” ibid, 7, 342–346

(1928); “Statistical methods of investigating electrons in atoms,” Z. Phys. 48, 73–79

(1928); see also Chap. 1 in Ref. [3].

[23] O. Gunnarsson, and B.I. Lundqvist, “Exchange and correlation in atoms, molecules,

and solids by the spin–density formalism,” Phys. Rev. B 13, 4274–4298 (1976).

[24] J.C. Slater, “A simpliﬁcation of the Hartree–Fock method,” Phys. Rev. 81, 385–390

(1951); “Statistical exchange–correlation in the self–consistent ﬁeld,” in Advances in

Quantum Chemistry, Vol. 6, P.-O. Lowdin, Ed. (Academic Press, London, 1973), pp.

1–92.

(1992).

[25] See, e.g., D.C. Langreth and J.P. Perdew, “Theory of nonuniform electronic systems I:

Analysis of the gradient approximation and a generalization that works,” Phys. Rev.

B 21, 5469–5493 (1980); J.P. Perdew and Y. Wang, “Accurate and simple density

functional for the electronic exchange energy: generalized gradient approximation,”

Phys. Rev. B 33, 8800–8802 (1986).

[26] J.P. Perdew et al., “Atoms, molecules, solids, and surfaces: Applications of the general-

ized gradient approximation for exchange and correlation,” Phys. Rev. B 46, 6671–6687

[27] For example, see the proceedings of the VIth International Conference on the Appli-

cations of Density Functional Theory. (Paris, France, 29 Aug.—1 Sept. 1995), Int. J.

Quantum Chem. 61(2) (1997).

[28] A.D. Becke, “Density–functional thermochemistry III: The role of exact exchange,” J.

Chem. Phys. 98, 5648–5652 (1993); “Density–functional thermochemistry IV: A new

dynamical correlation functional and implications for exact–exchange mixing,” ibid,

20

104, 1040–1046 (1996).

[29] R.O. Jones and O. Gunnarsson, “The density functional formalism, its applications and

prospects,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 61, 689–746 (1989).

[30] M.D. Segall et al., “First principles calculation of the activity of cytochrome P450,”

Phys. Rev. E 57, 4618–4621 (1998).

[31] R. Shah, M.C. Payne, M.-H. Lee and J.D. Gale, “Understanding the catalytic behavior

of zeolites — a ﬁrst–principles study of the adsorption of methanol,” Science 271, 1395–

1397 (1996).

[32] M.J. Rutter and V. Heine, “Phonon free energy and devil’s staircases in the origin of

polytypes,” J. Phys.: Cond. Matter 9, 2009–2024 (1997).

[33] W.-S. Zeng, V. Heine and O. Jepsen, “The structure of barium in the hexagonal close-

packed phase under high pressure,” J. Phys.: Cond. Matter 9, 3489–3502 (1997).

[34] F. Kirchhoﬀ et al., “Structure and bonding of liquid Se,” J. Phys.: Cond. Matter 8,

9353–9357 (1996).

[35] R. Car and M. Parrinello, “Uniﬁed approach for molecular dynamics and density–

functional theory,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2471–2474 (1985).

[36] W. Kohn, “Density functional theory for systems of very many atoms,” Int. J. Quant.

Chem. 56, 229–232 (1994).

[37] M.C. Payne et al., “Iterative minimization techniques for ab initio total–energy calcu-

lations: Molecular dynamics and conjugate gradients,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 1045–1097

[38] See, e.g., Z.Y. Zhang, D.C. Langreth, and J.P. Perdew, “Planar–surface charge densities

and energies beyond the local–density approximation,” Phys. Rev. B 41, 5674–5684

(1992).

(1990).

21

[39] See, e.g., C. Speicher, R. M. Dreizler, and E. Engel, “Density functional approach

to quantumhadrodynamics: Theoretical foundations and construction of extended

Thomas-Fermi models,” Ann. Phys. (San Diego) 213, 312–354 (1992).

[40] J.S. Rowlinson and F.L. Swinton, Liquids and liquid mixtures, 3rd ed. (Butterworth

Scientiﬁc, London, 1982).

[41] S.H. Vosko, L. Wilk, and M. Nusair, “Accurate spin–dependent electron liquid correla-

tion energies for local spin density calculations: a critical analysis,” Can. J. Phys. 58,

1200–1211 (1980).

(1997).

[42] B.S. Jursic, “Computation of some ionization potentials for second–row elements by

ab initio and density functional theory methods.,” Int. J. Quant. Chem. 64, 255–261

22

FIGURES

1000

Hartree−Fock

r
a
e
y
 
r
e
p
 
s
d
r
o
c
e
r
 
d
e
v
e
i
r
t
e
r
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n

100

10

Density Functional Theory

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

year

FIG. 1. One indicator of the increasing use of DFT is the number of records retrieved from

the INSPEC databases by searching for the keywords “density”, “functional” and “theory”. This

is compared here with a similar search for keywords “Hartree” and “Fock”, which parallels the

overall growth of the INSPEC databases (for any given year, approximately 0.3% of the records

have the Hartree–Fock keywords).

23

TABLE

Method

C

N

O

F

HF

10.81

13.91

12.05

15.70

LDA

GGA

EXP

12.15

15.47

14.60

18.57

11.28

14.78

13.37

17.40

11.24

14.54

14.61

17.45

Table 1: First ionization potentials of isolated atoms, calculated in the Hartree–Fock

approximation, and using density functional theory with the LDA (Ref. [41]) and with the

GGA (Ref. [26]), compared with experiment [42].

24

