8
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
0
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Minimizing postulation in a senior undergraduate course in electromagnetism

Nelson P. Andion
Institute of Physics, Federal University of Bahia,
Salvador 40210-340, Brazil.
e-mail: andion@ufba.br.

An approach to the teaching of electromagnetism to senior undergraduate students, designed for
overcoming the fragmentation of the theory is described. As usual it starts from the static case, but
it is strictly based on Helmholtz theorem of uniqueness of vector ﬁelds, on primary experimental
observations upon the sources of electric and magnetic ﬁelds, on Lenz’s law and on principles of
superposition and reciprocity of interactions. Thereafter, without further postulation, all laws and
rules arise in a procedure where electricity and magnetism parallel one another. Maxwell’s equations
are built up on a step-by-step basis, showing that electromagnetic ﬁeld can be considered but a
twofold linear vector ﬁeld obeying the simplest principles of physical theories. It is shown that every
system of units ﬁts this formalism, provided suitable values are assigned to some constants arising
therein from superposition principle.

I. INTRODUCTION

Contrasting with earlier procedures [1] contemporary physical sciences undergraduate teaching makes frequent use
of some powerful mathematical tools pertaining not only to calculus but also to the methods of theoretical physics.
Nevertheless, the axiomatic structure hardly takes advantage of such powerful mathematical machinery. Indeed, in
spite of their extraordinary contribution in adapting the available mathematical basis to pedagogical needs, most
textbooks on electromagnetic theory intended to senior undergraduate students approach the subject by means of
the same axioms used in books intended to freshmen: the laws of Coulomb, Amp`ere, Biot and Savart, Lorentz force
equation, etc. [2–6]. On the other hand, outstanding eﬀort has been directed to minimizing the number of axioms
of electromagnetic theory, in the form of textbook chapters and papers. Unfortunately, they require a mathematical
background that is seldom mastered by students at this course level, thus being labelled “optional matter” and often
omitted, although not disregarded [7, 8].

The pedagogical approach presented here stands as a mean term between the conventional one and those highly
synthetic works ultimately designed for axiomatic purposes. It has been developed for a course in electromagnetic the-
ory to senior undergraduate students of physics, aiming to encompass the mathematical apparatus and the theoretical
concepts into an unitary formalism which provided conciseness and axiomatic economy to the theory, without loss of
conceptual or technical knowledge: accordingly, the above mentioned laws, which usually constitute axioms become,
here, the consequence of superposition and reciprocity principles applied to a vector ﬁeld arising from a scalar physical
quantity, the electric charge. It provides a better understanding of the theory and prepares the student for the advent
of Maxwell’s equations, which are obtained on a step-by-step basis without invoking the usual mosaic of postulates.
Throughout the formalism, electricity and magnetism parallel one another, showing their aﬃnity and common origin,
even in the stationary case. After obtaining the equation of electromagnetic induction Maxwell’s equations are derived
by simply imposing the requirement of self-consistency to the previous set, a procedure that leads to displacement
current. Finally, the essentials of time-varying ﬁeld theory are discussed along with the derivation of the wave equa-
tions on potentials and the Poynting theorem. A brief discussion on systems of units for electromagnetic ﬁelds in a
vacuum and its implications in our general formalism ends its presentation.

The resulting formalism yields great emphasis on concepts, without disregarding the need for training on calculation
techniques envisaging the solution of scientiﬁc problems. This procedure can better prepare the student for dealing
with physical concepts and develop his/her creativeness.

Our approach is founded on a threefold base: (i) a review of mathematical concepts, referring to vector algebra
and vector calculus, particularly the theorem of Helmholtz; (ii) on the phenomenological realm, we begin with a
set of three elementary thought experiments: ﬁrst, the pendulum electroscope [9]; second, the interaction between
permanent magnets; third, the interaction between an electric discharge and a compass, to which the conservation of
electric charge and Lenz’s law are added; (iii) from the conceptual realm, principles of superposition and reciprocity
of interactions. Following the general use of courses at this level we assume, critically, the validity of Newtonian
mechanics and Galilean transformations. Besides, for reason of conciseness we present here only the approach to
electromagnetic systems in a vacuum (microscopic theory). Macroscopic theory will be presented later [10].

In Section II the mathematical basis of our approach is founded and further combined, in Section III, with theoretical
postulates and experimental evidence for obtaining the ﬁeld equations in the static case. Section IV shows how a

1

reciprocity can be invoked and justiﬁed in the formalism and how Lorentz force is derived from it. Section V extends
the ﬁeld equations to the time-dependent case, i.e., we arrive at Maxwell’s equations and its consequences. In Section
VI a brief discussion is made about systems of units and in Section VII we present our ﬁnal remarks.

II. MATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND

In what mathematical support is concerned, we would like to point out the statement of the theorem of Helmholtz

[11, 12]: let V (r) describe a vector ﬁeld. If we are given the functions s(r) and c(r), such that,

∇ · V = s(r),

∇ × V = c(r),

V = −∇φ + ∇ × A,

then V is uniquely determined as:

where φ and A are the scalar and vector potentials, respectively, given by:

and

and

According to Eqs. (2.3)-(2.5), the resulting ﬁeld has the form

φ(r) = (1/4π)

[s (r′

) / |r − r′

|] dV

′

A(r) = (1/4π)

[c (r′

) / |r − r′

|] dV

′

.

Z

Z

V (r) = (1/4π)

[s (r′

) (r − r′

) / |r − r′

3
|

]dV

′

Z

+(1/4π)

Z

[c (r′

) × (r − r′

) / |r − r′

3
|

]dV

′

.

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

All integrals above are taken over the whole space. This theorem is a powerful tool for developing the theory, because
establishing s and c in Eqs. (2.1) and (2.2), leads to the unique determination of V. Thus, the search for those
two functions constitutes an advantageuos starting point for developing a theory of the ﬁeld V. Furthermore, Eqs.
(2.4)-(2.6) show that, from the mathematical standpoint, s (r′) dV ′ and c (r′) dV ′ play the role of ﬁeld sources located
at point r′ and having scalar and vector nature, respectively. When applied to the ﬁeld vectors E and B, this theorem
provides not only a precise correlation between these ﬁelds and their sources, but also the proper deﬁnition of other
physical quantities as, for instance, the magnetic vector potential. In addition, it has a number of corollaries [13] which
provide better understanding of the theory clarifying, particularly, the origin of the magnetic scalar potential [14].
On the other hand, it has to be pointed out that, for practical purposes, the theorem use is almost entirely restricted
to the stationary case, for in the general time-dependent situation the ﬁnite character of the velocity of interactions
impedes an a priori determination of the right-hand side term in Eqs. (2.1) and (2.2). In other words, despite being
useful for theoretical inspection of time-dependent ﬁelds, Helmholtz theorem cannot aﬀord the complete solution for
them. Furthermore, in electromagnetism we deal with a twofold vector ﬁeld, a ﬁeld described by vectors E and
B which can be depicted by independent ﬁeld equations in the static case but not in the general (time-dependent)
case, because of their common origin in the dynamics of electric charges. Therefore our starting point must be the
ﬁeld originated from stationary source conﬁgurations, i.e., the case when time is ignorable and the non-instantaneous
nature of interactions is irrelevant. It is underlined that the solution for the time-dependent case - as well as its
analysis - will be worked out after establishing the general equations, Maxwell’s equations.

A second point to be stressed on the mathematical foundations of the formalism is the uniqueness of products
involving vectors, as long as only linear operations are taken into account. Accordingly, it can be shown by simple
means that:

1. The multiplication of a vector v by a scalar c is the only linear operation leading from the pair {c, v} to a vector

quantity.

2

2. The usual scalar multiplication of two vectors u and v is the only linear operation leading from them to a scalar

quantity.

3. Analogously, the vector multiplication of an ordered pair of vectors {u, v} is the only linear operation leading

from this pair to a vector quantity. [15]

III. EQUATIONS OF THE STATIC FIELD

Assuming that electric and magnetic ﬁelds have vector nature, our formalism starts from the determination of the
analogues of Eqs. (2.1) and (2.2) for both these ﬁelds. There are powerful theoretical arguments which can be used
for attaining that aim but, in order to weaken our set of axioms, we prefer to approach the subject by means of some
trivial experimental concepts and facts. It wouldn’t be important describing here a detailed experiment. For our
purpose a simple enumeration of the experimental goals and the possibility of reaching them is enough. These goals
are proving:

1. that the electric ﬁeld is irrotational;

2. that the magnetic ﬁeld is divergenceless;

3. the equivalence between permanent magnets and electric discharges as sources of magnetic ﬁeld.

Electricity: Electric interactions are here deﬁned by means of well known elementary experiments consisting of
rubbing some bodies against wool, fur or certain fabrics and observing that they attract pieces of paper and other
light objects. Electrometers and pendulum electroscopes are among the useful measuring instruments. At this stage of
development we also introduce the concept of insulators and conductors, as enlightened by the concept of conduction,
which can be easily checked from the experimental standpoint. Then a Van de Graaﬀ generator is presented, its
operation being described in terms of the preceding concepts and phenomena. Electric ﬁeld, represented by the vector
E, is deﬁned as the responsible for the electric interaction and its sources are shown to have scalar nature. This fact
can be demonstrated by charging a spherical metal ball - using a Van de Graaﬀ generator, for instance - and observing
that a rotation around an arbitrary axis passing across its center doesn’t change its ﬁeld, i.e., the attraction/repulsion
it causes on, say, the pendulum electroscope. Thus we prove that the electric ﬁeld is irrotational, since we must have

in order to cope with the non-vector nature of its sources. On the other hand, taking into account that, in Eq. (2.1),
s(r) is the scalar source density, we can write

∇ × E = 0,

∇ · E =k1ρ (r) ,

(3.1)

(3.2)

being ρ (r) the electric charge density and k1 a constant to be established according to a system of units.

Magnetism: In a similar manner, magnetism is deﬁned as the interaction between permanent magnets at rest. A
compass may be used as measuring instrument. The tendency to alignment of the compass in a preferred direction is
observed and assigned to an external ﬁeld, due to the Earth. It is neglected as compared to the magnetic ﬁeld created
by the magnet. Alternatively, a double magnetic needle, as that used by Faraday for neutralizing the Earth’s magnetic
ﬁeld [16], can be used in place of the common compass. Magnetic ﬁeld, represented by the induction vector B, is the
responsible for magnetic interaction. Its sources are proven to have vector nature, as their orientation aﬀects the ﬁeld
they produce, according to the orientation and reorientation of the compass under such ﬁeld. That these sources don’t
have a scalar component can be observed by superposing two identical permanent magnets in opposite directions and
noticing that their ﬁelds vanish [17] by opposition of the vector sources. If there were a scalar component of the
ﬁeld source it would, instead, double its contribution to the ﬁeld as the magnets were superposed, regardless of the
common axis of their directions. Therefore, we must have:

∇ · B = 0.

(3.3)

In the third and last part of the thought experiment, a Van de Graaﬀ generator supplies charge to a rough capacitor
[18] which is then conveniently discharged by means of a conducting wire. The resulting magnetic ﬁeld is detected
by a compass. Thus we conclude that the motion of electric charges is equivalent to permanent magnets, in the sense
that it also gives rise to a magnetic ﬁeld. Although remarking that not all magnetic ﬁelds are originated by moving
electric charges, we claim, in view of the referred experimental observation and our deﬁnition of magnetic interaction

3

that, from the mathematical standpoint, magnetic ﬁelds can always be seen as being so originated. In other words, it
is always possible to ﬁnd distributions of electric currents leading to a prescribed ﬁeld, whatever its true sources [19].
Before deriving the last equation on the vector ﬁelds, namely, the analogue of Eq. (2.2) for vector B, we shall work
out the hydrodynamic picture of electric charge ﬂows. We recall those concepts referring to mass ﬂows, as density,
ﬂux, etc., and establish, as usual, the charge density

and the current density

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

ρ = N q

J = N qv,

∇·J + (∂ρ/∂t) = 0.

∇ × B = k2J(r),

for a system of moving charged particles, being N the number of particles per unit volume, q the charge of each
particle and v its drift velocity. Conservation of electric charge is then imposed, leading to continuity equation,

An important remark is that the hydrodynamic picture is enough for macroscopically describing the steady ﬂow of
charges. Therefore, ρ and J, given by Eqs. (3.4) and (3.5), are the only quantities needed for describing this ﬂow and,
consequently, all its eﬀects. Whereas ρ describes the charge conﬁguration, J describes its motion; when combined
they describe a sort of electrodynamic state of the system, similarly to what occurs in strictly dynamic ﬂows. As long
as the vorticity of B is considered as deriving from charge ﬂows, it must be a function of J. Furthermore, for obeying
superposition principle it must be a linear function of J. Thus we have

where, as for k1, k2 will be evaluated in accordance with the chosen system of units. Equation (3.7) completes the
aimed set of equations on E and B. Obtaining E and B is now straightforward. According to Eqs. (2.6), (3.1), (3.2),
(3.3) and (3.7) we have:

and

E(r) = (k1/4π)

[ρ (r′

) (r − r′

) / |r − r′

3
|

]dV

′

B(r) = (k2/4π)

[J (r′

) × (r − r′

) / |r − r′

3
|

]dV

′

.

Z

Z

Finally we must underline a special feature of the ﬁeld equations, namely, the asymmetry shown by Eq. (3.2) as
compared to Eq. (3.3) and by Eq. (3.1) as compared to Eq. (3.7), which amounts to the magnetic ﬁeld not having
scalar sources, i.e., for it arising from the motion of the electric ﬁeld sources, the electric charges. It is tempting
to admit the converse, i.e., the existence of magnetic poles directly originating a magnetic ﬁeld as well as - by its
motion - an electric ﬁeld and, consequently, the possibility of reversing and eliminating that asymmetry. In practice,
although magnets - our original source of magnetic ﬁeld - are endowed with north and south “poles”, attempts to
divide them into their “polar” parts are unsuccessful: the resulting parts are again magnets, with north and south
“poles”. However, since long the existence of magnetic poles has been assumed as theoretically possible [20, 21] and,
more recently, it became an imposition to certain theories. Besides, a great number of experimental attempts to detect
magnetic poles have been performed, leading in a few cases to positive events [22], being the most outstanding of these
the one reported by Cabrera [23]. In view of the only positive experiments being cosmic rays or matter searches, of
unpredictable repeatability, as well as in most cases having divergent interpretations, the existence of magnetic poles
is yet an open theme in scientiﬁc investigation. Due to the scope of this approach we won’t consider it therein.

IV. SUPERPOSITION AND RECIPROCITY LEADING TO LORENTZ FORCE

Comparing Eqs. (2.1) and (2.2) with Eqs. (3.1), (3.2), (3.3) and (3.7) and taking into account our discussion about
Helmholtz theorem in Section II, we conclude that ρdV and JdV are elementary sources of E and B, respectively.
Nevertheless we must consider the diﬀerent meanings of the word source. We may call elementary source of a certain
ﬁeld a minute part of the material system which originates such ﬁeld, or we may so entitle the physical quantity,
carried by that material element, which measures its intensity as ﬁeld source. In other words, by source we mean the

4

physical medium or else its measurable attribute as physical agent. The latter is the choice when we talk about, say,
“a point charge q” and give its position instead of referring to “a particle bearing an amount q of charge” located
somewhere. It is a shorthand inherited from mathematics, i.e., we use the mathematical concept of ﬁeld source (see
Section II) as a shorthand description of the material source. On the other hand, one may ask how such a particle or
an elementary material system would respond to an external ﬁeld. One shall expect that, as long as it is a source of
a given ﬁeld, it is also sensitive to the presence of an external ﬁeld of the same kind and, even more, that the physical
quantity which measures its intensity as ﬁeld source will, reciprocally, measure its sensitivity to that external ﬁeld.
Particularly, this implies that a material medium only suﬀers the action of ﬁelds of the kind it originates. The above
argumentation may be summarized as the following qualitative reciprocity principle: an elementary material system
suﬀers the action of an applied ﬁeld in the same measure as it originates a ﬁeld of that kind. In association with
superposition principle it brings immediately on Lorentz force law. Indeed, let us initially calculate the force exerted
by an external electric ﬁeld on the elementary source of another. According to superposition principle stated, e.g., as
“summing up causes leads to summing up their eﬀects”, the resulting force has to be linear in both physical quantities
which measure its immediate causes: the intensity of the external electric ﬁeld, given by the ﬁeld vector Eext, and the
elementary source sensitivity given by ρdV , according to reciprocity principle. In view of the discussion in Section II
about products involving vectors, the only way of combining those two quantities for obtaining a linear result is the
multiplication of the vector Eext by the scalar ρdV . Thus we must have, for that force:

being α another constant referring to the system of units. Analogously, being the vector product the only possibility
of linearly combining two vectors (see, again, Section II), the magnetic force resulting from the action of an external
magnetic ﬁeld, Bext, on an elementary magnetic ﬁeld source, JdV , must be given by

being β the last constant attached to a system of units. Now, in view of Eq. (3.4), Eq. (4.1) takes the form

being

the number of particles in volume dV . It is immediately noticed from Eq. (4.3) that the force exerted by an electric
ﬁeld E on a point charge q is

Analogously, introducing the expression of J, given by Eq. (3.5), into Eq. (4.2) we get:

being dn as deﬁned by Eq. (4.4). Then, in the discrete limit, when a charge q moves with velocity v under a ﬁeld B,
we have

Summing up Eqs. (4.5) and (4.7) we get Lorentz force equation:

The above equation has been derived under the assumption that the particle which suﬀers the force Fem belongs
to a steady ﬂow. Nevertheless it must be remarked that such condition doesn’t restrict the type of motion of an
individual particle in the ﬂow. Indeed, it can be shown that the particle may have any instantaneous acceleration -
not to mention its velocity - even in this case. Therefore, we arrive to the conclusion that Eq. (4.8) is valid whatever
the particle motion.

Introducing ρ′ = q′δ (r′) into Eq. (3.8) and applying the result in Eq. (4.5) we obtain Coulomb’s force between

charges q and q′ :

dFe = α (ρdV ) Eext,

dFm = β (JdV ) × Bext,

dFe = α (dn) qEext,

dn = N dV

Fe = αqE.

dFm = β (dn) qv × Bext,

Fm = βqv × B.

Fem = q (αE+βv × B) .

Fe = (αk1/4π)(qq

′r/r3),

5

(4.1)

(4.2)

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

(4.6)

(4.7)

(4.8)

(4.9)

showing that Coulomb’s law is but a measurable result of the basic conditions satisﬁed by electrostatic interaction: (i)
superposition principle, (ii) reciprocity principle and (iii) scalar nature of the electrostatic ﬁeld source. Particularly,
the conservative nature of electrostatic ﬁeld is due to the scalar nature of the ﬁeld source, as can be noted in the
derivation of Eq. (3.1). Analogously, for obtaining the laws of magnetism it is only required to add to those principles
the assumption that the static magnetic ﬁeld arises from the steady ﬂow of electric ﬁeld sources. We may also obtain
the interaction force of a pair of parallel wires carrying currents I and I ′ by combining, for instance, Eq. (3.7) in
integral form (Amp`ere’s circuital law) with Eq. (4.2), and using the correspondence between a volume distribution
∗dr - where the asterisk stands for an arbitrary factor (an scalar or a
of charges and a current circuit:
vector) and the multiplication sign, if needed. There results, for the magnetic force per unit length of wire:

∗JdV ↔ I

R

H

Fm1 = −(βk2II

/2πd)t,

′

(4.10)

where t represents the unit vector in a direction on the plane containing the wires which is perpendicular to them
and points outward.

The set of fundamental equations of static electric and magnetic interactions is now accomplished. The choice of
constants k1, k2, α and β in Eqs. (3.2), (3.7) and (4.8) implies deﬁning a system of units. For performing applications
and solving problems at this stage of development one may ascribe these constants the values pertaining to the
preferred system of units as well as, correctly, the positive sign to all them, and postpone the detailed analysis of
diﬀerent possibilities of signs and values until obtaining Maxwell’s equations and analyzing its implications. Then it
will be possible to restrict their signs to be positive, ﬁnd the only relation among them: αk1/βk2 = c2, and determine
the rules governing the systems of units used in electromagnetism, as we do in Sections V and VI.

All laws and useful relations valid for static electric and magnetic interactions follow from the equations formerly
derived. Accordingly, Eqs. (3.2) and (3.7) are, respectively, Gauss’ law and Amp`ere’s circuital law in diﬀerential form.
As previously pointed out, the Coulombian ﬁeld and the laws governing magnetic phenomena follow from Eqs. (3.9)
and (4.7). The meaning of electric potential and the proof that it obeys Poisson’s or Laplace’s equation, the derivation
of relations which establish the electric and magnetic energy and energy density, etc., also follow straightforwardly
from the previous relations. In brief, no concept or relation is omitted in our approach, although they may appear in
a diﬀerent order.

V. TIME-DEPENDENT FIELDS

In this Section we extend the analysis of electromagnetic phenomenology to the time-dependent case, starting from
electromagnetic induction. It can be rigorously shown that it isn’t an independent phenomenon. On the contrary,
the law of electromagnetic induction - Faraday’s law - and, in general, Maxwell’s equations can be derived from the
phenomenology of static ﬁelds by suitably applying a Lorentz transformation to the corresponding quantities [7, 8].
However, as we already noticed (Section I), such derivation requires the knowledge of concepts and techniques seldom
mastered by students at this course level, but we can avoid further postulation by adopting an approach [24] based
on a Galilean transformation imposed to the Lorentz force that a purely magnetic ﬁeld exerts on charges at rest on a
circuit attached to a moving frame, as well as on the invariance of physical laws, particularly Lorentz force equation.
It is important to note that, although Lorentz transformation would be the only rigorous choice, the Galilean one
leads to the same result, namely:

∇ × E = −(β/α)(∂B/∂t),

as the general form of the electromagnetic induction law, Faraday’s law. Constants α and β arise here in accordance
to our general formalism.

Imposition of self-consistency to the set of Eqs. (3.2), (3.3), (3.7), (5.1) and the equation of continuity, Eq. (3.6),

leads to displacement current and to substitution of Amp`ere’s law, Eq. (3.7), by

∇ × B = k2J + (k2/k1)(∂E/∂t).

The unchanged equations plus the latter constitute the set of microscopic [25] Maxwell’s equations.

For completing the picture given by this formalism we will analyze a few outstanding consequences of Maxwell’s
equations: the wave equations on electromagnetic potentials and the energy balance described by Poynting’s theorem.
Adopting a procedure analogous to the usual one [26] we derive, from Eqs. (3.3) and (5.1), the electromagnetic
vector and scalar potentials, Aem(r) and φem(r), respectively, related to the time-dependent ﬁeld vectors according
to:

(5.1)

(5.2)

6

and

and

B(r) =∇ × Aem

E(r) = −∇φem − (β/α)(∂Aem/∂t).

∇ · Aem + (k2/k1)(∂φem/∂t) = 0,

∇2φem − (βk2/αk1)(∂2φem/∂t2) = −k1ρ

∇2Aem − (βk2/αk1)(∂2Aem/∂t2) = −k2J.

Applying to them the remaining Maxwell’s equations, Eqs. (3.2) and (5.2), and imposing to the result the condition:

to be identiﬁed as the Lorenz condition in its general form, we are lead to the wave equations

In the absence of charges and currents the above equations reduce to d’Alembert’s equations in φem and Aem,
provided that βk2/αk1 > 0. Otherwise those equations lead to decaying or building-up solutions, without physical
meaning. Moreover, in the meaningful case αk1/βk2 represents the square of the electromagnetic wave velocity, which
is experimentally known to equal the velocity of light, c, in view of light waves belonging to the electromagnetic
spectrum. Thus we have,

αk1/βk2 = c2 > 0.

The physically meaningful solutions of Eqs. (5.6) and (5.7) are the well-known retarded potentials.

On the other hand, applying to Eqs. (5.1) and (5.2) a treatment analogous to the one adopted by Landau [27] we

are lead to the energy relation:

∂

(cid:26)ZV

(1/2)

(α/k1)E2 + (β/k2)B2
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

dV +

K

/∂t = −

S · ndS,

(cid:27)

X

IS

being V the volume enclosed by surface S. The summation
K represent the total kinetic energy of the enclosed
charged particles or, alternatively, their total energy, including their rest masses (these are constants, thus their
inclusion don’t alter the ﬁnal value of the derivative). The vector S in the right-hand side is Poynting vector, deﬁned
here as:

P

S =(α/k2)(E × B).

If V is extended to comprise the whole space and the charges and currents form a bounded system, Eq. (5.9) reduces
to

d

(cid:26)Z

(1/2)

2

(α/k1)E
(cid:2)

+ (β/k2)B

dV +

K

/dt = 0.

2

(cid:3)

(cid:27)

X

This equation tells us that the quantity into the outer brackets is conserved. Being
K the kinetic (or the total)
energy of the particles in the system, we conclude that the quantity into outer brackets represents the mechanical
energy of the system of particles, being the integral - now taken over the whole space - the energy stored in the
electromagnetic ﬁeld. Accordingly, the integrand

P

ω = (1/2)

(α/k1)E2 + (β/k2)B2
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

is associated with the energy density of the ﬁeld. Thus, Eq. (5.9) represents the energy balance of the system -
Poynting’s theorem - being S a measure of the energy ﬂow per unit area and per unit time. Yet all this familiar
digression has been performed up to the determination of individual signs on the constants of the set {k1, k2, α, β},
which we are now in a position to accomplish, thus conﬁrming the positive value we ascribed them a priori (see
Section IV).

From Eq. (5.8) we conclude that the products αk1 and βk2 have the same sign. Consequently, the same holds
for α/k1 and β/k2. Thus the ﬁeld energy, given by the integral in Eq. (5.11), will have this common sign. In other
words, it will be positive or negative according to these products (ratios) having the positive or the negative sign.

7

(5.3)

(5.4)

(5.5)

(5.6)

(5.7)

(5.8)

(5.9)

(5.10)

(5.11)

(5.12)

However the ﬁeld energy can’t be negative. In fact, in deriving Eq. (5.11) no relation has been assumed between the
charge of particle-sources and their masses or velocities. Therefore, under the hypothesis of negative ﬁeld energy we
could imagine a system of particles with suﬃciently great values of charges and suﬃciently small values of masses and
velocities, so that its total relativistic energy, i.e., its rest mass, given by the quantity into the outer brackets in Eq.
(5.11), would be negative, which is obviously forbidden [28]. Thus we must rule out negative signs from the products
(ratios) αk1 (α/k1) and βk2 (β/k2). It results that the ordered set {k1, k2, α, β} can only bear signs according to the
schemes: (1) {+ + ++}; (2) {+ − +−}; (3) {− + −+}, or (4) {− − −−}, each sign belonging to the constant which
occupies the same site into the brackets. Now we proceed to show that among the four cases, those which diﬀer by
an overall sign inversion - case 1 as compared to case 4 and case 2 as compared to case 3 - are equivalent. Indeed,
Maxwell’s equations in absence of charges and currents, i.e., for ρ = 0 and J = 0, don’t change by an overall inversion
of the signs on these constants (cf. Eqs. (3.2), (3.3), (5.1) and (5.2)). Neither are Coulomb’s law, Eq. (4.9), and
the force between current circuits (see, e.g., Eq. (4.10)) changed under such an operation. This means that both
the ﬁeld-ﬁeld relation and the particle-particle interaction remain unchanged under a general inversion of signs on
those constants. The only change is noted in the particle-ﬁeld relation, but it isn’t signiﬁcant here. It represents an
inversion on charge sign: we would name positive what is normally considered negative and vice-versa. In view of
this analysis the number of cases are reduced, even more, to a half. Accordingly, we choose k1 > 0 - which amounts
to establishing that a positive source gives rise to divergent lines of force and conversely - so eliminating cases 4 and
3 in view of cases 1 and 2, respectively. Now, from Eq. (5.1) we notice that only case 1 obeys Lenz’s law; case 2,
for which α and β have diﬀerent signs, doesn’t follow that law and must also be discarded. Thus we conclude that,
as long as electromagnetism is described by our postulates all constants of the set {k1, k2, α, β} are positive [29]. We
have thus conﬁrmed the signs we anticipated for those constants in Section IV, as well as the relation given by Eq.
(5.8), among them.

As for the results we obtained in the static case, the above results represent the core of electromagnetic theory
for time-dependent ﬁelds.
Indeed, Maxwell’s equations and Lorentz force equation are enough for describing all
phenomena related to electromagnetic waves, electrodynamics of moving particles, etc. As a whole, the previous
analyses of static and time-dependent cases form an axis from which many speciﬁc subjects and problems branch,
whose formulation entails a corresponding number of interesting approaches and solutions yet not ﬁtting into the
space here available. However, in view of its importance and general applicability, that of systems of units represents
a subject worth while analyzing here. Particularly, when suitably employed the results of such analysis unveil the
generality of this formalism, under which problems and applications can be worked out regardless of the system of
units used in their formulation.

VI. SYSTEMS OF UNITS

Theoretical and historical reasons converged to transform the systems of units in electromagnetism into one of
the most entangled theme of the undergraduate physics course. Theoretical freedom to choose, represented by the
four constants previously deﬁned - having only one required relation linking them - enhanced by other undetermined
constants related to ﬁelds in material media, was the background for early deﬁnition of practical units and their
dictating the establishment and renewal of several systems, leading eventually, in 1960, to the SI (Syst`eme International
d’Unit´es) [30]. Although ending in a scientiﬁc system this process betrays its origin through the complex interrelations
among the resulting units and between them and those of systems created directly for scientiﬁc purposes - particularly
the gaussian system, the most used among the latter. Determination of Maxwell’s equations governing ﬁelds in material
media requires an extended discussion about the properties of those materials as well as about coherence between
the corresponding electric and magnetic constitutive equations. We shall avoid it here and only discuss the subject
of system of units envisaging applications to ﬁelds in a vacuum.

Units of electromagnetic quantities are linked to the mechanical ones by Eq. (5.8), or by Eqs. (4.9) and (4.10),
or by other equivalent relations. In other words, those units aren’t independent from mechanical units but, instead,
shall be deﬁned in connection to them. Thus, systems of electromagnetic units are based on mechanical systems of
units, CGS and MKS, and accomplish them. In conclusion, they must obey two requirements:

1. being attached to the CGS or the MKS system of units;

2. the corresponding constants being interrelated according to Eq. (5.8).

As we pointed out, there are two commonly used systems: the SI, linked to the MKS system and having constants
given by {1/ε0, µ0, 1, 1} - in the order previously deﬁned - and the gaussian system, linked to the CGS and having
the constants {4π, 4π/c, 1, 1/c}. Note that both obey Eq. (5.8) [31]. Whenever needed, our equations can be readily

8

adapted to one system or another by substituting the values of these constants in them. Nevertheless we believe that
this shall be done only in applications, leaving the constants and the whole theory in their general form insofar as
theoretical developments are aimed.

VII. FINAL REMARKS

Starting from the theorem of Helmholtz, which establishes the conditions for uniqueness of vector ﬁelds, and
supported by elementary experimental concepts on the ﬁeld source, a theoretical basis is readily accomplished as
diﬀerential equations for the stationary state ﬁeld vectors, E and B, representing the basic laws regarding electro-
static and magnetostatic ﬁelds. Then, Lorentz force arises from the principles of superposition and reciprocity of
electromagnetic interactions through a very simple reasoning, and the law of electromagnetic induction - Faraday’s
law - is also obtained from them by imposing a Galilean transformation of reference frame on forces due to stationary
magnetic ﬁelds. As a consequence of self-consistency being imposed to the previous set of equations, Maxwell’s equa-
tions are obtained up to the determination of four constants whose signs are uniquely deﬁned with the help of Lenz’s
law and whose values are linked by a single relation, derived from the experimental fact of light waves belonging to
the electromagnetic spectrum. In short, this approach has the following essential features:

1. The ﬁeld equations are proposed, from the beginning, in Maxwell’s format, i.e., in terms of divergence and curl

diﬀerential operators, being continuously adjusted until transforming into Maxwell’s equations.

2. Beginning with the theorem of Helmholtz, it clariﬁes some concepts as, for instance, those of ﬁeld source, both

in its mathematical and physical meaning, and vector magnetic potential.

3. The whole theory follows from trivial principles and from elementary experimental observations.

4. Along its development, electric and magnetic phenomenology are always presented side by side, and their aﬃnity

is clearly shown even for static ﬁelds. The presentation thus requires less expenditure of time in class.

5. Uniqueness of Maxwell’s equations and their consequences are unambiguously derived from those primary prin-

ciples.

6. Alternatively, the formalism would apply to other kinds of vector ﬁelds obeying diﬀerent primary principles,
restricting their possible number and properties, according to the signs and values of constants {k1, k2, α, β}.

7. Every system of units ﬁts the formalism, provided that suitable values are assigned to those constants.

In essence, the formalism was based on primary experimental concepts, through which we have shown that an scalar
quantity - the electric charge - gives rise to both the electric and the magnetic ﬁelds, being the former a consequence
of its presence and the latter one of its motion. Thus, electromagnetic laws and rules represent the simplest picture
Nature can stand for those vector ﬁeld [32]. However we must remark that it was the available mathematical apparatus
which provided these conclusions, thus it is an underutilization of technical resources not reaching them in a senior
undergraduate course.

The emphasis on calculation techniques - brought to undergraduate teaching in physics some forty years ago - seems
to have looked at the urging demand for development of new technologies, but it can do much more. It provides the
means for presenting to students a sequential theory of electromagnetism, with closely intertwined concepts, thus
enlightening its overall picture and overcoming its usual fragmentation. In other words, the ﬁnal result may be a clear
and unitary course.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am greatly indebted to Olival Freire Jr. and Saulo Carneiro for their careful reading of a previous version of the
manuscript and their invaluable suggestions, and to Ademir Santana and Marcelo Moret for their encouraging help
on solving speciﬁc problems. I also address my thanks to the students whose comments and even doubts were very
worthy in the process of transforming the initial ideas into a deﬁned pedagogical formalism.

9

[1] M. Abraham and R. Becker, The Classical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism (Blackie & Son, London, 1950).
[2] J. C. Slater and N. H. Frank, Electromagnetism ( McGraw-Hill, New York, 1947 ).
[3] J. R. Reitz, F. J. Milford, and R. W. Christy, Foundations of Electromagnetic Theory (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1980).
[4] W. Hauser, Introduction to the Principles of Electromagnetism (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1971).
[5] M. A. Heald and J. B. Marion, Classical Electromagnetic Radiation (Saunders College Publishing, Orlando, 1995).
[6] P. Lorrain and D. R. Corson, Electromagnetic Fields and Waves (Freeman, San Francisco, 1970).
[7] See Ref. 4, pp. 232-243.
[8] D. H. Kobe, “Generalization of Coulomb’s law to Maxwell’s equations using special relativity,” Am. J. Phys. 54 (7),

631-636 (1986).

[9] Pendulum electroscope: a device consisting of a tiny ball whose core is made out of a light material as, for example, cork,
covered by a thin conducting layer, the whole being suspended from a support by a ﬁne thread of silk or another light
insulating ﬁber. Under inﬂuence of the nonuniform electric ﬁeld of a bounded system of charges, the ball suﬀers electric
induction and moves toward that source. This movement can be reversed by neutralizing the opposite induced charge
through contact with the inducing source.

[10] N. P. Andion, Minimizing postulation in a senior undergraduate course in electromagnetism. Part II: ﬁelds in material

media (to be published).

[11] W. Panofsky and M. Phillips, Classical Electricity and Magnetism (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1955), pp. 1-5.
[12] G. Arfken, Mathematical Methods for Physicists (Academic, New York, 1970), 2nd. ed., pp. 66-70.
[13] See Ref. 11, pp. 5 and 6.
[14] See Ref. 10.
[15] Among “vector quantities” we also count the pseudo-vectors.
[16] E. M. Purcell, Electricity and Magnetism (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1963), 2nd.ed., pp. 226-228.
[17] Unless for a short-range residual ﬁeld due to quadrupoles and higher-order multipoles, which could at this moment be

justiﬁed by the non-interpenetration of the magnets.

[18] We mean a kind of capacitor whose functioning can be easily explained and understood - in terms of the concepts previously

established here - as for example a Leyden bottle. Thus we avoid introducing a “black-box” into the experiment.

[19] At this point we must refer to ﬁelds originating from intrinsic magnetic moments of microscopic origin. The assumed
equivalence between magnets and currents is conﬁrmed later when, as usual, magnets are shown to behave as volume and
surface distributions of electric current (magnetization currents).

[20] P. A. M. Dirac, Quantised Singularities in the Electromagnetic Field, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A133, 60-72 (1931).
[21] P. A. M. Dirac, The Theory of Magnetic Poles, Phys. Rev.74, 817-830 (1948).
[22] Particle Data Group, Review of Particle Physics, Phys. Rev. D 54, 685-687 (1996).
[23] B. Cabrera, First Results from a Superconductive Detector for Moving Magnetic Monopoles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1378-1381

(1982).

[24] I. E. Tamm, Foundations of the Theory of Electricity [Spanish version] (Mir, Moscow, 1979), pp. 381-389.
[25] Deriving the general (macroscopic) equations requires a consistent development of ﬁeld equations in material media, which

would extend too much this paper (see Ref. 10).

[26] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 2nd. ed. (John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1975) pp. 219-220.
[27] L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields (Addison-Wesley, Cambridge, Mass., 1951) pp. 78-80.
[28] Although being Galilean in general, our approach can easily bear such a relativistic digression, based on a matter of

fundamental scientiﬁc knowledge.

[29] On the other hand it can be shown, by interchanging the roles of electric and magnetic ﬁelds in the theory and reinterpreting
Lenz’s law, that the theory of an electromagnetic ﬁeld arising analogously from magnetic poles would obey case 2. Thus,
the generalized theory comprises both physically meaningful cases!

[30] E. C. Jordan and K. G. Balmain, Electromagnetic Waves and Radiating Systems, 2nd.ed. (Prentice-Hall, Inc., New Jersey,

1968), pp. 22-23.

[31] We recall that ε0µ0 = 1/c2.
[32] Its apparent intricacy is due to a sort of logical inversion: the usual choice of following historical chronology when developing
a course in electromagnetic theory leads to reversing the roles of suitable premises and suitable consequences. So are, for
example, the statements of ﬁelds and potentials in the conventional formalism.

10

