9
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
0
6
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

MY LIFE AS TUTOR

Reﬂections on Two Recent Experiences

Alessandro B. Romeo

Onsala Space Observatory,
Chalmers University of Technology,
S-43992 Onsala, Sweden
(romeo@oso.chalmers.se)

22 January 1999

Final Report for ‘Pedagogy of Group Tutoring’ (1998),

Advanced Research Course at Chalmers University of Technology

1

SUMMARY

In this ﬁnal report, I brieﬂy reﬂect on two parallel teaching experiences as
tutor: one for ‘Computer Science and Engineering in Context’ (1998) and the
other for ‘Introduction to Electrical Engineering’ (1998), obligatory courses
at Chalmers University of Technology. Special emphasis is put on the former.
Besides, I brieﬂy view such experiences in interaction with my research work,
private life and new teaching position. In harmony with my conception of
teaching, I avoid the standard formal style of reports and try an interactive
dialogue with the reader.

2

Why I am writing this report

The course ‘Computer Science and Engineering in Context’ is ﬁnished and
now it is we, the tutors, who should write a ﬁnal report on our teaching
experience. Such reﬂections are important for at least two reasons: (1) for
ourselves, because we can view our experience retrospectively and learn how
to improve our role of educators; (2) for the others, either new tutors or course
organizers, in order to improve the structure of the course and optimize its
impact on the student education at Chalmers.

In writing this report, I will use a colloquial style and imagine to interact
directly with the reader. I always use a formal style in writing scientiﬁc pa-
pers. Here instead I want to experiment with a new way of communicating
my ideas, something between an oral discussion and a written report, some-
thing more spontaneous and hopefully more eﬀective. So let us discuss the
main phases of my experience.

How I got involved in this course

I had just come back from a three-month visit to the International School
for Advanced Studies in Trieste, Italy, when I heard that Peter Jansson
was recruiting tutors for the course. At that time, I had an urgent need of
ﬁnancial support since my position at Onsala Space Observatory was ﬁnished
a few months before. So I didn’t hesitate to conﬁrm my participation. On
the other hand, I did also hope to complete the scientiﬁc work started in
Italy, and thus I was unwilling to teach intensively before the new year.

The ﬁrst meeting with Peter and the other tutors was a really positive start.
What I liked most of that workshop was, apart from the beautiful place
where it was held, the fact that it was structured as an interactive discussion
between course organizers, pedagogues and tutors. This is precisely what I
believe teaching should be: not a monologue, but an open dialogue between
the participants. My previous teaching experience taught me that ﬂexibil-
ity and intuition are important qualities in such a respect. After this ﬁrst
workshop, I felt very charged and ready to start.

3

What I expected and what happened

Before the actual start of the course I felt somewhat anxious. In fact, this
was the ﬁrst time that I should tutor research projects in other ﬁelds than
physics or mathematics. I am an astrophysicist and know very little about
computer science and engineering. Students always expect much from their
teachers, and so I expected much from myself. But how could I explain them
that I don’t know anything about their ﬁeld and, yet, I could be a good
tutor? The best would be of course to clarify my role since the beginning,
and so I did.

The initial expectation analyses, one performed on myself and the other
performed on my students, gave immediately good results. I felt accepted
by the students, and thus I could also trust myself in the new role. This was
the premise for a fruitful atmosphere and a successful work.

How I acted: an ABC

A. Next came the problem of how to integrate the important points em-
phasized at the pedagogy course into my personal method of teaching. My
conception of teaching is that it should be dynamic, as opposed to static. So
what better opportunity than experimenting brainstorming, snowball and
related techniques since the beginning, that is at our ﬁrst group meeting?
Students accepted this idea enthusiastically. They like to experiment new
forms of learning, just as we like to experiment new forms of teaching. This
is because our mind likes changes. Nobody can guarantee that one method
is better than another, it depends on so many factors, most of which are
out of our control. What is important is to adapt ourselves as teachers to
the students, but such a process should be as swift and smooth as possible.
Besides, perhaps even more important, we should show the students that we
are willing to learn from them. I believe that such a conception of reciprocal
teaching and learning is what can make teachers and students active members
of the same team: to give and to receive work always better together.

B. Now a crucial question arises: how can we optimize our interaction with
the students? The answer that I found is: observing how students interact
between one another, and deciding which role to take accordingly.
If we
want to observe the real behaviour of students, we should disturb them as

4

little as possible with our presence and make them unaware of our role of
observers. My solution was to say: “I see that you are discussing intensively
speciﬁc topics of the project. Do you mind if, meanwhile, I read something
urgent?” So, while pretending to read an astrophysical paper, I was instead
concentrating on their interactions. How long? About half an hour, that is
the typical time that students need for forgetting about the presence of an
apparently inactive tutor. How many times? About once or twice a month, in
order to monitor the evolution of the student interactions. This is especially
important for ﬁnding out if there are conﬂicts in the group. In such a case,
the best is of course to sort out these conﬂicts as soon as possible, and the
tutor should then act as a real psycho-analyst.

C. Last but not least, what about student evaluation? A key factor to bear
in mind is that, whenever people interact, they evaluate one another. This
means that not only teachers evaluate students, but also students tacitly
evaluate teachers. Both evaluations start from the beginning and last up to
the end of the series of meetings, or even beyond. Our goal as educators is
to give students good examples even concerning such a delicate point: we
should show them that timely and constructive evaluations can be of beneﬁt
for both parts. We are human beings, and mistakes belong to our nature. It is
through mistakes that children learn to live in the adults’ world, it is through
mistakes that humanity has progressed to the present. The important thing
is to recognize our mistakes and to improve. Yes, if we emphasize this goal
as the reason of the evaluations, then we can be sure that students will agree
and collaborate. What a better example than to start with ourselves? It
is hard but necessary.
If we show that we want to improve through the
suggestions of the students, then we also show that we are willing to learn
from them. What a better satisfaction for the students? To teach their
teachers! Everyone teaches and learns at the same time and democratically,
as it should be.

In summary: Be a good example for your students not only as an educator,
but also as a student and a human being!

If you want to know more

The previous discussion can be extended by referring to my four progress
reports, which are unpublished but available on request, and to appropri-

5

ate literature. Let me ﬁrst recommend the book and TV series: ‘Filosoﬁska
Fr˚agor – ¨Aventyr i Tankens V¨arld’ produced by the ‘UtbildningsRadion’ in
1998. Such a source does not directly concern pedagogy, but it helps us to
reﬂect on fundamental problems about ourselves and our complex interac-
tions with others, and thus to learn from our life experiences. The literature
suggested at the pedagogy course covers important aspects of group tutor-
ing and related problems. Lenn´eer-Axelson & Thylefors (1991) discusses the
psycho-sociology of group work, and I ﬁnd it especially useful for learning
how to cope with conﬂicts. Jaques (1992) discusses educational methods for
improving the quality of group teaching and training. I ﬁnd it especially use-
ful for learning several things: techniques such as brainstorming and snowball
(expectation analysis is discussed by Widerberg 1994); the tutor’s roles in
his/her interaction with the students, and their eﬀects on group dynamics
and evolution; and group evaluation. In addition, Booth et al. (1997) and
Jansson (1998) analyse the impacts of the course ‘Computer Science and
Enginnering in Context’ and the underlying project ‘D++’ on the Swedish
education.

What I learned

What I learned from this experience is due to two major sources: (1) the
excellent course ‘Pedagogy of Group Tutoring’ organized by Peter Jansson
and Shirley Booth; (2) the interaction with my students. The ﬁrst source
represented a concrete example of how fruitful a group work can be. It also
contributed to structure and rationalize my ideas about teaching, which had
started to take form about 15 years ago, that is at the time of my ﬁrst private
lessons. The second source was, I believe, fundamental: I learned to learn
from my students.

Comparison with a parallel experience

My experience as tutor for the course ‘Computer Science and Engineering
in Context’ was rich and joyful. I had an ideal group of students, the best
among all ﬁrst-year students that I had had in ﬁve years of teaching here at
Chalmers. The course organization was excellent, a real team work between
course organizers, pedagogues and tutors. What else to say?

6

Parallel to that, I had a painful experience as tutor for the course ‘Introduc-
tion to Electrical Engineering’. The group of students was on the whole very
lazy. Actually, there was a good student among them, but he was shy. So the
group was dominated by the lack of internal motivation and the stubborn-
ness of the other students. I did my best to stimulate their enthusiasm and
activity, but with poor results. The course organization was, to say the least,
chaotic. The recruitment of tutors was completed more than one week after
the start of the course. Tutors were not informed about their duties until
few days before they were assumed to act. For example, they had to play the
role of mathematical ‘exercisers’ (not tutors) with no previous psychological
preparation for that, and with a resulting substantial delay in the start of
the project. All the steps of the project were decided by the course organizer
without consulting the tutors, who just found weekly instructions for their
work .......... The list is even longer .......... Last, and worst, I had a clear
impression that the course organizer wanted to convey the idea that students
should pass the exam; this impression was also shared by the students of my
group. What else to say? An experience that I would never repeat!

One may wonder whether such a picture is objective or not. How is it possible
that two parallel experiences were one so positive and the other so negative?
What I can say is that I am not black and white in the way of thinking, and
that I have other teaching experiences for comparison. Thus I believe that the
picture reﬂects sharply the contrast between two course organizations, which
unavoidably inﬂuence the performance of both tutors and students. Viewing
such organizations in context and monitoring the opinions of both tutors and
students may help these courses to progress towards their important common
goal.

How teaching interacted with my research work

When I came back from Italy, I was very excited and full of new ideas. It was
the ﬁrst time that I could stay in my natural environment for more than one
month after seven years of residence in Sweden. At the International School
for Advanced Studies I had started three important scientiﬁc collaborations,
one of which together with the Astrophysics Group at Chalmers, and I had
planned to complete these projects as soon as possible because of the oﬃcial
end of my position at Onsala Space Observatory. Thus the impact of intensive
teaching on my research work was hard at the beginning: I was obliged to

7

teach in order to earn money for surviving. This was in sharp contrast to my
previous teaching experience, in which I had got involved spontaneously. Did
anything change afterwards? Yes, deﬁnitely! Peter and my students of the
course ‘Computer Science and Engineering in Context’ succeeded to create
such a stimulating atmosphere around my role of tutor that I quickly became
enthusiastic, even considering my disappointment about the other course.
(Now, of course, I feel a bit embarrassed to write such things about Peter
because he will read my report, but this is the pure truth.) In conclusion,
my research work underwent substantial delays, but I earned an invaluably
rich teaching experience.

How teaching interacted with my private life

Outside the academic world, I am a happy husband and father of three chil-
dren. Apart from an obvious period of stress caused by the initial teaching-
research conﬂict, my family life reﬂected the satisfaction of being tutor. I
was so absorbed in such a role that I proposed a practical project for the
week-ends to my family. A brief work plan was ready by the end of Novem-
ber, and the result was the construction of a beautiful Christmas crib. There
was no ﬁnal report :-)

8

MY NEW LIFE AS LECTOR

Now my children would say: “snipp snapp snut, nu ¨ar sagan slut”, but the end
of that story is the beginning of a new one. This Christmas I have received a
surprising present: a tenure-track lector position, which the Swedish Natural
Science Research Council will ﬁnancially support to 80% for three years, that
is beyond the start of the new millennium. This means a lot to me: more
balance between my teaching and research works, possibly time for popular
science, more economical security for my family, and thus a clearer view of
my future; in other words, a new life.

9

