9
9
9
1
 
l
u
J
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
0
7
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ON THE INTERPRETATION OF THE REDSHIFT IN A STATIC
GRAVITATIONAL FIELD

L.B. OKUN

ITEP, Moscow, 117218, Russia
okun@heron.itep.ru
e-mail:

K.G. SELIVANOV

ITEP, Moscow, 117218, Russia

e-mail:

selivano@heron.itep.ru

and

V.L. TELEGDI
EP Division, CERN
CH - 1211 Geneva 23
valentine.telegdi@cern.ch

e-mail:

ABSTRACT

The classical phenomenon of the redshift of light in a static gravitational potential, usually
called the gravitational redshift, is described in the literature essentially in two ways: on
the one hand the phenomenon is explained through the behaviour of clocks which run the
faster the higher they are located in the potential, whereas the energy and frequency of the
propagating photon do not change with height. The light thus appears to be redshifted relative
to the frequency of the clock. On the other hand the phenomenon is alternatively discussed
(even in some authoritative texts) in terms of an energy loss of a photon as it overcomes the
gravitational attraction of the massive body. This second approach operates with notions such
as the “gravitational mass” or the “potential energy” of a photon and we assert that it is
misleading. We do not claim to present any original ideas or to give a comprehensive review of
the subject, our goal being essentially a pedagogical one.

1 Introduction

There are two kinds of photon redshift known in the literature, a gravitational and a cosmo-
logical one. Though in the General Relativity framework the two shifts can be described very
similarly, in the literature they are usually discussed separately. The cosmological redshift
is that of light from distant galaxies which recede. It is generally referred to as the Hubble
redshift. For the farthest observed galaxies it is quite large, ∆λ/λ
5. The gravitational
redshift arises when light moves away from a static massive object, e.g. the earth or the sun.
Its observed magnitudes are generally small. This paper is devoted exclusively to this type of
redshift.

≈

The gravitational redshift is a classical eﬀect of Einstein’s General Relativity (GR), one
predicted by him [1] well before that theory was created [2] (for the historical background, see
e.g., [3]). Phenomenologically one can simply aﬃrm that the frequency of light emitted by
two identical atoms is smaller for the atom which sits deeper in the gravitational potential.
A number of ingenious experiments have been performed [4]–[9] to measure various manifes-
tations of this eﬀect. They are discussed in a number of excellent reviews [10] whose main
goal is to contrast the predictions of GR with those of various non-standard theories of gravity.
Explanations of the gravitational redshift per se within the standard framework are however
not critically discussed in these reviews.

Most treatises on GR [11], [12] follow the deﬁnitive reasoning of Einstein [2] according to
which the gravitational redshift is explained in terms of universal property of standard clocks
(atoms, nuclei). The proper time interval between events of emission of two photons as measured
by the standard clock at the point of emission is diﬀerent from the proper time interval between
events of absorption of those photons as measured by identical standard clock at the point of
absorption (in this way it was ﬁrst formulated in [13]).

In the static gravitational potential the picture simpliﬁes because there is a distinguished
time – the one on which metric is independent. This time can be chosen as a universal (world)
one. Under this choice the energy diﬀerence between two atomic levels increases with the
distance of the atom from the earth while the energy of the propagating photon does not
change. (In what follows we speak of the earth, but it could be any other massive body.) Thus
what is called the redshift of the photon is actually a blueshift of the atom. As for the proper
times at diﬀerent points, they are related to the universal time via a multiplier which depends
on gravitational potential and hence has diﬀerent values at diﬀerent points (see section 4).

Actually, most modern textbooks and monographs [14] derive the redshift by using so-
phisticated general relativity calculations, e.g. using orthonormal bases (a sequence of proper
reference frames) to deﬁne photon energy and parallel transporting the photon’s 4-momentum
along its world-line. Sometimes this description is loosely phrased as a degradation of the pho-
ton’s energy as it climbs out of gravitational potential well. (Some other classical textbooks also
use this loose phrasing [15].) However, the non-experts should be warned that the mathematics
underlying this description is radically diﬀerent from the heuristic (and wrong) arguments pre-
sented in many elementary texts, e.g. [16]. These authors claim to deduce the “work against

1

gravity” viewpoint by pretending that the photon is like a normal, low-velocity, massive particle
and thus has a “photon mass” and “photon potential energy”. Such derivations are incorrect
and should be avoided. They are in fact avoided in exceptional popular texts, e.g. [17].

2 Experiments

The ﬁrst laboratory measurement of the gravitational redshift was performed at Harvard in
1960 by Robert Pound and Glenn Rebka [4], [5] (with 10% accuracy) and in 1964 by Pound
and Snider [6] (with 1% accuracy). The photons moved in a 22.5-meter tall tower. The
source and the absorber of the photons (γ-rays of 14.4 keV energy) were 57Fe nuclei. The
experiment exploited the M¨ossbauer eﬀect which makes the photon lines in a crystal extremely
monochromatic. The redshift was compensated through the Doppler eﬀect, i.e., by slowly
moving the absorber and thereby restoring the resonant absorption. The shift measured in this
way [5] was ∆ω/ω

10−15.

≈

As to the interpretation of the result, there is some ambiguity in the papers by Pound et al.
Although they mention the clock interpretation by referring to Einstein’s original papers, the
absolute reddening of the photon is also implied as can be seen from the title of Pound’s talk
in Moscow [5] “On the weight of photons”. From the title of the paper by Pound and Snider
[6], “Eﬀect of gravity on nuclear resonance” one might infer that they did not want to commit
themselves to any interpretation.

By contrast, the majority of the reviews of gravitational experiments [10] quote the Harvard
result as a test of the behaviour of clocks. In fact the result must be interpreted as a relative
shift of the photon frequency with respect to the nuclear one since the experiment does not
measure these frequencies independently.

An experiment measuring the relative shift of a photon (radio-wave) frequency with respect
to an atomic one was also performed with a rocket ﬂying up to 10,000 km above the earth and
landing in the ocean [7].

Alongside the experiments [3]–[7] special measurements of the dependence of the atomic
clock rate on the altitude were done directly by using airplanes [8], [9] (see also reviews [10]).
In these experiments a clock which had spent many hours at high altitude was brought back
to the laboratory and compared with its “earthly twin”. The latter, once corrected for various
background eﬀects, lagged behind by ∆T = (gh/c2)T , where T is the duration of the ﬂight at
height h, g the gravitational acceleration, and c the speed of light.

One of these background eﬀects is the famous “twin paradox” of Special Relativity, which
stems from the fact that moving clocks run slower than clocks at rest. It is easy to derive a
general formula which includes both the gravitational potential φ and the velocity u (see, e.g.,
the book by C. M¨oller [11]):

dτ = dt h1 + 2φ/c2

u2/c2

1/2
i

,

−

(1)

2

where τ is the proper “physical” time of the clock, while t is the so-called world time, which
can be introduced in the case of a static potential and which is sometimes called laboratory
time.

In his lectures on gravity [12], Richard Feynman stresses the diﬀerences between the eﬀects
due to u and to φ. He concludes that the centre of the earth must be by a day or two younger
than its surface.

3 Theory before General Relativity:“elevators”

Since most of the conclusive experiments on the gravitational redshift were earthbound, we
shall throughout use that frame in which the earth is at rest (neglecting its rotation).

As is well known, a potential is deﬁned up to a constant. When considering the gravitational
) = 0;

potential φ(r) at an arbitrary distance r from the earth’s centre, it is convenient to set φ(
then φ is negative everywhere.

∞

Near the earth’s surface (at h = r

R

R) it is legitimate to approximate φ linearly:

−
δφ(h) = φ(R + h)

≪

φ(R) = gh ,

−

(2)

where g is the usual gravitational acceleration. Note that δφ(h) is positive for h
discuss the redshift only to the ﬁrst order in the parameter gh/c2.

= 0. We shall

(The linear approximation Eq. (2) is valid for the description of experiments [8, 9]. It is
104 km) it is not adequate and the
obvious, however, that for the high-ﬂying rockets [7] (h
newtonian potential should be used, but this is not essential for the dilemma “clocks versus
photons” which is the subject of this paper.)

≈

Einstein’s ﬁrst papers [1] on the gravitational redshift contain many of the basic ideas on the
subject which were incorporated (sometimes without proper critical analysis) into numerous
subsequent texts. He considered the Doppler eﬀect in the freely falling frame and found the
increase of the frequency of an atom (clock) with increasing height (potential). The cornerstone
of his considerations was the local equivalence between the behaviour of a physical system in a
gravitational ﬁeld and in a properly accelerated reference frame.

For the potential (2) it is particularly convenient to appeal to Einstein’s freely falling ref-
erence frame (“elevator”). In such an elevator an observer cannot detect any manifestation of
gravity by any strictly local experiment (equivalence principle).

Consider from such an elevator falling with the acceleration g a photon of frequency ω which
is emitted upwards by an atom at rest on the surface of the earth and which is expected to be
absorbed by an identical atom ﬁxed at height h. The frequency of light is not aﬀected by any
gravitational ﬁeld in a freely falling elevator: it keeps the frequency with which it was emitted.
Assume that at the moment of emission (t = 0) the elevator had zero velocity. At the time
t = h/c, when the photon reaches the absorbing atom, the latter will have velocity v = gh/c

3

6
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

directed upwards in the elevator frame. As a result the frequency of the photon, as seen by the
absorbing atom, will be shifted by the linear Doppler eﬀect by v/c = gh/c2 towards the red,
that is 1

∆ω
ω

=

gh
c2

−

.

Consider now another situation, when the upper atom (absorber) moves in the laboratory
frame with a velocity v = gh/c downwards. Then in the elevator frame it will have zero
velocity at the moment of absorption and hence it will be able to absorb the photon resonantly
in complete agreement with experiments [4, 5]. Obviously, in the elevator frame there is no
room for the interpretation of the redshift in terms of a photon losing its energy as it climbs
out of the gravitational well.

4 Theory in the framework of General Relativity: metric

Up to now we used only Special Relativity and the newtonian gravity. As is well known, a
consistent relativistic description of classical gravity is given in the framework of GR with its
curved space-time metric. One introduces a metric tensor, gik(x), i, k = 0, 1, 2, 3, which is, in
general, coordinate dependent and transforms by deﬁnition under a change of coordinates in
such a way that the interval ds between two events with coordinates xi and xi + dxi,

is invariant. Setting dx1 = dx2 = dx3 = 0, one obtains the relation between the proper time
interval dτ = ds/c and the world time interval dt = dx0/c for an observer at rest 2

For a static case, Eq. (5) integrates to

where g00 is a function of x in the general case while in the case of Eq.(2) it is a function of
x3 = z = h.

The time τ is displayed by a standard clock and can also be viewed on as a time coordinate
in the so-called comoving locally inertial frame, i.e. such locally inertial frame which at a given
instant has zero velocity with respect to the laboratory frame. If one has a set of standard clocks
at diﬀerent points, then their proper times τ are diﬀerently related to the world (laboratory)
1Minute corrections of higher order in gh/c2 to the “elevator formulas” are lucidly discussed on the basis of

a metric approach in ref. [18].

2 Let us recall that sometimes the world time is called laboratory time. The former term reﬂects the fact that
it is the same for the whole world, the latter signiﬁes that it can be set with standard clocks in the laboratory.
Many authors refer to t as the coordinate time.

ds2 = gik(x)dxidxk

dτ = √g00dt .

τ = √g00t ,

4

time t, due to x-dependence of g00 (see Eq. (6)). This explains the airplane experiments [8]-[9].
(Note that t is often referred to as the “coordinate time”.)

A weak gravitational ﬁeld can be described by a gravitational potential φ, and g00 is related

to the gravitational potential:

g00 = 1 + 2φ/c2 .

We shall explain the meaning of this relation a bit later (see Eqs. (8)–(10)). According to Eqs.
(6), (7) a clock runs the slower in the laboratory the deeper it sits in the gravitational potential.

Analogous to Eq. (5) is a relation between the rest energy E0 of a body in the laboratory

frame and in the comoving locally inertial frame,

(notice that Elab
covariant 4-vector, while dt is the zero-th component of a contravariant 4-vector).

0 dτ ; this is because the energy E is the zero-th component of a

0 dt = Eloc

The rest energy in the locally inertial frame is the same as in the special relativity (see e.g.

[19] and the book by E. Taylor and J.A. Wheeler [16], p.246).

Elab

0 = Eloc

0 √g00

Eloc

0 = mc2 ,

(7)

(8)

(9)

while the rest energy in the laboratory system Elab
includes also the potential energy of the
body in the gravitational ﬁeld. This is in accordance with the main principle of the general
relativity: all eﬀects of gravity arise only via the metric tensor. Eq. (7) for the g00 component
of the metric tensor in a weak gravitational ﬁeld can be considered as a consequence of Eqs.
(8), (9) and of the relation

0

Elab

0 = mc2 + mφ ,

(10)

which generalizes the notion of the rest energy of a free particle to that of a particle of mass m
in a gravitational weak potential.

Now we are in a position to explain the redshift in the laboratory frame. According to Eq.
(8) or Eq. (10) the energy diﬀerence εlab of atomic or nuclear levels in that frame depends on
the location of the atom. The deeper atom sits in the gravitational potential the smaller is εlab.
For an absorber atom which is located at height h above an identical atom which emits the
photon, the relative change in the energy diﬀerence is gh/c2,

∆εlab
εlab =

gh
c2

.

(11)

(We use in Eq. (11) the linear approximation of Eq. (2).) One can say that the energy levels
of the absorber atoms are shifted towards the blue in the laboratory frame. Eq. (11) is, of
course, nothing but a way to describe the diﬀerence in the rates of atomic clocks located at
a height h one above the other. On the other hand, the energy (frequency) of the photon is
conserved as it propagates in a static gravitational ﬁeld. This can, for example, be seen from
the wave equation of electromagnetic ﬁeld in the presence of a static gravitational potential or

5

from the equations of motion of a massless (or massive) particle in a static metric. Clearly,
in the laboratory system there is no room for the interpretation in which the photon loses its
energy when working against the gravitational ﬁeld.

Finally, one can discuss the experiment using a sequence of locally inertial frames which
are comoving with the laboratory clocks (atoms) at the instants when the photon passes them.
As we explained above, in such systems the standard clocks run with the same rates, the rest
energy of the atom is equal to its mass, times c2, Eq. (9), and the energy levels of the atom are
the same as at inﬁnity. On the other hand, the energy of the photon in the laboratory frame
Elab

γ = ¯hωlab and in the comoving locally inertial frame Eloc

γ are related as

Elab

γ = Eloc

γ √g00 .

Eq.(12) follows from Eq.(8) by noticing that the photon can be absorbed by a massive body
and by considering the increase of the rest energy of that body. Thus, since Elab
is conserved,
Eloc

γ decreases with height:

γ

ωloc(h)

ωloc(0)

Eloc

γ (h)

Eloc

γ (0)

−
ωloc(0)

=

−
Eloc
γ (0)

=

gh
c2

−

(12)

(13)

and this is the observed redshift of the photon. But Eloc decreases not because the photon
works against the gravitational ﬁeld. The gravitational ﬁeld is absent in any locally inertial
frame. Eloc
changes because one passes from one of the locally inertial frames to the other: the
one comoving with the laboratory at the moment of emission, the other – at the moment of
absorption.

γ

5 Pseudoderivation and misinterpretation of gravitational

redshift

The simplest (albeit wrong) explanation of the redshift is based on ascribing to the photon
both an inertial and a gravitational“ mass” mγ = Eγ/c2. Thereby a photon is attracted to the
earth with a force gmγ, while the fractional decrease of its energy (frequency) at height h is

∆Eγ
Eγ

=

∆ω
ω

=

−

gmγh/mγc2 =

g h/c2 .

−

(14)

Note that (up to a sign) this is exactly the formula for the blueshift of an atomic level. That
should not surprise. The atom and the photon are treated here on the same footing, i.e. both
non-relativistically! This is of course inappropriate for the photon. If the explanation in terms
of gravitational attraction of the photon to the earth were also correct, then one would be forced
to expect a doubling of the redshift (the sum of the eﬀects on the clock and on the photon) in
the Pound-type experiments.

Some readers may invoke Einstein’s authority to contradict what was said above. In his
1911 paper [1], he advanced the idea that energy is not only a source of inertia, but also a

6

source of gravity. Loosely speaking, he used the heuristic argument “whenever there is mass,
there is also energy and vice versa”. As he realized later, this “vice versa” was not as correct as
the direct statement (a photon has energy while its mass is zero). By applying this energy-mass
argument, he calculated the energy loss of a photon moving upwards in the potential of the
earth as discussed above. With the same heuristic principle he also derived an expression for
the deﬂection of light by the sun which however underestimated the deﬂection angle by a factor
of 2. Subsequently, in the framework of GR, Einstein recovered this factor [2]. The correct
formula was conﬁrmed by observation.

6 The wavelength measurement

Up to now we have discussed the gravitational redshift in terms of the photon frequency and
clocks. Let us now consider the same phenomenon in terms of the photon wavelength and
gratings. To do this we consider two identical gratings at diﬀerent heights, inclined with
respect to the z-axis along which the light propagates between them. We do not go into the
details of this gedanken experiment. The z-projections of grating spacing is used only as a
standard of length. The lower grating serves as monochromator, i.e. as the light source. The
wavelength of the photon λlab(z) corresponds to its frequency, while the spacings of the grating
in vertical (z) direction llab(z) correspond to the rates of the clocks.

For the sake of simplicity, one may consider a very small incidence angle on the gratings,
i.e. the grazing incidence of the light. In that case, the vertical projection of the spacing is
practically the spacing itself. (Recall that, for the grazing incidence, the spacing llab must be
of the same order as the wavelength λlab.)

While the photon energy Elab is conserved in a static gravitational ﬁeld the photon momen-
tum plab is not. The relation between these quantities is given by the condition that the photon
remains massless which in a gravitational ﬁeld reads

gijpipj = 0

where the gij, i, j = 0, . . . , 3 are the contravariant components of the metric tensor, pj are the
components of the 4-momentum, p0 = Elab, p3 = plab = 2π¯hc/λlab(z) (for the photon moving
along the z-axis). For the cases we are discussing the metric gij can be taken in diagonal form,
in particular g33 = 1/g33.

¿From Eq. (15) one readily ﬁnds how λlab(z) changes with height:

λlab(z) = qg33(z)/g33(0)qg00(0)/g00(z)λlab(0)

On the other hand, the grating spacing in the z-direction, llab(z), also changes with height.
This is just the standard change of scale in the gravitational ﬁeld, explained e.g. in the book
by L. Landau and E. Lifshitz,

84, [11]:

(15)

(16)

(17)

§

g33(z)l0

llab(z) = q−
7

where l0 is the “proper spacing” in z-direction, counterpart of the proper period of the standard
clock. Thus the spacing llab(z) depends on z as follows

llab(z) = qg33(z)/g33(0)llab(0)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

Finally, in the wavelength analogue of the Pound et al. experiment with z = h one would
measure the double ratio (λ(h)/l(h))/(λ(0)/l(0)). The result can be presented in the form

∆λlab/λlab

∆llab/llab = qg00(0)/g00(h) = gh/c2

−

λlab(0)]/λlab(0) and analogously for ∆llab/llab. Notice that g33
where ∆λlab/λlab = [λlab(h)
drops out from the result. This should be so because there is a freedom in the choice of z-scale,
and the observed quantities cannot depend on this choice. The Eq. (19) is analogous to the
one describing the Pound et al. experiments:

−

∆ω/ω

∆ǫ/ǫ = qg00(0)/g00(h) =

−

gh/c2

−

where ω is the frequency of the photon, ǫ/¯h is the frequency of the clock (see Eq. (11). A word
of explanation should be added about Eq. (20). In the laboratory frame the ﬁrst term in the
left hand side is equal to zero,

∆ωlab/ωlab = 0

as discussed in section 3, thus only the second term given by Eq. (11) contributes.

We would however like to stress an important diﬀerence as compared to the case of frequency.
There one can independently measure the diﬀerence in rates of the upper and lower clocks,
∆ǫlab/ǫlab, (analogue of the second term in the left hand side of Eq. (19)) and that was done
in the airplane experiments. Here the change of the scale, ∆llab/llab, cannot be measured
independently. This important diﬀerence comes from the fact that the metric is static while it
is z-dependent.

One has to realize that such a laboratory experiment with gratings cannot be performed at
the present state of the art in experimental physics (recall the importance of M¨ossbauer eﬀect in
the experiments of Pound et al.). However for the measurement of a large value of the redshift,
e.g. that of sodium spectral line from the sun, it is feasible. Such a grating experiment was
performed by J.W. Brault in 1962 and was described in
38.5 in the monograph by C. Misner,
§
K. Thorne and J.A. Wheeler [14]. In this experiment the wavelength of the emitted light was
ﬁxed not by the lower grating, but by the atom on the sun surface.

7 Conclusions

The present article contains little original material; it is primarily pedagogical. The gravita-
tional redshift being, both theoretically and experimentally, one of the cornerstones of General
Relativity, it is very important that it always be taught in a simple but nevertheless correct way.

8

That way centers on the universal modiﬁcation of the rate of a clock exposed to a gravitational
potential. An alternative explanation in terms of a (presumed) gravitational mass of a light
pulse – and its (presumed) potential energy – is incorrect and misleading. We exhibit its fallacy,
and schematically discuss redshift experiments in the framework of the correct approach. We
want to stress those experiments in which an atomic clock was ﬂown to, and kept at, high alti-
tude and subsequently compared with its twin that never left the ground. The traveller clock
was found to run ahead of its earthbound twin. The blueshift of clocks with height has thus
been exhibited as an absolute phenomenon. One sees once over again that the explanation of
the gravitational redshift in terms of a naive “attraction of the photon by the earth” is wrong.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank V.V. Okorokov, who asked the question on compatibility in the frame-
work of General Relativity of experiments by Pound et al., and the airplane experiments. We
also thank S.I. Blinnikov, A.D. Dolgov, A.Yu. Morozov, N. Straumann, K. Thorne and G.
Veneziano for very interesting discussions. We would like to express our gratitude especially to
E.L. Schucking for his help in substantially improving our bibliography and for his insistence on
a uniﬁed invariant approach to both gravitational and cosmological redshifts based on Killing
vectors. We did however not follow his advice wanting to focus the general reader’s attention
on the fallacy of the wide-spread naive interpretation of the gravitational redshift. Last but
not least we want to thank J.A. Wheeler for his encouragement. One of us (L.O.) would like to
thank the Theoretical Division of CERN, where part of this work was done, for their hospitality.

References

[1] A. Einstein, “ ¨Uber das Relativit¨atsprinzip und die aus demselben gezogenen Folgerun-
gen,” Jahrb. d. Radioaktivit¨at u. Elektronik 4, 411–462 (1907); “ ¨Uber den Einﬂuss der
Schwerkraft auf die Ausbreitung des Lichtes,” Ann.Phys. 35, 898-908 (1911).

[2] A. Einstein, “Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie,” Ann.Phys. 49, 769–822
22; The Meaning of Relativity (Princeton University Press, New York, 1921), Eq.
§

(1916)
(106).

[3] A. Pais, ‘Subtle is the Lord ...’, The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford

University Press, 1982), Chapter 9.

[4] R.V. Pound and G.A. Rebka, “Apparent weight of photons,” Phys.Rev.Lett. 4, 337–341
(1960); “Variation with temperature of the energy of recoil-free gamma rays from solids,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 4, 274–275 (1960); “Gravitational red-shift in nuclear resonance,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 3, 439–441 (1959).

9

[5] R. Pound, Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk 72, 673–683 (1960); “On the weight of photons,”

Sov.Phys.Uspekhi 3, 875–883 (1961) (English translation).

[6] R.V. Pound and J.L. Snider, “Eﬀect of Gravity on Gamma Radiation,” Phys.Rev. B140,
788–803 (1965); “Eﬀect of gravity on nuclear resonance,” Phys.Lett. 13, 539–540 (1964).

[7] R. Vessot and M. Levine, “A test of the equivalence principle using a space-borne clock,”

Gen.Rel.Grav. 10, 181–204 (1979).

[8] J. Haefele and R. Keating, “Around the world atomic clocks: predicted relativistic gains,”
Science 177, 166–167 (1972); “Around the world relativistic clocks: observed relativistic
time gains,” ibid., 168–170.

[9] C. Alley et al., in Experimental Gravitation, Proceedings of the Conference at Pavia (Sept.

1976), (ed. B. Bertotti, Academic Press, 1977).

[10] C. Will, Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics, (Cambridge University Press,
1981), Section 2.4; “The confrontation between general relativity and experiment: a 1992
upgrade,” Int.J.Mod.Phys. D1, 13–68 (1992); Preprint WUGRAV-95-5, gr-qc/9504017
(1995);
I. Shapiro, Gravitazione Quanti e Relativit`a. Astroﬁsica e Cosmologia (Giunti Barbera,
Firenze, 1979), Section 3;
N. Ashby and J. Spilker, The Global Positioning System: Theory and Applications 1,
(American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Inc., 1995), Chapter 18;
J. Taylor, Astronomical and Space Experiments to Test Relativity, in General Relativity
and Gravitation (Cambridge University Press, 1987), p. 214.

[11] W. Pauli, Theory of Relativity (Pergamon Press, 1967), Section 53.

C. M¨oller, The Theory of Relativity (Oxford Clarendon Press, 1960),
L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields (Pergamon Press, 1962),
S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology (Wiley, 1972), pp. 79–85;
P. Schneider, J. Ehlers, E.E. Falco, Gravitational Lenses (Springer-Verlag, 1996), pp. 93-97
N. Straumann, General Relativity and Relativistic Astrophysics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1984), pp. 96–99
I. Ciufolini and J.A. Wheeler, Gravitation and Inertia (Princeton University Press, 1995),
pp. 97–108.

89.
§

92, 93.

§§

[12] R. Feynman, Lectures on Gravitation (Brian Hatﬁeld, Addison-Wesley Publishing Com-

pany, 1995), Section 5.2.

[13] H. Weyl, Raum, Zeit, Materie (Verlag von Julius Springer, Berlin, 1923), 5te Auﬂage,

p.322; see also the 7th edition republished by J.Ehlers in Spinger-Verlag in 1988.

[14] C. Misner, K. Thorne and J. A. Wheeler, Gravitation (Freeman and Co, San Francisco,

1973), Sections 7.2-7.5, 25.3, 25.4, 38.5;
R. W. Wald, General Relativity (University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London, 1984)
p.137;

10

H. Stephani, General Relativity (Cambridge University Press, 1996), second edition;
I. R. Kenyon, General Relativity (Oxford University Press, 1996), pp. 15–21.

[15] Max Born, Einstein’s Theory of Relativity (Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1962),

11;
§

Chapter VII,
D. W. Sciama, The Physical Foundations of General Relativity (Doubleday and Company,
Inc., Garden City, NY, 1969), Chapter 5;
Ya. B. Zeldovich and I.D. Novikov, Relativistic Astrophysics. Vol. 1. Stars and Relativity
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London, 1971), pp. 89–93.

[16] The New Encyclopedia Britannica 20, p.174 (1994), 15th Edition;

J. A. Wheeler, A Journey into Gravity and Spacetime, Scientiﬁc American Library (1990),
pp. 48–53, 166–168;
E. Taylor and J. A. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics (Freeman and Co., New York, 1992), 3rd
edition, pp. 258, 272;
D. Layzer, Constructing the Universe, Scientiﬁc American Library (New York, 1984),
Chapter 6, pp. 210–212.

[17] J. Schwinger, Einstein’s Legacy, Scientiﬁc American Library (1986) pp. 141–153.

[18] E.A. Desloge, “Nonequivalence of a uniformly accelerating reference frame and a frame at
rest in a uniform gravitational ﬁeld,” Am. J. Phys. 57, 1121–1125 (1989); “The gravita-
tional red shift in a uniform ﬁeld,” Am. J. Phys. 58, 856–858 (1990).

[19] L. B. Okun, “The Concept of Mass,” Physics Today, pp. 31–36 (June 1989); “Putting to
Rest Mass Misconceptions,” Physics Today, pp. 13,15,115,117 (May 1990); Usp. Fiz. Nauk
158, 511–530 (1989); “The concept of mass (mass, energy, relativity),” Sov. Phys. Usp.
32, 629–638 (1989); “Note on the meaning and terminology of Special Relativity,” Eur. J.
Phys. 15, 403–406 (1998).

11

