How to teach statistical thermal physics in the introductory physics course

Koo-Chul Lee
Department of Physics and Center for Theoretical Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, Korea
(February 2, 2008)

9
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
8
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

style. The temperature is usually introduced through op-
erational deﬁnition which can not explain the signiﬁcance
We report several simulation programs1 which can be used to teach the statistical foundation of thermal physics in the
introductory college physics courses. These programs are simple applications of a technique of generating random conﬁgurations
of many dice with ﬁxed total value. By simulating dice throwing only we can demonstrate all the important principles of classical
thermodynamics.

I. INTRODUCTION

The laws of thermodynamics were formulated long be-

fore we knew the existence of atoms and molecules.

The formal thermodynamics curriculum based on the
empirical laws have been replaced by courses based on
physical and statistical foundation of the subject in the
intermediate courses in undergraduate curriculum for
some time now. In these courses they show how the prop-
erties of macroscopic system are simple consequences of
the behaviors of their elementary constituents. Unfortu-
nately, however, in the introductory physics courses the
“traditional” exposition of the subject following the his-
torical sequence of events is still prevailing.

In the age when a single atom can be trapped and
manipulated teaching thermal physics starting from the
empirical laws of thermodynamics is a pedagogical scan-
dal.
It is a high time to reform the style of teaching
the thermal physics in the introductory college physics
course.

In most of introductory college physics text books au-
thors introduce the laws of thermodynamics before going
on some brief exposition on the statistical basis of subject
if they mention it at all. They introduce the concept of
entropy nearly at the end of thermal physics part using
Clausius’ deﬁnition

in conjuction with the Carnot cycle. On the other hand
Boltzmann’s deﬁnition of the entropy

dS = dQ/T

S = k ln W

is usually appear as if a passing remark with brief com-
ments. Almost none makes any attempts to relate two
expressions. The Clausius’ deﬁnition of entropy is one
of the most diﬃcult subject to teach. First of all T in
the above expression (1) is the absolute temperature. If
it were not the absolute temperature in the expression
(1) the Clausius’ deﬁnition is meaningless. However the
concept of the absolute temperature has never been fully
explained previously in textbooks that follow traditional

(1)

(2)

1

of the absolute temperature other than a curious exper-
imental fact. We can not convey the signiﬁcance of the
absolute temperature without any inkling of statistical
nature of the absolute temperature.

Secondly dQ is usually introduced in conjuction with
the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics where it is implied an
arbitrary inﬁnitesimal quantity of heat. However in the
Clausius’ deﬁnition (1) the left side is an exact or total
diﬀerential of a state function S. How can we expect stu-
dents understand meaning of the Clausius’ expression if
we do not explain them carefully and clearly the physi-
cal and mathematical circumstances which let us connect
an arbitrary inﬁnitesimal quantity to an exact diﬀeren-
tial of a some function, S. This subject is not an easy
topic even in the intermediate thermal physics courses,
where we devote much more time for the discussion of
the subject.

In many cases instructors bypass all these details of the
Clausius’ expression and proceed to apply the formula to
thermodynamic processes.

On the other hand Boltzmann’s deﬁnition is simple
and clear enough. Only problem is how to relate the
Boltzmann’s expression to thermodynamic functions in a
simple and clear manner. It is the task of statistical me-
chanics but statistical mechanics is generally considered
too diﬃcult subject to teach in the introductory physics
courses.

In this paper I propose that teaching statistical me-
chanics in the introductory college physics courses is not
at all diﬃcult if we employ a proper method. The proper
method I propose in this paper is a simulation of dice
throwing on computers. Dice are familiar objects in our
daily life and any students have an experience of throwing
dice. Students can learn how thermodynamic principles
emerge if they throw a large number of dice, say tens of
thousands of dice. Computers came of age to let students
throw many dice. With the aid of computer simulations
students can easily understand the statistical foundation
of thermal physics.

A Chinese proverb says2:
“ I hear, I forget;

stand.”

I see, I remember;

I do, I under-

There is no better way than letting students run the
simulations themselves and understand them.
I wrote
all the programs discussed in this paper in JAVA applet
and can be viewed and run at the web site referenced in
the Ref.1 with a JAVA enabled browser such as Netscape
(version 4.04 with patches or later version) or MS Inter-
net Explorer (4.0 or later version).

Students should be aware of the fact that the num-
bers we deal in statistical mechanics are huge and are
not even comparable with astronomical numbers as we
demonstrate in the conclusion of this paper. This fact
is intimately connected to a core principle of the ther-
modynamics, namely the irreversibility. This fact is also
important mathematically. For example if we throw N
dice simultaneously the number of possible outcome is
W = N 6. Students who are accustomed to the linear
quantity, a property of an exponential quantity, W for a
large N such as

W ∼= N W ∼=

W
N

(3)

may look like paradoxical. However the validity of an ap-
proximate relationship (3) within the error of O(1/N ) for
a quantity ln W/N is easily tested for the thermodynamic
system where a typical N is of order of 1023. However
for small numbers such as N = 3 or 4 the approximation
(3) is certainly a nonsense. The validity of statistical
mechanical argument begins at the point where the size
of our system becomes large enough to tolerate the ap-
proximate relationship (3). Students can learn this fact
through the computer simulations.

The dice system is a good analogy of a physical sys-
tem made of N paramagnetic atoms of spin J = 5/2 in
the external magnetic ﬁeld3. Atoms assume 2J + 1 = 6
equally spaced energy states. We can make the spacing
exactly unity by controlling the external magnetic ﬁeld.
Students need not know the detail of paramagnetic atom.
It suﬃces to say that dice represent atoms that assume
only 6 equally spaced energy levels. Therefore the total
value of dice is the total energy of the system.
In all
our simulation programs except the ﬁrst one we label the
value of dice from 0.

In this simulation programs I emphasize that there are
only two principles involved; the conservation of energy
which is inherited from mechanics and the ”principle of
equal a priori probability” of accessible microscopic states
consistent with the macroscopic speciﬁcation. We will
put the conservation of energy by hand. This means we
are considering the microcanonical ensemble.

Therefore the ﬁrst law is not a new thing but a simple
application of the conservation of energy to the thermal
system.
In order to implement the “principle of equal
a priori probability” we use the microcanonical Monte
Carlo (MC) technique ﬁrst introduced by M. Creutz4 and
further elaborated by myself5.

The microcanonical MC technique is a simple device
which allows us to scan uniformly all accessible micro-
scopic states of ﬁxed total value or total energy.

We generalize common die to a die of ν faces where
ν can be any integer numbers, 2, 3,
. Although
dice of arbitrary faces do not exist in the real world,
one can imagine dice in the shape of tetrahedron(ν = 4)
octahedron(ν = 8) etc. Since dice of polyhedron shape
are analogous to atoms of arbitrary number of equally
spaced energy levels.

, 6,

· · ·

· · ·

Other parameters of the system we can control in the
simulation programs are the number of dice N and the
total value of dice T which is the total energy E for the
corresponding analogous physical system.

The number N is restricted to a square of an integer
L for programming convenience. L ranges from 2 to any
number restricted only by the computer resources. How-
ever for L value larger than 200 ( N > 40000) the dice
conﬁgurations will not be shown.

Noninteracting atoms can not relax to thermal equi-
librium state like an ideal gas. We need to introduce
a weak interaction. The microcanonical MC technique
used in the simulation program introduces a mechanism
which eﬀectively amounts to physical interaction between
magnetic atoms. Suppose the spins of the magnetic atom
couple to the phonons of the underlying lattice so weak
that only a single phonon interact with one magnetic
In the program a single atom is ran-
atom at a time.
domly selected and exchange energy with the phonon
either by taking in or giving oﬀ energy according to a
speciﬁed rule.

In the next section we will explain the microcanonical
MC technique by way of simulating rolling of dice.
In
order to make students feel at home we throw only dice
in the simulation programs and a phonon is represented
by the Maxwell’s demon4 who carries a bag of energy.

Following three sections we present dynamical entropy
simulation, statistical temperature simulation, Maxwell-
Boltzmann distribution simulation. In all these simula-
tions we throw only dice and watch the consequences.
In the ﬁnal section we make a summary and concluding
remarks.

II. PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL A PRIORI
PROBABILITY AND MICROCANONICAL
MONTE CARLO TECHNIQUE

The fundamental postulate of equilibrium statistical
mechanics is the principle of equal a priori probabilities.
To college freshmen it suﬃce to say that the internal
molecular interaction is complex enough that all micro-
scopic states consistent with the macroscopic speciﬁca-
tion are equally likely to occur. This is analogous to the
simple postulate of assigning equal probabilities to head
and tail in an experiment of tossing a coin. The ultimate
validity of the postulate can only be established by check-
ing its predictions against experimental observations.

In order to realize the postulate we adopt the micro-
canonical Monte Carlo technique4 which has been suc-

2

cessfully used for calculating thermodynamic functions
of more complex system with precision and eﬃciency5.

We can do this by simulating a throw of N dice on com-
puters. The total value designated by T of dice which is
the sum of the value of individual dice. We throw dice
for a ﬁxed T . Since T is the total energy of the analo-
gous physical system we are generating a microcanonical
ensemble.

How can we throw N dice whose total value matching a
some predetermined value T ? In other words how can we
generate a random dice conﬁguration of a given T ? We
can think of throwing dice randomly until we get a throw
whose total value matches T . This is impractical unless
either the number of dice is very small or T is close 3.5N.
(If we throw N dice randomly we will most likely get T
values which is close to 3.5N .) The microcanonical MC
technique is one eﬃcient method of generating random
conﬁgurations of dice for a given ﬁxed value of T .

For the purpose of illustration let us consider a system
of N = 100 dice and generate a microcanonical ensemble
of T = 260.

Our system consists of 100 dice and a demon who car-
ries a bag of maximum capacity of 10 units of value or
energy. There are 5 units of energy in the demon’s bag
initially as in the Fig.1. Therefore the total value of
dice+demon system is 265 and this number remains ﬁxed
throughout the simulation.
In other words the system
made of dice and the demon is a closed system.

Fig.1

FIG. 1. The initial conﬁguration of the applet 1.

if you
“Select & Roll” button you will get a randomly selected dice
on the margin to the right side and the new face as a result of
the roll. The amount of increment or decrement in value as
a result of the roll is indicated. Examining the state of bag,
the decision whether accept the new conﬁguration or not is
also indicated by ”Yes” or ”No”. By clicking ”Replace or Put
it back” button you get a new conﬁguration or retain the old
one.

Thermalization or MC step consists of following steps:
(1) The demon selects one die out of 100 dice randomly
and rolls it. (2) The new conﬁguration generated by the
rolled die makes the total value of dice system either in-
crease or decrease. If the increment can be covered by
the energy units in the bag or decrement can be accom-
modated by enough vacancy in the bag the new conﬁg-
uration is accepted. Otherwise the move is rejected and
the die retains the old value and no new conﬁguration is
generated. (3) The demon repeats the same procedure,
steps (1) and (2).

This MC procedure amounts to the random walk in the
conﬁgurational space(analogous to the phase space for
the Hamiltonian system) bounded by the energy band

254 < T < 266 which is analogous to the energy shell
for the continuous Hamiltonian system. We deﬁne one
thermalizing MC step by whole procedure until the new
conﬁguration of the given T (= 260) is generated. This
procedure satisﬁes the condition of detailed balance and
can be made ergodic4.

It should be noted that the capacity of the bag is the
minimum size to keep the successive two conﬁgurations
of the given T from being the same one. At T = 260
the value in the bag is 5 units and there are 5 units of
vacancy. Therefore any change in the value of a single die
can be accepted always. Some times the rolled dice turn
up the old value again but it is still considered as a fresh
conﬁguration although the conﬁguration is unchanged.
On the other hand if the bag size is larger than 10 , it
will take much longer time to return to the given T = 260
state while for a bag of capacity smaller than 10 there is
a chance that the successive two conﬁgurations might be
the same one by rejecting the move in the step (2) making
the statistics deteriorated5.

Fig.2

FIG. 2. A random dice conﬁguration with T = 260 which
is obtained from the initial conﬁguration of Fig.1 after per-
forming several MC steps.

Fig.2 is a typical conﬁguration obtained after a few MC
steps. In the following and subsequent chapters all the
simulations use this thermalizing MC steps and the de-
mon will be hidden in the background and conﬁgurations
= 260 states will also be suppressed and hidden.
of T

III. THERMAL RELAXATION AND CHANGE
OF ENTROPY

Starting from the initial conﬁguration given by the dice
arrangement shown in Fig.1 of the last section we ther-
malize the system by performing the MC steps and watch
how the conﬁguration changes in time. The time is the
number of MC steps described in the last section.

Now we calculate the entropy by the Boltzmann’s cel-
ebrated formula given by the eq. (2). W in the eq. (2)
is the number of conﬁgurations and the k is the Boltz-
mann’s constant which deﬁnes the unit of thermody-
namic entropy. In this paper we set k = 1.

From this point onwards we relabel the face of dice as
and use diﬀerent colors to represent these
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
{
values instead of “dots”. This will make the total value
T of the last section change to T

N .

}

If we take a view that the total value T is the only
macroscopic parameter that speciﬁes our macroscopic
state then W = W (T ), where W (T ) is the total num-
ber of conﬁgurations that have the total value T . Then

−

3

6
the equilibrium entropy of the system is

S(T ) = ln W (T ).

(4)

n0, n1, n2, n3, n4, n5

Let us subdivide the microscopic conﬁguration into
classes of conﬁgurations having a ﬁxed set of values
which are the number of dice
{
showing 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 respectively. We will call these
numbers “occupation numbers”. We designate the num-
ber of conﬁgurations belonging to a ﬁxed set of occupa-
). Then
tion numbers,

n0, n1, n2, n3, n4, n5

}

nk

by W (
{

}

}

{

W (T ) = X
{nk}

′W (
{

nk

)

}

where “ ′ ” in the above summation implies that
the sum is carried out over all possible set of values

n0, n1, n2, n3, n4, n5

consistent with the condition

{

and

}

5

X
k=0

5

X
k=0

nk = N

knk = T

(5)

(6)

(7)

the last section and Fig.4 is the typical simulation result
of the applet 2 with a diﬀerent set of system parameters.

FIG. 3. The default initial conﬁguration of the applet 2
which is exactly the same conﬁguration as shown in the Fig.1.
If we click the “Start/Resume” button we generate a series of
conﬁgurations such as shown in the Fig.2.

We see in the Fig.4, the entropy deﬁned by eq, (11) ap-
proaches to the equilibrium entropy as time progresses.
Students can watch how the conﬁguration changes vi-
sually and the computer calculate the entropy at every
instance and plot a graph.

As the time progresses we will see the “entropy” in-
crease monotonically and hit the maximum value eventu-
ally and remains there “forever” apart small ﬂuctuation
which tends smaller as the system size grows larger. This
is the 2nd law of thermodynamics !

Fig.3

Fig.4

In the expression (5) the number of summand is O(N )
(at most N 6 in this case). This implies that at least one of
the summands must be O(exp(N )) if W (T ) is O(exp(N ))
in view of the approximate relations (3). This then allow
us to replace the sum (5) by a single largest term. i.e.

W (T ) = W (
{

˜nk

).

}
) in the above expression(8) is the largest term

(8)

˜nk

W (
{

}

among the summands in the eq.(5).

Let us now generalize the equilibrium entropy into a
generalized entropy which represents a nonequilibrium
state by

Sgen = ln W (
{
Since the W (nk) of the generalized entropy (9) is noth-

(9)

nk

) .

}

ing but the multinomial coeﬃcient given by

W (
{

nk

) =

}

N !

,

n0!n1!

n5!

· · ·

(10)

we can write the generalized entropy (9) as

Sgen = ln N !

ln nk! .

(11)

5

−

X
k=0

In the simulation programs the entropy is calculated

using the formula (11).

Fig.2a is the default initial conﬁguration of the applet
2 which is the same dice arrangement as in the Fig.3 of

FIG. 4. The typical simulation result of the applet 2. The
scale of the energy density is (0.0 - 5.0). Initially the upper
region starts out with the energy density 5.0 while the lower
region starts out with 0.0.

The applet 2 also calculate the energy density of the
two regions, namely the upper region where the dice of
value 6(now 5) were initially occupied and the remaining
lower region where dice of value 1(now 0) were occupied.
We will see that the MC steps randomize the conﬁgura-
tions in both “energy” and “conﬁgurational” space. As
the system relaxes to equilibrium state the energy density
becomes uniform everywhere manifesting one character-
istic of equilibrium state.

In the right lower corner in the applet 2, the equilib-
rium entropies are plotted. The graph shows the thermal
ﬂuctuation in the equilibrium state in an enlarged scale
in changing colors. The zoomed-in scale is marked in the
left side of the original plotting region. Students can es-
timate the size of the ﬂuctuation as the size of the system
grows.

On the other hand in the opposite limit where the num-
ber of dice is small, say 4, then average period of return-
ing to the initial state is less than 64 = 1296 which stu-
dents can observe during the experiment. By estimating
these probabilities students can understand the meaning
of irreversibility.

In the applet 2 students can edit 3 system variables
namely the energy density, e which is T /N , the size of
the system by L, which is the square root of N , and

4

number of energy levels, ν which is the number of faces
of a die (6 for an ordinary die). “e” accepts a real number
and is converted to a closest integer T by multiplying N
with a possibility of a loss of precision.

There are two more editable variables in the applet 2:
They are “time”, the number of thermalizing MC steps
and the “NoDP” , which is the number of data points to
display. Therefore every “time/ NoDP” MC steps gener-
ated data are displayed or plotted.

For a given T , the initial state is constructed such a
way that T is made of q dice of highest value ν
1 and
single die of value r , where q is the quotient and r is
the remainder satisfying T = (ν
1)q + r. The priority
is given such a way that dice of higher value occupy the
top and leftmost positions.

−

−

Finally the applet also plot the entropy calculated us-

ing approximate formula

SStir =

ν−1

X
k=0

nk
N

−

ln

nk
N

,

(12)

in green color.

for the factorial,

SStir is calculated using the Stirling’s approximation

ln n! = n ln n

n

−

which is made in the same spirit as the approximation
(3). We plot this to show the range of the system size
where the statistical argument based on this approxima-
tion becomes valid.

The points to watch in this simulation are:
(A) The visual characteristics of thermal equilibrium

state such as uniformity in various densities.

(B) The relaxation, irreversibility, 2nd law of ther-
modynamics. Although the algorithm described in the
above is periodic (any simulation on the computer is pe-
riodic for that matter), if N is moderately large number,
say N=100, there is absolutely no chance that we see the
conﬁguration return to the original unique arrangement
or close to it. This is the irreversibility. It is sheer enor-
mous length of the recurrence period (Poincar`e cycle)
which makes the reversibility impossible.

(C) The size dependence of ﬂuctuations. Students can
watch the ﬂuctuation subsides as the system size grows
keeping all other parameters intact. Students can watch
the ﬂuctuations in the entropy and local energy densities
shrink proportionally to 1/√N as N grows.

(D)The entropy versus the energy. The entropy as
a function of energy will be shown in the next section.
However in this simulation students may try various en-
ergy densities “e” to see how the equilibrium entropy
changes as a function of energy . Since the energy levels
of this system is ﬁnite the equilibrium entropy does not
always increase as the energy density increases. Some
students may discover the concept of negative absolute
temperature.

(E)The extensibility of the entropy.

Students can
watch how the entropy density change or remain as the
size of the system grows.

IV. THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM AND
STATISTICAL TEMPERATURE

In the last section we presented a simulation program,
the applet 2 which demonstrates the process of relaxation
of a single system to the equilibrium state and the char-
In this section we
acteristics of the equilibrium state.
present a simulation program that demonstrates the be-
havior of relaxation of two systems which are thermally
interacting with each other. From this point onwards we
denote the total value of dice by E instead of T and T
will be used to denote the absolute temperature.

Initially we separate the two systems A and B by a
thermally insulating wall so that they can not exchange
energy. We prepare our system in highly nonequilibrium
states for both systems as described in the last section.
When we thermalize two systems with insulating wall on,
then the relaxation processes are just the same as in the
case of a single system. When we remove the wall two
systems can exchange energy. Simulation program is de-
signed such a way that two independent microcanonical
MC processes of ﬁxed energies are performed, when two
systems are insulated, alternating one MC step each for
A and B. When the wall is removed we use the single
microcanonical MC process. In this case we also perform
MC steps alternately for A and B parts.

Fig.5
FIG. 5. The typical simulation result of the applet 3. The
entropy and energy densities as well as the equilibrium canon-
ical inverse temperatures for A and B parts are plotted in dif-
ferent colors in the same rectangle in upper right corner. The
scales of these quantities are shown in the middle center area.
The scales of the plotting area for the entropy vs. energy is
the same one as the scales of the main plotting area. At every
plotting instance the values of these data are also displayed
during the simulation in the upper middle area. The total en-
tropy and energy densities are simply (SA + SB)/(NA + NB)
and (EA + EB)/(NA + NB).

In the applet 3(Fig.5), we can control the size, NA, NB
the number of energy levels νA, νB,
initial energies,
EA, EB for two systems A and B separately. There are
only one length of time of simulation and a single number
of data points.

During the simulation process we can toggle the insu-
lating wall on and oﬀ by clicking the check box. This will
make the system relax to the ﬁnal equilibrium state in
may diﬀerent paths.

The equilibrium condition for two system in thermal
contact where the energy exchange between two systems
are allowed is given by the maximum entropy principle.
For if we maximize total entropy

S = SA(EA) + SB(EB)
under the condition that the total energy of combined
system

5

E = EA + EB = constant,

we obtain

dSA
dEA

=

dSB
dEB

.

We should emphasize the fact that the equilibrium con-
dition for two systems in thermal contact, is that two
slopes of entropy as a function of energy equal to each
other. This simulation program explicitly shows that the
equilibrium is reached when the slopes of two entropy
functions SA and SB become equal.

Therefore statistical deﬁnition of the inverse tempera-

ture 1/T naturally follows as

(13)

(14)

1
T

=

dS
dE

.

Of course any single valued function of the entropy
slope may be deﬁned as the temperature. However the
absolute temperature was known before the statistical
mechanics was discovered. In order to make the previ-
ously known absolute temperature such as the one that
enters in the Clausius entropy expression (1) coincide
with the statistical deﬁnition, the temperature must be
deﬁned as in the eq.(14) as we all know.

This temperature can be calculated during micro-
canonical MC simulation by examining how often the
system visit the energy levels E
1, and E + 1. If in
a given period of simulation the frequency of visits are
recorded as f− and f+, then S+
S− = ln(f+/f−) and
T can be estimated by

−

−

1
T

= (ln

)/∆E

f+
f−

(15)

where ∆E = 2 in our case. This is the microcanonical
temperature.

However this method of estimating the temperature
is time consuming since we have to collect about 1000
data for f±’s for a reasonable statistics at every instance.
This makes the simulation almost crawl. Fortunately we
have an analytic expression for the temperature for large
systems3.

In the applet 3 the inverse temperature 1/T (

β) is the
equilibrium canonical inverse temperature β calculated
solving the following equation for β for a given set of
variables e(= E/N ) and ν,

≡

e =

ν

1
−
2 −

ν
2

cosh

β +

cosh

.

(16)

ν
2

1
2

β
2

This is the canonical temperature for large systems.
It was tested and veriﬁed that the canonical tempera-
ture agrees within the statistical error bar with the equi-
librium microcanonical temperature calculated using the
formula (15), if the size of the system is large enough so
that the Stirling’s approximation remains valid.

The Fig.?? is a typical simulation result of the applet
3. There are many steps where thermodynamic functions

remain ﬂat. These regions are when the insulating wall
is on so that each system is in thermal equilibrium state
separately.

The entropy as a function of energy is traced and plot-
ted in a small box in the lower center area. At the end of
the simulation the straight line with the slope calculated
by solving the equation (16) is drawn extending from the
end points of two curves. Students can visually conﬁrm
that these slopes are indeed the slopes of the simulated
entropy functions at the ﬁnal equilibrium state.

Points to watch in this simulation program are:
(A) Zeroth law of thermodynamics.
Although we do not have 3 system in thermal contact
we can do so indirectly by placing 2 diﬀerent systems in
the position of B in thermal contact with one common
system, A.

(B) Students should watch the small box where the
entropy as a function of energy is being traced during
the simulation. It shows the functions are concave down-
ward. If these two systems start at the points where their
slopes are diﬀerent then they reach thermal equilibrium
states when their slopes become equal. If they overshoot
the equilibrium point then it will make the total entropy
decrease. It is a simple law of probability which keeps
this from happening!

(C) Students can also make a rough estimate of the
entropy change in the process of heat transfer, by cal-
culating dSA = dEA/TA and dSB = dEB/TB together
1/TA), where
with the net change dS = dE/(1/TB
dE = dEB =

dEA.

−

This can be done by suspending the simulation just
before removing the wall and after reinsert the wall. In
this way students can verify that the Boltzmann’s en-
tropy is indeed the same quantity deﬁned by Clausius(1),
dS = dQ/T , where dQ = dE.

−

(D)Students can experiment various paths to reach to
the thermal equilibrium state by drawing the curves over
the old one to conﬁrm that the ﬁnal equilibrium state is
indeed a single unique state.

V. MAXWELL-BOLTZMANN DISTRIBUTION

In most text books for introductory college physics
courses, authors introduce Maxwell-Boltzmann (M-B)
distribution and discuss its consequences. However none
derives or even present any plausible argument for the
origin of the distribution.

If we throw and generate a truly random conﬁgura-
tion of suﬃciently large number of dice keeping the total
value E ﬁxed and examine the distribution of occupation
numbers

, we get the M-B distribution given by

˜nk

{

}

˜nr = A exp(

), r = 0, 1, 2,

5.

(17)

· · ·

r
T

−

Why? It is not so diﬃcult to explain the reason to stu-
dents in the introductory physics courses if students un-

6

derstood the probability, entropy, and temperature which
we discussed and demonstrated in the previous sections.
Truly random conﬁguration can be realized when the
system is in the thermal equilibrium. Let us concentrate
one die say, one in the upper leftmost corner. Let us keep
performing MC steps after the dice system reached the
thermal equilibrium and ask how often this particular die
will show a value r. This frequency fr must be propor-
tional to the number of conﬁgurations of the rest of dice
i.e., WN −1(E
to have total value E
r). If N is
r,
−
suﬃciently large, WN −1(E
r) can be approximated by
r) = W (E
WN (E

−
r). Therefore

−

−

fr

∝

−

−

W (E

r) = exp(S(E

r))
dS
dE

r)

−
∼= exp(S(E)
r
T

= Aexp(

−

−
).

(18)

In the above derivation we have used the deﬁnition of
the temperature (14), the Taylor series approximation
S(E

( dS
dE )r since r << E.

This is the standard argument for deriving the canoni-
cal distribution6 and is not much more diﬃcult than what
we have done so far.

r) ∼= S(E)

−

−

In the applet 4, instead of examining the frequency fr
of a single die which is time consuming we examine the
distribution of occupation numbers
since every die
is equivalent and the outcome of other dice may be con-
sidered as the manifestation of the single die in question
in the time series. Another words it is the demonstration

˜nr

{

}

Fig.6

FIG. 6. The typical simulation result of the applet 4. Ap-
plet 4 is very much the same as the applet 2. We trace the
change of occupation number {nk} in time instead of the en-
ergy densities. At the end of the simulation when the equi-
librium is reached we plot the bar diagram of the {˜nk} using
the colors representing dice values.

of the ergodic hypothesis that the time average is the
ensemble average!

Fig. 4 is the typical simulation result of applet 4. In
this simulation program, applet 4 we trace the distribu-
tion of occupation numbers from the highly nonequilib-
rium state to equilibrium state.

The curve drawn using cross mark “x” in the middle
rectangle is the entropy deﬁned by the equation (11).
It can be used to determine if the system reached the
equilibrium state.

The temperature used for drawing the M-B distribu-
tion curve given by eq.(17) is the canonical temperature
deﬁned in the equation (16) and the constant A is deter-
mined by the normalization condition (6).

Points to watch in this simulation program are:

(A) Students can perform the experiments for systems
of small number of dice and increase the size gradually
to see from what size the M-B distribution is applicable.
(B) Students can watch the ﬂuctuation subsides as the

size of the system grows.

(C) The entropy of the equilibrium state is represented
by a single term of a set of occupation numbers as we
saw in the eq. (8). Therefore
of the eq. (8) are the
M-B distribution. Students may discover that the M-B
distribution can also be derived by maximizing Sgen (11)
under the conditions (6) and (7).

˜nk

{

}

VI. CONCLUSION

In this simulation programs I made the point that the
statistical foundation of thermal physics is not so diﬃcult
to teach to students in the introductory physics courses
if we have some simple examples to demonstrate or let
students try themselves.

The postulate of equal a priori probabilities is an easy
concept to teach. The energy conservation is not a new
concept. The crux is the realization of the postulate.
However if we use the microcanonical MC technique we
cam easily implement the postulate. Without the micro-
canonical MC technique it would indeed be diﬃcult to
generate a truly random conﬁguration of ﬁxed E.

The microcanonical MC is not a diﬃcult technique to
follow as we demonstrated in the sec.II. Once students
understand how to generate a truly random conﬁguration
of given ﬁxed total value, E then simulations that follow
are simple applications of this microcanonical MC steps.
Students can easily grasp the laws of thermodynam-
ics especially the 2nd law together with the concept of
irreversibility. The number of conﬁgurations even for
a 100 dice is 6100 > 1078 which far exceeds the age of
universe in seconds which is less than 1018. Therefore
it is impossible even for a system of 100 dice in ther-
mal equilibrium return to the initially prepared highly
nonequilibrium state. Even if a computer generates a
million conﬁgurations in a second the odd that we get
the initially prepared nonequilibrium state in the age of
universe is still 10−54 !

Students can also learn and understand that the en-
tropy becomes maximum at the thermal equilibrium and
never decreases apart the ﬂuctuations which will get less
as the system size grows.

From the maximum entropy principle of thermal equi-
librium state it is easy to understand the condition of
two systems becoming in thermal equilibrium state. It is
when two slopes of the entropy as a function of energy
become equal to each other. From this understanding it
is natural to introduce the statistical inverse temperature
as the slope of the entropy as a function of energy.

The simulation also makes students understand the
true meaning of Clausius’ deﬁnition of entropy. It is more
natural to take a view that the Clausius’ entropy for-

7

mula(1) is deﬁning the absolute temperature rather than
deﬁning the entropy.

In most introductory college text book M-B distribu-
tion are introduced without derivation. Simply throwing
many dice it is easy to demonstrate and understand why
occupation numbers must follow the M-B distribution.

In conclusion it is not that diﬃcult to teach the sta-
tistical foundation of thermal physics in the introductory
college physics courses if we know how to teach the sta-
tistical concepts. The microcanonical MC technique is
one such ”how-to”.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the Ministry of
Education, Republic of Korea through a grant to the Re-
search Institute for Basic Sciences, Seoul National Uni-
versity, in part by the Korea Science Foundation through
Research Grant to the Center for Theoretical Physics,
Seoul National University.

1These programs were originally written to supplement a
textbook(in Korean) used for the introductory college physics
course at Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. They are
translated into English and uploaded at the web site: Koo-
Chul Lee, “Thermal Physics Simulations,”
http://phys.snu.ac.kr/StatPhys/frame-e.htm.

2M. Johnson, D. Johnson, K. Lee, “A Pedestrian Guide To

Reforming The Introductory Physics Course,”
http://www.phy.duke.edu∼mark/reform/.

3F. Reif Fundamentals of Statistical and Thermal Physics

(McGraw-Hill, New York, 1965), pp. 257-262.

4Michael Creutz, “Microcanonical Monte Carlo Simula-

tion,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1411-1414 (1983).

5Koo-Chul Lee, “A new eﬃcient Monte Carlo technique,”

J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 23, 2087-2106 (1990).

6See Ref.3 pp. 202-206.

8

This figure "fig1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9908046v1

This figure "fig2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9908046v1

This figure "fig3.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9908046v1

This figure "fig4.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9908046v1

This figure "fig5.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9908046v1

This figure "fig6.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9908046v1

